NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI
R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

ADAPTIVE NOISE CANCELLATION OF AN ANALOG FIBER OPTIC LINK
By

MOHAMMAD NAZRUL ISLAM

A project presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Engineering in the program of Electrical and Computer Engineering.

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004

Mohanim^i Nazrul Islam 2004

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

UMI Number: EC52939

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignm ent can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete m anuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52939 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Instructions on Borrowers
Ryerson U niversity requires the signatures o f all person using or photocopying this project report. Please sign below, with address and date.

Signature

Address

Date

11 1

Reproduced with perm ission of the oopyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

ADAPTIVE NOISE CANCELLATION OF AN ANALOG FIBER OPTIC LINK

Abstract

There are three dominant noise mechanisms in an analog optical fiber link. These are shot noise that is proportional to the mean optical power, relative intensity noise (RIN) that is proportional to the square o f the instantaneous optical power and therm al noise that is a function of absolute temperature and independent o f the optical power. This report describes an adaptive noise cancellation o f these dom inant noise processes that persist an analog optical fiber link. The performance o f an analog optical fiber link is analyzed by taking the effects o f these noise processes. A nalytical and simulation results show that som e improvement in signal to noise ratio (SNR) and this filter is effective to rem ove noise adaptively from the optical fiber link.

Keywords: Relative intensity noise (RIN), Adaptive filter. Recursive least square
(RLS), Therm al noise. Shot noise. Poisson distribution. A dditive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN).

IV

Reproduced with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduotion prohibited without permission.

Acknowledgments

T he com pletion of this project report w ould not have been possible w ithout the valuable advice, continual guidance and technical expertise o f my supervisor. Prof. Xavier. N. Fernando. I am thankful to my fellow graduate students in the wireless Networks and com m unication Research (W INCORE) group for their support, fruitful discussion, and for creating a pleasant work atmosphere. M y special thanks goes to my parents and m y wife for their love, understanding, support and encouragement throughout m y studies.

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Contents

Chapter 1 Noise Reduction in Analog Fiber Optic Link
1.1 Introduction................................................................................................... 1

1.2 Related previous w ork in this A rea................................................................ 2 1.3 Proposed Approach to Cancel the Noise from A nalog Optical link 5

1.4 Thesis O rganization............................................................................................6

Chapter 2 Noise in Optical Fiber Link
2 .1 A nalog Optical Link and its N oise C om ponents.......................................7 2.2 N oise in Optical Link....................................................................................... 10 2.3 Shot N oise.......................................................................................................... 10 2.4 Relative Intensity Noise (R IN ).....................................................................15 2.5 Therm al N oise..................................................................................................21 2.6 Signal to Noise Ratio at the R eceiver.........................................................23 2.7Num erical exam ple of Signal to Noise R atio.............................................26

VI

Reproduced with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter 3 Adaptive Noise Cancellation Technique 3.1 Algorithms for Adaptive Noise Cancellation........................... 29
3.2 Sim ulation R esults.................................................................................................34

Chapter 4 Conclusion and Discussion
4.1 D iscussion..............................................................................................................46

4.2 Future direction.................................................................................................... 48 4.3 C onclusion..............................................................................................................49

References............................................................................................... 50 Appendix................................................................................................. 53

vu

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter 1
Noise Reduction in Analog Fiber Optic Link
In this chapter a brief description is given about the optical fiber link and its noise com ponents. The necessity o f adaptive filtering process is explained by com paring with the previous w ork done to rem ove noise from the fiber optic link. Later a proposed approach is described to cancel the noise from analog optical link.

1.1 Introduction
Fiber optic link is not only used for the transm ission o f digital signals but also is used for many potential applications o f analog links. A nalog optical links are im portant for transm ission o f signals over long distances due to the low loss o f optical fiber. These range from individual voice channels (4K H z) to m icrowave links operating in Giga Hertz region. For an analog recevier the perform ance fidelity is m easured in term s of a c arrierto -n o ise (CNR) ratio (which is defined by the root mean square (rms) carrier pow er to rm s noise pow er at the input o f the RF receiver following the photo detection process). A good SNR ratio is the demand o f m any applications. The various noise processes for an optical analog fiber link are phase noise, shot noise, relative intensity noise (RIN), and therm al noise. N oise in optical fiber link can be elim inated by (i) filters that are designed based on prior inform ation and kept fixed in receiver (The receiver filter used for after detection to suppress the out o f band noise is a typical exam ple) or (ii) it m ay be

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

adaptive, and designed each tim e a connection is established (as in equalization for polarization m ode dispersion). Latter one is called adaptive filter regardless o f the com putation m echanism used for determ ining the filter coefficients. L ot o f efforts has been given in the past to elim inate the above m entioned noise from the fiber optic link. Som e o f the previous w ork done to elim inate the noise from an analog optical fiber link is descried below.

1.2 Related Previous Work in this Area
R. S. B ondurant et al. in their paper describe a technique to cancel the frequency noise in sem iconductor laser b y nonlinear heterodyne detection [5]. In this technique tw o signals w ith same random phase noise but different frequencies o r polarization are generated at the transm itter. If they propagate through the sam e channel and undergo the sam e random changes, fo r exam ple phase and polarization, then the phase noise is canceled by perform ing a nonlinear operation on the two signals at the receiver . A ckerm an et al. in their w ork described how laser intensity noise can b e reduced w ith a conventional laser noise suppression m ethod o f differential detection using two outputs o f an external m odulator with equal optical path delays [6],[7]. T he tw o outputs from the M a c h - Z ehnder interferom eter are out o f phase. So subtracting them w ith a differential detector, the signal com ponent rem ain unchanged w hile canceling the com m on m ode laser intensity noise. The differential detection m ethod can suppress the relative intensity noise over the m odulation bandw idth as long as the path length from each output is carefully m atched to a sm all fraction o f the electrical w avelength. This critical length m atching betw een fibers can be difficult w hen installing a link over a long distance.

Reproduced with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

T o avoid the len g th -m atch in g problem o f optical fiber R oger H elkey proposed and dem onstrated a new bandpass differential m ethod to cancel the laser relative intensity noise [8], In this m ethod tw o com plem entary output signals o f the m odulator are subtracted by delaying one output h a lf o f the m odulation period and then optically sum m ing the signals coherently in a polarization coupler. This incoherent sum m ing uses polarization-- m aintaining fib er from the m odulator output to the polarization coupler. This m ethod uses only one long single m ode fioer fro m the output o f the polarization coupler to the detector, so no length m atching is required after th e polarization coupler. K azuro K ikuchi and M otoki K akui in their w ork described a m ethod to reduce the shot noise using the quantum correlation in light em itting diodes (L E D 's). T he photon stream fro m a light em itting diode has the optical shot noise and as well as electrical shot noise. U sing two L E D 's w ith electrical m utual coupling they show that these two kinds o f shot noise have correlation w ith each other and using this quantum correlation

betw een these tw o shot noise (electrical and optical) 0.45 dB noise reductions can be achieved [11]. K. J W illiam s and R. D Esm an in their paper described a balanced photorecevier w hich is u tilized to reject both laser intensity noise and noise added b y erbium -doped fiber am plifier [12]. They dem onstrated that a greater than 16 dB noise im provem ent can be achieved using this method. G unnar Jacobsen in his pap er described a rigorous and accurate m odel for m ultichannel direct detection system w here optical pream plificaion is used [13]. The m odel accounts

R eproduced with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

for the influence o f an optical bandiim iting filter as well as o f a polarization filter. In this model he show ed that how the m ultichannel analysis can be im proved in accuracy and can be m odified to determ ine the im pacts o f phase noise, spontaneous em ission noise and receiver therm al noise. H yuck M. Kwon in his paper described an optical orthogonal code division multiple access (OOCDM A) system including the effects o f avalanche photodiode noise (APD) and therm al noise as w ell as interference for the O O CD M A direct detection receiver [14]. In this system a h ard -lim iter placed at the front o f the receiver in the presence o f APD and therm al noise and he com pared the perform ance o f a system without hard -lim iter. F o r adaptive noise cancellation lots o f w ork has so far been done in speech signal processing and biom edical engineering. Som e o f them w ill be m entioned in the follow ing paragraphs. S urindar D hanjal in his paper described how to cancel the noise in speech signal by delayed linear prediction noise cancellation technique [9]. In this technique, the current clean speech signal sample is predicted as a linear com bination o f the past M noisy speech samples delayed by one pitch period T and then using the w eighting coefficients determ ined by solving a set o f linear equations sim ilar to the set o f equations solved in the classical linear prediction analysis. P adm a A kkiraju and D. C. Reddy in their paper have described an adaptive noise cancellation technique in processing M yoelectric activity o f respiratory m uscles. In their w ork they used the W idrow 's adaptive noise canceler to solve the problem o f reducing

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

the

interfering

ECG

(Electrocardiograph)

activity

from

the

recorded

EM G

(Electrom yography), w hich is used as a diagnostics tool for the treatm ent o f respiratory disease. T he adaptive noise canceler im plem ented in a transversal structure w as found to successfully reduce the corrupting cardiac activity [10].

1.3 Proposed Approach to Cancel the Noise from Analog Optical Link
L ots of w ork so far has been done to reduce the noise from the optical analog fiber link m any different w ays. But not m uch w ork has been done to adaptive cancellation o f noise from the optical signal. F rom the previous references and analysis we can see that all o f the authors in their approaches try to com pensate the noise by using o p to -electronic com ponents. In their w orks they dem onstrate how to com pensate the noise individually such as som e try to com pensate laser relative intensity noise or shot noise or therm al noise com ponents in receiver, transm itter, am plifier etc. M ost o f them try to design com ponents with low noise (shot, therm al or relative intensity) figure.

Prim ary Input

 D enoised signal

Reference Input ( N oise )

er

Fig. 1. B asic elem ents of an adaptive filter

R eproduced with perm ission of th e copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

In m y present w ork an adaptive noise cancellation technique is used to cancel the th ree -n o ise (shot, therm al and relative intensity) com ponents. T o realize the adaptive noise cancellation, w e use tw o inputs and an adaptive filter. T he basic elem ents o f an adaptive filter is show n in Fig. 1. O ne input is the signal corrupted by noise (prim ary input). T h e other input contains noise (A W G N ) related in som e w ay to that in the m ain input b u t does not contain anything related to the signal (noise reference input). A ll the noise (therm al, shot, relative intensity noise) considered here are equivalent w hite G aussian noise in their probability distribution. T he filter co -efficien ts w ere adjusted using the R ecursive least squares (RLS) algorithm s [3] to approach the set o f w eights for w hich th e output has m inim um noise in the least square sense.

1.4 Thesis Organization
In our present w ork, we have discussed the m ethod o f adaptive noise cancellation technique for fiber optic link. This report is arranged in the follow ing order: in Chapter 1, an introduction is given w ith previous w ork done in this area, in C hapter 2, the optical fiber lin k w ith its noise com ponents is described, in C hapter 3, the algorithm s used for noise cancellation and its im plem entation is show n and in C hapter 4 conclusion is given with discussion o f results.

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Chapter 2
Noise in Optical Fiber Link
Any undesired interference or disturbance in a signal is know n as noise. T here are three dom inant noise term s present in the analog optical fiber link. In this chapter a brief m athem atical and analytical description is given to determ ine the variance o f these noise com ponents. Further the probability distribution o f the noise is discussed and how w e can consider these probability distributions for our sim ulation also described.

2.1 Analog Optical Link and its Noise Component
T he basic elem ent o f an analog optical link is shown in Fig. 2. U sually a transm itter contains either a light em itting diode (LED) or a laser diode as an optical source.

Optical signal

E le ctrical a n a lo g O ptical transm itter O ptical fiber channel Optical detector E le c tric a l an alo g o u tp u t

In p u t signal

S ignal to R F receiv er

Fig. 2. Basic elem ents o f an analog fiber optic link

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

The simplest form for optical fiber links is direct intensity modulation, w here the optical output from the source is m odulated simply by varying the current around the bias point (at the source site it is approximately at the m idpoint o f the linear output region) in proportion of the message signal. In this way inform ation signal is transm itted directly in the baseband. In the photodetector site a photodiode is used to detect the very weak optical signals. Detection o f the weakest possible optical signals requires that the photodetector and its following am plification circuitry be optim ized so that a given signal to noise ratio is maintained. The noise sources in the receiver arise from the photodetector noise resulting from the statistical nature o f the photon to electron conversion process and the thermal noise associated with the am plifier circuitry.

In an analog link, the tim e-varying electrical signal s(t) is used to am plitudemodulate directly an optical source about some bias point defined by the bias current I g . The transm itted optical power P(t) is thus o f the form [1]

+

(2 . 1)

where

is the average transm itted optical power, s(t) is the analog modulation signal,

and m is the m odulation index. A t the receiver end, the photo current generated by the analog optical signal is

q(f) = 9lMP,[l + mj(r)] = /p M [l+ ms(t)] (2.2)

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

where 91 is the detector responsivity,

is the average received optical power, Ip = 9tf^

is the prim ary photocurrent, and M is the photodetector gain. For PIN photodiode M is considered as unity. If s'ft) is a sinusoidally modulated signal, then the mean square signal current at the photodetector output is

(2.3)

I f P (t) is a sinusoidally m odulated signal i.e., P(t) = P,. (1+ mcosrot) Then integration o f the previous equation (2.3) becomes [1]

{j;)={3ÎP j+i(m 9SP ,)= (2.4)
This is the m ean square signal current at the photodetector. It consist o f two components. Among them, first one is dc term and usually this term can be removed. If we rem ove the dc term and consider the photodetector gain M then the mean square signal current equation becom es [1]

\

'

2

(2.5)

This mean square signal current is im portant to calculate the signal to noise ratio, which is used for later calculation and simulation.

Repro(duced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.2 Noise in Optical Link
In an optical fiber receiver usually PIN (positive intrinsic negative) or A P D (avalanche photo diode) is used as a detector. Several noise m echanism s exist in a directly m odulated analog fiber link such as polarization mode noise, m ode-hopping noise, shot noise, relative intensity noise and thermal noise. Among these noise processes, we will analyze three dom inant noise mechanisms in an analog optical fiber link. These are shot noise that is proportional to the mean optical power, relative intensity noise {RIN) that is proportional to the square of the instantaneous optical power and therm al noise that is a function o f absolute temperature and independent of the optical pow er. In this section, we derive the expressions for the variances of optical link noise components. These expressions are needed to evaluate the signal to noise ratio that is done in the next section.

2.3 Shot Noise
The fundam ental uncertainty when a photon emission event occurs produces a form of signal dependent noise called quantum noise or shot noise. It is a direct consequence of the independence of photon emission event. The quantum or shot noise arises from the statistical nature o f the production and collection o f photoelectrons when an optical signal is incident o r rhotodetector. The quantum noise current has a mean square value

in a bandw idth B that is proportional to the average value o f the photocurrent / . In this

10

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

section an expression is derived for the shot noise. If w e consider a double side band (DSB) intensity modulation at the laser diode for R F -optical conversion and assume a linear electrical optical conversion then the instantaneous optical intensity output power P(t) for the response o f an electrical signal s(t) is given by

P(f)= Pg [1+ ms(t)]

(2.6)

Here m is the modulation index, F], is the mean optical pow er and s(t) is the electrical signal. Photo detector at the receiver produces a detector current Ip(t) which is

proportional to the instantaneous optical pow er P(t) in response of the received optical power. Since light is composed of photons which are discrete packets o f energy. In shot noise process the arrival time o f light occurs as discrete units or photons. Therefore the expression for Ip{t) can be written as

4 (f) =

(2.7)

where, /z^(r) is the impulse response o f the photo detector. To consider the effect of filtering after detection, let the detected current Ip(t) be filtered by a filter with transfer function H(f) to obtain an output current /(t). Then the mean value o f /(t) is obtain simply the convolution o f the received signal with the im pulse response of the receiver filter A(t).

11

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction orohibited without oerm ission.

N ow, if we consider the detector responsivity % , which is defined as the

p h o to cu rren t/

generated per unit optical power P(t). It is written as [1]

^_lp(0_r\g P{t) hv (2.9)

Here, p is the quantum efficiency o f the photo-detector, h is Plank's constant (6.625X 10"^'^ Joules/sec) , q is the electron charge and v is the frequency o f the optical signal. Responsivity is constant for a given wavelength so it does not change with P(t). Hence, if we include the responsivity the mean value o f detector current is given by

£ [/(0 ]=

I P(x )/r(t - 1 )^x
( 2 . 10)

The variance of /(t) can be found using the moment generating function o f the photodiode. It is important to m ention that there appears q in the variance of /(t).

V a r [ /( 0 ] = 9ÎÇ jP (T )/r" {t - x )dx

(2 .11)

12

Reproduced with perm ission of the copvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

From the above expressions o f mean and variance o f /(t) we see that both are time varying quantities and that are determ ined by linear filtering operation on I p { f ) . Usually the bandw idth B of the receiver filter is greater than the bandw idth o f electrical signal s(t). So, the received signal passes through the filter w ithout any distortion. The filter how ever blocks the no frequency direct current te rm % ^ .

F rom the expression o f the variance of 7(t) we see that the signal P (t) filtered through a hypothetical filter that has an im pulse response = h^{t). The frequency

response o f 77(f) and H j i f ) are obtained by performing the Fourier Transform on h(t) and A;( 0 - From the transfer function of it is obvious that only the D C term

917J, passes through this filter and both side bands are attenuated. Therefore the shot noise after filter for P I N is given by;

F or A P D (avalanche photodiode) the expression for shot noise can be w ritten as = .^ 2 .1 3 )

w here F (M) is a noise figure associated w ith the random nature o f the avalanche process and M is the avalanche noise. It has been found that to a reasonable approximation

13

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduotion prohibited without permission.

F{M )~ M"" (with 0 < %<

1 . 0

) depends on the material. B oth F (M) an d M

are

considered unity for P IN photodiode.

It has been dem onstrated that statistics o f distribution o f shot noise follow a Poisson probability distribution [2]. The Poisson distribution has the property that the variance o f fluctuation equals to the mean. In optical com m unication all sources obey the Poisson distribution. Shot noise is signal dependent because noise variance equals the average signal. The larger the mean signal, the larger the variance. T he Gaussian approxim ation is used here to replace the discrete Poisson probability function. The continuous Gaussian pdf with a mean value m and variance <y ^ is given by (y - m f P , W = I - ,- exp ·V27ra
2

a'

(2.14)

To approxim ate the Poisson distribution, we can set m ean o f Poisson distribution m= a "m · Iri this process o f Gaussian approxim ation, we overestim ate the value of Poisson distribution far below the mean and underestim ate the value far above the mean. These errors approxim ately cancel out and Gaussian approxim ation can be satisfactory to estimate error probabilities. However, when small error rates are to be calculated, the approxim ation m ay not be accurate since these error rates use the 'tails ' o f the distribution w here the Gaussian and Poisson distribution are significantly different.

14

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.4 Relative Intensity Noise (RIN)
The laser does not produce light that is stable in intensity. The basic physical m echanism of a laser is am plification by stim ulated em ission, which is random in nature. This random ness introduces a noise that increases with the optical power. This noise resulting from random intensity fluctuations is called relative intensity noise (RIN), which may

be defined in terms o f the m ean-square intensity variations. A fluctuation in the optical output intensity due to the m ultiple reflections in fiber optic link leads to the optical intensity noise. The noise produce due to R IN is proportional to the square o f the optical power. It can be w ritten m athem atically by the follow ing equation R IN = {AP` ) l { F , y (2.15)

W here

) is the mean square am plitude of the noise fluctuations per unit bandw idth

and P,, is the square of the optical power. F or a given laser R IN is constant. The expression for the m odulated transm itted optical signal considering relative intensity noise (RIN) is given by [21]

f (0 = |i+

+ AP(0]

where P,, is the average transm itted optical pow er, s(t) is the analog m odulation signal, m is m odulation index and is NP(t) the instantaneous fluctuation terms due to relative intensity noise.

15

ReDroduced with oerm ission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited w ithout o e r m i s s io n .

T o obtain an expression o f the detector current w ith RIN, the filter output current is convoluted w ith.filter im pulse response h{t) [
2 1

].

//, (0 = 9Î J

(T :) h { t - x ) d x
(2.17)

In the presence o f relative intensity noise the prim ary shot noise process Ip {t) is a doubly stochastic Poisson process. T he m ean and variance o f this doubly stochastic output process are determ ined by the generalized Cam pbell theorem .

T he average o f / (f) is given by the follow ing equation considering A P (t) is a zero m ean process.

E ^ p (r)]= p j 9Î J [l + L where

) ] /^ + AP(x)}z(f - x ) d i \ = I d > ns(t) J (2.18)

is the detected current produced by photo detector and it 's intensity is

proportional to the instantaneous optical pow er P(t). T he variance o f Ip{t) is given by

CL19) F rom equation (2.10) and (2.11), this sim plifies to,

16

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

Var[/^(0 ]=
I-

JP(x)/i^(r - x ) d i i+Varist Jp(x)/z(f-x)<ix i
J L -- J (2 .2 0 )

The first term in equation (2.20) is the variance o f the shot noise due to the constant optical input pow er. T he second term is the variance o f the relative intensity noise after the receiver filter. Since shot noise already considered in article 2.3 so the relative intensity noise can be re-w ritten as

( l l ) = Varlsi

JP(x ) h ( t - x ) d x
CZ.21)
the expectation of the second o rder term and

since
P (0

variance

is

= [l + (r)][p ,,+ A P(0 ] ^ this sim plifies

Var]l^{t)]=E

9

ÎJ[l +m i' (x)}^P(x')h{t--x ) d x
(2.22)
the previous equation

N ow if w e define a new filter /î (t) = [l + n M (t)IP (,+ A P (t)]
3

sim plifies to

{jl)~

9

Î JA P(x)/zj(t -X)dx
(2.23)

W hen this expression is converted to frequency dom ain it becom es

17

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

( 72 ) = % :
(2 2 4 )

Here,

( / ) is the d o u b le-sided pow er spectral density o f the relative intensity noise.

A t frequency o f interest for analog optical transm ission this has a constant spectrum .

From the conservation o f pow er, the pow er confined in the spectrum

[-^^3

(/)|

is sam e as

the average square value o f the term [l + m j(r)] for an ideal filter. This is independent o f the spectral shape o f j(t). Therefore noise pow er due to R I N is given by

(2.25)
This is the m ost accurate expression for R IN than the w idely used expression for the

variance o f RIN. M any authors have om itted the second term the fact that m ost o f the time m is in the range o f

. This is due to

0 . 1

and j ( f ) « l so that the term is

insignificant. B ut for higher value of m and s(t) this term is not negligible. Considering the small value o f m and ^ ) « 1 the equation o f R I N can be w ritten as

Ifm N ) = a - Ri N= R I N { ^ P f B

(2.26)

18

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

H ere the RIN, w hich is m easured in dB/H z is defined by the noise to signal pow er ratio

R IN =

(:L27)

w here

(AP^)^ is the m ean square intensity fluctuation o f the laser output

is the

average laser light intensity and B is the bandw idth. Typically, a R I N value is specified fo r a given laser diode in dBm/Hz. This R I N value is related to the d o u b le-sid ed pow er spectral density iV by the follow ing equation

(2.28)

In linear scale the R I N can be w ritten as
^ RI N

(2.29)

R I N ( .d B I Hz)

where

=10

 «

(2.30) (2 31)

and / , = 91P

19

R eD roduced with D erm ission o f th e coDvriaht ow ner. Further reoroduction orohibited w ithout o er m issio n .

H ere 91 is the responsivity o f photodiode, and it specifies the photocurrent generated per unit optical pow er, R I ^ is the relative intensity noise in linear s c a l e , i s photocurrent

and P is optical power.

T he stochastic rate equations for laser sim plified w hen L angevin forces are assum ed to be G aussian random process w ith zero m ean and under M arkovian approxim ation [4]. The definition o f R I N is derived from this approxim ation so we can say that distribution o f R IN is also a G aussian and fo r our sim ulation w e also consider the probability o f distribution o f relative intensity noise is w hite Gaussian.

W hen light travel through a fiber link som e optical pow er gets reflected due to refractive index discontinuities in splices, coupler and filters etc. T his reflected signal degrades the perform ance o f receiver and transm itter. F or h ig h -sp eed analog link, we need to consider to m inim ize optical reflections back in to the laser otherw ise it can cause intensity noise, phase noise and change its w avelength and linew idth. A nd hence reduce the signal to noise ratio. It has been dem onstrated that because o f back -reflected signals in an optical fiber link the R I N increases by 1 0 -2 0 dB [1].

20

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

2.5 Thermal Noise
Therm al noise in an electrical circuit arises due to the random fluctuation o f electron and it is a function of absolute tem perature. All the resistive elem ents of an electrical circuit is the m ain source o f the therm al noise. The therm al noise is independent to the optical signal level but increase w ith the tem perature (ie proportional to the absolute tem perature). In an analog optical fiber link photodiode and am plifier are the main source o f therm al noise. T he equivalent current noise source has a d o u b le-sid ed pow er spectral density. T o sim plify the analysis o f the receiver circuitry, if w e assum e that the am plifier input im pedance is m uch greater than the load resistance ( R ^ ) , so that its therm al noise is m uch sm aller than that o f load resistance . T he photo detector load

resistor contributes a m ean -sq u are therm al noise current, w hich can be express by the following equation

(2.32)
W here kg is B oltazm ann's constant (1.38054 X 10 ^^Ws/K), T is the absolute

tem perature in K elvin,

is the receiver equivalent load resistance and B is the

bandw idth o f the receiver. U sing a load resistor, w hich is large but still consistent with the receiver bandw idth requirem ents, can reduce this noise.

21

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

The thermal noise spectral density is a constant independent of frequency and thus contains equal am ount of power per unit bandw idth regardless of frequency. Therefore the noise spectrum is called white. M any methods of com m unication analysis are based on noise sources having a white pow er spectral density and a Gaussian probability density function. This type o f noise model is called additive white Gaussian noise or AWGN, For our analysis we will consider thermal noise as an additive white Gaussian noise. F rom mathematics we know that the sum o f n statistically independent Gaussian random variables is also a Gaussian random variable. To dem onstrate this point, let

= Z -X, w here the x .

1=1,2,

n, are statistically independent Gaussian random

variables w ith means

variances ^

2

. For n statistically independent random variable

the characteristic function o f Y is given by the following equation

/=l

n
_g2V m v-v'a,/2

12

(2.33)

22

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

n

n

W here

m

a
(=1

n

d

o ^ '

/

Therefore, Y is Gaussian distributed with mean

and variance C T^

For this moment, we assume that the Gaussian approxim ation is valid so that, both therm al and shot noise can be represented by continuous Gaussian distributions. R I N also considered zero mean Gaussian random process. The noise fluctuations caused by thermal effects, relative intensity noise and the shot noise fluctuations are uncorrelated because they are generated from independent physical process. Therefore, the total noise is the sum of three uncorrelated and thus independent Gaussian random variables, one for the shot noise w ith mean (m) equal to the , the other for therm al noise that is

v a ria n c e O ^

zero mean with variance<j^ and for R I N zero mean with variance

. The probability

density function o f the sum of these three random variables is also Gaussian w ith a mean m and a variance ^

2.6 Signal to Noise Ratio at the Receiver
The perform ance of photodetector in a light w ave com m unication system is typically expressed using the signal -to -n o is e ratio (SNR) or carrier-to -n o ise ratio (CNR). Signal to noise ratio (SNR) in an analog receiver is defined as the ratio of the mean square signal current to the mean square noise current. On the other hand, the ratio o f the rms pow er to

23

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

the rms noise pow er at the input of the radio frequency receiver following the photo detection process is known as carrier to noise ratio {CNR). Let us assume a

com m unication system with m m odulation index per RF channel with a DC photocurrent o f I^ and an effective noise bandw idth B at the receiver. Then the SNR can be written as,

SNR=^

(a)
shat + < ^ t h + ^ RIN

(2.34)

w here { h ) --0^1 p ) 1'^ is the mean square signal photocurrent. Substituting for the shot noise, therm al noise and RIN noise we find the SNR at the photodetector is given by [1]

SNR =

{rnMIp

J
Ak T 2B GL35)

l l R I N + lqlpM^^ F { M ) +

W hen the optical power level at the receiver is low, the pream plifier circuit noise (thermal noise) dominate the system noise. For this case the SNR is given by

SNR = (4kpT/R,)B

(2.36)

24

Reproduced with permission of the copyiiqht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

In this case, signal to noise ratio is directly proportional to the square of the received optical power, so in this case for each - I d B variation in received optical power SNR will change by--2dB.

For intermediate power levels the quantum -noise (shot noise) term o f the photodiode will dominate the system noise. In this case the SNR is given by [1]

SNR=- ^ (2.37)

so in interm ediate pow er level SNR ratio will vary by 1 dB for every dB change in the received optical power.

If the laser has a high R IN value so that the reflection noise dominates over other noise terms, then SNR becomes [1]

RIN.B

(2.38)

w hich is a constant. It does not depend on the photo current in the receiver and can be im proved by reducing laser R IN or increase the m odulation index m. From the expression o f various noise com ponents nam ely shot, therm al and RIN noise we see that therm al

25

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyriqht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

noise has a constant variance and depends only on receiver resistance. This possesses a white spectrum . The variance o f relative intensity noise varies with RF signal level because it is proportional to the square of the optical power. Since the instantaneous

optical pow er in the fiber fluctuates at radio frequency, the square of its increase with RF signal level depends on the modulation index m. The variance o f shot noise is linearly proportional to the m ean optical power o f fiber. The mean optical power does not change unless the DC bias current is changed. Therefore, we can say that the shot noise does not change w ith RF pow er and constant for a given modulation index m. W e can additionally points out that (i) T he higher the modulation index m yields better SNR or CNR. This is because m ore pow er is contained in the sidebands com pared to the unmodulated carrier. But we cannot increase the m odulation index as much as we like because nonlinear effects lim it the m odulation index m to a low er value. Usually modulation index m lower than 0.3.

2.7Num ericaî E xam ple of S ign al to Noise Ratio
In this section a numerical exam ple is given to show that how the SNR varies for different noise with variation o f output pow er and m odulation index (ra). SNR for a typical system which is operating in optical wavelength ISOOnm, Bandwidth lOOMHz, received optical pow er /I =P,, [l+0.4sin(ft)t)] where ^ the optical signal average

pow er, C Dis the m essage frequency, relative intensity noise for the laser source is

26

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

-155dB /H z, Pin photodiode produce a 4}iA current in response to a

6

|xW optical

illum ination, the dark current is negligible. Load impedance is IK Q and the system operating at room tem perature (300K) is given below (Fig. 3.):

a ss;

X, X X X > 0 0 0 5 f » E « B B ll t

f

Overall signal to noise ratio Laser noise lim it (RIN) Shot noise lim it Thermal noise lim it

Fig. 3. T he variation o f SNR in dB with respect to output optical pow er in dBm

From Fig. 3. we can say that signal to noise (SNR) ratio for relative intensity noise is constant w ith output optical pow er whereas signal to noise ratio (SNR) for shot noise and therm al noise increases with increases o f output optical power. Overall (considering three noise together) signal to noise ratio increases w ith output optical pow er but after sometimes it becomes constant when relative intensity noise dominates over other noise.

27

Reproduced with perm ission of the copvrlpht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

3w »w T ^^ : 3#xx'

-^S'.GO
*ft M
+ + X Overall signal to noise ratio Laser noise (RIN) Shot noise Thermal noise

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

'* ^

06

09

Modulation Index (ml ^

'

Fig. 4.

V ariation o f SNR (in dB) w ith m odulation index (m) for the typical system

described above for a constant output pow er lOmW.

In Fig. 4. variation o f SNR with m odulation index is shown for the same system described above. From Fig. 4. we can say that signal to noise (SNR) ratio due to therm al and shot noise increases with increase o f m odulation index but for laser relative intensity noise it is constant with change o f m odulation index. Overall (^considering three noise together) signal to noise ratio (SNR) increases with increase o f m odulation index and it rem ain constant after m odulation index 0.15. It is intensity noise over other noise. due to the dom ination o f relative

28

R e o r o d u c e d w ith o e r m i s s i n n n f th p . n n n w r in h t n w n p r

F i i r t h p r m n r n d i i r t t i n n n r n h i h i t o H vA /it hn i i t m a r m i c c i r v n

Chapter 3
Adaptive Noise Cancellation Technique
In this chapter an adaptive noise cancellation technique is described to rem ove the noises from optical fiber link. A b rief description is given about the ste p -b y -ste p process o f the algorithms used for noise cancellation. The sim ulation param eters and its im plem entation are described with figure. L ater an effective discussion is given about the achieve result.

3.1 Algorithms for Adaptive Noise Cancellation
The basic idea o f an adaptive noise cancellation algorithm is to pass the corrupted (signal m ixed w ith noise) signal through a filter that tends to suppress the noise w hile leaving the signal unchanged. As w e m entioned above, this is an adaptive process, w hich means it does not require a com plete priori know ledge o f signal o r noise characteristics. The ste p -b y -ste p process o f the algorithm is described below: (a) Choose o r generate a signal corrupted by noise (b) Generate a A W G N noise signal equivalent to three noise com ponents (thermal noise, shot noise and RIN noise)

(c) Send the noise signal through adaptive filter and filter autom atically generates a replica o f noise

29
Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

(d) Filter adjusts itself to reduce the error betw een filter output and noise (e) F ilter output is subtracted from the corrupted signal and produces denoised signal

Signal+Noise (

+n^)

-output signal z

Noise(nl
Thermal Noise

Shot Noise

RIN Noise

Fig. 5. A daptive noise cancellation using three noise com ponents

T o realize the adaptive noise cancellation, we use tw o inputs and an adaptive filter Fig. 5. O ne input is the signal corrupted by noise (Prim ary Input, w hich can be expressed as s. + «o)- T he other input contains noise related in som e w ay to that in the m ain input but

30

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

does not contain anything related to the signal (noise reference input content three noise com ponents therm al noise, shot noise and R I N noise, all o f are assum e w hite Gaussian noise, expressed as n ,) . T he noise reference input pass through the adaptive filter and an output y is p roduced as close a replica as possible o f m.

O ptical signal

Electrical analog O ptical transm itter O ptical fiber channel O ptical detector

Input signal

Signal + Noise (si+nO)

O u tp u t signal z

Therm al N oise

ise (ni;

er

Shot Noise

RIN Noise

Fig.

6

. B asic elem ents o f an analog fiber optic link and adaptive noise cancellation

31

ReDroduced with oerm ission of the coovrioht ow ner. Further reoroduction o ro h ib ite d w ithout o e r m is s io n .

The filter readjusts itself continuously to m inim ize the error betw een no and y during this process. Then the output y is subtracted from the prim ary input to produce the system output which is the denoised signed. The basic elem ents o f the an analog fiber optic link to adaptive noise cancellation o f the noise is shown in Fig.
6

. A ssum e that s,., n

g, n^ and y are statistically stationary and have zero m eans. Suppose that

is

uncorrelated w ith no and n i, n, is correlated with Hq. W e can get the follow ing equation o f expectations:

E[z^]=E[.yf]+E[(,,,,-y)2]

(3.1)

W hen the filter is adjusted so that E[z^] is m inim ized, E [(no - y)^] is also m inim ized. So the system output z can serve as the error signal for the adaptive filter. Several algorithm s can be used for the adaptive filter. The L east M ean Squared (LM S) algorithm is the m ost w idely used and the sim plest one. B ut it is not effective for convergence o f h ig h -sp eed signal. The second one is Recursive L east Squares or RLS algorithm s. Several investigators derived RLS independently. H ow ever, the original reference on the RLS algorithm s given by Placket in 1950 [3]. T he RLS algorithm s use the inform ation contained in all the previous input data to estim ate the inverse o f the autocorrelation m atrix o f the input vector. It uses this estim ate to properly adjust the tap w eights o f the filter. The algorithm w orks in follow ing sequence:

32

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

·

C om pute output o f the signal

·

C om pute E rror

·

C om pute the K alm au gain vector

·

U pdate inverse o f th e correlation m atrix

·

U pdate the co-- efficient

T he follow ing are the equations [19] used for calculating various data fo r the RLS algorithm

Com pute K alm an gain vector k ( n) = -- -

--------------

(3.2)

l + r 'C /''(n )P (n -l)f/(n )

Compute output y{n) = w'" (n -1 )1 7 (n)

(3.3)

Com pute error e{n) = d ( n ) - y ( n )

(3.4)

Update coefficients w(n) = w ( n - 1) + k (n )e (n )

(3.5)

Update inverse o f the correlation m atrix P(n) = X~^P{n - 1 ) - X~'k(n)U^ (n)P (n - 1 ) (3.6)

in the above equations P corresponds to the inverse o f the autocorrelation m atrix o f the input signal, k is called the K alm an gain vector. L am bda is the forgetting factor, w hich tells the filter to forget the earlier inputs, e is the error signal, w is the w eight co -e ffic ie n t

33

R eD roduced with o er m issio n o f th e coovrioh t ow n er. Further reoroduction o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t n e r m ia e in n

o f the filter, y is the output. H ere w e used stationary inputs, fo r this reason lam bda is set to 1, w hich is know n as the infinite m em ory version o f the algorithm .

3.2 Simulation Results
Based on the RLS algorithm an original signal is recovered fro m corrupted signal. H ere noise are considered as random G aussian in nature and artificially generated. T he entire noise signal is assum ed w hite G aussian noise because all the noise can be represented by equivalent A W G N noise. The flow chart for the entire adaptive noise cancellation process is show n in Fig. 7.

34

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

^

START

2 )

AWGN Thermal noise generator

Poisson distributed shot noise generator

AW GN RIN noise generator

_______SE ____
Generate equival ent AW GN shot noise Generate asinusoidal signal corrupted by noise

Adaptive filte r w it h RLS algorithm

No
OTor square<=MMSE

Yes
Subtract therepl icaof noise from corrupted signal

Denoised signal

Fig. 7. Flow chart for the adaptive noise cancellation from analog optical link

35

R eproduced with perm ission of the coovrioht o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n n rn h ih lte d w ith o u t o p rm ic cin n

For tiie simulation the parameter chosen is given below:

·

Bandwidth o f the signal is 10 M Hz

·

Sampling frequency is chosen as 40 M Hz

·

Tap weights for filters is 8

·

Lam bda is chosen 1

For our simulation we consider a typical system which operating at a temperature 300 degree Kelvin, Relative intensity noise is -1 5 5 dB/Hz, photocurrent = 4j:10

optical power Pq = 6xlO~^ w a tt, load resistance is 1000 Ohms, Bandwidth (B) for the system is considered 10 MHz. By applying the equation (2.12) the shot noise variance for the system is calculated, from equation (2.29) relative intensity noise variance is calculated and from equation (2.32) thermal noise variance is calculated . B y adding these three noise variances we can get the variance for the overall noise signal. In simulation all the three noise variance add together to get the the variance o f the over all noise . This overall variance is used to generate a random Gaussian noise signal. Sample computer program for the simulation is shown in appendix.

We can see from Fig. 8. the filter tap weight amplitude variation w ith number of samples of the signal, where w(0), w ( l) w(7) are the filter tap weights. V ector of the

amplitude o f the tap weights is given by w=[2.65, -2 .1 , 0.9, -0 .8 , 0.4, -0 .4 , 0.2, 0]. It is evident that 8 tap weights are sufficient for cancellation o f noise from the signal.

From the learning curve given in Fig. 12. to Fig. 14. we can say that average error square o f the signal become almost few samples. and for Fig. 16 to Fig. 18 it becom es after

36

Reproduced with perm ission of the copvriaht owner. Further reproduction orohibited without oerm ission.

Fig. 9. shows the noise with signal and Fig. 10. shows the denoised signal after removal o f the noise from signal. From the Fig. 11. we can see that how the filter rem oved the noises from a low frequency sinusoid signal. Both the corrupted signal and denoised signal shown in this Fig .11.

Filter tap vveignl

'-H vr-'-S»-.
-

0)

*4

-r

,

V» 

..

vîW'.-î.'î ig$> *
.X- .-2
% 4 0O6< ^) 0 f^MW (w )vO* M iiO # O *(' ()00OC0O0O<>O4CiW O W O4O('')') ( 4 % t'(w >') v #  'W « I' q0O('0O0(iO0(' O0W)00O0*O ') » (H )4OWC4 <X:

ttj

No of sam ples(n)
«ISlUWJtJftfgUülSÎT'S'J

Fig. 8. Filter tap weights

From Fig. 12. to Fig. 21. we can see the learning curve o f the filter for different m odulation indexes and bandwidth. The learning curve for different bandwidths with a constant m odulation shows that the average error square o f the signal becomes iO"^ after 5 to 20 samples for bandwidth upto 75 M Hz and for bandw idth greater than 75

37

Reproduced with oerm ission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm issio n

M Hz the average error square o f the signal becomes ^Q-4 after few hundreds samples ie there still present some noise for these bandwidths.

V

'0.Ü

«.'3ô:ld 41 %'SU'W »

»
%

-w
I $ Fig. 9. Signal w ith noise

So we can say

that this filter can

rem ove noise from the corrupted signal

reasonably for bandw idth upto 75 M Hz but after that bandwidths it can remove noise with some error. It also evident from the learning curve of the filter that it can remove noise from signal w ith constant bandw idth ( Fig. 16. to Fig. 18.) with variable

38

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

modulaüon index and vice versa (Fig. 19. to Fig. 21.). By using this filter we can achieve
som e am ount o f signal to noise ratio (SNR) im provement depending on the nature o f the noise, bandwidth, m odulation index and signal power.

-is

sq:|
S

Ü ' ..50'-

m ]K à m .3 0 0

'350:..: 400

.450

'

=

Fig. 10. Denoised signal

39

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

##00_.,45q0.''BC0pg

Fig. 11. Signal with noise and denoised signal

40

R e D r o d u c e d w ith nerm lç;çîinn n f t h n n n n v /rin h t n w n n r

F i i r t h o r r a n r n r l : i n H n n n r n h l K i tc iH tA/lthrvi if n a r m i

ii;sg,æ8 a!as!^!^5¥iM ;sgig

 _________

jw*5ë

S>«'tA.f>M .«

wa* M EB B m W I Fig. 12. Learning curve o f the filter for 10 M Hz bandwidth

2_' .'J

m e#

lu )
;·'

S jO

Fig. 13. Learning curve o f the filter for 20 M Hz bandwidth

41

R eD roduced with oerm issio n of th e co o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r reo ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is sio n

*% #A "%
_

-I: H f>

.,.

ftUï^mm U M B M

7CO

% -,

OQO . 9 0 0 : 1Ü00 j-4
»vU>M 4 kl

,^ 3 m i

Fig. 14. Learning curve o f the filter for 50 M Hz bandw idth

m m

X>n '"'1C

400

igdo

600

/ . Ü O Û

900

.lUOU.'V

N o ol « a m p le s

&

Fig. 15. Learning curve o f the filter for 75 M Hz bandw idth

42

Reproduced with perm ission of the coovriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without oerm ission.

v Z C a . ItAe' ÿ S'- · f f } T r% t^ rro

% * r / r » " "' 'I

-so .

100 ,160 ^

^

J

. I ... .r i j

40Q

^%aO

GQO

Fig. 16. Learning curve o f the filter for m odulation index 0.10 and 10 M H z bandw idth

`i l
 ·` · îitt

Fig. 17. Learning curve o f the filter for m odulation index 0.15 and 10 M H z bandw idth

43

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

ÔUO
W j Of s a n p l f -

350
'* " `

Fig. 18. L earning curve o f the filter for m odulation index 0.20 and 10 M H z bandw idth

Â O T i.tn 0 1 tl

imasiiffl]

M M SBa

Fig. 19. Learning curve o f the filter for m odulation index 0.10 and 20 M H z bandw idth

44

R eorodU C ed with n e rm is s in n of th e e n n v rin h t n w n e r

F u rth e r renrnH i intien n m h ih iferl

vA /i+heiit

earm iccim n

^ m

 "

i

^

I

k

% " " " * " ^ ^ 1 TM " " * " " ^ l" "

I *

5 10

/ocag SCO
N o o f «; n n p jl

^  .if i.;';· ( . · I ' .» .»

faob

Fig. 20. L earning curve o f the filter for m odulation index 0.10 and 30 M Hz bandw idth

I

11/0 M R B B B K K O M m

mi

'no

mms

eOOBBGOO . 7 0 0 .
i T O

800' agK gm gB B g' U

 No p p i

Fig. 21. L earning curve o f the filter for m odulation index 0.10 and 50 M Hz bandw idth

45

R eoroduced w ith o e r m is s io n of th e co D v rio h t o w n e r . F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n n ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s in n

Chapter 4
Conclusion and Discussion
In this chapter a b rief discussion is given on the sim ulation result. T he future effort needed to im plem ent the sim ulation fo r real case analysis also discussed w ith conclusion.

4.1 Discussion
Telecom m unication (digital or analog) based on optical fiber link becom es one o f the m ost active expanding areas due to rapidly grow ing dem and for high data rate, m ultim edia signal etc. A nalog optical links are im portant for transm ission o f signals over long distance and it has high dem and due to low loss o f optical fiber. A lthough it has high dem and, its utilization is affected by a num ber o f im pairm ents such as different kind o f noise (therm al, shot, R IN noise), dispersion etc. The perform ance o f an analog receiver m easured by the signal to noise ratio (SNR). N oise presence in the signal degrades the signal to noise ratio. So to im prove the SNR is the dem and for m any potential applications o f fiber optic link. The m ain noise o f an analog fiber optic link m ainly considered as phase noise, therm al noise, shot noise, relative intensity noise (RIN). F o r our analysis and sim ulation three m ain noise are considered. This project report illustrates a sim ulation m odel o f an analog fiber optic link system using M ATLA B softw are and provides a feasible solution to im prove the perform ance o f the fiber optic link by rem oving the noise from the corrupted signal.

46

R eproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

In our p resent work, w e have discussed the m ethod o f adaptive noise cancellation technique for fib er optic link. In this project report we described the m otivation for investigating the adaptive noise cancellation technique for fib er optic links w ith previous w ork done in these fields. It also includes a b rief description o f the system com ponents and how they are considered in our analysis. A t the end we described the algorithm s used for cancellation o f m ain three noise com ponents optical fib er link and its im plem entation. Lots o f efforts so far have been given to elim inate or rem ove th e a b o v e m entioned noise fro m the analog optical fiber link m any different w ays. F rom the references and analysis we can see that all o f the previous researchers try to com pensate the noise individually such as some try to com pensate laser relative intensity noise (R IN ) o r shot noise or therm al noise in transm itter, receiver, am plifier etc. M ost o f them try to design com ponents (am plifier, transm itter, diode, receiver) w ith low noise (shot, therm al noise or relative intensity noise) figure. (therm al, shot and R IN ) from the

In m y p resen t w ork an adaptive noise cancellation technique is u sed to cancel the three m ain noise (therm al noise, shot noise, and R IN noise). The signal is considered as a sinusoidal w ith different bandw idth and m odulation index and noise in our sim ulation considered as an equivalent o f the three noise (therm al, shot and relative intensity noise) w hich is random ly generated G aussian noise. In our sim ulation different situation has been considered. Som etim es it considered bandw idth is constant but m odulation index is variable and vice versa. F ro m the dem onstrated figure we can conclude th at the noise

47

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyriqht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oerm ission.

(therm al noise, shot noise, R IN noise) from the optical fib er link can be elim inated adaptively w ithout know ing th eir com plete priori know ledge. F ro m o u r sim ulation w e achieve som e im provem ent m odulation index and noise. o f SNR depending on the signal pow er, bandw idth,

F ro m the learning curve fo r the signal for different bandw idth and m odulation index w e can conclude th at the filter can rem ove noise fro m corruptesd signal w ith m inim um m ean square error (M M SE) 10*^ indexes. for different bandw idth and m odulation

4.2 Future Direction
F or our p resent approach and analysis all the noise com ponents w ere converted to or assum ed to be G aussian distributed. W e observed that the noise can be com pletely rem oved fro m the signal. F or future w orks and analysis w e can take the real noise w ith exact probability distribution and nature o f the noise com ponents w ithout their approxim ation. Som eone can take the real tim e m ultim edia signal, w hich is now in G H z range for the sim ulation and im plem ent the adaptive filter in real case analysis for separate th e noise from signal from the received corrupted signal. F ro m the dem onstrated figure and learning curve o f the filter w e see that the filter can rem ove noise com pletely from a signal o f different bandw idth and m odulation index but future transm ission efforts are given to w ork fo r greater bandw idth because noise pow er varies w ith the bandw idth.

48

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

4 3 Conclusion
A daptive noise cancellation technique is effective to rem ove the noise ( therm al, shot and relative intensity noise) from the analog optical fiber link w ithout the com plete priori know ledge . This filter is effective in rem oving noise from the signal o f bandw idth 10"^ after 75 M H z

upto 75 M H z w ith M inim um M ean Square Error ( M M SE) o f

M M SE is too high. B y using this adaptive filter w e observed that som e SN R increase is possible for the optical fiber link. F o r sm aller bandw idth SN R increase is greater than the larger ones.

49

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

References:
[1] [2] G erd Keiser, " Optical fib e r communications" T hird edition, M cG raw -H ill, 2000 B, M Oliver, "Thermal and quantum noise" Proceedings o f IE E E vol. 53, pp 436-454, M ay 1965 [3] [4] Simon H aykin, Adaptive Filter theory, 2"'* edition, Prentice Hall, 1996 S. Ovadia, "Broadband cable T V access networks: From technologies to application" T* edition, Prentice Hall, 2001 [5] R. S. Bondurant, D. W elford, S.B. Alexander, and V.W .S Chan, "Frequency noise cancellation in semiconductor laser by nonlinear heterodyne detection,"

Optical Letter., Vol. 11, pp. 7 9 1-793, Dec 1986. [6] S. Y am ashita and T. Okoshi, " Suppression o f com m on mode beat noise from optical am plifiers using a balanced receiver," Electron Letter. Vol. 28, pp 2 1 23, 1992. [7] E. Ackerman, S. W anuga, J. M acD onald and J. Princr, " Balanced receiver external m odulation fiber optic link architecture with reduced noise figure," IE E E M icrowave theory and technology Symposium. Dig., vol 2, Atlanta, GA, pp 6 1 5 618, 1993. [8] R. Helkey," Relative -Intensity Noise Cancellation in Bandpass External M odulation links," IE E E Transaction on M icrow ave Theory and Technology. Vol. 46, Dec 1998

50

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction orohibited without oerm ission.

[9]

Surindar Dhanjal, " Delayed Linear Prediction Noise Cancellation Technique in Speech Signal", Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (C C E C E --92) Proceedings, Sept. 92.

[10]

P. AkJdraju, D. C. Reddy, " Adaptive Cancellation Technique In Processing M yoelctric Activity o f Respiratory M uscles", IE E E Transaction on Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 39, No. 6, June 1992.

[11]

K azuro Kikuchi and M otoki Kakui, " Reduction o f shot noise w ith L ight Em itting D iodes", IE E E Journal o f Quantum Electronics, Vol. 28, No 7, pp 1626-1630, July 1992

[12]

K. J. W illiam s and R.D. Esman, " Optically A m plified dow n converting Link w ith Shot-- Noise Lim ited Performance", IE E E Photonics Technology Letters, V ol. 8 , No. 1, pp 148-150, Jan 1996.

[13] G unnar Jacobsen, " M ultichannel system design using optical pream plifier and accounting for the effects o f phase noise. A m plifier noise, and Receiver noise" Journal o f Light Wave Technology, Vol. 10, pp. 36 7 -3 7 7 , N o -3 , M arch 1992. [14] H yuck M. Kwon, " Optical orthogonal code division M ultiple Access System - P a r t I A PD noise and Therm al Noise", IE E E Transaction on Communications, V ol 42, n o -7 , pp 2470-2479, July 94 [15] K jell Blotekjaer," Therm al noise in Optical Fibers and its influence on long D istance Coherent com munication Systems", Journal o f Lightwave Technology, V ol. 10, No. 1, pp 3 6 -4 1 , Jan 1992.

51

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

[16]

Edw ard I. Ackerman, Charles H. Cox III, E. Betts, " D esign o f an Optical Link w ith Low N oise Figure", Technical report, Lincoln laboratory, M IT, Jan 2001.

[17]

C. H. Cox III, E .I Ackerman, and G.E. Betts," Some limits on the perform ance o f an analog optical link" Technical report, Lincoln laboratory, M IT, A pril 1999.

[18]

R. D. Hem pstead,"Analysis o f Therm al noise spike cancellation" IE E E Transaction on M agnetics, Vol. M ag -1 1 , no. 5, Sept. 1975.

[19] [20]

John G. Proakis," D igital Communication" forth edition. Tiljay Adalt," Applications o f signal processing to optical Fiber communication" Proceedings o f IE E E Thailand, Sept 2002.

[21]

Bernard W idrow et al," Adaptive N oise Canceling Principles and application". Proceedings o f the IE E E Vol 63, pp 1692-1716, Dec 1975.

[22]

Stephen B. Alexander," Optical Communication Receiver Design", 2""* edition, A Publication o fS P IE , U SA 1997

[23]

G ovinda P. Agrawal," F ib er-O p tic Communication Systems", 2"** edition, A W iley-Interscience Publication, U SA 1997.

[24]

M arvin R. Sambur, " Adaptive Noise Canceling for Speech signals", IE E E Transactions onA SSP , Vol. A SS P -26, #5, pp.419-423, Oct 1978.

52

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

APPENDIX
% % Sample program for Adaptive noise cancellation from an fiber optic link by RLS algorithm clear all; close all; refgain= l; nvaril=0.0001; %% noise variance for shot noise nvari2=0.0002;% % N oise variance for R IN noise c=100*10'^6; %% B it rate o f the signal B=1.00*10^7; %% Bandw idth of the signal considering 30 dB=1000 s/n ratio from the form ula c= B log2(l+ s/n) fs=4.0*10^7; %% Frequency sampling rate greater than 2B T s= l/fs; forder=8; N=IOOOO; t=[0:Ts:10000*Ts]; sg=sin(2*pi.*t.*t/N/N*8); w real=randn(l ,forder) ; nth=fix(rand+0.5 ) ; ns=fix(rand+0.5) *2*sqrt(nvari 1)-sqrt(nvari 1) ; nr=fix(rand+0.5)*2*sqrt(nvari2)-sqrt(nvari2); additivenoise=nth+ns+nr;

53

Reoroduced with oerm ission of th e c o o v ria h t o w n e r. F u rth e r reo ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ited w ith o u t oerm ifision

ref=conv(additivenoise,wreal); . prim ary=sg+ref( 1;length(sg)) ; fref=additivenoise*refgain; lam bda= l; % 5Technically this is lam bda inverse w( 1, :)=zeros( 1,forder); init=100; rinv=diag(ones(l,forder)*init); % zero pad so we can start the filter at 0 and notthrow o f the index frefp ad = [zero s(l,fo rd er-l) fref]; start=flops; for n = l:N ; % offset n so we can start tha correct value o f zero padded fref m = n + fo rd er-l; frefblock=frefpad(m -forder+ l : 1 :m)' ; refp(n)=w(n,:)*(frefblock); output(n)=prim ary(n)-refp(n); k=lam bda*rinv*frefblock/(l+lam bda*frefblock'*rinv*frefblock); w (n+I,:)=w (n,;)+k'*output(n); % Out put used as an error signal rinv=lam bda*rinv-lam bda*k*ffefblock'*rinv; end; w ork=flops-start; w(length(w),:); figure;

54

Reproduced with perm ission of the coovriaht owner. Further reproduction orohibited without oerm ission.

hold on. fo r ii= l:forder; plot(w (:,ii),'r '); end; figure;
s u b p I o t(3 ,l,l);

plot(prinaary);axis([0 length(primary) m in(prim ary) m ax(prim ary)]); titleCPrim ary signal'); subplot(3,l,2); plot(output);axis([0 Iength(primary) m in (sg )-.l m ax(sg)+ .l]); title('Filtered output'); subplot(3,l,3); plot((ref(l:length(refp))-refp).'^2); max(primary)+. 1]); title('M ean squared Error'); axis([0 lengtli(primary) m in(prim ary)-. 1

%% signal to noise ratio calculation after and before filter

sv=2*forder; sw=length(sg); SNRpre=norm (sg(sv;sw))/norm (ref(sv:sw)); %% N oise before filtering

55

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.

SNRpre= 1O*log 10(SNRpre) ; SN R post=norm (sg(sv:sw ))/norni(sg(sv;sw )-output(sv;sw ));% % N oise after filtering SN Rpost=10*logl0(SN R post);

figure; hold on plot(10*logl0(output*10^3),SN R post,'k '); xlabel('output pow er P_o(dB m )') ylabel('signal to noise ratio (SNR) in (dB )'> title('SNR after noise rem oved'); figure; hold on plot(10*logl0(output* 10^3),SNRpre,'g '); xlabel('O utput pow er P_o(dB m )') ylabel('signal to noise ratio(SNR) in (dB )') title('SN R before noise rem oved');

56

Reproduced with perm ission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.


