NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

AN INTERFEROMETRIC STUDY OF FREE CONVECTIVE HEAT TRANSFER IN A DOUBLE GLAZED WINDOW WITH A BETWEEN ? ANES VENETIAN BLIND
by Bertha Lai B.Eng., Ryerson University, 2002

A thesis presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment o f the requirements for the degree of Master o f Applied Science

in the Program of Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004 © Bertha Lai 2004

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

UMI Number: EC52964

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52964 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Borrower

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

m

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Abstract

AN INTERFEROMETRIC STUDY OF FREE CONVECTIVE HEAT TRANSFER IN A DOUBLE GLAZED WINDOW WITH A BETWEEN-PANES VENETIAN BLIND Bertha Lai Master of Applied Science, 2004 Program o f Mechanical Engineering, Ryerson University

The free convective heat transfer in a double-glazed window with between-panes Venetian blinds was measured using a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. A vertical cavity with differentially heated/cooled flat plates was set up with an internal blind at slat angles o f <p = 0 ° , < p = 45°, and 4>= 90° from the horizontal and tip-to-plate spacings of 5 = 2mm, 5 = 4mm, and 5 = 8mm. Heat transfer measurements were taken with air as the test fluid and at Rayleigh numbers o f Ra ~ 4 .5 x l0 \ Ra ~ 6.7x10 \ and Ra ~ 13.1x10"*, based on cavity widths o f IF = 28.7mm, W = 32.7mm, and W = 40.7mm, respectively. Finite

fringe interfere grams were used to obtain local and average heat transfer data. Infinite fringe interferograms were taken to visualize the temperature field within the cavity. A preliminary numerical study of the experimental geometry was also conducted. The

results show that there was substantial variation in local heat transfer rates caused by the presence of the between-panes blind inside the window cavity. In general, experimental average Nusselt numbers were found to be lower than those o f a cavity without blinds.

IV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Acknowledgements

The author would like to acknowledge Dr. D. Naylor for his invaluable advice and continuous guidance throughout the project that showed the way to its successful completion. The author would also like to acknowledge the support o f the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The author is most grateful to Alan Machin for his time and assistance in building the experimental model and setting up equipment for the Laser Interferometry lab. The wonderful help provided by the Engineering Support staff, especially Joseph Amenkrah, is also greatly appreciated. Last but not least, the author wishes to thank her family and friends who have given ongoing support and encouragement. The author especially thanks Karlick for his love and understanding during the course o f this thesis.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table o f Contents

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION BORROWER ABSTRACT ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS TABLE OF CONTENTS LIST OF TABLES LIST OF FIGURES NOMENCLATURE CHAPTER I GENERAL REVIEW 1.1 1.2 1.2.1 1.2.2 1.3 Introduction Literature Review ..... Free Convection in Vertical Cavity Venetian Blind Studies Scope of Research

1 1 iii
IV V

vi viii ix
X

1 3 3
8

11

CHAPTER 2 EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.3.1 2.3.2 2.3.3 2.3.4 2.4 Introduction Interferometer Test S ectio n ................. Hot Isothermal Flat Plate Cold Isothermal Flat Plate Venetian Blind Model Assembly. Scanning and Auxiliary Apparatus 13 14 16 17 20 23 25 30

CHAPTER 3 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND ANALYSIS 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 Introduction Experimental Procedure Interferogram Analysis Calculation o f Local and Average Plate Nusselt Numbers 31 33 35 39

CHAPTER 4 PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 4.1 4.2 Introduction Finite and Infinite Fringe Interferograms 40 40

VI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Page 4.3 4.4 Heat Transfer Results Reproducibility o f Experiments 46 67

CHAPTER 5 NUMERICAL STUDY 5.1 Introduction 5.2 Numerical Model 5.2.1 Model Geometry 5.2.2 Governing Equations and Solution Procedure 5.3 Numerical Results CHAPTER 6 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.1

71 72 72 73 74

6.2 6 .2.1 6 . 2.2 APPENDIX A A.1 A.2 A.3 A.4 A.5 APPENDIX B APPENDIX C C.l C.2 C.3 C.4 C.5 C.6 APPENDIX D D .l D.2

Conclusions Recommendations Recommendations for Experimental Study Recommendations for Numerical Study AIR PROPERTIES Dynamic Viscosity Thermal Conductivity Specific Heat Density Coefficient of Thermal Expansion EXPERIMENTAL DATA SAMPLE CALCULATIONS Given Data Air Properties ................. Rayleigh Number Based On Cavity Width Local Heat Transfer Coefficient Local Nusselt Number Average Nusselt Number EXPERIMENTAL ERROR ANALYSIS Uncertainty in Local Nusselt Number Uncertainty in Rayleigh Number

89 91 91 92

94 94 96 96 96 97

128 129 130 131 133 133 134 136 138

REFERENCES

139

vn

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

List o f Tables

Table

Title

Page

4.1 B .l B.2 B.3 B.4 B.5 B.6 B.7(a) B.7(b) B.7(c) B.7(d) B.7(e) B.7(f) 8.7(g) B.7(h) B.7(i)

Summary of average Nusselt numbers Hot plate thermocouple calibration Cold plate thermocouple calibration Venetian blind thermocouple calibration Plate surface average and blind temperatures for j = 2mm Plate surface average and blind temperatures f o r - 4mm Plate surface average and blind temperatures for 5 = 8mm Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 2mm, 4 >= 0°, top section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, 4>= 0°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, < j) = 0°, bottom section Local Nusselt numbers for ^ = 2mm, (f>- 45°, top section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, 4>= 45°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, cf) = 45°, bottom section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, (p = 90°, top section Local N usselt numbers for s = 2mm, (f) - 90°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, 4>~ 90°, bottom section

64 97 98 98 99 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109

V lll

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

' fable

Title

Page

B.8(a) B.8(b) B.8(c) B.8(d) B.8(e) B.8(f) B.8(g) B.8(h) B.8(i) B.9(a) B.9(b) B.9(c) B.9(d) B.9(e) B.9(f) B.9(g) B.9(h) B.9(i) D.

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 4mm, cjj - 0°, top section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 4mm, (f>= 0°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s - 4mm, 4 >- 0°, bottom section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 4mm, cf) = 45°, top section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 4mm, < f) --45°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 4mm, (p = 45°, bottom section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 4mm, cp = 90°, top section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 4mm, cp = 90°, middle section ........ Local Nusselt numbers for s = 4mm, (p = 90°, bottom section Local Nusselt numbers for = 8mm, (^ = 0°, top section Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = = 8mm, (p = 0°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 8mm, (p = 0°, bottom section Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 8mm, < p= 45°, top section................. Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 8mm, (p = 45°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 8mm, (p = 45°, bottom section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 8mm, ^ = 90°, top section Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 8mm, (p = 90°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s = 8mm, cp = 90°, bottom section 1 Summary o f sources o f uncertainty

110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 134

IX

f :

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

List o f Figures

Figure

Title

Page

1.1 1.2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 2.10 3.1 4.1

Tall rectangular cavity geometry Experimental test geometry Typical layout o f the Ryerson Mach-Zehnder interferometer Photograph o f Test Model with Ryerson MZI Mechanical drawing o f the hot plate Mechanical drawing o f the cold plate's top sheet Mechanical drawing o f the cold plate's backing sheet Venetian blind slat and support system Model assembly Mechanical drawing o f the plexiglass spacers.......... Mechanical drawing o f the plexiglass sheets Scanning Apparatus Interferograms o f working experimental m o d e l ............................... Composite finite and infinite fringe interferograms for s = 2mm and ^ = 0° . Composite infinite fringe interferograms for < ;^= 0° at various s Composite infinite fringe interferograms for 4>= 45° at various s Composite infinite fringe interferograms for 4>= 90° at various s

4 12 15 16 19 21 22 24 27 28 29 30 32

42 43 44 45

4.2 4.3 4.4

X

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure

Title

Page

4.5

Local Nusselt number distribution for s = 2mm and (^= 0° at R a ~

47

4.6 4.7

Sketch o f inner and outer circulation flows Local Nusselt number distribution for s = 4mm and < />= 0° at R a ~ ôJxlO * Local Nusselt number distribution for s = 8mm and < p= 0° at R a ~ 13.1x10'* Local Nusselt number distributions for = 0° at various .

48

50

4.8

51 52

4.9 4.10

Local Nusselt number distribution for s = 2mm and (fj=Q° at R a ~ 4.5x10'* . Local Nusselt number distribution for j- = 4mm and ({) = 0° at R a ~ ôri^TO^ Local Nusselt number distribution for s = 8mm and < p= 0° at R a ~ 13.1x10" . Local Nusselt number distributions for at various s

54

4.11

55

4.12

56 57

4.13 4.14

Local Nusselt number distribution for ^ = 2mm and cf>-0° at R a ~ 4Jxl^ Local Nusselt number distribution for s = 4mm and ^ = 0° at 6.7x10" Local Nusselt number distribution for 5' = 8mm and 13.1x10" ~

59

4.15

60

4.16

Q° at R a ~ 61 62 65 66 69
70

4.17 4.18 4.19 4.20 4.21

Composite infinite fringe interferograms for s = 8mm and (f>= 90°. Local Nusselt number distributions f o r = 2mm at various (f> Local Nusselt number distributions for s = 4mm at various c f> Comparison of average Nusselt numbers with cavity correlation Reproducibility test for s = 2mm and = 0°, bottom section.

XI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure

Title

Page

5.1 5.2 5.3

Numerical model geometry Comparison o f temperature contours for 0 --0° at various s Comparison o f local Nusselt number distribution for s = 2mm and (p = 0° Comparison o f local Nusselt number distribution for s = 4mm and = Comparison o f local Nusselt number distribution for s = 8mm and 4>= Q° . ................. Comparison o f local Nusselt number distribution for 5 = 2mm and <^ = 45°. Comparison o f stream and temperature contours with infinite fringe interferogram for .s = 2mm and (f) = 45° Comparison o f stream and temperature contours with infinite fringe interferogram for 5 = 8mm and cf) = 90° Comparison o f local Nusselt number distribution for .v = 2mm and ^ = 90° Comparison o f numerical and experimental average Nusselt numbers for 4>- 90° Comparison o f numerical and experimental average Nusselt numbers for ^ = 0° Comparison o f numerical and experimental average Nusselt numbers for ^ = 45° A ir properties: dynamic viscosity & thermal c o n d u c tiv ity

72 75

77

5.4

78

5.5

79

5.6

81

5.7

82

5.8

83

5.9

84

5.10

86

5.11

87

5.12

88 96

A. 1

XII

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Nomenclature

A a b c Cp d g G Gr hy k L n Nuavg Nuy p Pr R Ra s SF T u, V U, V W X X, Y Z

aspect ratio amplitude o f light [m] nominal blind-to-plate spacing speed o f light [m/s] specific heat [J/kg-K] pin and gauge block distance [mm] gravitational acceleration [m/s^] Gladstone-Dale constant [m^/kg] Grashof number local convective coefficient [W/m^-K] thermal conductivity [W/m-K] vertical height o f the cavity [m] index o f refraction average Nusselt number local Nusselt number pressure [Pa] Prandtl number ideal gas constant [J/kg-K] Rayleigh number based on cavity width blind tip-to-plate spacing scale factor temperature [K] velocity components [m/s] dimensionless velocity components width o f the cavity [m] fringe distance [mm] dimensionless co-ordinates optical length o f plate [m]

G re ek

a P e Sp As

thermal diffusivity [m^/s] volumetric expansion coefficient [K"'] fringe shift order surface paint emissivity fringe shift [mm]

xm

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

9 À M
V

P 4 >

dimensionless temperature wavelength [m] dynamic viscosity [N-s/m"] kinematic viscosity [mVs] density [kg/m^] blind slat angle

Subscripts

actual c / h o photo pin ref s test
00

actual value value for cold plate value evaluated at film temperature value for hot plate initial value value taken from interferogram value for the pin value for the reference beam value for the surface of the plate value for the test beam value for the ambient

Abbreviations

BS CFD CSA DA FEHT IGU LTP M MZI NFRC SHG ZHF

beam splitter computational fluid dynamics Canadian Standards Association data acquisition Finite Element Heat Transfer insulated glazing unit linear temperature profile flat mirror Mach-Zehnder interferometer National Fenestration Rating Council solar heat gain zero heat flux

XIV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter 1 GENERAL REVIEW

1.1

Introduction

Heat transfer through windows and other fenestration systems is receiving escalating attention from researchers as people become increasingly aware o f the importance o f energy efficiency. In most building structures, substantial amounts of heat gain in the summer and heat loss in the winter through windows add to energy consumption and undesirable costs. For this reason, the double-glazed window has been used extensively for the insulating effects provided by its air-filled cavity. The design o f windows is aided by the wide use o f commercial simulation software in North America. VISION [1] is used by the Canadian Standards Association (CSA), while WINDOW [2] is used by the National Fenestration Rating Council (NFRC). These programs have been developed to examine one-dimensional heat transfer for a variety o f glazing systems and environmental conditions, and provide users with the centre-glass U-value and solar heat gain (SHG) coefficient. Shading devices, such as Venetian blinds, are commonly placed near windows to act as a screen from direct sunlight, improve thermal performance, provide privacy, as well as for aesthetics and other benefits. Although the effect o f these shading devices on a window performance is a subject o f interest for many researchers, no correlations are currently available to predict the heat transfer results for these problems. Consequently, neither VISION nor WINDOW is able to include shading devices in their calculations.

1

Reoroduced with D e r m i s s i o n of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

The cunent study is part of an ongoing effort to understand the thermal interaction between a window and a blind. between-panes louvered blind. The focus o f the present work is on a

Several window companies offer this contemporary

design in which the blind is located between the glass panes inside the enclosed cavity of a double-glazed window. This conveniently keeps the blind away from tampering and dust, and with the control mechanism hidden in the frame, eliminates the unwanted strings and cords for a more pleasing appearance. One particular company claims these between-panes blinds can significantly improve the thennal performance of a window by lowering its U-value and SHG coefficient. However, the company states that this is only for the case when the blind is in the closed position, based on the fact that solar transmission is reduced. Nonetheless, to understand the overall effect o f between-panes blind on the thermal performance o f a double-glazed window, it is necessary to also consider the conductive characteristic of the blind when it is fully open, and variations it may cause to the convective flow inside the air space. The current study is an experimental analysis o f the natural convective heat transfer within a double-glazed window containing a set o f internal Venetian blinds. Classical interferometry is used to visualize and measure the variations in the thermal field across the window cavity in the presence of between-panes blind. A preliminary numerical study is also presented, which is used to aid in the design o f the experimental model and interpretation o f the results.

R e o ro d u c e d with o e rm is s io n of th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is sir

1.2

Literature Review

The geometry o f a double-glazed window is essentially a vertical cavity. The heat transfer problem of free convection in a vertical cavity forms the basis for the present study, and a brief summary o f related literature is given. investigations involving Venetian blinds is also provided. A review o f the published

1,2.1

Free Convection in Vertical Cavity

The typical double-glazed window consists o f two panes o f glass separated by an edge-spacer at the top and bottom. The sealed slot is usually filled with air or other types o f gases and acts as an insulating layer between the indoor and outdoor surfaces. The difference in temperature between the glazings drives the fluid into a circulating flow. The thermal performance o f a double-glazed window is strongly dependent on the convective heat transfer inside the enclosure. This phenomenon may be reduced to the simplified model o f free convection in a vertical cavity. The topic o f natural convection in tall, rectangular cavities has been extensively researched for the past century. As shown in Figure 1.1, the geometry in these studies assumes uniform tv.uperatures on the vertical walls, and the horizontal end walls are treated as having either a zero heat flux (ZHF) or a linear temperature profile (LTP). The convection o f fluid inside the cavity is driven by buoyancy, which causes an upward flow near the hot wall and a downward flow near the cold wall. This heat transfer problem has

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

many practical applications, including insulating cavity walls and double-glazed windows. Clearly, the classical cavity model cannot perfectly mimic the complexity o f a commercial double-glazed window, as there are temperature variations on the glazings especially in the edge-glass region, as well as end losses that occur at the edge-spacers. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to go through the major theoretical, experimental, and numerical studies and note the fundamental findings pertaining to this topic. For more detailed reviews, the reader is referred to Ostrach [3], and Wright and Sullivan [4].

ZHF or LTP

H '

Figure 1.1

Tall rectangular cavity geometry

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

It has been found that the solution to this heat transfer problem, the Nusselt number {Nu = hW !k\ is a function of the Rayleigh number {Ra = Pr-gl^ATW^p'///) and the aspect ratio {A = L/W) of the cavity. O f course, these parameters are directly related to variables such as length (I) and width (IF) o f the cavity, temperature difference across the cavity (AT = T/, - Tc), and Prandtl number (Pr = fiCp/k) o f the fluid, that affect the type o f flow, flow regimes, and instability in the flow. Heat transfer correlations that are found in the literature were often given in the form of: Nu = cRa' "A!' (1.1)

The laminar free convection was first defined separately into conduction and boundary layer regimes by Batchelor [5]. Using a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) to obtain local heat transfer results, Eckert and Carlson [6] refined Batchelor's work by proposing conduction, transition, and boundary layer regimes. The conduction regime occurs when the temperature difference is small {Ra <10^). A weak unicellular flow o f fluid traveling up the hot wall and down the cold wall exists, and heat transfer across the cavity is primarily due to conduction between the counter-flowing streams, resulting in a linear temperature profile {Nii =1) . As the temperature difference increases (lO'* < Ra < 10^), the flow strengthens and develops into boundary layers on the vertical walls, separated by a core region. Higher horizontal temperature gradients exist at the walls due to the convection in the boundary layers than in the core region, where only a small degree o f conduction takes place. This is the boundary layer regime, with higher heat transfer rates {Nu > 1). In-between the conduction and bourJ iry layer regimes is the transition regime. Heat transfer is the combination of convection in the boundary layers and conduction across the core region. The critical value o f Ra at which flow leaves the

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

conduction regime is a function o f the enclosure aspect ratio, A. It is noted that a vertical temperature gradient in the core region was also observed once the flow leaves the conduction regime. In addition to the interferometric work by Eckert and Carlson [6], numerous experimental studies have been conducted to obtain visualization and heat transfer data, which were used to gain insight on the fluid flows. Elder took streak photographs using partic'es suspended in water to observe streamlines of laminar [7] and turbulent [8] flows. He discovered a multicellular flow pattern in the core region. This secondary flow

created instability in the conduction and boundary layer regimes which was observed in the streak photographs by Vest and Arpaci [9] and Seki et al. [10]. Yin et al. [11] made temperature profile measurements for a wide range o f Ra and further define the flow regimes. Other experimental studies, like Randall et al. [13], ElSherbiny et al. [14, 15], Shewen et al. [16], have included heat transfer correlations. In particular, ElSherbiny et al. [14] proposed the following well-established correlation: Nu, --0.0605i?a
( 1.2 . 1)

Nu-, = 1 +
,

0.104J(a 0.293

( 1.2 .2 )

k I
Nil, = 0.2421 ^ A

\ + ------

r6310""'

x O .2 7 2

(1.2.3)

Nu = Max{Nu ^, Nu ^, Nii^ ) The correlation is based on experiments carried out over wide ranges o f Ra and A.

(1.2.4)

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Earlier theoretical study was performed by Gill [17], who obtained an approximate solution for the boundary layer flow that agreed with Elder's experimental results. Improvements on Gill's theory were later made by Bejan [18]. The work of Raithby et al. [19] produced solutions for various flow regimes and found even better agreement with existing experimental data. More recent analysis o f Zenouzi and Yener [20] included the effect o f radiation on the natural convection problem. An abundance o f numerical studies exists in the literature, modeling fluid motion inside a cavity with either ZHF or LTP boundary conditions. Amongst them are the papers by Newell and Schmidt [21], Bergholz [22], Jones [23], Raithby and Wong [24], Lee and Korpela [25], Chait and Korpela [26], Ramanan and Korpela [27], and Jin and Chen [28, 29]. The numerical solutions were able to compute instability in the flow, and streamline plots o f the multicellular flow pattern were generated. Attempts were made to predict the onset o f secondary cells at differing critical Rayleigh numbers (Rac). Few studies are available which are directly related to the heat transfer through a double-glazed window. Korpela et al. [30] used the finite difference method to calculate average and local Nusselt numbers and suggested a formula for window spacings. A finite element model was used by Curcija and Goss [31] to study the natural convection in an insulated glazing unit (IGU) coupled with radiative and conductive heat transfer. Window U-values were calculated. Wright and Sullivan [32, 33] developed a numerical model to examine natural convection in a window cavity, which formed the basic model for many subsequent window studies. Finally, Wright [34] developed a new correlation based on the ones presented by ElSherbiny et al. [14] and Shewen et al. [16] that is valid for a variety o f window applications.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1.2.2

Venetian Blind Studies

In recent years, many research studies have emerged regarding the effect o f Venetian blinds on window performance. Some important experimental and numerical investigations were carried out as part o f a collaborative effort to generate valuable information that will be used to develop VISION, so that Venetian blinds and other shading devices can be modeled in the code. The major works are discussed below. The first and most prominent work is the experimental study by Machin [35]. He used an MZI to obtain interferograms and heat transfer data for an isothermal heated flat plate adjacent to a Venetian blind, and took flow visualization photographs as well. The geometry and procedure of this experiment [36] became the standard for other interferometric studies, including the present one. Following Machines experimental

work. Ye [37] worked on a finite element solution to numerically study the effect o f Venetian blinds on heat transfer in various glazing units, such as internal blind in an IGU. Later, Phillips [38] developed a full-scaled finite element model to solve Machin's heat transfer problem. The numerical results were in close agreement with the experimental data. Originally, Phillips et al. [39] used a conjugate conduction/convection model and found that radiation is a significant factor. Based on this finding, a conjugate conduction/ convection/radiation model was created [40]. Again, using the MZI, Duarte [41]

performed an experimental study o f free convection from a heated vertical plate in the presence of heated Venetian blind to simulate solar irradiance. As part o f this

experiment, Naylor and Duarte [42] formulated the direct temperature gradient method to measure low convective heat transfer rates using interferometry.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Other works are the ones by Collins et al. [43, 44, 45] where they conducted an interferometric study [43] o f convective heat transfer from an isothermal surface adjacent to a heated Venetian blind, carried out a numerical analysis [44] on the experimental problem and then validated the results [45] against the experimental data. Oosthuizen et al. [46, 47] examined the effect o f vertical blind on heat transfer from a window in a numerical study. In the most recent studies by Shahid and Naylor [48, 49], the work of Phillips was extended and a conjugate conduction/convection/radiation finite volume model o f a complete fenestration, i.e., single-glazed and double-glazed windows with horizontal Venetian blinds, was developed. The numerical model was validated with the results from Machin [35] and Phillips [38]. Several studies are found to be somewhat related to the current research, and shall be mentioned here. The numerical studies by Kelkar and Patankar [50] and Mezrhab and Bchir [51] both addressed the natural convection in partitioned cavities. Smith et al. [52] presented a numerical model that simulates a double-glazed window with various features, including between-panes vertical and horizontal partitions. Fang [53]

experimentally studied the U-value o f single-glazed and double-glazed windows with a long-wave high-reflectivity Venetian blind. Surprisingly, more than a few papers were discovered in the literature to have studied the effect of between-panes Venetian blinds. Using a guarded-heater-plate

apparatus. Garnet et al. [54] performed an experiment to determine centre-glass U-values o f a window with internal blind, with attention on the effect o f blade angle. Rheault and Bilgen [55] theoretically studied the automated Venetian blind window system. With the louvers modeled as rotating flat surfaces with no curvature, a detailed radiative exchange

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

analysis was carried out. They found a significant reduction in solar heat load at optimal louver angles. The numerical study by Zhang et al. [56] focused on the insulating effect o f the cavity with the blind at the closed position. The slats were modeled as overlaying strips, again with no curvature, with a small spacing between overlaps for air leakage. It was determined that this permeable screen improves the insulating capability o f the cavity by inhibiting the convective heat transfer rate. In Korea, Cho et al. [57] conducted a study on the heating and cooling loads o f a typical building. Similar to Rheault and Bilgen's conclusion, they reported that, by varying the slat angle, the use o f betweenpanes Venetian blinds helps control solar gains. Using a goniospectrometer, Breitenbach et al. [58] measured the solar energy transmittance for a range o f incidence angles at different blind slat angles. After neglecting to model slat curvature, they realized that the spatial distribution of light is strongly influenced by the shape o f the slats. The latest study was by Naylor and Collins [59], who developed a twodimensional finite volume model to calculate heat transfer in a window with betweenpanes Venetian blind. A "Simplified Model", which combines the data from a conjugate conduction/convection CFD model with a simple radiation model, was evaluated against a conjugate conduction/convection/radiation "Full CFD Model". The "Simplified

M odel" closely predicted the window U-value predicted by the "Full CFD Model". This study shows that, for most purposes, thermal radiation can he decoupled from the CFD calculations. The "Simplified Model" may be used to estimate U-value with less

computational requirements, while still accounting the effect o f radiation.

10

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1.3

Scope of Research

As the development o f more sophisticated analysis programs for fenestration systems continues, researchers need to carry out a variety o f experimental and numerical heat transfer studies. Some integral topics include, for example, complex glazing

configurations and the influence o f adjacent shading devices. There is a call for future software releases to incorporate shading devices like the Venetian blind when calculating window performance. With increasing popularity o f the between-panes Venetian blinds, the thermal performance o f this geometry is o f major engineering interest. The objective o f the present research is to determine the effect o f blind slat angle {(f^ and blind tip to window surface spacing (s) on the free convective heat transfer in a double-glazed window with a between-panes Venetian blind. geometry is shown in Figure 1.2. A sketch o f the test

A Mach-Zehnder interferometer will be used to

visualize the natural convection flow inside the window cavity and to measure the heat transfer rates on the hot and cold surfaces. The experimental results are intended to be used primarily for the validation o f future numerical models being developed in a joint project by Ryerson University, Queen's University, and the University o f Waterloo. As part o f a preliminary study, a basic numerical solution will be obtained for the free convection in the test geometry. The numerical results are intended to simulate the conditions o f the present experiment and provide an estimation o f the heat transfer results.

11

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

i» R S

-Z H F

7 },

Figure 1.2

Experimental test geometry

12

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter 2 I PERIMENT AL APPARATUS

'
i

2.1

Introduction

`

There are many types o f optical techniques used for heat transfer studies [60]. The present experiment was carried out with a Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI). The

I
i

method o f laser interferometry provided visualization o f the temperature field from which local temperature measurements and heat transfer data could be obtained. The theory and technique o f classical interferometry using a Mach-Zehnder interferometer has been described in reference [61]. This system is particularly

:

advantageous because o f the large displacement o f the test beam from the reference beam, allowing for high quality and accurate interference. It is non-intrusive to either the
I

I

temperature or the flow, giving full-field measurements with no disturbance. There is no thermal inertia, permitting real time visualization and measurements. There are some limitations with the MZI. Interferometry is ideal for

measurements of two-dimensional temperature fields, and is difficult to apply to turbulent flow. The test fluid must be transparent to laser light, which is air in this case. Because o f the sensitivity o f the system, the working environment has to be clean and have very low vibration levels. The interferometer consists o f expensive and extremely delicate optics, which requires careful handling and proper set up by a skilled operator. The reader is referred to more comprehensive studies on the theory of interferometry [60] and other optical techniques [62].

13

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout permission.

2.2

Interferometer

The M ach-Zehnder interferometer is used to measure and visualize the free convective temperature field o f the window cavity. The test fluid in the study is air, which is suitable for this application since it is homogeneous and transparent to radiation so that only the convective heat transfer component is measured. Air can also be

considered as an ideal gas, relating the temperature field directly to the density field. The Ryerson Mach-Zehnder interferometer was constructed by Von Bistram in 1994, based on Tarasuk's design [63] and the interferometer at the University o f Western Ontario. Further details can be found in Von Bistram's thesis [64] at Ryerson University. The schematic diagram in Figure 2.1 shows the typical layout o f the Ryerson M ach-Zehnder interferometer. The light source is a 15 mW Flelium-Neon laser, which produces monochromatic light at a wavelength o f A = 6.328x10'^ m. The beam first

passes through a spatial filter that filters and expands the beam onto a parabolic mirror, generating a collimated beam with a diameter o f about 20 cm. It then strikes the first beam splitter (B Sl), where it is separated into the reference beam and test beam. These two beams are perfectly in phase and have approximately the same intensity. The test beam and reference beam are reflected off two flat mirrors (M l and M2, respectively). The reference beam travels tlirough ambient air at room temperature, while the test beam passes through the experimental model, in this case the window cavity. The air in the cavity is at various temperatures different than the ambient air temperature, which changes its index o f refraction. This causes the light passing through ambient air and the light passing by the model to travel at different speeds. The two beams, which are now

14

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

T
out o f phase with each other, are recombined at the second beam splitter (BS2). The output beam shows the pattern of constructive and destructive interference and can be recorded as interferograms. A spherical mirror focuses the beam onto a small mirror which reflects the image back for recording by a camera.

S p in ie r

/ jL .

/

^ E x p e r im e n ta l M odel

7

\
^

Hat
M irror
(M l)

S p h e r ic a l M ir r o r
(B S l)

L a ser B eam S p litter P a r a b o lic B eam E xpander M irror

F lat M ir ro r
(M 2)

]

Figure 2.1

Typical layout o f the Ryerson Mach-Zehnder interferometer

The interferometer was mounted on an optical bench manufactured by Newport Corporation, 1.205m x 3.03m (4' x 10') with 1/4-20 NC tapped holes equally spaced on 25.4mm (1") centres. The bench was placed on eight inner tubes to reduce vibrations. Some o f the optics were cantilevered on 9.525mm (3/8") steel plates off one side o f the bench in order to accommodate the experimental model. The apparatus was put inside a 3.66m X 6.10m x 2.44m (12' x 20' x 8 ') enclosure to reduce air currents and exterior light.

15

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.3

Test Section

The test section was a vertical  cavity consisting o f two isothermal flat plates separated by spacers at the top and bottom ends. A set o f seventeen blind slats were situated at the centre of the cavity on support posts that were mounted onto the spacers. The entire model had an overall height, width, and depth o f 393.7mm x 215.9mm x 355.6mm (15-1/2"
x

8-1/2"

x

14"), respectively.

A photo of the test model with the

Ryerson Mach-Zehnder interferometer is given in Figure 2.2.

Figure 2.2

Photograph o f Test Model with Ryerson MZI

16

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

t !
i

?

2.3.1

Hot Isothermal Flat Plate

1
! ; ) ) j > ! : I Figure 2.3 shows a mechanical drawing o f the hot plate. The size o f the plate was chosen based on the considerations discussed in Machin's thesis [35]. The 12.7mm (1/2") thick aluminum plate had a width o f 355.6mm (14"), corresponding to approximately nine fringes in the infinite fringe mode for a 20°C temperature difference across the cavity (2.2°C per fringe). The height of the plate was 393.7mm (15-1/2"), which was based on the original height o f 380mm (15") selected by Machin [35]. The extra height was added to fit the end spacers while still holding the same number o f blind slats as M achin's model. It was decided that three composite interferograms would be necessary in order the study the entire cavity from top to bottom. The aluminum plate was machined to its exact dimensions on the Ryerson CNC milling machine. The front surface of the plate was milled in the beam direction to a flatness o f within ±0.12mm. The improved flatness makes the alignment o f the test beam with the model more accurate, hence yielding better results. Also for alignment purposes, twelve holes were drilled at precise locations for dowel pins (Spaenaur Inc. 238-277). The surface was then spray-painted with an enamel paint that has a known emissivity of C p = 0.81 ± 0.02, measured at the University o f Waterloo using an infrared reflectometer. This is close to the emissivity of untreated window glass. The hot plate had to be heated to temperature T, above the ambient temperature Too. This was done by six electric strip heaters adhered to the back surface to deliver the desired amount of heat evenly throughout the front surface. Based on the plate

17

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

configuration and the heat loss calculations according to manufacturing specifications, it was determined that a total power o f 14.8W was required. The chosen heaters (Minco Products Inc. model HK 5426 R8.3 L36 B) were Kapton insulated self-adhesive heaters in the size o f 51mm x 178mm (2" x 7 ") with a resistance of 8.30, accurate to ±10%. The heaters were arranged in three rows with two heaters side by side covering the entire width o f the plate in each row. The three heaters on each side were connected in series and the two sides connected in parallel, with a total resistance o f 12.450. The temperature o f the plate was measured by eight thermocouples strategically placed at various locations on the back o f the plate. Holes were drilled into the back surface of the plate such that the thermocouple tips were within
2 mm

below the front

surface. The type of thermocouple used (Omega Engineering Inc. type TT-T-24-SLE) was high performance Teflon-coated 24 gauge type T (copper-constantan), which has a deviation o f 0.4°F at 200.2°F. The thermocouples were calibrated in an isothermal bath against a precision thermometer calibrated against national standards (see Appendix B). The thermocouples were connected to a data acquisition (DA) system where the ambient and plate temperatures were monitored. For all experiments, the plate was isothermal to within 0.6 °C, which was 3% of the overall temperature difference (AT = 20°C). On the back surface of the plate, there were sixteen 1/4-20 blind tapped holes for mounting. The back side o f the plate was insulated by a layer o f 25.4mm (1") thick polystyrene and 12.7mm (1/2") thick plywood, secured into these holes with nylon threaded rods and nuts. The plate assembly was supported on aluminum angle brackets and mounted onto the base plate. The complete model assembly shall be discussed in Section 2.3.4.

18

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

JJ CD X D O
Q. C

8 Qg "O
C D

(/) CO
o'

3

8235

C 3-I/4";

CD

3

CD

3*

D A S H E D L IN E S SHOOJ ·L O C A T IO N O F PLA TE HEATERS l& x 8 3 5 d / 4 'V T A PPE D HOLES Sx HOLES FOR THERM OCO UPLE

iD  O CL
C VO

a O 3 "O O

S.
o c

 D
B A C K VIEW cn

w
o'
3
NOTE: I. ALUMINUM P L A T E S H A L L B E 12.1 C l/2 " ; T H IC K .

Figure 2.3

Mechanical drawing of the hot plate

2.3.2

Cold Isothermal Flat Plate

The cold plate used in the test section was manufactured from two different sheets o f aluminum. The top sheet had a thickness o f 19.05mm (3/4"), with flow

channels milled into its back surface. The 6.35mm (1/4") thick backing sheet served to close the flow channels. Mechanical drawings of the top and backing sheets are shown in Figures 2.4 and 2.5. The size o f the assembled cold plate was 25.4mm (1") thick, with the same height and width as the hot plate o f 393.7mm x 355.6mm (15-1/2" x 14"). The cold plate was cooled to a constant temperature using a precision temperature bath. Cold water was pumped through a 12.7mm (1/2") flow channel milled into the hack surface o f the top sheet at a depth of 6.35mm (1/4"). The path o f the flow channel was designed such that the inlet coils alongside the outlet towards the centre o f the plate. This design promotes isothermal conditions within the plate. The front surface o f the top sheet was treated the same way as the front surface hot plate described in Section 2.3.1. A separate backing sheet was machined to seal the flow channel. A 3.5mm

(0.139") diameter 0-ring gasket was added to stop water leakage (Spaenaur Inc. 825175). The backing sheet was fastened to the top sheet using thirty-two 5-40 screws

around the perimeter o f the plate. Since additional mounting holes cannot be drilled as they would interfere with the flow channel, the plate had to be mounted on the aluminum angle brackets with these same screws. The small size o f these fasteners limited the weight o f the plate assembly that can be supported, so it was decided that the polystyrene insulation and the plywood would not be attached on the back o f the cold plate. A study was performed using the heat transfer software FEHT [65] to calculate the amount of heat

20

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

JD CD T 3 O
Q.
C

r,-j=W»n:ur«ri5n(.S|lç«)(Jîj|a

s Q_
T3
CD

12.1
31.15 d - l/4 'V

(\/2" )

C/Î
CO

o' 3

12.1 Cl/2"; FLOW CHANNEL 6 3 5 Cl/4"; C2AP BETWEEN CHANNELS

O O g c q `
3"

CD

120

3
CD

4 2 3 6 2 5 CI-ll/16"; EQUALLY SPA CED PINS

Tl C
3"
CD CD

3 4 x *3.115 C*l/S"; SECURING PIN 3.115 Cl/8"; O -R IN G GASKET

T3

O Q. O 3
T3

K )
I2x H O L E S F O R LEVELING PIN S FRONT VIEW

I0X *1.5815 C *l/I6"; HO LES FO R THERM OCOUPLES

O 3"
CD CL

C T

O c  a CD
cn
CD

3"

NOTE: I. 2. ALUMINUM P L A T E SHALL B E 19.05 C 3 /4 "; THICK. FRONT SU RFA C E O F P L A T E SH A LL B E P R E C IS IO N FLAT MILLED. FLOW CHA NNELS SHALL B E MILLED INTO B A C K SURFACE AT D E P T H OF 6 3 5 Cl/4";. H O L E S F O R T H ER M O C O U P L E S SHALL B E D R IL L E D INTO B A C K SURFA CE cCF P LA T E AT LO C A TIO N S INDICATED ON DRAWING *02. D E P T H CCF H O L E S 'S H A L L B E 11.4625 Cll/16";.

o'
3

3. 4.

Figure 2.4

Mechanical drawing of the cold plate's top sheet

-S
o

J3

a c
o
CD

CL

TJ
CD

C/)

o'

oe 3 355*
( \4 V
2 5 .4 CI")

O O *o C û'
=r

CD

3
CD

3.115 n/sv
C3-RINC3 G A S K E T

*o O Q .
C

CD

S -. o 3  Q O 3*
cr
CL

4 2 * 6 2 5 n - ii/iè " ; EQUALLY SPA CED PIN S

K ) N J

152.4
(&'')

3 4 x *3.115 ('*1/8"; SECURING PIN

o c
T3

(D
cn cn

o'
3

B A C K VIEW

NOTE: I. ALUMINUM B A C K IN G P L A T E SHALL B E 6 3 5 d / 4 " ; THICK.

Figure 2.5

Mechanical drawing of the cold plate's backing sheet

gain from the ambient without the use o f any insulation. The results confirmed that the lack o f insulation causes a temperature change throughout the plate surface o f less than ±0.02°C. The temperature o f the plate was measured by nine thermocouples inserted into holes precisely drilled all the way through the backing sheet to within 2 mm o f the front surface o f the top sheet. The thermocouples, which were o f the same type used in the hot plate, were connected to the same DA system as the hot plate.

2.3.3

Venetian Blind

The blind slats used in the experiment were taken from commercially available horizontal 1-inch aluminum Venetian blinds. The blind slat had a curved width o f 25mm, a thickness o f 0.16mm, and a radius o f curvature o f 50mm. Each o f the seventeen slats was cut to the precise length o f 342.9mm (13-1/2") to fit the depth o f the window cavity. The surfaces of all slats were painted with the same emissivity paint as the plate surfaces. The holding strings normally used for commercial louvers were eliminated as they would intrude into the interferometric output. Instead, they were replaced by a more precise and rigid support system, which is shown in Figure 2.6. The support posts were two 4.76mm (3/16") square steel tubes precision machmed with equally spaced holes to set the blind pitch at 22.2mm (7/8"). Each blind slat had a notch cut on either end with a custom-made jig. The slat were secured on nylon slotted set screws (Spaenaur Inc. 477-017) at the

notches and mounted onto the posts with the screws, allowing the slat to pivot freely on its centerline. The use of this simple support system provided an easy yet accurate way

23

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3 4 2 .3 fl3 -l/2 'V "

0.16
SLAT S ID E VIEW

2x NOTCHES F O R MOUNTING SCREW S

'- 2 4 .1 4

SLAT T O P VIEW

P L E X IG L A S S P A C E R T H ER M O CO U PLE T, T H ER M O CO U PLE T,

TH ER M O CO U PLE T,

23&I f 3 /3 2 "2 MOUNTING HOLE F O R B LIN D SLA TS ALUMINUM BLIN D SLAT IN C L O S E D PO SITIO N ('l>=S0';

TH ER M O CO U PLE %

4 .1 6 2 5 / 3 / I 6 " ; SQUARE S TEEL R O D

T H ER M O CO U PLE T,

T H ER M O CO U PLE T, T H ER M O CO U PLE T18.1----P L E X IG L A S S P A C E R 2381 /3 /3 2 " 2 MOUNTING HOLE
FO R S P A C E R

BLIND S U P P O R T

Figure 2.6

Venetian blind slat and support system

24

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

to adjust the angle o f the slats. Fine 40 gauge thermocouple wires (Omega Engineering Inc. type TT-T-40-SLE) were attached to the underside o f some blades, and their temperatures were monitored by the DA system.

2.3.4

Model Assembly

An exploded view o f the assembled model is illustrated in Figure 2.7, using the 3D modeling application SolidWorks [6 6 ]. Both the hot and cold plates were supported on 50.8mm x 50.8mm (2" x 2") aluminum angle brackets and mounted onto a 9.5mm (3/8") thick aluminum plate. Since the cold plate was to have 12.7mm (1/2") hoses

attached to its back for cooling fluid from the temperature bath, it was determined that it shall be fixed to the base plate to prevent the hoses from coming loose due to extensive movement. The hot plate, therefore, was mounted on slotted tracks to permit movement in the x-direction for changing cavity widths. The position o f the hot plate was readily adjustable w ith the use o f wing nut fasteners. adjustable legs for leveling o f the entire model. The width o f the cavity was controlled by precision machined plexiglas spacers at the top and bottom. Mechanical drawing for these spacers is given in Figure 2.8. The grooves on the spacers served as the centerline location where the support posts for the blind were mounted. The complete blind and spacer assembly rested on the top surface o f the plates on four screws attached to an aluminum plate affixed to the top spacer. These screws allowed for easy alignment of the blind in the beam direction. In addition, clamps were used to hold the plate surface firmly against the spacers. The base plate was equipped with

25

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Using FEHT [65] again, the heat transfer through the plexiglas spacers was checked. It was verified that the heat transmission across the spacers between the hot and cold plates did not alter the plate surface temperatures. To ensure minimal heat loss

through the spacers to the ambient, the surface temperatures o f the hot plate (Tsj, ~ 35°C) and cold plate (T^^c ~ 15°C) were set such that the average temperature in the cavity would be near the ambient temperature (Too ~ 25°C). In order to create a quiescent test environment, the interferometer was located inside an unventilated enclosure. To isolate the cavity from ambient air, which simulates the condition o f an actual double-glazed window, an optical window assembly was placed on both sides o f the cavity. A pair o f existing 15.2cm diameter optical windows mounted in a plexiglas frame were used in a modified assembly. N ew plexiglas sheets w ith dimensions as shown in Figure 2.9 were made that can be added to the existing frame. The different sizes were designed such that tlie assembled optical window would cover the whole cavity when taking photograph o f the three individual sections. The optical w indow assemblies were attached to the side o f the aluminum angles supporting the plates at the slots, which allowed for adjustment in cavity width. stripping was used on all sides to further seal the cavity. Foam weather-

26

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

(N

2? E

<3

o

CO

o
CM

J 2 &_
O
2

Ô 27
<

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

m

S

lU s
_J

lU s A

m lU û m g
>

(U M M S 'üb

< u C 4 -i O
1

I "p.

m
-i

< < d X lu
'Q'Q !Rk
m

g l I

00

I

ci

Q O

>

i Ph

uu m= 'ûè

T

t(\ 5 'Sc

m m5 > a?=

$

28

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

I
fNin % &c 8

s
3) .

I in

%
ê

% g" < <
X

iD v 3 4

I
Î
O s
CN

C 3 Ü

I

(L

i

29

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.4

Scanning Apparatus

Finite and infinite fringe interferograms were captured on Polaroid film (type 55 positive-negative 4" x 5" instant sheet film) using a Calumet view camera with the lens removed. The interferograms were analyzed with a manual scanning system consisting o f a microscope with a precision traversing and rotating stage that displayed a magnified image on a television monitor. The output o f the interferograms was enlarged 160 times to help ease the task o f measuring the fringe shifts. A photograph o f the scanning apparatus is shown in Figure 2.10. More detailed information on the scanning apparatus components can be found in M achin's thesis [35].

H®'»*

I T j j

1h J m m ti 1 1 1 I I

a" ' - -

.I

T

rSï^5'>

Figure 2.10

Scanning apparatus

30

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter 3 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND ANALYSIS

3.1

Introduction

A total o f fifty-four photographs were taken under different experimental conditions. Some preliminary pictures were taken to determine the optimal vertical

fringe spacing in the finite fringe mode that would generate measurements with the least uncertainty. The range o f variables studied with the experimental model was: s = 2mm, 4mm, and 8 mm 4 >= 0°, 45°, and 90° where ^ is the blind tip-to-plate spacing and cf) is the blind slat angle. For each experiment, both finite and infinite fringe interferograms were obtained. Infinite fringe setting is when the test beam and reference beam are almost perfectly parallel upon recombination at the second beam splitter; finite fringe setting is when the reference and test beams are purposely misaligned by a small angle upon recombination. It was decided that finite fringe interferograms would be used for heat transfer analysis because a finite fringe pattern can be readily obtained for the cavity problem (see Section 4.2 for more explanation). For comparison, fringe shift measurements were made for both the hot plate and the cold plate. Examples o f interferograms o f the working

experimental model in both the finite and infinite fringe modes are shown in Figure 3.1. In this chapter, the experimental procedure is outlined, and the analysis of the interferograms, along with the computation o f heat transfer results, is explained in detail.

31

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

(a) Finite fringe

(b) Infinite fringe

Figure 3.1

Interferograms of working experimental model

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3.2

Experimental Procedure

Before proceeding with the experiment, the interferometer must be carefully aligned. A detailed procedure on the alignment o f the Ryerson Mach-Zehnder

interferometer can be found in Machin's thesis [35]. Initially, before canying out any alignment, all the thermocouples were plugged into a panel that was hooked up to the DA system just outside the interferometer enclosure. The plate heaters were also plugged into an outlet which was connected to a DC power supply. The hot plate was heated by setting the power supply to the maximum until it approached the desired temperature and the voltage was then set accordingly. A temperature controller was used to regulate the power supply such that the plate remained at the required surface temperature T,. The hoses were hooked up to the back o f the cold plate for circulation from the constant temperature bath. The ambient pressure was measured using a mercury barometer with a calibration traceable to national standards. It was corrected based on room temperature and gravity according to manufacturer's specifications. For all experiments, a temperature difference between the hot and cold plates of AT ~ 20°C was maintained for the Rayleigh numbers o f Ra ~ 4.5x10'', Ra ~ 28.7mm,
6 .7

x 1 0 '', and Ra ~ 13.1x10'', based on the cavity widths o f JV = The Rayleigh number was

W = 32.7mm, and W = 40.7mm, respectively.

calculated as follows;

/A where g is gravitational acceleration, /? the volumetric expansion coefficient, p the density o f air, Cp the specific heat, p the dynamic viscosity, and k the thermal

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

conductivity. All air properties are evaluated at the film temperature (see Appendix A). Since there is no ambient air present in the experiment, the film temperature is taken as the mean cavity temperature. Also, the temperature difference (T, - r®) in the above equation is calculated as the temperature difference across the cavity {AT = Tsj, - Ts,c), with the value for ambient temperature replaced by the average surface temperature

of the opposite plate. Thus, equation (3.1) is redefined as: (3.2)

juk
The test model was placed on a table near the centre o f the test beam. The blind structure was mounted on the required spacers, and the assembly was carefully positioned into the model. The position of the hot plate was set and clamps were put in place. The height of the table was adjusted such that the required section of cavity could be viewed in the output. A plumb bob was used to level the model vertically by adjusting the legs of the base plate. The horizontal alignment was also checked against a spirit level. The interferometer test beam was accurately aligned with the test model. The plates were aligned by lining up the locating pins on the surface. A white card was

placed just beyond the model and the flat mirror (M l) was rotated until reflection from the plate surfaces was eliminated, so that the test beam was aligned with the plate surfaces. The blind assembly was also aligned to the test beam by adjusting the screws o f the top spacer that were resting on the model. Finally, finite and infinite fringe patterns were obtained using Tarasuk's [63] near field-far field focusing technique. It was noted that for each section o f the cavity, the above alignment procedure had to be repeated to ensure correct alignment of the test beam. Consequently, the finite fringe pattern had to be reset each time the flat mirror (M l) was adjusted. These minor

34

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

adjustments were very time-consuming and were not carried out during the infinite fringe mode. Such high accuracy was not necessary since the infinite fringe interferograms

were not used for heat transfer measurements. The angle o f each blind slat was manually set one by one. With the reference beam blocked, the slat angle was set by matching the interferometric output against a special grid o f the required angle. All seventeen blind slats were painstakingly set by checking the output image of the three different sections of cavity before the experiments began. The camera was positioned and leveled with the image reflected from a small mirror at the focal point. The camera was aligned so that the image fit completely in the lens. A scale photo was taken at a shutter speed of l/30`* ' o f a second with the reference beam blocked and the model at room temperature. As the system reached steady-state, the lights in the room were turned off and an interferogram was taken at a shutter speed o f I/ 6 O"' o f a second. Finite fringe interferograms were taken first for all experiments. The interferograms were developed according to Polaroid's instructions and then scanned. Finally, another set o f experiments were repeated and infinite fringe

interferograms were obtained for visualization.

3.3

Interferogram Analysis

The analysis o f interferograms is based on the wave nature o f light.

The

amplitude (a) o f a monochromatic light, such as the laser light used in the present experiment, traveling in the x-direction can be expressed as:

35

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

a = a,,sin -- ( c / - x ) À

(3.3)

where O o is the maximum amplitude, À the wavelength, c the speed o f light, / the time and X the position. Thus, the amplitude o f the reference beam at a fixed point can be expressed as: «nf


(3 4)

Similarly, the amplitude o f the test beam at the same position can be expressed as: (3.5)

where (j) is the phase shift between the two beams due to the different index o f refraction of the air at the test section. Assuming the maximum amplitude o f both beams to be equal (ao,/-e/= cio.test = ao), the recombined output beam can be written as the sum o f equations (3.4) and (3.5):

^

sm

.

l.TlCt . ( iTTCt hsin T

(3.6)

It can be seen that constructive interference will occur when ^ 2 k is an integer, and destructive interference will occur when {(f>/2iz) + 1/2 is an integer. The constructive and destructive fringes can be measured on the interferograms. The distance from fringe

centre to fringe centre represents a phase difference of one wavelength between the two beams. A fringe shift (e) occurs when the test beam is 180° out o f phase with the reference beam, which is when the number o f wavelengths in the direction o f the reference beam differs by an integer amount. Using the plate surface as reference, this can be expressed as: 36

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

s =N -

= integer

(3.7) given wavelength

where N is the number o f wavelengths, which can be determined for a if the length o f the model (Z) is known, as follows; JV =

(3.8)

The index o f refraction (n) o f a medium is theratio o f the speed o f light in a vacuum (co) to the speed o f light in the medium (c):

c

A

W ith the refractive index o f one beam being a known constant value (««/), equation (3.7) can be written as: g= = (3.10)

The relationship between the index of refraction and density (p) o f a fluid is given by the Lorenz-Lorenz equation: (U--1) _ 3 ^ (%: + 2 )/, 2 (3.11)

where G is the Gladstone-Dale constant, which is dependent on the type o f fluid and the wavelength o f light. For air and a He-Ne laser (X = 6.328x 10'^ m), G = 0.226x10^ m^/kg [67]. Since air has a refractive index o f nearly 1 (n = 1.0002716 at standard temperature and pressure [62]), equation (3.11) can be reduced to: =G P It follows that for air at the plate surface: >^raf=Gp,,j+l (3.13) (3.12)

37

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

and for air near the test section:

n = Gp + \
Substituting equations (3.13) and (3.14) into equation (3.10) yields: ZG A

(3.14)

(3.15)

For the present study, air can be considered to behave as an ideal gas. Thus, for a given pressure (p) and ideal gas constant of air {R = 287 J/kg-K), the relationship between fluid density and temperature (7) is: (3.16) Substituting equation (3.16) into equation (3.15) gives the equation for determining fringe shift between two known temperatures: ZpG

s =

(3.17)

Solving for temperature, equation (3.17) can be written in a more useful form as:

GpZ

^ +1

In the present study, the plate surface temperature

was used as the reference

temperature in equation (3.18) to calculate fringe temperatures. Since the first fringe did not necessarily represent a full fringe shift from the plate surface, linear extrapolation o f the first two fringes closest to the surface was used to
d e te rm in e

the fractional

frin g e

shift. Each consecutive fringe was then represented by this fractional shift plus an integer amount.

38

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3.4

Calculation o f Local and Average Plate Nusselt Numbers

An expression for the local heat transfer coefficient {h) can be found by equating the heat transferred by convection to the heat transferred by conduction at the plate surface (x = 0), as follows; dT x= 0

h=

' dx x= 0 (T,, - r j

(3.20)

where

is the thermal conductivity o f air evaluated at the surface temperature obtained

from property tables (see Appendix A). The local Nusselt number (Nu) is defined as:

.r=0

(3.21)

where ^ i s the thermal conductivity o f air evaluated at the film temperature, also obtained from property tables. The temperature gradient (dT/dy) at the wall is obtained from the fringe temperature profiles on the interferogram. The temperature difference {Ts,h - 71.c) is calculated from the average plate temperatures measured from thermocouples. The average Nusselt number (Nuavg) is determined by numerically integrating the local values over the span o f the plate using the trapezoidal rule. A complete sample calculation is given in Appendix C.

39

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Chapter 4 PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS

4.1

Introduction

Free convective heat transfer in a double-glazed window with a between-panes Venetian blind was visualized and tlte heat transfer results were analyzed. Using a MachZehnder interferometer, experiments were conducted on a cavity o f height L = 380.3mm with louvers mounted at the centre at blind tip-to-plate spacings o f j' = 2mm, s = 4mm, and s = 8mm, and at blind slat angles o f = 0°, ç !>= 45°, and cf? = 90° from the horizontal.

Finite fringe interferograms were taken o f the fringe shift field between the hot and cold isothermal flat plates at a temperature difference o f AT ~ 20°C. Heat transfer

measurements were made at the Rayleigh numbers o f Ra ~ 4 .5 x l0 \ Ra ~ 6 .7 x fO \ and Ra ~ 13.1x10" ^, based on cavity widths o fW = 28.7mm, W ~ 32.7mm, and W = 40.7mm, respectively. Local and average Nusselt numbers were obtained for heat transfer

analysis. Infinite fringe interferograms were also obtained to visualize the temperature field inside the cavity.

4.2

Finite and Infinite Fringe Interferograms

For each test geometry, two composite interferograms were taken, one in finite fringe mode and the other in infinite fringe mode.

40

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 4.1 shows two composite images for s = 2mm and cf) = 0°, each composed o f three separate photographs. Due to restriction in the size o f the optical output o f the MZI, the length o f the cavity was divided into three individual shots, showing the top, middle, and bottom sections o f the cavity. In classical interferometry, the infinite fringe mode is usually preferred when obtaining images for heat transfer analysis. In applications where the test fluid is a gas at constant pressure, as is the case in this study, the fringes represent lines o f constant temperature. Thus, infinite fringe interferograms have the advantage o f providing full temperature field visualization. Normally, when setting the infinite fringe pattern, the optics m ust be adjusted so that no fringe appears in regions o f ambient air, where there is no change in temperature. Since ambient air was not present in the cavity, it was not possible to achieve an infinite fringe pattern with high precision. In order to overcome this problem, it was decided that the finite fringe mode shall be used for heat transfer analysis. In this mode o f opération, there is no need for the presence o f ambient air when setting the finite fringe pattern. Moreover, in regions o f low heat transfer rates, such as the top and bottom ends o f the cavity, fringes can become fat and indistinct on infinite fringe interferograms, making it difficult to locate fringe centres. W ith finite fringe interferograms, fringe shift data can be obtained more easily.. Although infinite fringe interferograms were not used for making heat transfer measurements, they were taken for visualization and discussion purposes. The infinite fringe interferograms for the blind slat angles o f ^ = 0°, c f>= 45°, and 4>= 90° at the three different blind tip-to-plate spacings are presented in Figures 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4, respectively.

41

Reoroduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

%

(a) Finite fringe

(b) Infinite fringe

Figure 4 .1

Composite finite and infinite fringe interferograms for s = 2mm and cf>=Q°

42

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

(a) 5 = 2mm

(b) 5 = 4mm

(c) ^ = 8mm

Figure 4.2

Composite infinite fringe interferograms for

= 0" at various

5

43

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

(a) s = 2mm

(b) 6 " = 4mm

(c) s = 8mm

Figure 4.3

Composite infinite fringe interferograms for (f) - 45° at various 44

5

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

m

(a) s = 2mm

(b) s - 4mm

(c) s = 8mm

Figure 4.4

Composite infinite fringe interferograms for (f) = 90° at various 5

45

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.3

Heat Transfer R esu lts

The distribution of local Nusselt numbers corresponding to the finite fringe interferogram for the case with blind tip-to-plate spacing o fa = 2mm and blind slat angle oï^=Q° is shown in Figure 4.5. The results for both the hot plate and the cold plate are simultaneously plotted, along with the positions o f each blind slat. In this configuration, the tips of the slats are very close to the plate surfaces. In effect, the slats are acting as a thermal bridge increasing the conductive heat transfer rate across the cavity. This can be seen in the periodic extreme peaks and valleys on the graph, corresponding respectively to the maximum absolute values of local Nusselt numbers on the hot and cold plates, matching the location of each blind slat. Referring back to Figure 4.2, the infinite fringe interferogram shows the fringes close together near the plate surface at the slat tip locations which indicates that the air flow is restricted by the slat, causing an increase in fluid velocity Nevertheless, it is mostly conduction in the blind that contributes to the high heat transfer rates found at these peaks. The air flow described above is generated by the hot air rising up the hot plate, turning at the top of the cavity, then meeting the cold plate and continuing downwards in a circulating movement around the cavity in the gap between the blind and the enclosure. For convenience, this shall be referred to as the outer circulation. Another type o f air flow occurring simultaneously inside the cavity is the inner circulation, where hot and cold air interchanges in a circulating pattern in the spaces between each blind slat. The two types of air circulation are illustrated in Figure 4.6. This phenomenon is reminiscent of boundary layer flow on the vertical walls and secondary cellular flow in the core region defined in early literatures for free convection in vertical cavity [5, 6]. 46

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

30

-§
o
C

'â

Q_

Q _

8

"D 0
o'

t »- I » I  < I - I I I t I I 1 I < > » 1 >- I J- I -1 --L_!--f f I I, f ! f ) I , I I

I I I

I

. l i t

I _l

1-- »

t -t

t- I

I

I

I . I J- I I-- ] -

(/) W o

(D O o "O c q ' rr r-j 0) X } E 3
z

=r

I
L i
^ ^

i.

L i

*»**

L

k

li

N\

rr

0
o c

-§
CL

< D cn § S o

0

g. o 3 "D 0 g g

-2

1

-4

NV\
-- -- -- o--- hot plate cold plate

\;
Ï

h i \i V \ ! '< \

O c ·a 0

3"

(/) c n
3

o'

·' I I " I · T`" T ""|

1 * I I I · < i

* '

I 1 I · · I i~

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

300

320

340

360 380

Vertical D istance, Y (mm)

Figure 4.5

Local Nusselt number distribution for s = 2mm and ^5 = 0° at

~ 4.5x10

O u te r C irculation

Inner C ircu latio n

Tc

Figure 4.6

Sketch o f inner and outer circulation flows

Figure 4.7 shows the local Nusselt number distribution for the case with blind tipto-plate spacing of j = 4mm and blind slat angle o f 0 = 0°. There are still periodic peaks where heat transfer rates are higher at the location o f blind slats. With the increase in blind tip-to-plate spacing, however, the conductive effect o f the slats is less prominent, so the magnitude of the peaks on the graph is smaller. As seen in Figure 4.2, the fringes are spaced further apart at the slat locations. As the space increases between the blind and the plates, convection increases as outer circulation flow grows stronger. The effect o f convection is especially noticeable at the top and bottom ends o f the cavity, where the air

48

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

turning at the comers and impinging on the opposite plate surface causes higher heat transfer rates for the cold and hot plates, respectively. The local Nusselt number distribution shown in Figure 4.8 is also for the blind slat angle o f ^ = 0°, but at the widest blind tip-to-plate spacing o f ^ = 8mm. At this setting, there are no periodic peaks found on the graph, meaning that the conductive effect of the blind slats is largely lost when the tips o f the slats are far from the plate surfaces. The infinite fringe interferogram in Figure 4.2 shows the slats having minimal effect on the local fringe spacing. Instead, heat transfer is dominated by the convective flow o f the outer circulation, with evidence of very strong end effects found both on the graph and on the infinite fringe interferogram. From the interferogram, one can clearly see the development o f the thermal boundary layer on the hot and cold plates, with low temperature gradients across the core region o f the cavity. The local Nusselt number distribution graphs for the blind slat angle o f 0 = 0° at the tliree different blind tip-to-plate spacings are shown together in Figure 4.9. For

clarity, only heat transfer results for the hot plate are plotted on graphs used for the purpose o f comparison. The graph shows the period o f the peaks matches with the pitch o f the blind slats, but the scale o f the peaks differs between s = 2mm and s = 4mm. If the peaks are disregarded, the heat transfer rates remain relatively steady over the height of the cavity. This indicates that the convective effect o f the outer circulation is small

relative to the conductive effect o f the blind slats for these two cases, except for the bottom region o fs = 4mm, where air circulation is stronger. In contrast, for i' - 8mm, the effect of convection is evident in the high Nusselt numbers at the bottom end o f the plate, and the continuous decrease in heat transfer rate towards the top end o f the plate.

49

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1

s°

f
'o

C -\d n

X

/
f

% o

II

-eT3

§

I

E ë

s

/

I Q 1 ·C

S c

a a
o

g X) « u

j
% ) en S Z 1 o h J

/
5 .5? ix

nfvj `jeqtunN iiassnN leooq 50

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

o
ex o

00 CO
o

(O co
o

O
o o co

o

ri n 'S

oo
CNi

o co

C M 'So

CM

E & >-

1 I
oo

o

00

b

I

8

§

o
CD

1 t

1
-O

< D

o

e
ë

o o

w D z g o v-l
OO

o co

o
CD

& E

o

o
CM

O
CD

nisi 'jaqoinN ^assPN leooq 51

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

o

00 CO § CO

C\J

00

y.

o

oo

a 0

o
(D

1
"S
o

II

E
CN

X
CD
ü

cS co c O Xi 'S co ` -3 O J X)

C
00

b

CD

O O

-c g

S

i
c/l

c /l

% g
o

CN

O O O 00 O
CD

&

O

O
OO NCD CO

O

n|sj `jaqiunfsi îigsshn |Booq

52

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Figure 4.10 shows the distribution of local Nusselt numbers for the case o f blind tip-to-plate spacing of 5 = 2mm and blind slat angle o f ^ = 45°. At this slat angle, the gap between the blind tips and the surfaces o f the plates is, in reality, more than 2mm. In turn, the conductive effect o f the slats is less significant. By inspecting the location of the peaks, it is found that the maximum Nusselt numbers occur at regions between each slat, where the inner circulation flow takes place. The interaction between this inner

circulation and the outer circulation pushes the boundary layer towards the plate surfaces, causing an increase in heat transfer rate. This can be observed on the infinite fringe interferogram in Figure 4.3. The high heat transfer rate caused by convective flow at the end regions o f the cavity is also noted. The local Nusselt number distribution for the blind slat angle o f < p = 45° for the cases o f blind tip-to-plate spacing o f 5 = 4mm and 5 = 8mm are shown respectively in Figures 4.11 and 4.12. The heat transfer results for these are similar to those for the case ofjf = 2mm, with periodic peaks happening at locations between each blind slat. The infinite fringe interferograms in Figure 4.3 also show a similar trend. It is interesting to find periodic variations even at these wide spacings, which indicates that the effect of the inner circulation on the local heat transfer rate is rather strong. The graphs for all three cases o f blind tip-to-plate spacing at the blind slat angle o f (f) = 45° are shown in Figure 4.13. Since the peaks are caused by convective effect o f the inner circulation flow rather than the conductive effect o f the slats, their amplitudes do not differ much between the different blind tip-to-plate spacings, unlike the previous case o f blind slat angle < f>= 0°. As the distance between the blind and plate surfaces increases, there is evidence o f strengthening convection around the entire enclosure as outer circulation grows stronger. At the bottom o f the cavity, local heat transfer rate 53

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

o
CO

O " §
o

o

cg co
o o
(O

"o
iri T )X

n

o

Q

JO

00 CN

ta -4II

o co
CN

<X'

-SE & >
É

CN

I I
K
a 0

S CN
§ O
co

c
b
ü

I

"en
' t ;

1
Ü

o
oC 8 §

1
c/5

z "S o v-î
o

11
e -o

00

O T )§ S ·SP a

8 O O
?
CO
co

oo

co

CN

nN `jeqtunN liassnN |eooi

54

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

o o

-o

o

00

o

o
CNi

co
o o

'o
r-* V Û U Q % ; So T*X

co
o

oo
CNJ

o

N JD
o
(Ni

1

O Z

E E > O aï 3 L M ü
o
CM CM

I
C o ë c 0

O 00

b

I

1

.cr

S 1  t:
s
o

I

i
%

o o

i

G 3 O O U)

§
o
CD

S)

O

O'
o
oo

CM

C O

00

nfsj `jaqujnN iiassnN leooq 55

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

o

--o.

00 CO § CO
o
CO

i

sr < X .

o o co o

00
CM

n a %

g
o
CM

E & >o

1
00

I

R
o
00

Q s

I

8

(c a C 2 0

II

î

<o
o

o

't:

I
0 >
1

o o

o

co z n o h J r-1

00
cr
IZ

ü

o
CD

o

i üû £

o
CM

o
00

co

o

CM

co

co

nN `Jsqtu n N l|9SsnN leooq

56

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CD

33 O
CL
C

T3

I
8

O CD
Q .

 D
CD

O 3 O O O  D *<
c q

7

*-- -- -a--- ^ ....

2mm s -- 4mm i' = 8mm
s =

CD

6
Z

`

rr

3

CD

3

3"
(D

Z

m 5 E 3 '"i,

A-A

T3

s
L A

df 4 (D «
Z

\

i:

f

O O
CL C

"O
o

S o

3

2 §.
=r o c

,'A A
A A 0
20

1

"O CD
C/)

e n
o'
3

0 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380
Vertical D istance, Y (mm)

Figure 4.13

Local Nusselt number distributions for 4 >= 45° at various s

increases for the hot plate due to the convective effect caused by the stream o f cooler air traveling with the outer circulation flow. In Figures 4.14 to 4.16, the local Nusselt number distribution for the blind slat angle o f = 90° at the blind tip-to-plate spacings of 5 = 2mm, 5 = 4mm, and 5 = 8mm are W ith the hlind at the closed position, the window cavity is

shown, respectively.

separated into two narrow cavities o f half the original width. Convective heat transfer is occurring on both the hot and cold plate surfaces to the air within the partitioned cavities. Hence, with the exception o f end effects, heat transfer rate remains relatively steady in the centre region o f the cavity, with the absence of peaks. Looking at the infinite fringe interferograms in Figure 4.4, the boundary layer growth on the plate surfaces is visible. Specifically, comparing the case o f 5 = 8mm with the no blind case in Figure 4.17, the boundary layer flows in the cavity with and without the blind are very much alike. A t this point, it is necessary to identify some features found on the graphs that are caused by imperfections in the manufacture o f the experimental model. One must keep in mind that commercial blinds will have similar, likely greater, imperfections. Despite the absence o f peaks, there is evidence o f fluctuations, particularly near the top and bottom o f the enclosure, on the graphs in Figures 4.14 through 4.16. This is the effect of air leakage between the blind slats, which is also evident in Figure 4.4. Although the blind is supposed to be completely closed at the slat angle o f 4>- 90°, it is not possible to do so in practice. In fact, the experimental model has been designed such that the ends of the slats overlap one another when the blind is closed, which simulates the operation of real commercial blinds. At each position where two slats overlap, there is inevitably a small gap where air can flow through. In retrospect, it may be more useful to study a blind slat angle of, say, (f) = 85°. 58

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

o

CO

CO

CO

o
CM CO

o o
CO

m Q % :
%
o

X

n

o

00 CM

as

O

1 I (N
>CD

o o
CM

O c Q

s

li % , U 4

O CO

g

s O C O  ·C
o

I
'-a

I I c
'3 % 5 z 1 o h J

o
CM

§
o
00

o

CO

·SP

o
CM

o
oo

CO

o

CO

CO

nN `JaqiuHN t|9SsnN |BOoq 59

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CD a

J3

o a
CD Q.

c o

T3 CD

8 3* CD O 0 1
(O '

6

3: o g 3
CD

4

0)
3" CD

2

-§ O Q_ C a o
3

E D z

0

O s O

Z

cn 3

O zy
CD

s o

 2

o_

 4

O c "O CD
i/i
3

·6

C D
o' ·8

-- -- -- o--

hot plate cold plate

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

300

320

340

360

380

Vertical D istance, Y (mm)

Figure 4.15

Local ' Ivsselt number distribution for s = 4mm and 4>= 90° at

~ 6.7x l Q

JJ CD *a
o
Q .

c o

CD CL

g  O
CD

8

C/J

3 a 5 CD O O "D
CQ *

o'

6

4

3*

3
CD C

3. 3
CD

0 XJ E 3 0 CO
CO Os

2

"

0

g *o
Q_

o

C a
o

Z

3 s o

 2

" D O
CD CL

3

 4

 6
o
CD

-- t--- -- o--

hot plate cold plate

Ü ) c n
3

o'

8 0
20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

300

320

340

360

380

Vertical D istance, Y (mm)

Figure 4.16

Local Nusseit number distribution for 5 = 8mra and

90° at

~ 13.1x10

:

(a) With blind, 0 = 90°

(b) Without blind

Figure 4.17

Composite infinite fringe interferograms for s - 8mm

62

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

In addition, there are small step discontinuities in local Nusseit number found on the graphs in all cases. For example, one case where the discontinuity is obvious is for the blind slat angle o f (/!> = 90°, around y = 250mm in Figure 4.16. As mentioned

previously, since the interferograms for each case has to be taken in three shots, changes in the state o f the test section at different times cannot be avoided. Even though careful measures have been taken, it is hard to control experimental parameters, such as surface temperature o f the plates and settings o f the optics, to ensure that they are exactly the same between each shot. For this reason, the graphs and composite interferograms may not match perfectly between the different sections o f the cavity. A summary o f the average Nusseit numbers for both the hot and cold plates, integrated over the height o f the cavity, is presented in Table 4.1 for the nine cases of blind tip-to-plate spacing and blind slat angle. It can be seen that the average Nusseit numbers for the hot and cold plates for the same case differ by from -2.0% to +7.7%. Generally, the hot and cold plate average Nusseit numbers are the same to better than 4%, which is well within the expected level of experimental uncertainty (see Appendix D). Although the main reason for these differences is likely experimental uncertainty, one should also keep in mind that only the convective heat transfer rate is measured in the experiment. Some difference in the hot and cold plate Nusseit numbers can be expected because of: (i) thermal radiation effects, (ii) heat losses/gains at the end walls and optical windows, and (iii) air leakage to/from the enclosure.

63

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 4.1

Summary of average Nusseit numbers

s 2mm 2mm 2mm 4mm 4mm 4mm 8mm 8mm 8mm

0° 45° 90° 0° 45° 90° 0° 45° 90°

Ra 4 .5 x 1 ^ 4.5x10" 4.5x10" 6.7x10" 6.7x10" 6.7x10" 13.1x10" 13.1x10" 13.1x10"

W llava. hot

W Have, cold

Z89 2T3 1.43 247 2 J6 1.53 2.51 :28i 2.07

2.73 2.10 1.46 235 2.27 1.44 2.59 2.60 2.01

% Diff +5.7 +1.2 -2.0 +5.2 +29 +6.4 -0.6 +7.7 -0.3

The effect o f blind slat angle is now examined. In general, for all blind tip-toplate spacings, the average Nusseit number decreases as blind slat angle increases. This can be easily explained for the blind tip-to-plate spacing o f = 2mm and cf) = 0°, as

shown in Figure 4.18, where the local heat transfer rate is strongly dependent on the conductive effect o f the blind slats. As the tips o f the slats move away from the plate surfaces Bi (f>- 45°, the local heat transfer rates decrease as the conductive effect lessens. When the blind is closed at 0 = 90°, local heat transfer rates remain relatively low as air circulates primarily within the two separate half-width cavities. At 5 = 4mm, where the convective outer circulation within the cavity has a more significant effect on heat transfer rate, changing the blind slat angle from ^ = 0° to 4 > 45° causes very little

change in local Nusseit numbers, which can be seen in Figure 4.19 as the two graphs almost superimpose upon each other. When the blind slat angle goes to 0 = 90°,

however, the local heat transfer rates drop notably as the blind inhibits the outer circulation flow. The trend is similar for the case o f s --8mm.

64

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Z ü CD  D O a c
CD Q-

o

ID
CD

» » »

I

» » » '

«  ' *

'



»

I

» «

»

I

'

»



I

» « * ___ I

I

l

J , I_ _ _ 1

I

l_ .l

L--i

'

I

 '

>

I

I

l _ -L

I

I

I

I

I

»

_t__i

I _i--I

I

I

I

I-- I__:-- I-- I -- i-- L--I -

C O

(g o` 3 O O "O '< CQ' 3T 3
CD

^= 0° "O-----

<f>=45°
ç5= 90°

3

Z

"n c
CD T D O CL C

o .a £ 3 0)
c/) c/}

4

0\ Ln

3

a
o

T D O g g Q CL
3 O C
"

3

S o

h

h

k

K

4 r-* .

î
'îA
m m

\!i
\
V -s, ^

"D CD

en en

o*
3

0 H--I--I--I --I --:--I --I --I --I--r--I--I --I --I--I--I--I--I --I--I--I--I--I --I --I --1 --I --I --1 --r--i--|--i--i--i--|--i--i--i--) --i--i--i--|--i--i--i--r --i--i--i--|--i--i--i--|--j--« --« --|--» --i--i--I--i--« --i--|--'--« --'--T

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

200

220

240

260

280

300

320

340

360

380

Vertical D istance, Y (mm)

Figure 4.18

Local Nusselt number distributions for .y = 2mm at various 4 >

(0 T 3 O
Q.
C

J3

S CL
"D
CD

C/î

en

6

3 O 5 (D O O  D '<
CQ*

o'

5

zr

Q
CD

4

c

~n

CD "O O Q_

3

g. O 3 O Z7
CD

C

C\ C O N
2

Q.

C

O
1

ZT

 D
CD

O * 3
0 0 20
40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380

en en

Vertical D istance, Y (mm)

Figure 4.19

Local Nusselt number distributions for s = =4mm at various 4 >

L

In Figure 4.20, the average Nusselt numbers for the hot plate for all the cases are compared to the cavity correlation by ElSherbiny et al. [14]. Since the correlation applies to an empty cavity without blinds, the graph illustrates the impact on overall heat transfer caused by the presence o f blinds. Apparently, except for one case, all the experimental average Nusselt numbers fall below the curves defined by equation (1.2), at the corresponding Rayleigh numbers (Ra) and aspect ratios (A). The results show that the blind can inhibit heat transfer across the cavity, hence, improve the insulating effect o f the double-glazed window. With the blind slat angle o î (f> = 90°, the experimental

average Nusselt numbers are lowered by up to 40%. For the case o f ^ = 0° at the close blind tip-to-plate spacing o f 5 = 2mm, the experimental average Nusselt number is much higher than the theoretical value. This is due mainly to the strong conductive heat

transfer across the blind slats, which greatly increases the local heat transfer rates at the slat locations. In this case, the insulation provided by the air space in the window cavity is diminished by the interference o f the blind. Nonetheless, in most cases, the betweenpanes blind is able to enlrance the thermal performance of the double-glazed window by suppressing the convective heat transfer across the cavity.

4.4

Reproducibility of the Experiment

To illustrate the reproducibility o f the results, one experiment was repeated after a lapse o f a few days. The interferogram for the blind tip-to-plate spacing o f s = 2mm and blind slat angle o f ^ = 0° at the bottom section o f the cavity was chosen. The results o f the reproducibility test are presented in Figure 4.21.

67

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

This experiment was expected to be one o f the most difficult to replicate because o f the close proxim ity o f the tips o f the blind slats to the plate surfaces. Both

I

interferograms were scanned at the same frequency. By inspection, the periodic variation and distribution o f local Nusselt numbers was virtually identical. The locations o f some maxima and minima were shifted, due probably to the inaccuracy in setting the blade angle, which can cause fluctuations in blind tip-to-plate spacing. The discrepancies in heat transfer data can also be attributed to inconsistent scanning between each interferogram, such as locating fringe centres and the plate surface. Despite the some dissimilarity in local Nusselt numbers, the average Nusselt numbers o f the two experiments changed only slightly (Mv/g. - 1.086, Nurepro. ~ 1.152). The experimental uncertainty in local Nusselt number is shown in Appendix D to be about ±7%. This is consistent with the overall difference in average Nusselt number

between the original experiment and the reproducibility test.

68

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

JJ CD "D O a
c o
CD Q.

· 4
_J----------J _____ : I 1 ,1 _ _L _

* D
CD

c /) w o` 3
4 o o

A = 13.25, ElSherbiny at al. [14]

4 = 11.63, ElSherbiny at al. [14]
A = 9.34, ElSherbiny at al. [14]

/

§ > 1 0
CQ*

· i = 2mm, (j) = 0°, Present Experiment B s - 2mm, (j>= 45°, Present Experiment A s = 2mm, 4> = 90°, Present Experiment
o

 3
CD T1

Si

0)

A

3 -

C
3 "

E Z3 z

O
a
A

i = 4mm, ^ = 4mm, s = 4mm, i = 8mm, s = 8mm, j = 8mm,

(j) = 0°, Present Experiment 4> = 45°, Present Experiment < t>= 90°, Present Experiment (f) - 0°, Present Experiment (f) - 45°, Present Experiment (j>= 90°, Present Experiment

O
o

CD CD
T 5

Ô 5
ON

a o
o

O CL C Z J
3 "

N O

z 2 0) T O

w M 3

-

I

2

CD Q.

O c " D CD

3 "

C D if)
o'
3

103

10"
Rayleigh Number, Ra

105

Figure 4.20

Comparison o f average Nusselt numbers with cavit}' correlation

3 S
CL

I
*a
CD

CO CO

o'

3

6

g8 C Q 3: 0 1
CD

5

=3

z

TI c

0 n E 3

L_r

4 o o.

I
CL

C

& . o 3  a
o
CD CL

<1
o

z

i
S
o

3

2

3" I
T3
CD

1
-- Original ·O'Reproducibility test

c /1
Q -

Ç 2
Z5

0
0 20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Vertical D istance, Y (mm)

Figure 4.21

Reproducibility test for s = 2mm and (f) = 0°, bottom section

Chapter 5 NUMERICAL STUDY

5.1

Introduction

In order to predict the heat transfer results to be expected from the interferometric study, a preliminary numerical study was performed during the preparation stage o f the experiment. This numerical study was intended to simulate the experimental model that was being developed at the time. Using the commercial CFD software package FIDAP [68], a two-dimensional conjugate conduction/convection numerical model was created to study the free convective heat transfer in a double-glazed window with a betweenpanes Venetian blind. Since the scope o f this numerical study was limited, thermal

radiation exchange was not considered in this study. Calculations were obtained for the blind tip-to-plate spacings o f 5 = 2mm, ^ = 4mm, and s = 8mm, and at blind slat angles o f 4>=Q°, c f>= 45°, and (p -- 90° from the horizontal. Several parameters were held constant, such as the Prandtl number at Pr - 0.7 to model air in the cavity. The solid to air The

conductivity ratio was set as 4600, corresponding to aluminum blind slats.

dimensionless height o f the window, or the aspect ratio o f the cavity, was fixed at ^ = 13.22, 11.61, and 9.33 for 5 = 2mm, 4mm, and 8mm, respectively. Local Nusselt number data were generated in the range o f 10^ < R a < 5 x lO \ as well as temperature and stream function contours for visualization. The findings o f this numerical study were published at CANCAM03 (Canadian Congress o f Applied Mechanics) [69]. In this chapter, these results are compared to those obtained from the experiment.

71

Reproduced with permission o f the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.2

Numerical Model

5.2.1

M odel Geometry

The numerical study examines the natural convective heat transfer within a double-glazed window with between-panes Venetian blind. The problem geometry is shown in Figure 5.1. The hot and cold glazing surfaces are isothermal at temperatures T/, and Tc, respectively, while the top and bottom horizontal end walls are adiabatic. The height o f the window, L, contains a total o f seventeen blind slats. Taking into account the curvature o f the blind slat, the nominal blind-to-plate spacing, b, is re-adjusted at each blind slat angle, so that the blind tip-to-plate spacing (set from the cf)=Q° position), s,

is the same on both sides.

w Figure 5.1 Numerical model geometry

72

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.2.2

Governing Equations and Solution Procedure

The flow is assumed to be two-dimensional, steady, laminar, and incompressible. Thermophysical properties are assumed to be constant, except for fluid density which is treated with the Boussinesq approximation. The dimensionless continuity, momentum, and energy equations [70] for the fluid are:
-H = 0

a%

ar

(5.1)

dP a^ ay ay

-+

az"

ay

(5.2)

Gr

. a%

ay ;

dP -+ a.y^ ay

ayz

(5 3 )

PrGr

^

ay

ay

ay"

ay"

(5.4)

where the dimensionless variables are defined as follows: jT = ^,y = Z ,[/= _ f_ ,r= _ Z IF' pr [/,re f
^ r-7 : I/..., = ------------, 0 = -

w

(5.5)

p 'W

p' = p - p ^ ^ p and the Rayleigh number based on cavity width is: Ra (5.6)

va

73

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Steady conduction in the solid blind slats is modeled by Laplace's equation: ^ + ^ =0 ax- a rThe dimensionless boundary conditions are as follows: t / = V= 0 , 0 = 1 (5.-0

for%=0,0<y<

w w
L W (5.8)

t/= F=0, 0 = 0

L fo r X = i , o < y < --

U= F= 0 , -- = 0 ay

fbr0<%<l,y=0.

Equations (5.1) through (5.7) are solved subject to the boundary conditions specified in (5.7) using the finite element method [71]. Nine-node quadrilateral elements with biquadratic interpolation functions are used for temperature and velocity. Pressure is eliminated from the momentum equations using the penalty formulation [72]. The discretized equations are solved using successive substitution to speed convergence. Based on a grid sensitivity study that has been conducted, a mesh o f approximate.y 40,000 nodes is used.

5.3

N um erical Results

A comparison o f the temperature contours for 0 = 0 ° and the three blind tip-toplate spacings o f 5 = 2mm, s = 4mm, and s = 8mm at Ra = 4%10\ Ra = 4%10\ and Ra = lOxlOt, respectively from the numerical study with the infinite fringe interferograms taken at Ra ~ 4.5xlO'^ , Ra ~ 6 .7 x lO \ and Ra ~ 13.1 xio"*, respectively from the experiment is given in Figure 5.2.

74

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

a

i

(a) s = 2mm

(b) s = 4mm

(c) s = 8mm

Figure 5.2

Comparison o f temperature contours for 0 = 0° at various j-

75

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Since the parameters for the numerical study were set before the experiment was carried out, the Rayleigh numbers were close to, but not exactly the same as those o f the experiment. Also, as mentioned in Chapter 4, the fringes on the infinite fringe

interferograms might not represent the exact location of the actual isotherms. Despite these discrepancies, the temperature fields show excellent qualitative agreement. Figure 5.3 shows a comparison o f local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm and ^ = 0° at = 4x10'' from the numerical study with the experimental results at ~ 4.5x10'*.

All local Nusselt number comparisons are presented for the hot plate. The numerical and experimental heat transfer distributions are generally consistent, with the exception of some peaks. This may be due to the fact that in the experimental model, the blind slats cannot be all perfectly set to the tip-to-plate spacing of j' = 2mm. With the blind tips so close to the plate surface, the heat transfer rate is greatly affected by the slight deviation in tip-to-plate spacing, producing variation in the peak values. When the blind tip-to-plate spacing is increased to s = 4mm for the same ^ - 0°, as shown in Figure 5.4 the variation in the peak values diminishes. Although the closest numerical Rayleigh number that can be used is Ra = 4x10'* compared to the experimental Ra ~ 6.7x10'*, the local Nusselt number data agree well. However, the numerical solution overpredicts the heat transfer at the bottom of the hot plate. In the numerical model the end walls are treated as adiabatic, but in the experimental model there are heat losses happening at the end walls, which may contribute to the reduced convective heat transfer rates. This difference is also visible when comparing the numerical results at Ra = 8mm and cj) ~ 0°, shown in

10x10'* with the experimental results at R a ~ 13.1 x 10" * for .v Figure 5.5.

76

: Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

" O O
C CD PL

C L

"O C D 8 0 3 1

X 3
CQ*

s
3
(D

= T -û

?
CD

s " O O Q .
C

g. O 3 T 5 O
CD CL

E x p e r im e n ta l

-Q CD C D CD
o"
3

Numerical

N on-D im ensional Vertical D istance, YAA/

Figure 5.3

Comparison

1 of

local Nusselt number distribution for s = 2mm and cp = 0°

"D

JJ 0 O
CL
C

CD CL

O 8

T3

0

W 0 O * 3 O 0 1 c q ' s o  3
0

7

Experimental Numerical

6

-n c 3: 0 a T3
o
Q. '- J

0) XI E 3 z
3

5

û) en en

4
il'

00

Z

O

3

T3

O 3" C T
C D CL

eu O) E eu <

3

2

C

O

1

·a
en
3

C D

en

0 0 1 2
3 4 5

o'

6

7

8

9

10

11

Non-Dimensional Vertical Distance, YAA/ Figure 5.4 Comparison of local Nusselt number distribution for s = 4mm and (p -0 °

f

~a

o
c o

CL

Q.

ro

"O
CD

(/) W o' 3 O g; O O T3 *< c5 ` 3" 3
C CD (D

10

-

Experimental Numerical

at

JQ

T]

3-

3(D 0 "O O Q. C g.
o
3

'J

O 3* 0 CL O C "O 0
o
3

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Non-Dimensional Vertical Distance, Y/W Figure 5.5 Comparison o f local Nusselt number distribution for s = 8mm and ^ = 0°

'm '1 3

A comparison o f local Nusselt numbers for

= 2mm and

~ 45° at Ra = 4x1 O '*

from the numerical study with the experimental results at Ra ~ 4.5x10" * is given in Figure 5.6. For this slat angle, the locations o f the maximum and minimum local Nusselt

numbers are completely mismatched between the numerical and experimental results. Looking at the isotherms shown in Figure 5.7, the numerical model predicts the maximum heat transfer occurring at the slat locations, where the tips of the slat impinge into the boundary layer o f the hot and cold plates. By contrast, the infinite fringe

interferogram shows the maximum heat transfer occurring in the space between each blind slat. The strong inner circulation flow between the slats is interacting with the outer circulation flow, and in effect, is pushing the boundary layer towards the plate surface. Apparently, analyzing the streamline plot in Figure 5.7, the numerical solution is unable to pick up this phenomenon. For reasons discussed in Chapter 4, the imperfections in the experimental model at 0 = 90° cause leakage between blind slats. Thus, a valid comparison cannot be made with the numerical results, which ideally models the blind as completely closed. Figure 5.8 shows the isotherm and streamline plots at Ra = 10x10" *, along with the infinite fringe interferogram at ~ 13.1x10" * for s = 8mm and (f) = 90°. In this case, one can clearly

see the jets o f air leaking between the blind slats near the top o f the experimental model, whereas the numerical model portrays the blind as an impermeable membrane with absolutely no leakage. The numerical local Nusselt numbers obtained at Ra = 4x10" *with the experimental data taken at Ra ~ 4.5x10* for j = 2mm and (f) = 90° are presented in Figure 5.9. The periodicity o f the numerical results is due to disturbances caused by the slight curvature in the shape o f the closed blind slats. The experimental results show leakage through the blind slats. 80

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

" D O a c
CL

C D

J3

o C D

i
Experimental Numerical
cn >

T 3
CO CO

C D

3 O 3^ C D O O " D (Q ` 2 o g 3
C D

o'

o 5
E 3 z
t/3 C /3

~n
c C D

3 a
o_ c
o

0)

Z

3

a O 3 TJ O
C D
o_
3 "

0 2

03

I

O c *3
CD CO CO

o'
3

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

Non-Dimensional Vertical Distance, Y/W Figure 5.6 Comparison of local Nusselt number distribution for = 2mm and (p = 45°

m

g

(i) streamlines

(ii) isotherms

(iii) interferogram

Figure 5.7

Comparison o f stream and temperature contours w ith infinite fringe interferogram for 5 = 2mm and c f>= 45°

82

J
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

(i) streamlines

(ii) isotherms

(iii) interferogram

Figure 5.8

Comparison o f stream and temperature contours with infinite fringe interferogram for s = 8mm and 0 = 90°

83

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

»

CO

c
CN

Q. L U Z

I I
o

o On
'S"g ca 8 c iS w b S
CN

E E

CO

X!

c2 C .2 "3
c /3

CD

C o '(/) c 0 E
z

03

ID
C

c o

% c /3 3 % C C S o
C -t-l

CO

o c o ts s £ o U
c\ in E &

CO

CO

in

TT

CO

CN

O

`JsqLUHN lisssnN 06ejeAV

84

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

In Figure 5.10, the average Nusselt numbers for 0 = 90° and the three blind tip-toplate spacings at the experimental Rayleigh numbers o f Ra ~ 4.5x10'*, Ra ~ 6.7x10'*, and R a ~ 13.1x10* are compared to the average Nusselt numbers obtained numerically over a range of Rayleigh numbers. The leakage occurring between the blind slats in the

experimental model causes a huge increase in the local heat transfer rates, especially near the top of the cold plate and bottom of the hot plate. In addition, with the blind

completely sealing the window cavity, the numerical model effectively calculates the local heat transfer rates on the hot and cold side as two separate cavities with half the original width. Therefore, the numerical average Nusselt numbers are much lower than the experimental average Nusselt numbers for this particular slat angle. Comparing the average Nusselt numbers for (f)=Qi° and 4>-- 45° at the three blind tip-to-plate spacings in Figures 5.11 and 5.12, respectively, the experimental results are consistently lower than the numerical values. Knowing that the local heat transfer data agrees fairly well in these cases (certainly for < f>= 0°, and for (f) = 45° though not in distribution but in magnitude), except near the bottom of the hot plate and top o f the cold plate, the difference in average Nusselt numbers can be attributed to end wall heat losses in the experimental model. If these end wall conditions can be reasonably modeled in the numerical study, it may improve agreement. Most importantly, it must be kept in mind that this numerical study is performed on a conjugate conduction/convection model, with .adiation neglected. As Phillips [38] found, convection is strongly coupled to the radiation exchange between the window and the blind. It is likely that the discrepancies in numerical and experimental average

Nusselt numbers are due, for the most part, to this effect.

85

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

JJ CD ~a o 0_ c 8 CL U

CD

--t--

6 ' = 2mm , Numerical

"D

= T CD O O
? T O

-+-- 5 = 4mm , Numerical +·· · s = 8mm, Numerical · 5 = 2mm, Hot Plate, Exp.  ,9 = 4m m , Hot Plate, Exp.

CÛ

Z T
Z
3

CD

3

m

Tl C
CD

z

E 3

o D A

s = 8mm, Hot Plate, Exp. s = 2mm , Cold Plate, Exp. j = 4mm , Cold Plate, Exp. s = 8mm, Cold Plate, Exp.

i "O
o Ql
00

q 5 w cn

z

3

3 " O o gC 7 8-' Q .
O C

o

0) 2

cn

O J

<

9



·a
CD

oe
CO
- 1 ------------ 1 ---------- 1 -- I--

1-- r

1Q 3

lo-* Rayleigh Number, Ra Figure 5.10

1Q 5

Comparison o f numerical and experimental average Nusselt numbers for cj) = 90°

«I

33

 g O
CL
C

8 CL
T5 CD

(fi C O
o'
Z3

s = 2mm , Numerical
5 = 4m m , Numerical s = 8mm, Numerical ·s = 2m m , 5 = 4m m , s = 8mm, 6 ' = 2m m , 5 = 4mm , s = 8mm , Hoî Plate, Exp. Hot Plate, Exp. Hot Plate, Exp. Cold Plate, Exp. Cold Plate, Exp. Cold Plate, Exp. /

O O *a
cq'

.-K

rr
o

S' ra

$

CD

3

O E
Z
3

.-K "

3 -

"H
3" C D

 O O g O 3
3 " Q. C

C D

05 (/) w -<t
00

Z
O)

3

m

O

CT

I
1-

2

..... 4* '

8-' CL O C " D C D
(fi

C D O * 3

103

1Q 4 Rayleigh Number, Ra Figure 5.11

--'--'--I -- 103

Comparison o f numerical and experimental average Nusselt numbers for

=

-s o
D. C

jO

8 Q. " O
C D

oe 3

C/)

o*
---------- --

1

= T (D O O 13 "C
cq'

s = 2mm, Numerical

/

--

h-- s = 4m m , Numerical F - · j = 8mm , Numerical

----------

Z 7 3 z m
3 E

·

3 C D

 
0 o
A

3" CD

"O O
D. C

C D

Z

3

= 2mm , Hot Plate, Exp. 5 = 4m m , Hot Plate, Exp. i' = 8mm, Hot Plate, Exp. s = 2mm, Cold Plate, Exp. 5 = 4m m , Cold Plate, Exp. = 8mm, Cold Plate, Exp.
' A

a O 3 O 3d; Q Q_
O C
3 "

Ô O

co

Z

m < /) c/) 3 2-

o

O) 2 0

CD

<
1
-

 +........

 o C D (/) en
3

o`

103

--r 10" »
Rayleigh Number, Ra

-1-------- 1 --

I-- I -- I-- p

1Q 5

Figure 5.12

Comparison o f numerical and experimental average Nusselt numbers for ^ = 45°

Chapter 6 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1

Conclusions

The results o f an interferometric study on the effect o f a between-panes Venetian blind in a double-glazed window have been presented. Finite fringe interferograms were obtained at three different blind tip-to-plate spacings and three different blind slat angles in air at a constant Rayleigh number for each cavity width. Local and average heat

transfer data were calculated. Infinite fringe interferograms were taken for visualization o f the temperature field inside the cavity. In addition, the results o f a preliminary

numerical study of the same heat transfer problem were compared with the experimental results. The conclusions are as follows:

i)

The results show that a between-panes blind has a significant influence on local heat transfer rates. The distribution of local Nusselt numbers depends strongly on the blind slat angle. The variation in blind tip-to-plate spacings changes the fluid flow patterns inside the window cavity noticeably.

ii)

W ith the exception o f one case {s = 2mm and (f) = 0°), the average Nusselt numbers obtained from the experiment are lower than the values computed from the correlation by ElSherbiny et al. [14] at the corresponding Rayleigh numbers and aspect ratios. This shows that between-panes Venetian blind can enhance the

89

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

thermal performance of a double-glazed window by reducing the convective heat transfer across the cavity.

iii)

Two types o f air flow are observed when the blind is open: the outer circulation around the perimeter o f the cavity and the inner circulation which occurs between blind slats. These air flow patterns are comparable to the boundary layer flow and secondary multicellular flow described in the literature for an "empty" cavity.

iv)

When the blind is fully open {cf) = 0°), the conductivity o f the aluminum blind slats increases the local heat transfer rates considerably, creating periodic maxima in Nusselt numbers. The effect is especially evident at close blind tip-to-plate spacing (j = 2mm). In this case, the blind slats are acting as thermal bridges

between the hot and cold surfaces, greatly reducing the insulating ability o f the window cavity at these locations.

v)

At the blind slat angle o f (f) = 45°, the local heat transfer rates are affected by the interaction between the inner and outer circulation flows. Maximum local Nusselt numbers occur in the spaces between each slat. From the interferograms, it

appears that strong inner circulation pushes the boundary layer towards the plate surfaces. This phenomenon has not been predicted by the numerical solution.

vi)

With the blind in the closed position {4> = 90°), it partitions the cavity and the outer circulation is limited to flow within two narrower cavities. Although some

90

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

1
air leakage is unavoidable, this improves the performance o f the window cavity as it is converted into two layers of insulation.

vii)

For close blind tip-to-plate spacing {s = 2mm), the blind slat angle is a dominant factor in governing the local and average heat transfer rates in the cavity. The effect o f blind slat angle weakens as the blind tip-to-plate spacing increases.

viii)

In general, the numerical results are found to be in good agreement with the experimental data. Except for the blind slat angle o f ^ = 45° described

previously, the local heat transfer rate distributions and temperature and flow patterns predicted by the numerical solution are similar in the experiment.

6.2

Recommendations

Suggestions pertaining to the experiment and numerical studies are listed in separate sections.

6.2.1 Recommendations for Experimental Study

i)

The main purpose o f the present study is to provide experimental data that can be used to validate results from future numerical studies. The development of

improved numerical models is essential and ongoing at Ryerson University, and continues to support the research for the window design industry.

91

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

ii)

The experimental analysis of window thermal performance needs to be done to study the effects o f other shading devices such as roller blinds and vertical blinds.

iii)

The study o f between-panes blind may be extended to plastic or wooden blind slats. These materials have lower thermal conductivities than aluminum, and can help further reduce heat transfer across the window cavity. Heated blind slats should also be used to simulate solar irradiance under daytime conditions.

iv)

In order to model the blind as completely closed {< f> ~ 90°) and eliminate air leakage, a more sophisticated slat support system is required to precisely control the slat angle. However, as commercial blinds also have small gaps between the overlapping slats in the closed position, it is more realistic to study a blind angle slightly less than < p= 90° and allow tiny amounts o f air to flow through the blind.

v)

To better understand the fluid mechanics within the window cavity in the presence of between-panes Venetian blind, a flow visualization study should be conducted to obtain images o f the velocity field.

vi)

For the present study, measurements were taken on both the hot and cold plates for all twenty-seven finite fringe interferograms, which was a very timeconsuming task. A digital analyzing system, like the one at University o f Western Ontario developed by Naylor [73], would be a valuable asset to those performing future interferometric analyses at the Ryerson Heat Transfer Laboratory.

92

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

6.2.2

Recommendations for Numerical Study

i)

Since the numerical analysis is intended to be a preliminary study for the experiment, radiative exchange has not been included in the computation to lessen the complexity o f the problem. A full conjugate conduction/convection/radiation numerical model has to be developed to better approximate the heat transfer in the experiment.

ii)

The top and bottom horizontal walls are modeled as adiabatic surfaces in the present numerical model. Obviously, there are minor heat losses happening at the end walls in the experimental model. There is a need to adequately simulate these end wall conditions in the numerical model in order to get acceptable local heat transfer results.

iii)

As mentioned above, the blind cannot realistically be fully shut, and hence, should not be modeled as perfectly sealed in the numerical model. Instead, it

should be represented as a permeable screen with a reasonable spacing set between overlapping slats. In this way, the numerical solution will be able to include the effect o f air leakage in the cavity.

93

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix A AIR PROPERTIES

Air properties were obtained from published data from Thermophysical Properties Research Center, Purdue University [74, 75, 76]. An extensive collection o f

experimental works was investigated to compile tabulated recommended values for dynamic viscosity, thermal conductivity, and specific heat. All properties are considered to be a function o f temperature only, with the exception o f density.

A .l

Dynamic Viscosity (ji)

The recommended values o f Touloukian, Saxena, and Hestermans [74] are plotted as the upper curve in Figure A .I. Dynamic viscosity values evaluated at the film

temperature were obtained by linear interpolations between data points. The values have an estimated accuracy of ±0.5% in the temperature range o f this study.

A.2

Thermal Conductivity {k)

The recommended values o f Touloukian, Liley, and Saxena [75] are plotted as the lower curve in Figure A .l. Theimal conductivity values evaluated at the plate surface temperature were obtained by linear interpolations between data points. The values have an estimated accuracy of ±1% in the temperature range o f this study. |

94

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A3

Specific Heat (Q,)

The following equation given by Toulukian and M akita [76] were used to obtain specific heat values at the film temperature. The correlation is valid for temperatures between 260K and 61 OK at standard pressure. The values are estimated to be accurate to ±0.25%. Cp = 1 0 4 4 .6 6 -3 .1 5 9 6 7 x l0 -'r + 7.07908x10^7"-2.7034x10-"?^ where temperature is in [K]. (A .l)

A.4

Density {p)

The density o f air was calculated using the ideal gas law. P=^ where R = 287.097J/kg'K; temperature is in [K] and pressure is in [Pa]. (A.2)

A.5

Coefficient o f Thermal Expansion (fi)

Since air is considered to behave as an ideal gas, the expression for the coefficient o f thermal expansion can be simplified to: =± (A.3)

where 2 / is the absolute film temperature in [K].

95

Reproduceid with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

(>1UJ/AA) > i `AiiAipnpuoo leu ijam
o
CO

03
CN O O

o o `

OO IN O O

<o
CN O CN O O

LO CN O O

CN O O

CO CN

o

o

o

O %

CO tT N - 0 ) 0 0 CO CO CD 'T- OO LD CD O CO N- m C OC O 00 o) CN CN CN CN CN C N (N C N

O O O O O O OO

O O C D C D C D O O O

O CD
CD

oooooooo

r^OOCDO-c-CNCO'N' CNCNCNCOCOCOCOCD

o

t 1 1 O
a * 5 5 o o « 7 3 p g a 5 0) Q. 0

N

O
CO

1
s S C L U , <
K

o o

E

H

iO
h - N- LO CO O

h

i^ r^ o-- dc rio ïO îc nC o T-- 7-- T T-* T~ T - " t-- N
oooooooo

C )i nc )i n( 3

o
CO CNJ

h-O O O -r-O JC O T f

c m c n j c n c o c o c o c o c o

o
CN

o
CN

O )

CO

(O
oilubu Aq

(suu/6>jg_oix) o' `A}is o o s !a

96

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout permission.

Appendix B EXPERIMENTAL DATA

Table B. 1

Hot plate thermocouple calibration

Actual CC) 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 25.0 20.0 15.0 25.5 30.0 35.5 40.0 35.1 30.0 25.5 Correction

1 14.9 20.1 24.6 29.6 24.6 20.2 15.0 25.2 29.7 35.3 39.7 34.8 29.7 25.2 +0.2

2 14.4 19.7 24.3 29.3 24.3 19.7 14.5 24.8 29.3 34.9 39.4 34.5 29.4 24.8 +0.6

Thermocouple 3 4 14.8 14.9 19.9 20.2 24.6 25.3 29.5 29.8 24.6 24.3 19.9 20.2 14.8 14.9 25.1 24.5 29.5 29.8 35.1 35.4 39.5 39.6 34.7 34.9 29.5 29.8 25.1 25.2 +0.3 +0.2

Readings ("C) 5 6 14.9 14.4 20.1 19.6 24.6 24.4 29.5 29.3 24.6 24.3 20.1 19.6 15.0 14.5 25.2 24.9 29.5 29.4 35.1 35.0 39.7 39.4 34.7 34.5 29.6 29.4 25.2 24.8 +0.2 +0.6

7 14.9 20.0 24.6 29.5 24.6 20.0 15.0 25.2 29.6 35.1 39.6 34.7 29.6 25.2 +0.3

8 14.8 20.0 25.0 29.5 25.0 20.0 14.8 25.1 29.6 35.0 39.6 34.7 29.6 25.1 +0.3

97

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.2

Cold plate thermocouple calibration

A ctual CC) 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 25.0 20.0 15.0 25.5 30.0 35.5 40.0 35.1 30.0 25.5 C orrection

9 14.8 20.0 24.6 29.5 24.6 20.1 14.9 25.1 29.6 35.2 39.6 34.7 29.6 25.1 +0.3

10 14.4 19.7 24.3 29.2 24.3 19.7 14.5 24.8 29.3 34.9 39.4 34.4 29.3 24.8 +0.6

T herm ocouple 11 12 14.7 14.5 19.9 19.7 24.6 24.8 29.4 29.3 24.5 24.8 19.9 19.7 14.7 14.5 25.3 25.0 29.5 29.3 35.1 34.9 39.5 39.3 34.6 34.5 29.5 29.3 25.0 25.3 +0.4 +0.4

R eadings ("C) 14 15 13 14.4 14.7 14.9 19.9 20.0 19.6 24.4 24.6 L24.3 29.4 29.2 29.3 24.4 24.6 24.3 19.9 20.0 19.6 14.7 14.9 14.4 25.0 25.1 24.9 29.5 29.5 29.3 35.0 35.0 34.9 39.5 39.5 39.4 35.1 34.8 34.5 29.7 29.6 29.3 25.0 25.1 24.8 +0.4 +0.3 +0.6

16 14.6 19.9 24.9 29.4 24.9 19.9 14.7 25.0 29.4 34.9 39.5 34.5 29.5 25.0 +0.4

Table B.3

Venetian blind thermocouple calibration

Actual rc) 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 25.0 20.0 15.0 25.5 30.0 35.5 40.0 35.1 30.0 25.5 Correction

17 15.0 20.1 24.8 29.7 24.8 20.2 15.1 25.3 29.8 35.4 39.7 34.8 29.7 25.2 +0.2

18 14.8 20.0 24.6 29.6 24.6 20.0 14.9 25.2 29.7 35.1 39.7 34.7 29.7 25.1 +0.3

Thermocouple 19 20 14.3 14.6 19.6 19.8 24.2 24.9 29.2 29.4 24.2 24.9 19.6 19.8 14.4 14.6 24.8 25.0 29.4 29.6 35.1 34.9 39.5 39.5 34.4 34.5 29.4 29.6 24.8 25.0 +0.6 +0.4

Readings (°C) 21 22 14.9 14.7 20.1 19.9 24.7 24.6 30.7 29.6 25.4 24.6 20.1 19.9 14.8 14.9 25.2 25.2 29.6 29.8 35.3 35.2 39.8 39.7 34.8 34.8 29.7 29.6 25.2 25.1 +0.1 +0.3

23 14.4 19.7 24.4 29.4 24.4 19.8 14.6 25.0 29.5 35.1 39.6 34.8 29.8 25.1 +0.4

24 14.7 19.8 25.0 29.5 25.0 19.8 14.7 25.1 29.6 35.1 39.6 34.7 29.6 25.1 +0.5

98 km
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.4

Plate surface average and blind temperatures (°C) for s = 2mm

Section 0" top middle bottom top middle bottom 25.0 24.2 24.2 25.0 24.1 24.2 25.1 top _ middle 24.1 bottom 24.2 34.7 34.6 34.8 34.7 34.7 35.0 35.0 34.9 34.9

Ts,c 14.9 14.9 14.9 15.0 14.9 14.9 15.0 14.9 14.9

45"

90"

r, 25.5 25.6 25.7 28.0 27.9 28.0 27.6 27.9 27.3

T. 25.9 25.9 26.0 26.8 26.6 27.0 27.4 28.1 28.7

n 25.4 25.4 25.5 25.2 25.0 25.5 27.5 26.9 26.9

Blind T4 25.4 25.6 25.7 25.5 25.8 25.5 25.6 25.2 24.8

Ts 25.3 25.3 25.4 25.1 24.7 25.0 23.2 23.4 23.4

T6 24.7 24.8 25.0 23.2 23.6 23.4 22.6 21.8 23.1

T7 24.5 24.5 24.1 21.6 22.3 21.6 20.8 20.7 21.9

Table B.5

Plate surface average and blind temperatures (°C) for j = 4mm

Section 0" top middle bottom top middle bottom top middle bottom

Too 24.3 24.3 24.7 24.3 24.2 24.9 24.3 24.3 ""4.8

T s,H

Ts,c 14.9 14.9 15.0 14.9 14.9 15.0 14.9 14.9 14.9

45"

90"

34.8 34.7 35.0 34.8 35.0 35.0 35.2 34.8 34.9

Tl 27.4 27.1 27.5 28.8 28.7 28.6 28.7 28.8 28.4

T2 26.5 26.3 26.7 27.6 27.4 27.2 28.0 28.1 28.6

T3 25.5 25.4 25.8 25.6 25.7 25.3 27.4 27.1 26.9

Blind T4 26.1 25.7 25.8 25.4 25.2 25.2 25.4 25.0 24.1

Ts 25.2 25.1 25.3 24.4 24.7 24.3 23.5 22.9 23.4

T6 24.7 24.5 24.8 22.6 22.3 22.4 21.8 22.3 22.7

Tr 22.7 22.5 22.9 21.2 21.0 21.2 21.2 21.6 21.9

99

I Reoroduced with Dermission of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without o e rm is s io n .

Table B.6

Plate surface average and blind temperatures (°C) for 5 = 8mm

(p 0"

Section top middle bottom top middle bottom top middle bottom

r» 24.5 25.0 25.0 24.5 24.4 25.1 24.5 24.4 25.1

Ts,h 34.9 35.3 34.9 35.0 34.8 35.3 34.9 35.1 34.9

ls,C

45"

90"

15.0 15.0 15.0 15.0 14.9 15.0 15.0 14.9 15.0

T, 29.6 29.3 29.4 29.3 29.4 29.7 28.7 28.1 27.9

T2 29.0 28.7 28.9 28.8 28.9 29.3 28.5 29.1 28.7

Ts 27.5 27.1 27.3 26.8 26.9 27.3 27.4 27.2 27.1

Blind T4 25.8 25.8 25.4 25.1 24.8 25.0 25.5 25.5 25.4

Ts 24.1 23.9 23.9 23.7 23.4 23.8 23.2 23.3 23.2

Ts 22.1 21.9 22.0 21.6 21.2 21.6 22.1 22.0 22.2

T? 20.9 20.9 20.9 21.0 20.9 21.0 21.8 21.6 21.7

100

R i ^ n m d i i n e d w i t h n A r m ÎR Ç tin n n f t h » p . n n u r i n h t n w n n r

F u r t h e r m n r n d i i n t i n n n m h i h l t o d w i t h n i it n o r m i c c r i r

Table B.7(a)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, c f>= 0°, top section p = 752.642mmHg, Ra = 4.439x 1O '*

y (mm) 72.64 69.95 67.26 64.57 61.88 59.19 56.50 53.81 51.12 48.43 45.74 43.05 40.36 37.67 34.98 32.28 29.59 26.90 24.21 21.52 18.83 16.14 13.45 10.76 8.07 5.38 2.69

Hot] 'late Nil y (mm) 0.7561 0' 0.8741 -2.69 1.4064 -5.38 1.9553 -8.07 2.7744 -10.76 3.5517 -13.45 1.3095 -16.14 1.7674 -18.83 2.2232 -21.52 2.6180 -24.21 2.7623 -26.90 2.8263 -29.59 3.0092 -32.28 6.4149 -34.98 1.3010 -37.67 1.5151 -40.36 -43.05 2.0439 2.3880 -45.74 2.7054 -48.43 2.7491 -51.12 2.7662 -53.81 3.6720 2.7486 1.4939 2.0621 2.5709 2.8330

Nil 2.7875 2.9565 3.2167 5.7990 1.3339 1.7673 2.3285 2.7913 2.9389 2.9499 3.0236 5.8752 1.4838 1.7920 2.3481 2.6301 2.9272 2.9531 3.1502 4.4734 2.0634

y (mm) 72.64 69.95 67.26 64.57 61.88 59.19 56.50 53.81 51.12 48.43 45.74 43.05 40.36 37.67 34.98 32.28 29.59 26.90 24.21 21.52 18.83 16.14 13.45 10.76 8.07 5.38 2.69

Cold Plate Nil y (mm) -2.5343 0 -2.5747 -2.69 -2.3045 -5.38 -1.8749 -8.07 -4.6980 -10.76 -4.0426 -13.45 -3.1604 -16.14 -3.1689 -18.83 -2.8561 -21.52 -2.6746 -24.21 -2.0811 -26.90 -1.6291 -29.59 -1.7859 -32.28 -3.5240 -34.98 -3.3563 -37.67 -3.1993 -40.36 -2.9629 -43.05 -3.0045 -45.74 -2.3464 -48.43 -1.7313 -51.12 -1.5824 -53.81 -4.0960 -3.3882 -3.2287 -3.0067 -2.8678 -2.4787

Nu -1.9021 -1.4519 -2.4267 -3.4215 -3.2162 -2.8591 -2.9111 -2.5062 -2.0340 -1.4971 -1.6266 -3.9224 -3.2940 -3.2769 -3.1008 -2.8772 -2.2904 -1.7226 -1.6591 -3.9452 -3.2848

y = 0m m c o rr esp o n d s to th e cen tre lo c a tin g pin on each interferogram

101

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.7(b)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, < p = 0°, middle section p = 760.076mmHg, Ra = 4.532x10'^

y (mm) 64.37 61.69 59.01 56.33 53.64 50.96 48.28 45.60 42.92 40.23 37.55 34.87 32.19 29.50 26.82 24.14 21.46 18.78 16.09 13.41 10.73 8.05 5.36 2.68 0

H ot] 'late Nu y (mm) -2.68 1.7959 2.2442 -5.36 -8.05 2.6433 -10.73 2.9030 -13.41 2.8584 2.8248 -16.09 3.3245 -18.78 5.3519 -21.46 -24.14 1.7473 2.0141 -26.82 2.5402 -29.50 2.8419 -32.19 2.9118 -34.87 2.9309 -37.55 2.9225 -40.23 4.6802 -42.92 1.8355 -45.60 2.0306 -48.28 2.5108 -50.96 3.0601 -53.64 3.0889 -56.33 3.0351 -59.01 3.0722 -61.69 3.5167 -64.37 2.5776 -67.06 -69.74 -72.42 -75.10 -77.78

Nu 1.6911 2.2111 2.8435 2.9918 2.9970 2.9230 3.3209 5.8300 1.8958 2.1634 2.6258 2.8709 3.1057 2.9071 3.1872 5.3951 1.5627 1.9043 2.4314 2.6450 2.8132 2.7639 2.7379 4.8659 2.0119 2.0255 2.2777 2.7900 3.0199

y (mm) 64.37 61.69 59.01 56.33 53.64 50.96 48.28 45.60 42.92 40.23 37.55 34.87 32.19 29.50 26.82 24.14 21.46 18.78 16.09 13.41 10.73 8.05 5.36 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -2.9144 -2.68 -2.8574 -5.36 -2.8093 -8.05 -2.3360 -10.73 -1.7615 -13.41 -1.5060 -16.09 -3.4680 -18.78 -3.3073 -21.46 -3.0665 -24.14 -3.0775 -26.82 -2.8753 -29.50 -2.5241 -32.19 -2.0615 -34.87 -1.4900 -37.55 -2.2345 -40.23 -4.1697 -42.92 -3.4766 -45.60 -3.3506 -48.28 -3.0902 -50.96 -2.7798 -53.64 -2.2987 -56.33 -1.7568 -59.01 -2.0474 -61.69 -5.5706 -64.37 -3.3107 -67.06 -69.74 -72.42 -75.10 -77.78

Nu -3.1870 -3.1411 -2.8279 -2.3917 -1.7656 -1.4115 -2.7690 -3.7296 -3.3860 -3.0817 -2.8838 -2.4505 -2.0414 -1.3999 -1.8646 -3.7080 -3.3180 -3.2321 -2.9355 -2.7554 -2.2843 -1.7655 -1.9023 -4.5645 -3.2619 -3.2676 -2.9278 -2.6730 -2.4038

102

Reoroduced with Dermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Table B.7(c)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, cf) = 0", bottom section p = 760.076mmHg, Ra = 4.560x10''

(mm) 62.16 59.45 56.75 54.05 51.35 48.64 45.94 43.24 40.54 37.83 35.13 32.43 29.73 27.02 24.32 21.62 18.92 16.21 13.51 10.81 8.11 5.40 2.70 0

Hot 'late Nu j( m m ) 2.9715 -2.70 2.8783 -5.40 -8.11 3.7502 3.6386 -10.81 1.9199 -13.51 -16.21 2.2656 2.6187 -18.92 3.2055 -21.62 3.1393 -24.32 3.1642 -27.02 3.3206 -29.73 6.0159 -32.43 1.7549 -35.13 2.2382 -37.83 2.7601 -40.54 2.9706 -43.24 3.1266 -45.94 3.1499 -48.64 3.1935 -51.35 5.1827 -54.05 2.8629 -56.75 2.0507 -59.45 2.4953 -62.16 2.7985 -64.86 -67.56

Nu 3.0702 3.1782 3.2519 4.0600 3.8782 1.9302 2.2963 2.8987 3.0407 3.0531 3.3817 3.5828 4.4698 1.9635 2.3296 2.8765 3.5486 3.6497 3.4376 3.7734 4.8065 3.3943 2.6070 3.0393 2.1268

(mm) 62.16 59.45 56.75 54.05 51.35 48.64 45.94 43.24 40.54 37.83 35.13 32.43 29.73 27.02 24.32 21.62 18.92 16.21 13.51 10.81 8.11 5.40 2.70 0

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -1.9303 -2.70 -1.7990 -5.40 -3.5995 -8.11 -10.81 -3.7295 -3.5594 -13.51 -3.2456 -16.21 -18.92 -2.9022 -2.5019 -21.62 -2.0831 -24.32 -27.02 -1.6507 -2.4821 -29.73 -3.8084 -32.43 -35.13 -3.4037 -3.2993 -37.83 -3.1417 -40.54 -2.8494 -43.24 -2.4438 -45.94 -2.0119 -48.64 -1.6116 -51.35 -3.9051 -54.05 -3.7042 -56.75 -59.45 -3.4001 -3.2387 -62.16 -2.9853 -64.86 -67.56

Nu -2.6981 -1.7345 -1.4515 -3.0109 -3.6663 -3.6565 -3.1343 -2.9536 -2.5528 -1.9401 -1.5408 -3.1281 -3.6943 -3.1782 -2.9730 -2.9627 -2.6068 -2.1786 -1.6884 -1.3951 -3.7940 -2.3109 -1.4226 -0.9735 -0.8641

103

R e o ro d u c e d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

Table B.7(d)

Local Nusselt numbers for -y = 2mm, < f>= 45°, top section p = 752.642mmHg, Ra = 4.451x10" ^

y (mm) 72.84 70.14 67.45 64.75 62.05 59.35 56.65 53.96 51.26 48.56 45.86 43.16 40.47 37.77 35.07 32.37 29.68 26.98 24.28 21.58 18.88 16.19 13.49 10.79 8.09 5.40 2.70

Hot Plate Nil y (mm> 0 0.1667 0.1897 -2.70 0.2241 -5.40 0.1510 -8.09 0.5102 -10.79 0.6973 -13.49 0.7935 -16.19 0.8577 -18.88 0.6940 -21.58 0.7316 -24.28 0.9609 -26.98 1.1600 -29.68 1.2453 -32.37 1.2482 -35.07 1.0407 -37.77 1.2248 -40.47 1.4260 -43.16 1.7976 -45.86 2.0062 -48.56 2.1170 -51.26 2.0393 -53.96 1.9051 1.6401 1.5314 1.4987 1.6731 2.1512

Nu 2.6165 2.3218 2.2784 2.0756 1.8633 1.6315 1.4602 1.5529 2.0957 2.4282 2.4379 2.3316 2.0021 1.7593 1.6723 1.9332 2.4089 2.7299 2.8316 2.6073 2.2755

y (mm) 72.84 70.14 67.45 64.75 62.05 59.35 56.65 53.96 51.26 48.56 45.86 43.16 40.47 37.77 35.07 32.37 29.68 26.98 24.28 21.58 18.88 16.19 13.49 10.79 8.09 5.40 2.70

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) 0 -4.5229 -5.5257 -2.70 -5.40 -3.9996 -3.3751 -8.09 -3.1331 -10.79 -13.49 -3.2095 -3.3102 -16.19 -3.1661 -18.88 -3.0530 -21.58 -24.28 -2.9973 -2.8695 -26.98 -2.5378 -29.68 -2.3670 -32.37 -35.07 -2.5396 -2.6250 -37.77 -40.47 -2.5157 -2.2175 -43.16 -2.2104 -45.86 -2.1704 -48.56 -1.9161 -51.26 -2.0330 -53.96 -2.5230 -2.5674 -2.5354 2.2323 -1.6978 -1.6132

Nu -1.8201 -1.9285 -2.0873 -2.1672 -2.1402 -2.2810 -1.9779 -1.7721 -1.8594 -2.0269 -2.3131 -2.3453 -2.4533 -2.2840 -1.8108 -1.5649 -1.7953 -1.9526 -2.0888 -2.1547 -2.2099

104

R e o ro d u c e d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

Table 6.7(e)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, (f>= 45°, middle section p = 760.076mmHg, Ra = 4.548x10'^

y (mm ) 67.12 64.44 61.75 59.07 56.38 53.70 51.01 48.33 45.64 42.96 40.27 37.59 34.90 32.22 29.53 26.85 24.16 21.48 18.79 16.11 13.42 10.74 8.05 5.37 2.68 0

H ot] *Iate y (mm) Nu 1.7751 -2.68 1.7280 -5.37 1.8036 -8.05 -10.74 2.0986 2.4492 -13.42 -16.11 2.6490 2.6572 -18.79 2.5507 -21.48 2.1529 -24.16 1.8805 -26.85 1.7741 -29.53 1.6362 -32.22 1.5190 -34.90 2.0603 -37.59 2.3532 ^ 0.27 2.4062 -42.96 2.2269 -45.64 1.9986 -48.33 1.7249 -51.01 1.7779 -53.70 2.1169 -56.38 2.8470 -59.07 2.7039 -61.75 2.8174 -64.44 2.6619 -67.12 -69.80 2.0892 -72.49 -75.17 -77.86

Nu 1.9367 1.6519 1.5744 2.0402 2.0512 2.2877 2.1550 1.8961 1.8640 1.9881 2.3412 2.6762 3.0843 2.6624 2.5235 2.1405 1.9249 1.9099 1.8378 2.0754 2.5902 2.5865 2.6297 2.2927 1.9806 1.7103 1.4330 1.3421 1.7863

y (mm) 67.12 64.44 61.75 59.07 56.38 53.70 51.01 48.33 45.64 42.96 40.27 37.59 34.90 32.22 29.53 26.85 24.16 21.48 18.79 16.11 13.42 10.74 8.05 5.37 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -2.2384 -2.68 -2.3269 -5.37 -2.0001 -8.05 -10.74 -1.5818 -13.42 -1.9576 -2.0776 -16.11 -2.3522 -18.79 -21.48 -2.6978 -2.7683 -24.16 -2.6433 -26.85 -2.4464 -29.53 -2.1054 -32.22 -1.8772 -34.90 -2.1782 -37.59 -2.1881 -40.27 -2.1542 -42.96 -45.64 -2.3123 -2.3240 -48.33 -2.1893 -51.01 -53.70 -2.2000 -1.8415 -5638 -59.07 -1.7996 -61.75 -1.9265 -2.0237 -64.44 -67.12 -2.2506 -69.80 -2.2928 -72.49 -75.17 -77.86

Nu -2.2734 -2.2121 -2.2520 -2.1860 -2.0005 -1.9397 -2.0105 -2.0553 -2.1334 -1.9146 -1.5430 -1.7336 -1.8976 -1.9677 -2.0341 -2.1908 -2.2278 -2.0405 -1.7939 -1.3964 -1.9185 -2.1417 -2.2983 -2.5220 -2.8194 -2.7124 -2.4938 -2.2466 -2.2341

105

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Table 6.7(f)

Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 2mm, c f>= 45°, bottom section p = 760.076mmHg, Ra - 4.589x10'^

y (mm) 61.73 59.05 56.36 53.68 51.00 48.31 45.63 42.94 40.26 37.58 34.89 32.21 29.52 26.84 24.16 21.47 18.79 16.10 13.42 10.74 8.05 5.37 2.68 0

H ot] *late Nil y (mm) 2.6951 -2.68 2.7180 -5.37 2.4989 -8.05 -10.74 2.0803 1.9652 -13.42 1.7838 -16.10 -18.79 1.8295 2.1059 -21.47 2.5704 -24.16 2.5480 -26.84 2.3896 -29.52 2.3101 -32.21 1.9272 -34.89 -37.58 1.7826 1.7502 -40.26 -42.94 2.0378 2.4328 -45.63 -48.31 2.6820 2.4995 -51.00 2.5035 -53.68 2.1735 -56.36 1.9370 -59.05 1.9174 -61.73 -64.42 2.0107

Nil 2.5608 2.6152 2.5165 2.4383 2.1129 2.1394 2.3403 2.5990 2.8036 2.6995 2.6935 2.7245 2.6083 2.6873 2.8112 3.1753 3.7203 3.7062 3.3205 3.4875 3.5740 3.6056 3.9594 4.1248

y (mm) 61.73 59.05 56.36 53.68 51.00 48.31 45.63 42.94 40.26 37.58 34.89 32.21 29.52 26.84 24.16 21.47 18.79 16.10 13.42 10.74 8.05 5.37 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nil y (mm) -1.8906 -2.68 -2.0061 -5.37 -8.05 -2.3010 -10.74 -2.3886 -13.42 -2.4671 -16.10 -1.9658 -1.7854 -18.79 -1.6834 -21.47 -2.0032 -24.16 -26.84 -2.1753 -2.4752 -29.52 -32.21 -2.3468 -34.89 -2.4803 -37.58 -2.4059 -40.26 -2.2365 -42.94 -2.0359 -2.0037 -45.63 -1.9318 -48.31 -51.00 -1.9335 -53.68 -1.9049 -2.0300 -56.36 -59.05 -2.0641 -61.73 -1.9598 -2.0039 -64.42

Nu -1.9807 -1.9534 -1.6352 -1.5972 -1.6983 -1.6552 -1.7767 -1.7376 -1.9788 -1.9613 -1.3017 -1.2091 -1.0464 -1.0119 -0.9276 -0.7965 -0.7882 -1.2722 -1.0333 -0.7608 -0.5822 -0.3405 -0.1323 -0.2721

106

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Table 6.7(g)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 2mm, (p = 90°, top section p = 752.642mmHg, Ra - 4.489x10'*

j; (mm) 72.92 70.22 67.52 64.81 62.11 59.41 56.71 54.01 51.31 48.61 45.91 43.21 40.51 37.81 35.11 32.41 29.71 27.01 24.31 21.60 18.90 16.20 13.50 10.80 8.10 5.40 2.70

H ot] *late Nu y (mm) 0.4572 0 -2.70 0.4479 0.4421 -5.40 0.4610 -8.10 -10.80 0.5539 -13.50 0.6129 0.6150 -16.20 0.6110 -18.90 0.1620 -21.60 0.1614 -24.31 0.1652 -27.01 -29.71 0.5060 -32.41 0.5565 -35.11 0.5883 -37.81 0.5621 -40.51 0.5729 -43.21 0.5978 -45.91 0.5876 0.6074 -48.61 0.5855 -51.31 -54.01 0.5724 0.5511 -56.71 0.5069 0.4980 0.5174 0.5284 0.5934

Nu 0.6300 0.5933 0.5808 0.6028 0.5995 0.6294 0.6493 0.7189 0.6326 0.7103 0.7125 0.6971 0.6963 0.6974 0.7417 0.7579 0.7965 0.8108 0.8414 0.8649 0.8891 0.8990

y (mm) 72.92 70.22 67.52 64.81 62.11 59.41 56.71 54.01 51.31 48.61 45.91 43.21 40.51 37.81 35.11 32.41 29.71 27.01 24.31 21.60 18.90 16.20 13.50 10.80 8.10 5.40 2.70

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) 0 -2.7998 -3.3066 -2.70 -3.2568 -5.40 -3.0064 -8.10 -10.80 -3.3107 -13.50 -3.8005 -4.1286 -16.20 -4.1640 -18.90 -4.0079 -21.60 -3.5568 -24.31 -3.3781 -27.01 -3.0464 -29.71 -2.8984 -32.41 -2.6964 -35.11 -37.81 -2.5343 -2.3521 -40.51 -43.21 -2.3451 -2.1529 -45.91 -2.1200 -48.61 -51.31 -1.9908 -54.01 -2.0443 -2.1936 -56.71 -2.2585 -2.2214 -2.2469 -2.2012 -2.1331

Nu -2.0653 -2.1004 -2.1210 -2.1556 -2.1388 -2.0410 -2.1662 -2.1754 -2.0294 -2.0998 -2.0555 -2.0283 -2.1249 -2.0538 -2.0300 -1.9274 -1.9435 -1.9475 -1.9138 -1.8664 -1.7757 -1.8620

107

Reoroduced with Dermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Table 8.7(h)

: 2mm, (f) = 90°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s '  p = 760.076mmHg, Ra = 4.574x1 O '*

y (mm) 64.29 61.61 58.93 56.25 53.58 50.90 48.22 45.54 42.86 40.18 37.50 34.82 32.15 29.47 26.79 24.11 21.43 18.75 16.07 13.39 10.72 8.04 5.36 2.68 0

Hot Plate Nu y (mm) 0.7806 -2.68 0.7880 -5.36 -8.04 0.4759 -10.72 Ô.5949 0.6576 -13.39 0.7191 -16.07 -18.75 0.7262 0.7916 -21.43 -24.11 0.8497 0.8789 -26.79 0.6163 -29.47 0.7443 -32.15 0.8533 -34.82 0.9572 -37.50 0.9994 -40.18 1.0112 -42.86 1.0562 -45.54 1.1423 -48.22 0.9013 -50.90 1.0351 -53.58 1.0539 -56.25 1.0962 -58.93 1.1752 -61.61 1.2756 -64.29 -66.97 0.9953 -69.65 -72.33 -75.01 -77.69 -80.36

Nu 1.1350 1.2185 1.2907 1.3014 1.3897 1.1868 1.2448 1.3261 1.3937 1.5043 1.5149 1.2792 1.3367 1.3680 1.4391 1.5921 1.6789 1.4239 1.4242 1.5181 1.6056 1.6158 1.6536 1.4879 1.6012 1.6686 1.7783 1.8316 1.8255 1.6670

y (mm) 64.29 61.61 58.93 56.25 53.58 50.90 48.22 45.54 42.86 40.18 37.50 34.82 32.15 29.47 26.79 24.11 21.43 18.75 16.07 13.39 10.72 8.04 5.36 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -1.6764 -2.68 -5.36 -1.5883 -8.04 -1.6318 -10.72 -1.5614 -1.3999 -13.39 -1.3334 -16.07 -1.6117 -18.75 -21.43 -1.5859 -1.4938 -24.11 -1.4474 -26.79 -1.4193 -29.47 -1.3199 -32.15 -1.3194 -34.82 -1.2860 -37.50 -40.18 -1.4373 -1.3548 -42.86 -45.54 -1.2563 -1.2199 -48.22 -1.1746 -50.90 -1.1398 -53.58 -1.0468 -56.25 -1.2769 -58.93 -61.61 -1.1786 -1.1186 -64.29 -1.0518 -66.97 -69.65 -72.33 -75.01 -77.69 -80.36

Nu -1.0822 -0.9704 -1.2844 -1.2147 -1.1044 -1.0674 -0.9520 -0.9084 -1.0469 -1.0352 -0.9589 -0.9059 -0.8545 -0.7792 -1.0140 -0.9297 -0.8943 -0.8148 -0.7513 -0.7251 -0.6764 -0.6213 -0.8429 -0.8033 -0.7705 -0.7329 -0.6587 -0.6093 -0.5488 -0.5066

108

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.7(i)

Local Nusselt numbers for .ç - 2mm, 4»~ 90°, bottom section p = 760.076mmHg, Ra = 4.578x10" ^

y (mm) 61.83 59.14 56.46 53.77 51.08 48.39 45.70 43.01 40.33 37.64 34.95 32.26 29.57 26.88 24.20 21.51 18.82 16.13 13.44 10.75 8.07 5.38 2.69 0

H ot] *Iate Nu j (mm) 1.9233 -2.69 1.7499 -5.38 -8.07 1.7429 -10.75 2.0581 1.9460 -13.44 -16.13 1.9608 -18.82 1.8836 2.0554 -21.51 -24.20 2.1545 -26.88 2.0333 2.1400 -29.57 2.0705 -32.26 -34.95 2.2886 -37.64 2.2330 2.1104 -40.33 -43.01 2.0628 -45.70 1.9881 2.1801 -48.39 -51.08 2.0227 -53.77 2.0848 2.0860 -56.46 -59.14 2.0199 2.2735 -61.83 2.0370 -64.52

Nu 2.2665 2.2114 2.1433 2.6517 2.4711 2.5095 2.3753 2.3385 2.6552 2.8198 2.5633 2.5971 2.7433 3.0994 3.1258 3.3011 3.4734 4.4981 3.8361 3.7547 4.2712 4.5699 4.4413 3.7498

y (mm) 61.83 59.14 56.46 53.77 51.08 48.39 45.70 43.01 40.33 37.64 34.95 32.26 29.57 26.88 24.20 21.51 18.82 16.13 13.44 10.75 8.07 5.38 2.69 0

Cold Plate Nu (mm) -1.0452 -2.69 -1.1021 -5.38 -0.9783 -8.07 -10.75 -1.0716 -13.44 -1.0014 -0.9642 -16.13 -0.8968 -18.82 -21.51 -0.8765 -0.9341 -24.20 -0.9321 -26.88 -29.57 -0.7933 -0.8333 -32.26 -0.8092 -34.95 -37.64 -0.7683 -40.33 -0.7438 -0.6214 -43.01 -45.70 -0.6232 -0.6720 -48.39 -0.7081 -51.08 -0.6605 -53.77 -0.6633 -56.46 -59.14 -0.6642 -0.6868 -61.83 -0.6739 -64.52

Nu -0.6769 -0.6979 -0.7394 -0.7107 -0.7153 -0.6326 -0.6017 -0.6221 -0.6389 -0.6486 -0.6902 -0.7024 -0.6595 -0.6073 -0.5432 -0.4953 -0.5199 -0.5273 -0.5227 -0.5185 -0.4682 -0.4159 -0.3585 -0.2878

109

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.8(a)

Local N usselt numbers for 5 = 4mm, (f>= 0°, top section ^ = 753.403mmHg, = 6.623x10'^

V (mm) 7Z56 69.87 67T9 64.50 61.81 59.12 56.44 53.75 5L06 4837 4&69 4T00 4031 37^2 34.94 3235 2936 26.87 24T9 2130 18.81 16T2 13.44 10.75 836 537 2.69

H ot]Plate Y (mm) Nu 0.4604 0 03992 -2.69 -5.37 03159 -8.06 1.3159 1.9090 -10.75 1.7248 -13.44 1.3866 -16.12 1.6235 -18.81 1.7601 -21.50 137&2 -24.19 1.9248 -26.87 23748 -2 9 3 6 2.4650 -32.25 :23558 -34.94 1.S298 -37.62 1.8744 -4031 2.1461 -43.00 22678 -45.69 2T480 -48.37 2T783 -51.06 24030 -53.75 23389 1.9096 23506 2.1701 22252 2.2511

Nu 23657 2.4773 2.8625 235 9 2 L8594 2.1004 22556 23616 23892 2.5509 2.7704 23253 2.0208 23514 2.2970 2.3657 23850 23 352 233 3 8 33 237 23292

V (mm) 7236 69.87 6739 64.50 61.81 5932 56.44 53.75 51.06 48.37 45.69 4330 40.31 37.62 34.94 32.25 29.56 2637 24.19 2130 18.81 16.12 13.44 10.75 836 537 239

Cold Plate y (mm) N il 0 -3.8194 4169 -43811 -5.37 -4.1257 -8.06 -4.2570 -10.75 -4.4075 -13.44 33801 -16T2 -3.3413 -18.81 -3.4817 -2 1 3 0 -3.2621 -24.19 33659 -2 637 -2.8201 -2 9 3 6 -2.4976 -32.25 415200 -34.94 -23667 -37.62 -23257 -40.31 -2.7000 -43.00 -2.7006 -45.69 416113 -4 8 3 7 42.4295 -51.06 411282 -5335 -2.2002 -2.6707 413209 416179 413136 -2.4864 -2.3452

Nu -1.9527 -1.8405 -2.3620 -2.5760 -2.5665 -2.4580 415134 413820 -2.1728 -1.9463 -1.9752 416130 416251 -2.4614 -2.5197 -2.4092 -2.2393 -1.9740 410538 -2.6243 -2.5440

110

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.8(b)

Lor?^ ' Tjsselt numbers for s = 4mm, (p = 0°, middle section -- 753.403mmHg, Ra = 6.605x10"^

y (mm ) 61.45 58.78 56.10 53 50.76 48TW 45^ 2 4275 4&07 37.40 34.73 32.06 29J9 26J2 24.04 21.37 18.70 16.03 1236 1CL69 8.01 234 2.67 0

H o t] 'late Nu y (mm) 233 7 0 -2.67 2.3342 -5.34i 23902 -8.01 2.3796 -10.69 :28219 -13.36 3.2317 -16.03 2.5499 -18.70 2.2157 -21.37 23631 -24.04 2/W83 -26.72 2^423 -2939 :25685 -32.06 2.6234 -34.73 28926 -37.40 2.6885 -40.07 2T033 -42.75 23996 -45.42 25368 -4&09 :25602 -50.76 2.6100 -53.43 239 8 7 -5630 23877 -5838 23331 -61.45 23342 -64.12 -6639 -69.46 -7213 -7480

Nu 23026 23875 23 927 2.4938 2.6735 23636 3.3442 23693 2T964 23495 24372 2.4971 23000 2.6971 23741 2.9908 21433 2.3193 24102 2.4540 24338 23997 :28896 33618 2.0071 23033 2.4215 2.4996

y (mm) 6145 58.78 56.10 53.43 50.76 48 3 9 45 4 2 4275 40.07 37.40 34.73 32.06 2939 2632 2434 2137 18.70 16.03 13.36 10.69 831 534 237 0

C old Plate Nu y (m m ) 423935 4267 -5 3 4 -2.3997 -2.2650 -8.01 -1.8932 -10.69 -1.7111 -13.36 424810 -16.03 -2.5379 -18.70 425535 -21.37 424850 -24.04 -2.5474 -26.72 -2.4562 -29.39 421635 -32.06 420671 -34.73 421812 -37.40 428598 -40.07 -2.4760 -42.75 -45.42 -2.4827 -2.3672 -4 8 3 9 423353 -50.76 -2.1340 -53.43 -1.9188 -56.10 421056 -5&78 -61.45 428786 -64.12 -2.7209 -66.79 -6 9 4 6 -72.13 -74.80

Nu -2.6238 423837 -23906 -2.2688 -1.8792 -1.8725 420856 -2.5477 -2.4835 -2.4930 -2.2051 423320 422378 420109 420553 425965 425871 424734 424559 -2.2675 -2.0051 -1.8128 -1.9964 -2.3840 425934 -2.4077 425196 425515

111

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.8(c)

Local Nusselt numbers for .v = 4mm, cf) --0°, bottom section p = 759.593mmHg, Ra = 6.776x10^

y (mm) 6L53 58.85 56.18 53.50 50.83 48.15 4548 4280 40.13 3745 34.78 3210 29.43 26.75 2L08 21.40 1&73 1&05 13J8 10.70 8.03 5J 5 268 0

H ot] *late Nu y (mm) 2.2913 4168 :25179 -5.35 2J241 -8.03 2.0024 -10.70 2.0101 -13.38 2.0572 -16.05 2.2538 -1&73 2.2621 -21.40 2.2584 -24.08 23861 -26.75 28548 -29.43 2T859 -32.10 2.0013 -34.78 2.0553 -37.45 2T666 -40.13 2.2117 -42.80 2T650 -4548 2J563 -48.15 2.7125 -50.83 2.6956 -53.50 1J482 -56.18 2.1035 -58.85 :22986 -6L53 2T259 -6 4 2 0

Nil 23169 2.4727 2.6956 :29320 2T646 22053 2.4708 25950 25106 25324 :2.6981 3T205 2.9447 :18545 20294 32490 23421 3.5298 :25382 4T048 -45780 44669 4T395 3.7650

y (mm) 6L53 58.85 56.18 53.50 50.83 48.15 45 4 8 42.80 40T3 37.45 34.78 32T0 2943 2675 2408 21.40 18.73 16.05 13.38 10.70 203 5 35 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -1.4988 4268 -1.9893 -5.35 -2.4343 -8.03 -10.70 -2.2639 -13.38 -22535 420984 -16.05 -2.0442 -18.73 -21.40 -1.9843 -1.7795 -24.08 -1.8051 -26.75 423483 -29.43 425756 -32.10 -34.78 423181 423330 -37.45 -2.2024 -40.13 420560 -42.80 -1.8777 -45.48 -1.7187 -48T5 -1.9853 -50.83 425556 -53.50 423398 -56T8 422488 -58.85 -2.2448 -61.53 -2.1988 -64.20

Nu -1.7534 -1.6119 -1.5980 -2.1502 -2.2825 421861 -2.0782 -1.9004 -1.8922 -1.5120 -1.3986 -2.1460 422690 -2.0927 -1.9418 -1.7995 -1.6387 -1.3734 -1.2316 -1.4950 -1.9140 -1.1046 -0.4525 -0.3872

112

Reproduced with permission of the copvriaht owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.8(d)

Local Nusselt numbers for 5' = 4mm, ^ = 45°, top section p = 753.403mmHg, = 6.623x10'*

.V (mm) 75.49 72.80 70.10 67.41 64.71 62.01 59.32 56.62 53.92 51.23 48.53 45.84 43.14 40.44 37.75 35.05 32.35 29.66 26.96 24.27 21.57 18.87 16.18 13.48 10.78 8.09 5.39 2.70

Hot Plate Nu y (mm) 0.3714 0 0.2052 -2.70 0.1815 -5.39 0.2188 -8.09 0.3607 -10.78 0.5717 -13.48 0.7220 -16.18 0.7974 -18.87 0.7357 -21.57 0.2322 -24.27 0.5596 -26.96 0.8634 -29.66 Ï.0296 -32.35 1.2308 -35.05 1.3158 -37.75 -40.44 1.5398 1.3135 -43.14 1.5782 -45.84 1.8322 -48.53 1.9223 -51.23 1.9133 -53.92 1.8393 -56.62 1.5819 1.5713 1.7577 2.0609 2.4707 2.6771

Nu 2.5053 2.5530 2.2192 1.9832 1.8683 1.9620 2.3391 2.3759 2.7402 2.7821 2.4560 2.0474 1.7766 1.5548 1.2990 1.7094 2.1077 2.1880 2.1401 2.0059 1.8844 1.5436

y (mm) 75.49 72.80 70.10 67.41 64.71 62.01 59.32 56.62 53.92 51.23 48.53 45.84 43.14 40.44 37.75 35.05 32.35 29.66 26.96 24.27 21.57 18.87 16.18 13.48 10.78 8.09 5.39 2.70

Cold Plate Nu j; (mm) -3.1980 0 -2.70 -5.8795 -7.0633 -5.39 -6.2660 -8.09 -10.78 -4.6107 -13.48 -4.4343 -16.18 -4.0269 -4.0913 -18.87 -21.57 -3.7684 -3.8782 -24.27 -3.5145 -26.96 -3.4483 -29.66 -32.35 -3.3558 -35.05 -3.5126 -37.75 -3.5296 -40.44 -3.5290 -43.14 -3.2879 -45.84 -2.9661 -48.53 -2.9166 -2.8511 -51.23 -2.5794 -53.92 -2.7170 -56.62 -2.8165 -2.7952 -2.8486 -2.7129 -2.4486 -2.1060

Nu -2.0462 -2.0947 -2.2234 -2.3423 -2.8478 -2.5475 -2.0588 -1.7607 -1.7954 -2.3078 -2.6459 -3.1318 -2.9922 -2.6511 -2.3064 -1.8131 -2.0927 -2.3550 -2.7487 -3.0297 -2.8967 -2.7535

113

R s o ro d u c e d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re n roclnotion n rn h ih ite r) w ith o u t n e rm ie c lo n

Table B.8(e)

f>= 45°, middle section Local Nusselt numbers for s ' : 4mm, < p = 753.403mmHg, Ra = 6.694x1

j' (ram) 64.33 61.65 58.97 56.29 53.61 50.93 48.25 45.57 42.89 40.21 37.53 34.85 32.16 29.48 26.80 24.12 21.44 18.76 16.08 13.40 10.72 8.04 5.36 2.68 0

H ot] *Iate Nu y (ram) 2.0618 -2.68 1.7646 -5.36 1.5362 -8.04 1.8751 -10.72 2.2672 -13.40 2.2377 -16.08 2.4076 -18.76 2.2701 -21.44 2.0645 -24.12 2.0613 -26.80 2.4274 -29.48 2.9701 -32.16 3.0635 -34.85 3.1651 -37.53 3.2307 -40.21 2.7889 -42.89 2.4315 -45.57 1.9985 -48.25 1.7466 -50.93 2.0423 -53.61 2.3925 -56.29 2.8150 -58.97 2.9821 -61.65 2.8166 -64.33 2.7179 -67.01 -69.69 -72.37 -75.05 -77.73

Nu 2.1104 1.8465 1.7829 2.2230 2.5985 2.9092 2.7544 2.3687 2.2029 2.1264 2.2509 2.6397 3.0623 3.1642 3.1894 2.9300 2.3842 1.9737 1.7432 2.0449 2.5045 2.7796 2.9051 2.5484 2.3422 2.0493 1.9307 2.4787 2.6670

y (mm) 64.33 61.65 58.97 56.29 53.61 50.93 48.25 45.57 42.89 40.21 37.53 34.85 32.16 29.48 26.80 24.12 21.44 18.76 16.08 13.40 10.72 8.04 5.36 2.68 0

Coid Plate y (mm) Nu -2.68 -2.3381 -2.0741 -5.36 -1.7392 -8.04 -10.72 -2.0079 -13.40 -2.3227 -2.6763 -16.08 -2.8410 -18.76 -21.44 -2.7837 -24.12 -2.6114 -2.2172 -26.80 -1.7791 -29.48 -1.8566 -32.16 -2.1925 -34.85 -2.5074 -37.53 -40.21 -2.8118 -2.9406 -42.89 -2.8185 -45.57 -2.4556 -48.25 -1.8299 -50.93 -2.0463 -53.61 -2.0797 -56.29 -2.0613 -58.97 -2.3288 -61.65 -2.5999 -64.33 -2.3968 -67.01 -69.69 -72.37 -75.05

Nu -2.1563 -2.0823 -1.8686 -1.7309 -1.9154 -2.3035 -2.4460 -2.4278 -2.3207 -1.8441 -1.5742 -1.5117 -1.8907 -2.1529 -2.3758 -2.4269 -2.3831 -2.1472 -1.8032 -1.5290 -1.6824 -1.9200 -2.2827 -2.4148 -2.3833 -2.2399 -1.9319 -1.6060

114

R û n r r iH i m o H

\A /ifh r \ o r m i c c i r \ n

r \ f t h c s n n r w / r lr t h t

rwAinar

Ri ir t h a r r a r \m r li

r \r /-\h iK lfa /-i

\A /l+ h /-Mit

r \f a r m ! o c ir \r )

Table B.8(f)

Local Nusselt numbers for s =4mm, (f) = 45°, bottom section p = 759.593mmHg, Ra = 6.772x10'*

y (mm) 61.30 58.64 55.97 53.31 50.64 47.98 45.31 42.65 39.98 37.32 34.65 31.98 29.32 26.65 23.99 21.32 18.66 15.99 13.33 10.66 8.00 5.33 2.67 0

Hot]Plate Nu y (mm) 2.7525 -2.67 2.8988 -5.33 2.4809 -8.00 2.2496 -10.66 2.0970 -13.33 2.3209 -15.99 2.4972 -18.66 2.8971 -21.32 3.1171 -23.99 3.0499 -26.65 3.5077 -29.32 3.0283 -31.98 2.5236 -34.65 2.0200 -37.32 1.6655 -39.98 2.0802 -42.65 2.3725 -45.31 2.5283 -47.98 2.5199 -50.64 2.4454 -53.31 2.5936 -55.97 2.5365 -58.64 2.6301 -61.30 2.9968 -63.97 -66.64

Nu 2.9890 2.9152 2.9425 2.7267 2.7232 2.9000 3.0275 3.1275 3.3358 3.4523 3.3571 3.3417 3.6700 3.8060 3.8222 3.9732 4.3231 4.0002 3.9881 4.1624 4.2646 4.6389 5.1133 4.6714 2.9751

j(m m ) 61.30 58.64 55.97 53.31 50.64 47.98 45.31 42.65 39.98 37.32 34.65 31.98 29.32 26.65 23.99 21.32 18.66 15.99 13.33 10.66 8.00 5.33 2.67 0

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -2.3602 -2.67 -2.2923 -5.33 -2.5420 -8.00 -2.6017 -10.66 -2.4604 -13.33 -2.1927 -15.99 -1.6352 -18.66 -21.32 -1.7070 -2.0408 -23.99 -2.3743 -26.65 -2.3693 -29.32 -2.4780 -31.98 -2.3336 -34.65 -2.5848 -37.32 -2.1110 -39.98 -2.0863 -42.65 -45.31 -1.9777 -1.9372 -47.98 -1.9929 -50.64 -1.9834 -53.31 -2.0120 -55.97 -1.9389 -58.64 -2.0076 -61.30 -2.1258 -63.97 -66.64

Nu -1.6668 -1.6469 -1.5256 -1.5185 -1.2213 -1.2719 -1.3244 -1.3775 -1.5277 -1.5083 -1.1082 -1.0508 -1.0327 -0.9210 -0.7833 -0.1302 -0.1254 -0.8378 -0.7682 -0.3277 -0.1723 -0.1220 -0.1841 -0.1213 -0.3666

115

~l-p

/*!

k-

C: :

I

Table 8.8(g)

Local Nusselt lumibers for s = 4mm, 4>= 90°, top section p = 753.4G3mmHg, Ra = 6.745x10'^

y (mm) 72.78 70.08 67.39 64.69 61.99 59.30 56.60 53.91 51.21 48.52 45.82 43.13 40.43 37.74 35.04 32.34 29.65 26.95 24.26 21.56 18.87 16.17 13.48 10.78 8.09 5.39 2.70

Hot]Plate Nu y (ram) 0 0.1688 0.2678 -2.70 0.2925 -5.39 0.2741 -8.09 0.2654 -10.78 0.2654 -13.48 0.2781 -16.17 0.2626 -18.87 1.8505 -21.56 1.7193 -24.26 1.4088 -26.95 0.2265 -29.65 0.1982 -32.34 0.1796 -35.04 0.1925 -37.74 0.1985 -40.43 0.1332 -43.13 0.1297 -45.82 0.1298 -48.52 0.2307 -51.21 0.2277 -53.91 0.2243 0.2279 0.2283 0.2293 0.1755 0.1710

Nu 0.1650 0.1656 0.1696 0.1649 0.1584 0.1568 0.1816 1.3418 0.2127 0.1992 0.1922 0.1830 0.1819 0.2149 0.1620 0.1552 0.1500 0.1483 0.3399 0.3745 0.4980

y (mm) 72.78 70.08 67.39 64.69 61.99 59.30 56.60 53.91 51.21 48.52 45.82 43.13 40.43 37.74 35.04 32.34 29.65 26.95 24.26 21.56 18.87 16.17 13.48 10.78 8.09 5.39 2.70

Cold Plate Nu y (ram) 0 -2.7936 -2.70 -3.5394 -3.8901 -5.39 -3.5296 -8.09 -3.5336 -10.78 -13.48 -3.5957 -3.4204 -16.17 -4.0072 -18.87 -3.2841 -21.56 -3.1222 -24.26 -2.8982 -26.95 -2.7503 -29.65 -2.5722 -32.34 -2.4006 -35.04 -2.3718 -37.74 -40.43 -2.2418 -43.13 -2.1145 -2.5205 -45.82 -48.52 -2.3589 -2.2957 -51.21 -2.2912 -53.91 -2.1408 -2.1896 -2.2810 -2.2081 -2.1651 -2.1540

Nu -2.0169 -1.9723 -1.9910 -1.9247 -1.8716 -1.8241 -1.7133 -1.7088 -1.7044 -1.6783 -1.9898 -1.9721 -1.9216 -2.0126 -1.9850 -1.8863 -1.9419 -1.9030 -1.8484 -1.8837 -1.8737

116

R e o ro d u ce d w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

Table B.8(h)

Local Nusselt numbers for s =4mm, 4>= 90°, middle section '* p = 753.403mmHg, Ra = 6.633x1O

y (mm) 64.40 61.72 59.03 56.35 53.67 50.98 48.30 45.62 42.93 40.25 37.57 34.88 32.20 29.52 26.83 24.15 21.47 18.78 16.10 13.42 10.73 8.05 5.37 2.68 0

H ot] *late Nu y (mm) 0.8502 -2.68 -5.37 0.8489 -8.05 0.8508 0.8858 -10.73 0.9217 -13.42 -16.10 0.9659 1.0214 -18.78 1.0154 -21.47 1.0016 -24.15 0.9974 -26.83 1.0600 -29.52 1.0702 -32.20 1.1388 -34.88 1.1486 -37.57 1.1343 -40.25 0.9441 -42.93 0.9838 -45.62 1.0406 -48.30 1.0828 -50.98 1.1177 -53.67 1.1917 -56.35 1.2294 -59.03 1.2743 -61.72 1.3454 -64.40 1.3142 -67.09 -69.77 -72.45 -75.14 -77.82

Nil 1.4335 1.4774 1.4996 1.5498 1.3134 1.3866 1.4035 1.4283 1.4765 1.5874 1.6053 1.6156 1.7381 1.8215 1.7953 1.8033 1.8768 2.0044 1.9965 1.7204 1.7206 1.8354 1.8997 1.8613 2.0079 2.0738 1.9983 2.0713 2.1947

y (mm) 64.40 61.72 59.03 56.35 53.67 50.98 48.30 45.62 42.93 40.25 37.57 34.88 32.20 29.52 26.83 24.15 21.47 18.78 16.10 13.42 10.73 8.05 5.37 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -1.7448 -2.68 -1.7393 -5.37 -1.8354 -8.05 -10.73 -1.8700 -1.7585 -13.42 -16.10 -1.7911 -1.6905 -18.78 -1.6523 -21.47 -24.15 -1.6328 -1.5511 -26.83 -1.5496 -29.52 -1.6046 -32.20 -34.88 -1.5487 -1.5123 -37.57 -40.25 -1.4389 -1.4533 -42.93 -45.62 -1.3530 -1.3229 -48.30 -1.2836 -50.98 -1.1978 -53.67 -1.1380 -56.35 -1.4228 -59.03 -61.72 -1.3635 -1.3757 -64.40 -1.2634 -67.09 -69.77 -72.45 -75.14

Nu -1.2173 -1.1892 -1.1815 -1.1858 -1.1779 -1.0633 -1.0493 -1.0138 -0.9857 -0.9096 -0.9002 -0.8952 -1.0896 -1.0855 -1.0231 -0.9829 -0.9879 -0.9033 -0.8855 rO.8862 -0.8163 -0.8010 -0.7412 -0.7060 -0.6535 -0.5940 -0.5197 -0.8323

117

R eD roduced w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

Table B.8(i)

Local Nusselt numbers for 5 = 4mm, c f>= 90°, bottom section p = 759.593mmHg, Ra = 6.159^\(f

y (mm) 61.43 58.76 56.09 53.42 50.75 48.08 45.41 42.74 40.07 37.39 34.72 32.05 29.38 26.71 24.04 21.37 18.70 16.03 13.36 10.68 8.01 5.34 2.67 0

Hot Plate y (ram) Nu 2.0672 -2.67 2.1519 -5.34 2.0105 -8.01 2.2255 -10.68 -13.36 2.2096 -16.03 2.2781 2.1144 -18.70 2.4408 -21.37 -24.04 2.4630 2.2768 -26.71 2.2818 -29.38 2.4290 -32.05 2.5886 -34.72 2.4325 -37.39 2.4778 -40.07 2.4837 -42.74 2.8112 -45.41 2.7355 -48.08 2.6637 -50.75 2.6637 -53.42 2.7748 -56.09 2.8832 -58.76 3.0897 -61.43 3.1041 -64.10

Nu 2.9173 2.7235 2.6804 3.0462 2.8261 2.8709 2.8581 2.7755 2.7295 3.1697 3.1094 3.0879 3.0343 3.0999 3.3775 3.4951 3.5717 3.7075 3.9257 4.1363 4.7077 4.5826 4.5406 3.7300

V (mm) 61.43 58.76 56.09 53.42 50.75 48.08 45.41 42.74 40.07 37.39 34.72 32.05 29.38 26.71 24.04 21.37 18.70 16.03 13.36 10.68 8.01 5.34 2.67 0

Cold Plate p (mm) Nu -1.0740 -2.67 -5.34 -1.0663 -8.01 -0.8899 -10.68 -0.9429 -13.36 -0.9285 -16.03 -0.9484 -18.70 -0.7830 -21.37 -0.8219 -24.04 -0.8548 -0.8575 -26.71 -29.38 -0.9062 -32.05 -0.7121 -34.72 -0.7514 -0.7751 -37.39 -0.7815 -40.07 -42.74 -0.8302 -45.41 -0.6660 -48.08 -0.6887 -50.75 -0.7103 -53.42 -0.6914 -56.09 -0.6929 -58.76 -0.4476 -0.4001 -61.43 -64.10 -0.4258

Nil -0.4591 -0.5288 -0.4955 -0.4888 -0.4981 -0.4999 -0.4022 -0.4496 -0.4914 -0.5323 -0.5596 -0.5057 -0.4407 -0.3645 -0.3544 -0.3984 -0.5596 -0.4851 -0.4347 -0.3645 -0.3070 -0.1752 -0.2090 -0.1509

118

R e D ro duced w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

Table B.9(a)

Local Nusselt numbers for = 8mm, 4>= 0°, top section p = 758.916mmHg, Ra = 12.978xl0"

y (mm) 81.97 79.05 76.12 73.19 70.26 67.33 64.41
61.48

Hot] 'late N il y (mm) 0 0.9697 0.1720 -2.93 0.1624 -5.86 0.2519 -8.78 0.6933 -11.71 -14.64 0.8746
0.5103 -1 7.57

Nu

1.5516 1.5586 1.5572
1.4084

y (mm) 81.97 79.05 76.12
7 3.19

Cold Plate Nu j; (mm)
-4.1511 0

Nu

1.6222 1.5908 1.5307
1.5552

70.26 67.33
64.41

0.1397
0 .141 6

58.55 55.62 52.70 49.77 46.84 43.91 40.99 38.06 35.13 32.20 29.28 26.35 23.42 20.49 17.57 14.64 11.71 8.78 5.86 2.93

1.0259
1.0724 1.1015

-20.49 -23.42 -26.35 -29.28 -32.20
-35.13

1.5573 1.6532 1.7495
1.6511

61.48 58.55 55.62
52 .70

-6.0669 -6.5247 -7.8669 -7.9378 -7.6075 -6.9350 -6.5903 -5.9441 -5.9349
-5 .4 0 0 4

-2.93 -5.86 -8.78
-11.71 -1 4.6 4 -1 7.5 7

-3.3244 -3.2274 -3.1366 -3.1736 -2.9773
-3 .1 1 5 4 -3 .0 8 5 0

1.1636 1.3015
1.1670 1.1808

1.6647
1.7667

49.77 46.84
43.91

-5.3073 -4.7764
-4 .7 0 4 6 -4 .966 4

-20.49 -23.42 -26.35 -29.28 -32.20
-35.13

-3.0460 -2.9342 -3.0124 -3.0820
-3.1551

-38.06
-40.9 9 -43.91 -4 6.8 4

-38.06
-4 0 .9 9 -43.91

1.1779
1.1939

1.9263 1.8249 1.9485
1.9074

1.2321 1.3780 1.3693 1.3700 1.2985
1.1572 1.4772

-49.77 -52.70 -55.62 -58.55

1.8781 1.8828
1.7711

40.99 38.06 35.13 32.20 29.28 26.35 23.42 20.49 17.57
14.64 11.71

-4.5750 -4.2358 -4.2667 -3.9638 -3.9597 -4.0851 -3.9042
-4 .0 2 7 7

-46.84
-4 9 .77

-52.70 -55.62 -58.55

-3.1048 -2.9497 -2.9925 -2.9128 -2.8660 -2.6024 -2.5057 -2.5476 -2.3530

1.4834 1.5257 1.5682

8.78 5.86 2.93

-3.6827 -3.7816 -3.8439 -3.5332 -3.5157

119

R e D rod uced w ith o e rm is s io n o f th e c o o v rio h t o w n e r. F u rth e r re o ro d u c tio n o ro h ib ite d w ith o u t o e rm is s io n .

Table B.9(b)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 8mm, (f>= 0°, middle section p = 76l.258mmHg,j;a= 13.280x10'*

y (mm) -90.58 -87.91 -85.25 -82.58 -79.92 -77.26 -74.59 -71.93 -69.26 -66.60 -63.94 -61.27 -58.61 -55.94 -53.28 -50.62 -47.95 -45.29 -42.62 -39.96 -37.30 -34.63 -31.97 -29.30 -26.64 -23.98 -21.31 -18.65 -15.98 -13.32 -10.66 -7.99 -5.33 -2.66

Hot Plate Nu y (mm) 0 3.0153 3.0575 2.66 2.9314 5.33 2.8964 7.99 10.66 2.7588 2.6838 13.32 2.7709 15.98 2.7204 18.65 2.8483 21.31 2.6460 23.98 2.7322 26.64 2.7423 29.30 2.4128 31.97 2.4055 34.63 2.5390 37.30 2.7765 39.96 2.5467 42.62 2.4999 45.29 2.5141 47.95 2.3569 50.62 2.4161 53.28 2.4613 2.2721 2.3578 2.4420 2.3941 2.2961 2.3277 2.2179 2.1816 2.0161 2.1192 2.1256 2.1343

Nu 1.9489 1.9560 2.0825 2.0566 1.8947 1.9743 2.1495 2.0316 2.0506 2.1205 2.0874 1.9766 1.9530 1.9631 1.8646 1.8770 2.0023 1.8302 1.9338 1.9628 2.0273

y (mm) -87.91 -85.25 -82.58 -79.92 -77.26 -74.59 -71.93 -69.26 -66.60 -63.94 -61.27 -58.61 -55.94 -53.28 -50.62 -47.95 -45.29 -42.62 -39.96 -37.30 -34.63 -31.97 -29.30 -26.64 -23.98 -21.31 -18.65 -15.98 -13.32 -10.66 -7.99 -5.33 -2.66

Cold Plate y (mm) Nu 0 -1.5040 -1.6331 2.66 -1.6102 5.33 -1.5425 7.99 10.66 -1.7322 13.32 -1.6588 -1.6025 15.98 18.65 -1.6076 21.31 -1.7674 -1.7507 23.98 -1.7497 26.64 -1.8432 29.30 31.97 -1.7894 -1.7240 34.63 -1.7243 37.30 -1.8677 39.96 -1.8310 42.62 -1.9118 45.29 -1.8378 47.95 -2.0478 50.62 -1.9500 -1.8662 -2.0095 -1.9771 -1.9611 -2.1033 -2.0413 -2.0926 -2.1247 -2.1426 -2.1484 -1.9922 -1.9786

Nu -2.1407 -2.0298 -1.9852 -2.1476 -2.1569 -2.0450 -1.9846 -2.2235 -2.2522 -2.1848 -2.2854 -2.3939 -2.3419 -2.2430 -2.4450 -2.4360 -2.2847 -2.5035 -2.5431 -2.4057

120

ReDroduced with oermission of the coDvrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Table B.9(c)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 8mm, cf) = 0°, bottom section = 761.258mmHg, jga = 13.047x10'^

y (mm) 61.69 59.00 56.32 53.64 50.96 48.28 45.59 42.91 . 40.23 « 37.55 34.87 32.18 29.50 26.82 24.14 21.46 18.77 16.09 13.41 10.73 8.05 5.36 2.68 0

H ot] 'late Nu y (mm) 3.1644 -2.68 2.9321 -5.36 3.0130 -8.05 3.1801 -10.73 3.2093 -13.41 3.0120 -16.09 3.2581 -18.77 3.2428 -21.46 3.5682 -24.14 3.3510 -26.82 3.2489 -29.50 3.5396 -32.18 3.3757 -34.87 3.3980 -37.55 3.8628 -40.23 3.5571 -42.91 3.7765 -45.59 3.9728 -48.28 3.9195 -50.96 3.7414 -53.64 3.9921 -56.32 4.0021 -59.00 3.7769 -61.69 4.1703 -64.37

Nu 4.1324 4.3174 4.3564 4.4736 4.2238 4.6092 4.6391 4.6519 4.8920 5.1405 4.9785 5.6346 5.4610 5.5535 6.1193 5.9490 6.0473 6.9341 7.2758 7.8682 8.0901 7.8922 6.5719 4.6017

j; (mm) 64.37 61.69 59.00 56.32 53.64 50.96 48.28 45.59 42.91 40.23 37.55 34.87 32.18 29.50 26.82 24.14 21.46 18.77 16.09 13.41 10.73 8.05 5.36 2.68

Cold Plate j; (mm) Nu 0 -1.6145 -1.7902 -2.68 -5.36 -1.7891 -8.05 -1.6449 -10.73 -1.7356 -13.41 -1.9242 -16.09 -1.7559 -18.77 -1.7395 -21.46 -1.6334 -24.14 -1.6386 -26.82 -1.6688 -1.4853 -29.50 -32.18 -1.6533 -34.87 -1.6078 -1.6752 -37.55 -40.23 -1.6826 -1.5748 -42.91 -1.5522 -45.59 -48.28 -1.5888 -50.96 -1.3455 -1.4254 -53.64 -1.5500 -56.32 -59.00 -1.4756 -1.4457 -61.69

Nu -1.4400 -1.4010 -1.3087 -1.1415 -12129 -1.3493 -1.2872 -1.2922 -1.3028 -1.1622 -1.1736 -0.8139 -1.1197 -1.1006 -1.1055 -1.0872 -0.8882 -0.8521 -0.1259 -0.7935 -0.8046 -0.1226 -0.1444 -0.3047

121

ReDroduced with oermission of the coDvrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Table B.9(d)

Local Nusselt munbers for s = Sirun, c f>= 45°, top section p = 758.91 ômraHg, Ra = 13.033x10^

V(ram ) 74.83 72.15 69.48 66.81 64.14 61.47 58.79 56.12 53.45 50.78 48.10 45.43 42.76 40.09 37.41 34.74 32.07 29.40 26.72 24.05 21.38 18.71 16.03 13.36 10.69 8.02 5.34 2.67

H ot] *late Nu y (mm) 1.0982 0 0.1262 -2.67 0.5233 -5.34 -8.02 0.2031 0.2892 -10.69 0.2171 -13.36 0.3965 -16.03 0.6376 -18.71 0.2212 -21.38 0.3406 -24.05 0.1746 -26.72 0.2088 -29.40 0.1679 -32.07 -34.74 0.3637 -37.41 0.3997 0.4679 -40.09 0.8624 -42.76 0.8413 -45.43 0.7122 -48.10 0.5502 -50.78 1.2292 -53.45 1.1724 0.9958 1.4372 1.3238 1.1888 1.7403 1.6487

Nu 1.5240 1.8876 1.7817 1.5854 1.7578 1.6750 1.5691 1.4285 2.1420 2.0263 1.8315 1.9486 1.8680 1.5661 1.6874 1.7263 1.7424 2.4927 2.3305 2.3689 2.4964

V (mm) 74.83 72.15 69.48 66.81 64.14 61.47 58.79 56.12 53.45 50.78 48.10 45.43 42.76 40.09 37.41 34.74 32.07 29.40 26.72 24.05 21.38 18.71 16.03 13.36 10.69 8.02 5.34 2.67

Cold Plate y (mm) Nu 0 -4.3287 -2.67 -7.1050 -5.34 -7.9478 -8.02 -8.0865 -10.69 -7.2507 -13.36 -6.2035 -16.03 -5.9802 -18.71 -6.1318 -21.38 -5.7972 -24.05 -5.3868 -26.72 -5.4135 -29.40 -5.5376 -32.07 -5.1939 -34.74 -4.7651 -37.41 -4.9275 -40.09 -4.9703 -42.76 -4.3953 -45.43 -4.3680 -48.10 -4.5500 -50.78 -4.3329 -53.45 -4.1261 -4.0593 -4.0930 -3.7869 -3.5552 -3.5140 -3.1890 -3.1701

Nu -3.2295 -3.4697 -3.3512 -3.3915 -3.4425 -3.0551 -2.8440 -2.8025 -2.5351 -2.9603 -3.3861 -3.1410 -3.2851 -3.2348 -3.0628 -2.7287 -2.8010 -2.5657 -2.7003 -2.8485 -2.5745

if-' :

122

ReDroduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.9(e)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 8mm, 4 >^ 45°, middle section p = 758.916mmHg, Ra = 12.963x10'*

y (mm) 61.34 58.67 56.00 53.34 50.67 48.00 45.34 42.67 40.00 37.34 34.67 32.00 29.33 26.67 24.00 21.33 18.67 16.00 13.33 10.67 8.00 5.33 2.67 0

H ot] 'late Nu y (mm) 2.0112 -2.67 1.8172 -5.33 2.0804 -8.00 2.2379 -10.67 2.3243 -13.33 2.7011 -16.00 2.6176 -18.67 -21.33 2.3029 -24.00 2.4257 2.2374 -26.67 2.6888 -29.33 2.5173 -32.00 2.6967 -34.67 3.0247 -37.34 -40.00 2.8643 2.6212 -42.67 2.3944 -45.34 -48.00 2.4233 2.3433 -50.67 2.5196 -53.34 2.8700 -56.00 3.0928 -58.67 2.9557 -61.34 2.8278 -64.00 -66.67 -69.34 -72.00 -74.67 -77.34

Nu 2.8451 2.5789 2.5685 2.5330 2.6402 3.0201 3.0440 2.9623 3.0560 2.7285 2.4978 2.8869 2.9406 2.9245 3.4867 3.2368 3.1476 2.9354 2.8284 2.7235 3.2555 3.4420 3.3986 3.4804 3.2129 2.9427 3.4156 3.3109 3.4881

j; (mm) 61.34 58.67 56.00 53.34 50.67 48.00 45.34 42.67 40.00 37.34 34.67 32.00 29.33 26.67 24.00 21.33 18.67 16.00 13.33 10.67 8.00 5.33 2.67 0

Cold Plate j; (mm) Nu -2.67 -2.2411 -5.33 -2.5284 -8.00 -2.7901 -2.6112 -10.67 -13.33 -2.9278 -3.0162 -16.00 -18.67 -2.5610 -21.33 -2.3707 -24.00 -2.4117 -2.4863 -26.67 -2.7643 -29.33 -32.00 -2.5130 -34.67 -2.9120 -37.34 -2.8389 -2.3457 -40.00 -2.3215 -42.67 -45.34 -2.2336 -48.00 -2.4383 -50.67 -2.4352 -53.34 -2.8005 -56.00 -2.3066 -58.67 -2.7359 -61.34 -2.5713 -64.00 -2.0831 -66.67 -69.34 -72.00 -74.67 -77.34

Nu -2.1017 -2.0363 -1.9920 -2.3599 -2.6547 -2.3003 -2.4035 -2.4399 -1.7413 -1.8061 -2.1338 -2.0062 -2.3780 -2.6626 -2.1796 -2.3992 -2.2626 -1.7463 -1.7917 -1.9210 -1.8311 -2.0940 -2.4012 -1.9271 -2.1104 -2.0983 -1.6100 -1.6331 -1.4322

123

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.9(f)

Local Nusselt numbers for ^ = 8mm, (f>= 45°, bottom section p = 761.258m m H g,i?a= 13.286x10^

y (mm) 64.32 61.64 58.96 56.28 53.60 50.92 48.24 45.56 42.88 40.20 37.52 34.84 32.16 29.48 26.80 24.12 21.44 18.76 16.08 13.40 10.72 8.04 5.36 2.68 0

H ot]Plate y (mm) Nu -2.68 2.9646 2.8726 -5.36 -8.04 3.0459 -10.72 2.8206 2.8180 -13.40 3.0412 -16.08 3.0686 -18.76 -21.44 3.3569 -24.12 3.3681 3.1792 -26.80 3.3688 -29.48 3.0766 -32.16 2.9984 -34.84 3.3825 -37.52 3.4309 -40.20 4.0690 -42.88 3.6447 -45.56 3.5165 -48.24 3.8328 -50.92 3.6496 -53.60 3.6925 -56.28 3.8719 -58.96 3.9747 -61.64 4.0937 -64.32 4.3052

Nu 4.1947 4.3263 4.4783 4.4087 4.7387 4.8097 4.9141 5.0971 5.2257 5.1048 5.4377 5.5075 6.0730 6.8605 6.6882 7.0018 6.6809 6.4994 6.2535 6.1972 5.8802 6.8737 6.1065 4.5645

y (mm) 61.64 58.96 56.28 53.60 50.92 48.24 45.56 42.88 40.20 37.52 34.84 32.16 29.48 26.80 24.12 21.44 18.76 16.08 13.40 10.72 8.04 5.36 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nu V (m m ) -2.68 -2.0060 -5.36 -2.2022 -8.04 -2.0802 -10.72 -2.2058 -13.40 -1.8918 -16.08 -1.9213 -18.76 -1.9180 -21.44 -1.5823 -1.7432 -24.12 -26.80 -1.6007 -29.48 -1.8457 -1.9704 -32.16 -1.6703 -34.84 -37.52 -1.7897 -40.20 -1.8780 -1.4466 -42.88 -1.5733 -45.56 -48.24 -1.5866 -50.92 -1.4241 -1.5252 -53.60 -1.2768 -56.28 -58.96 -1.4489 -61.64 -1.6180 -64.32 -1.1439

Nil -1.2977 -1.4318 -1.0843 -1.1872 -0.9196 -1.0575 -1.0472 -0.6608 -0.8053 -0.8674 -0.4699 -0.5230 -0.5429 -0.1761 -0.1480 -0.1306 -0.5997 -0.1334 -0.4046 -0.3144 -0.2121 -0.2157 -0.3332 -0.1373

124

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.9(g)

Local Nusselt numbers for s = 8mm, ^ = 90°, top section P = 758.916mmHg, Ra = 13.007x10'^

y (ram) 74.47 71.81 69.15 66.50 63.84 61.18 58.52 55.86 53.20 50.54 47.88 45.22 42.56 39.90 37.24 34.58 31.92 29.26 26.60 23.94 21.28 18.62 15.96 13.30 10.64 7.98 5.32 2.66

H ot] 'late Nil y (mill) 0.5336 0 0.3231 -2.66 0.3030 -5.32 0.1875 -7.98 0.2305 -10.64 0.3215 -13.30 0.4594 -15.96 0.2216 -18.62 0.4506 -21.28 2.0501 -23.94 1.1021 -26.60 0.6783 -29.26 0.5523 -31.92 0.1996 -34.58 0.1395 -37.24 0.1522 -39.90 0.8091 -42.56 0.3531 -45.22 0.1658 -47.88 0.1909 -50.54 0.2376 -53.20 0.1536 0.9316 0.2815 0.1924 0.1492 0.1548 0.4417

Nil 0.4525 0.2001 0.1535 0.1560 0.7101 0.5022 0.1839 0.2272 0.8221 0.7829 0.6062 0.3625 0.1653 0.9273 0.8148 0.7144 0.5428 0.1620 1.0293 0.9365 0.7303

j; (ram) 74.47 71.81 69.15 66.50 63.84 61.18 58.52 55.86 53.20 50.54 47.88 45.22 42.56 39.90 37.24 34.58 31.92 29.26 26.60 23.94 21.28 18.62 15.96 13.30 10.64 7.98 5.32 2.66

Cold Plate Nu y (mm) -3.1182 0 -2.66 -4.3799 -5.6158 -5.32 -7.98 -6.5218 -10.64 -6.8146 -13.30 -6.5378 -15.96 -6.2555 -18.62 -6.2665 -21.28 -6.1603 -5.4024 -23.94 -5.1575 -26.60 -4.7026 -29.26 -31.92 -4.3959 -34.58 -4.5791 -4.4539 -37.24 -39.90 -3.8888 -3.7488 -42.56 -45.22 -3.8128 -3.4803 -47.88 -50.54 -3.6730 -3.4775 -53.20 -3.1840 -3.1685 -3.2652 -3.4033 -3.3345 -2.9459 -3.0391

Nil -3.0097 -3.0996 -2.7497 -2.7722 -2.8449 -2.8250 -2.8320 -2.4837 -2.6219 -2.6006 -2.6498 -2.3175 -2.3162 -2.3891 -2.4331 -2.1406 -2.0731 -2.1987 -2.2965 -1.8696 -1.9735

125

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.9(h)

Local N usselt numbers for s = 8mm, c f>= 90°, middle section /? = 758.916mmHg, = 13.165x10'*

y (mm) 64.06 61.39 58.72 56.05 53.38 50.71 48.05 45.38 42.71 40.04 37.37 34.70 32.03 29.36 26.69 24.02 21.35 18.68 16.02 13.35 10.68 8.01 5.34 2.67 0

H ot] *late Nu y (mm) 1.6014 -2.67 1.5782 -5.34 1.5402 -8.01 1.7433 -10.68 1.6993 -13.35 1.7299 -16.02 1.7349 -18.68 1.7045 -21.35 1.7103 -24.02 1.9248 -26.69 1.9121 -29.36 1.9339 -32.03 1.9710 -34.70 1.9212 -37.37 1.9497 -40.04 1.8775 -42.71 1.9369 -45.38 2.1171 -48.05 2.1073 -50.71 2.1503 -53.38 2.1017 -56.05 2.1486 -58.72 2.2009 -61.39 2.0951 -64.06 1.9430 -66.73 -69.40 -72.07 -74.74 -77.41

N il 2.3284 2.4508 2.4376 2.3328 2.3574 2.2846 2.6280 2.4598 2.4906 2.5336 2.5844 2.5443 2.5702 2.5230 2.8261 2.8364 2.7221 2.7603 2.9535 2.8006 2.8507 3.0533 2.8422 3.1645 3.0408 2.9654 3.1122 3.1662 3.6802

j;(mm) 64.06 61.39 58.72 56.05 53.38 50.71 48.05 45.38 42.71 40.04 37.37 34.70 32.03 29.36 26.69 24.02 21.35 18.68 16.02 13.35 10.68 8.01 5.34 2.67 0

Cold Plate (ram) Nu -2.67 -2.8625 -2.8734 -5.34 -8.01 -2.7273 -2.5167 -10.68 -2.5224 -13.35 -16.02 -2.4184 -2.6156 -18.68 -2.5520 -21.35 -2.4982 -24.02 -2.2940 -26.69 -29.36 -2.4473 -2.3624 -32.03 -34.70 -2.3482 -2.4676 -37.37 -40.04 -2.3895 -2.4011 -42.71 -2.1595 -45.38 -2.1123 -48.05 -2.0833 -50.71 -2.2258 -53.38 -1.8136 -56.05 -2.2092 -58.72 -2.1874 -61.39 -1.8803 -64.06 -1.9399 -66.73 -69.40 -72.07 -74.74 -77.41

Nu -1.9453 -1.9946 -2.0078 -1.9785 -1.7976 -1.7861 -1.7123 -1.7497 -1.8331 -1.7910 -1.6814 -1.6127 -1.6128 -1.5771 -1.6175 -1.5694 -1.6142 -1.6399 -1.5999 -1.3932 -1.3645 -1.4049 -1.3635 -1.4111 -1,4440 -1.1425 -1.1724 -1.2548 -1.2861

126

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table B.9(i)

Local Nusselt numbers for i- = 8mm, ^ = 90°, bottom section p = 761.258mmHg, Ra = 13.038x10" * ^

y (mm) 61.55 58.87 56.20 53.52 50.84 48.17 45.49 42.82 40.14 37.46 34.79 32.11 29.44 26.76 24.08 21.41 18.73 16.06 13.38 10.70 8.03 5.35 2.68 0

H ot] 'late Nu y (mm) 2.3455 -2.68 2.7460 -5.35 2.5753 -8.03 2.4506 -10.70 2.7461 -13.38 2.6821 -16.06 2.6300 -18.73 2.9277 -21.41 2.6876 -24.08 3.0662 -26.76 2.9172 -29.44 2.8980 -32.11 3.0995 -34.79 2.9706 -37.46 -40.14 2.9586 3.2724 -42.82 3.2400 -45.49 3.1217 -48.17 3.5546 -50.84 3.4813 -53.52 3.4742 -56.20 3.7539 -58.87 3.8320 -61.55 3.4960 -64.22

Nu 3.7225 3.7567 3.4164 3.5925 3.4453 3.4389 3.7911 3.5272 4.0360 3.7975 3.8238 4.0520 3.9333 4.1742 4.0341 4.2153 4.8364 4.5655 4.4374 5.0850 4.8702 4.7766 4.3304 2.7325

y (mm) 61.55 58.87 56.20 53.52 50.84 48.17 45.49 42.82 40.14 37.46 34.79 32.11 29.44 26.76 24.08 21.41 18.73 16.06 13.38 10.70 8.03 5.35 2.68 0

Cold Plate Nu J) (mm) -0.O906 -2.68 -0.9045 -5.35 -1.0460 -8.03 -0.6887 -10.70 -0.8673 -13.38 -0.2702 -16.06 -0.6771 -18.73 -0.8470 -21.41 -0.2650 -24.08 -0.6399 -26.76 -0.1658 -29.44 -0.1142 -32.11 -0.5970 -34.79 -0.1735 -37.46 -0.2670 -40.14 -0.4954 -42.82 -0.1832 -45.49 -48.17 -0.1479 -0.1738 -50.84 -0.4175 -53.52 -0.2329 -56.20 -0.1760 -58.87 -0.4271 -61.55 -0.1778

Nu -0.2209 -0.2219 -0.1927 -0.1341 -0.3505 -0.3872 -0.2607 -0.2660 -0.1368 -0.1973 -0.1804 -0.6411 -0.2948 -0.4254 -1.5453 -0.4530 -0.6046 -1.0019 -0.3712 -0.1436 -0.4891 -0.2735 -0.3050

127

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Appendix C SAMPLE CALCULATIONS

A typical set o f experimental calculations is provided to demonstrate how the heat transfer results were obtained. The local Nusselt number calculations are for the finite fringe interferogram shown in Figure 4.1(a), for ^ = 2mm and ^ = 0° at y = = 100.0mm on the hot plate.

Given Data

Average hot plate surface temperature (r^/,) Average cold plate surface temperature (F,,c) Ambient pressure (p) Plate length in beam direction (2) Actual width o f cavity block {Waauad W idth o f cavity on scale photo (Wphoto) Distance fiom plate surface to fii'st fringe (xj^photo) Distance from plate surface to second fringe (x 2,photo) Gravitational acceleration (g) Ideal gas constant for air (R) W avelength o f Ue-Ne laser (2) Gladstone-Dale constant for air with He-Ne laser (G)

307.95K 288.06K 101310.2Pa 0.3556m 0.0287m 0.0213m 0.308mm 0.689mm 9.81m/s^ 287J/kgK 6.328 xlO'^m 0.226xl0-^m^/kg

128

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

C.2

Air Properties

Film temperature (7/)
J.

Tf

_ T ,j,+ T ,c -- 307.95 + 288.06 2 298.01K

Volumetric Expansion Coefficient (fi)

1 298.01

= 3.356xlO'^K-^
Density (p) From the ideal gas law: P 101310.2 " (287)(298.01) = 1.185kg/nf Dynamic Viscosity (p) By linear interpolation [74] eyaluated at Tj= 298.01K: 18.4343xl0'^kg/m-s

129

ReDroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Themial Conductivity at Surface Temperature By linear interpolation [75] evaluated at Ts,h ~ 307.95K:

A :, = 26.72xlO-^W/inK

Thermal Conductivity at Film temperature (^) By lineal- interpolation [76] evaluated at T/= 298.OIK:

^=25.99xlO-^W/mK

Specific Heat (Cp) From equation (A .l) where Tf= 298.OIK: Cp = 1 0 4 4 .6 6 -3.1596 7 x 1 0 -']}+ 7.07908xl0"^7}^-2.7034x10"% ^ Cp = 1 0 4 4 .6 6 -3 .15967xl0-'(298.0l)+ 7.07908xl0-^ (298.0iy-2.7034xl0-X 298.0iy = 1006.2J/kg-K

C.3

Rayleigh Number Based On Cavity Width

From equation (3.2):

Ra -

fik

^

(9.81)(3.356xl0")(307.95-288.06)(0.0287)^(1.185)Xl006.2) ' (18.4343xl0-®)(25.99xl0-^) = 4.560x10"

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

C.4

Local Heat Transfer Coefficient

Scale Factor (SFx)
CZ? _

w acluat,
photo

0.0287 ~ 0.0213 = 1.345 Fringe Shift (s)
actual ~ photo')

= 1.345(0.308) = 0.414mm
^ 2 , actual ^ ^ x i.^ 2 ,p h o lo )

= 1.345(0.689) = 0.927mm By linear extrapolation: ^1 _ '^1 A s Ax 0.414 0.927-0.414

1

S] = 0.808 e2 = si + \ = 1.808

131

ReDroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Fringe Temperature (7) F rom equation (3.18): T=
sJi 4 -1

GpZ 307.95 (0.808)(287)(6.328 x 10-')(307.95) (0.226xl0-^)(101310.2)(0.3556) = 306.25K T2 307.95 (1.808)(287)(6.328 x 1O'")(307.95) 4 -1 (0.226 X10-")(l 01310.2)(0.3556)

4 -1

= 304.17K Temperature Gradient (dT/dx)

dx

-4:, 304.17-306.25 (0.927 - 0.414) X10-^ ·-4054K/m

Local Convection Coefficient (/z) From equation (3.20):

h--

' dx

.\r= 0

h

(26.72 xl0-Q (-4054) 307.95-288.06 = 5.45W/m^-K

132

ReDroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

C.5

Local Nusselt Number

From equation (3.21);

k, (5.45)(0.0287) 25.99x10,-3
=

Nil

6.02

C.6

Average Nusselt Number

The average Nusselt number (Nuavg) was calculated by numerically integrating the local values over the span o f the plate using the trapezoidal rule. For the case o f the interferogram in this sample calculation, i.e. for s = 2mm and ^ = 0° on the hot plate: 1 Y

=

j\

N il

=

-

' \ s . 0 3 9 3 -I-2 . 1 2 6 8 ) + j ^ ^ ''^ ^ ^ ^ j ( 2 . 6 0 7 0 + 3 . 0 3 9 3 ) + · · · +

|( 0 .7 5 6 l + 0 .8 7 4 1 )

Niiavg = 2.89

133

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

Appendix D ERROR ANALYSIS

Just like any other experiment, this study with a Mach-Zehnder interferometer had a certain degree o f miceitainty. A thorough discussion o f the probable sources o f error pertaming to heat transfer measurements can be found in M achin's thesis [35]. The

relevant sources o f error and the amount o f uncertainty associated witli each are summarized in Table D .l.

Table D .l

Summary o f sources o f uncertainty

Quantity Absolute Uncertainty Ambient pressure (p) ± 66.64 Pa Plate surface temperature {Ts,i,, Ts,c) ± 0.6 K Optical length o f plate (Z) ± 0.005 m Fringe distance (Ar) ± 0.1 (Ax) m Fringe shift (e) d: 0.1(Ax/M^ Film temperature (T/) ± 0 .6 K Temperature difference (AT) d=0.6K Cavity width (W) ± 0.0002 m Specific heat (Cp) Dynamic Viscosit)' (jli) Thermal Conductb ity (k)

Percent Uncertainty ±0.06% ±1.7%, ±4% ±1.5%

±0.2% ±3% ±0.05% ±0.25% ±0.5% ±1%

The uncertainty in fringe shift error accounts for the slight misaligmnents that may have occurred in the finite fringe mode. Wlien setting the finite fringe pattern with the model at ambient temperature, the optics were aligned such that horizontal fringes, equally spaced at a distance d, appeared perpendicular with the plate surfaces. In this

134

ReDroduced with oermission of the coovrioht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

way, there will be no fringe sliifts as the temperature remains mrchanged across the cavity. If the beam became slightly misaligned at the time the interferogram was taken, there would be artificial fringe crossings that would result in a fringe shift error. In a preliminary study, it was found that for a fimge spacing o f d = Imin, there would be a maximiun friuge offset o f 0.1 mm across the widtli o f the cavity, W. Thus, the uncertainty in fringe shift error, &, associated with a fringe distance measurement, Av, can be determined by the following relationship: rp) 1\ IF where d, Ax, and W are in [mm]. The error analysis for this study was conducted based on the Kline and McClintock metlrod [77]. Consider an experimental result, R, calculated firom n

independent variables, x/, x?,... , x,,, with random uncertainties o f <5x/, 3x2,- §x,, , respectively. If each o f the parameters were assumed to have the same odds, then the uncertainty in the result, ôR, is given as follows: dR dx^

Sx-,

0 )2 )

For the case where R can be expressed as a product o f the variables, each raised to some power, so that: 7( = x X . . . < Then, the relative uncertainty can be calculated as: 2 R a--- + K > 2 + . .+ I (D.3)

(D.4)

135

Reoroduced with Dermission of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

D .l

Uncertainty in Local Nusselt Number

Based on the method described above, for the local Nusselt number given in equation (3.21), the uncertainty in the heat transfer result would be given as follows;
dNu ( dNu
 

dNu=J\

I +

az

sz

+

( dNu

ta(A.r)

X

f 3Nu 0s\ + ds

dh

sr..

+

C&5) The fringe temperature difference is optically determined by: T ,- T ,= Zsjt 3GLp T ., 3GLp (D.6)

where s\ is the fractional fringe shift from the plate surface to the first measured fringe, and As is the fringe shift between the first and second fringes. From fringe centre to fringe centre. As = 1. The value o f e, normally lies between 0 and 1. For convenience, let £i = 0. Equation (D.6) simplifies to: T T - T - T ______ bL. ' 2 S 'J l+1 Therefore, the experimental temperature gradient is calculated as: 03 7)

.v,/j

dx

x=0

3GLp Ax

+1

03 8)

Combining equations (3.21) and (D.8), the local N usselt number can be expressed as:

136

Reoroduced with Dermission of the coDvriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

s,h

2sR;iTs,h Nu = - A A -K

w
+

1 y_

(D.9)

From equation (D.9), the following partial derivatives were obtained using madiematics software Maple [78]. Note that the uncertainty in the conductivity ratio o f air at the surface and film temperatures (k/kj) is assumed to be negligible, and has been omitted from the differential equation. am dp

(DdO)

2ERAT 2&RAT dNu
st T x jj

y Y

2gRAT.,

______ ^ ____ W y Ax(r,
CDU)

dNu ~dL

i ,/ i

3GZ^

\2 + 1 G Z :fA x (7 :,-7 :^ )

CD 12)

ZSjl
s jl

w
+1
C D d3)

dNu d{Nx) dNu df y 2 ^ A 7 :, _

3GZp

(D.14)

I

GZjaAjfCT:^-if,,,)

3G4P

137

Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

s,h

W C&15)

dh

Z ^ ôNii ~dW

sjj 2^ A 7 :,, _ ^ 3GZf (D.16)

The error for each heat transfer result was calculated by substituting equations (D.IO) to (D.16) into equation (D.5) and using the numbers specified in Table D .l. In general, the average uncertainty in local Nusselt number was about 7%.

D.2

Uncertainty in Rayleigh number

The Rayleigh number based on cavity width can be written as follows:

Ra -

T jR -jjk

0 )1 7 )

Applying equation (D.17) to equation (D.4), the relative uncertainty in Rayleigh number can be defined as:

Ra

IT ;

r±
P

J

\f I

\ ; f ]

(D.18)

Substituting the values from Table D .l into equation (D.18) gives an imcertainty in Rayleigh number o f ±3.6%.

138

J
Reoroduced with oermission of the coovriaht owner. Further reoroduction orohibited without oermission.

References

1. Wright, J.L., 1992, "Glazing System Thermal Analysis," CANMET, Advanced Glazing System Laboratory, VISIONS, Minister o f Supply and Services Canada, University o f Waterloo. 2. Finlay son, E.U., Arasteh, D.K., Huizenga, C., Rubin, M.D., and Reilly, M.S., "W INDOW 4.0: Documentation o f Calculation Procedures," Energy and Environmental Division, Lav^rence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, California. 3. Ostrach, S., 1952, "Natural Convection in Enclosures," Advances in H eat Transfer, Vol. 8, pp. 161-227. 4. Wright, J.L. and Sullivan, H.F., 1989, "Natural Convection in Sealed Glazing Units: A Review," ASH RAE Transactions: Technical and Symposium Papers, Vol. 95, Part 1, pp. 592-603. 5. Batchelor, G.K., 1954, "Heat Transfer by Free Convection across a Closed Cavity between Vertical Boundaries at Different Temperatures," Quarterly o f Applied Mathematics, Vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 209-233. 6. Eckert, E.R.G. and Carlson, W.C., 1961, "Natural Convection in an Air Layer Enclosed Between Two Vertical Plates with Different Temperatures," InternationalJounral o f Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 2, pp. 106-- 120. 7. Elder, J.W., 1965, "Laminar Free Convection in a Vertical Slot," Journal o f Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 23, Part 1, pp. 77-98. 8. Elder, J.W., 1965, "Turbulent Free Convection in a Vertical Slot," Journal o f Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 23, Part 1, pp. 99-111. 9. Vest, C.M. and Arpaci, V.S., 1969, "Stability o f Natural Convection in a Vertical Slot," Journal o f F luid Mechanics, Vol. 36, Part 1, pp. 1-- 15. 10. Seki, N., Fukusako, S., and Inaba, H., 1978, "Visual Observation o f Natural Convective Flow in a Narrow Vertical Cavity," Journal o f F luid Mechanics, Vol. 84, Part 4, pp. 695-704. 11. Yin, S.H., Wung, T.Y., and Chen, K., 1978, "Natural Convection in an A ir Layer Enclosed within Rectangular Cavities," International Journal o f H eat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 21, pp. 307-315.

139

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

12. P apple, M.L.C., Tarasuk, J.D., 1987, "An Interferometric Study o f Developing N atural Convective Flow in Inclined Isothermal Ducts," Proceedings o f the AIAA 22'^'^ Thermophysics Conference, AIAA-87-- 1589. 13. Randall, K.R., Mitchell, J.W., and El-Wakil, M.M., 1979, "Natural Convection Heat Transfer Characteristics o f Flat Plate Enclosure," Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f H eat Transfer, Vol. 101, pp. 120-125. 14. ElSlierbiny, S.M., Raithby, G.D., and Hollands, K.G.T., 1982, "Heat Transfer by Natural Convection across Vertical and Inclined Air Layers," Transactions o f the A SM E Journal o f H eat Transfer, Vol. 104, pp. 96-102. 15. ElSherbiny, S.M., Hollands, K.G.T., and Raithby, G., 1982, "Effect o f Thermal Boundary Conditions on Natural Convection in Vertical and Inclined Air Layers." Transactions o f the A SM E Journal o f Heat Transfer, Vol. 104, pp. 515-520. 16. Shewen, E., Hollands, K.G.T., and Raithby, G.D., 1996, "Heat Transfer by Natural Convection across a Vertical Air Cavity o f Large Aspect Ratio," Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f Heat Transfer, Vol. 118, pp. 993-995. 17. Gill, A.E., 1966, "The Boundary-Layer Regime for Convection in a Rectangular Cavity," Journal o f Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 26, Part 3, pp. 515-536. 18. Bejan, A., 1979, "Note on G ill's Solution for Free Convection in a Vertical Enclosure," Joi/777a/ o f Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 90, Part 3, pp. 561-568. 19. Raithby, G.D., Hollands, K.G.T., and Unny, T.E., 1977, "Analysis o f Fleat Transfer by Natural Convection Across Vertical Fluid Layers," Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f H eat Transfer, Vol. 99, pp. 287-293. 20. Zenouzi, M. and Yener, Y., 1992, "Simultaneous Radiation and Natural Convection in Vertical Slots," Developments in Radiative Heat Transfer, Proceedings o f the 28^^ National Heat Transfer Conference, Vol. 203, pp. 179-- 186. 21. Newell, M.E. and Sclimidt, F.W., 1970, "Heat Transfer by Natural Convection within Rectangular Enclosures," Journal o f Heat Transfer, Series C, Vol. 92, pp. 159-- 168 . 22. Bergholz, R.F., 1978, "Instability o f Steady Natural Convection in a Vertical Fluid C a y e rf Journal o f F luid Mechanics, Vol. 84, Part 4, pp. 743-- 768. 23. Jones, I.P., 1979, "A Numerical Study o f Natural Convection in an Air-Filled Cavity: Comparison w ith Experiment," Numerical H eat Transfer, Vol. 2, pp. 193-213. 24. Raithby, G.D. and Wong, FI.FL, 1981, "Heat Transfer by Natural Convection across Vertical Air Layers," Numerical Heat Transfer, Vol. 4, pp. 447-457.

140

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

25. Lee, Y. and Koipela, S.A., 1983, "Multi-cellular natural convection in a vertical slot," Journal o f Fluid Mechanics, vol. 126, pp. 99-121. 26. Chait, A. and Korpela, S.A., 1989, "The Secondary Flow and Its Stability for Natural Convection in a Tall Vertical Enclosure," Journal o f Fluid Mechanics, vol. 200, pp. 189-216. 27. Ramanan, N. and Korpela, S. A., 1989, "Multigrid Solution o f Natural Convection in a Vertical Slot," Numerical Heat Transfer, Vol. 15, Part A, pp. 323-339. 28. Jin, Y.Y., Chen, C.F., 1996, "Natural Convection o f Fligh Prandtl Number Fluids witlr Variable Viscosity in a Vertical Slot," International Journal o f Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol 39, No. 13, pp. 2663-- 2670. 29. Jin, Y.Y. and Chen, C.F., 1996, "Instability o f Convection and Heat Transfer o f Fligh Prandtl Number Fluids in a Vertical Slot" Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f H eat Transfer, vol. 118, pp. 359-365. 30. Korpela, S.A., Lee, Y., and Drummond, J.E., 1982, "Fleat Transfer tlrrough a Double Pane Windows," Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f Heat Transfer, Vol. 104, pp. 539-544. 31. Curcija, D. and Goss, W., 1994, "Two-Dimensional Finite-Element Model o f Heat Transfer in Complete Fenestration Systems," ASHRAE Transactions: Technical and Symposium Papers, Vol. 100, Part 2, pp. 1207-- 1221. 32. Wright, J.L. and Sullivan, H.F., 1994, "A Two-Dimensional Numerical Model for Natirral Convection in a Vertical, Rectangular Window Cavity," ASHRAE Transactions: Technical and Symposium Papers, Vol. 100, Part 2, pp. 1193-1206. 33. Wright, J.L. and Sullivan, H.F., 1995, "A Two-Dimensional Numerical Model for Glazing System Thermal Analysis," zLSFOME Transactions, Vol. 101, Part 1, pp. 819-831. 34. Wright, J.L., 1996, "A Correlation to Quantify Convective Heat Transfer between Vertical W indow Glazings," ASJIRAE Transactions: Technical and Symposium Papers, pp. 940-946. 35. Machin, A.D., 1997, "An Experimental Study o f Free Convective Heat Transfer from a Vertical Flat Plate in the Presence of Louvers," M.E.Sc. Thesis, University o f W estern Ontario. 36. Machin, A.D., 1998, "Experimental Study o f Free Convective Heat Transfer at an Indoor Glazing Surface with a Venetian Blind," ASHRAE Internation Journal o f HVAC&R Research, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 153-- 166.

141

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

37. Ye, P., 1997, "Effect o f Venetian Blinds on Overall Heat Transfer tlirough Window Systems: A Finite Element Numerical Solution," M.E.Sc. Thesis, Queen's University. 38. Phillips, J., 1999, "A Numerical Study o f the Effects o f Venetian Blinds on Radiation and Convection Heat Transfer from a Window Glazing," M.E.Sc. Thesis, University o f Western Ontario. 39. Phillips, J., Naylor, D., Harrison, S.J., Oosthuizen, P.H., 1999, "Free Convection from a W indow Glazing with a Venetian Blind: Numerical Model Development," Transactions o f the CSME, vol. 23, no. IB, pp. 159-172. 40. Phillips, J., Naylor, D., Oosthuizen, P.H., and Harrison, S.J., "Modeling of the Conjugate Heat Transfer from a Window Adjacent to a Louvered Shade," Advanced Computational Methods in Heat Transfer VI, Wit press, Boston, pp. 127-136. 41. Duaite, N., 2000, "An Experimental Study o f Free Convective Heat Transfer from a Vertical Plate in the Presence o f Heated Venetian Blinds," M.E.Sc. Thesis, University o f W estern Ontario. 42. Naylor, D. and Duarte, N., 1999, "Direct Temperature Gradient Measurement Using Interferometry," Experimental H eat Transfer, vol. 12, pp. 279-- 294. 43. Collins, M,, Harrison, S.J., Naylor, D., and Ooosthuizen, P.H., 2001, "An Interferometric Study o f Convective Heat Transfer from an Irradiated Complex W indow Assembly," Proceedings oflM E C E 2001, 2001 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, New York. 44. Collins, M ., Harrison, S.H., Naylor, D., and Ooosthuizen, P.H., 2002, "Heat Transfer from an Isothermal Vertical Surface with Adjacent Heated Horizontal Louvers: Numerical Analysis," Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f Heat Transfer, vol. 124, pp. 1072-1077. 45. Collins, M., Harrison, S.H., Naylor, D., and Ooostlruizen, P.H., 2002, "Heat Transfer from an Isothermal Vertical Surface with Adjacent Heated Horizontal Louvers: Validation," Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f Heat Transfer, vol. 124, pp. 1078-1087. 46. Oosthuizen, P.H., Sun, L. and Naylor, D., 2002, "A Numerical Study o f the Effect o f Normal Adiabatic Surfaces on Natural Convective Heat Transfer from a Vertical Isothermal Plate," Progress in Transport Phenomena, Proceedings o f the 13`^ ' International Symposium on Transport Phenomena, pp. 327-- 331.

142

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

47. Oosthuizen, P.H., Sun, L., and Naylor, D., 2002, "The Effect o f Inclined Vertical Slats on Natinal Convective Heat Transfer from an Isothermal Heated Vertical Plate," Proceedings o f the 10`^ Annual meeting o f CFA Society o f Canada 2002, pp. 515-519. 48. Shahid, H., Naylor, D., and Lai, B.Y., 2003, "A Finite Volume Study o f a Single Glazed W indow with a Venetian Blind Attachment," Proceedings o f the 19`'' Canadian Congress o f Applied Mechanics, pp. 386-387. 49. Shahid, H. and Naylor, D., 2003, "Thermal Simulations o f a Fenestration with Horizontal Venetian Blind," Proceedings o f APM2002, 3 "^^ International Conference on Computational Heat and Mass Transfer, Banff. 50. Kelkar, K.M., and Patankar, S.V., 1990, "Numerical Prediction o f Natural Convection in Square Partitioned Enclosures," Numerical H eat Transfer, Vol. 1, Part A, pp. 269-285. 51. Mezrhab, A., Bchir, L., 1999, "Radiation-Natuml Convection Interactions in Partitioned Cavities," International Journal o f Numerical Methods fo r Heat and FhddFlow , Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 186-203. 52. Smith, T.F., Beckermaim, C., and Adams, C.C., 1993, "A Numerical Simulation Model for Studying the Thermal Performance of Windows," ASHRAE Transactions: Technical and Symposium Papers, Vol. 99, Part 2, pp. 585-596. 53. Fang, X.D., 2000, "A Study o f the U-factor o f the Window with a High-Reflectivity Venetian Blind," Solar Energy, Vol. 68, No. 2, pp. 207-214. 54. Garnet, J.M., Fraser, R.A., Sullivan, H.F., and Wright, I.E., 1995, "Effect o f Internal Venetian Blinds on Window Center-Glass U-Values," Proceedings o f the Window Innovations 95. 55. Rheault, S. and Bilgen, E., 1989, "Heat Transfer Analysis in an Automated Venetian Blind W indow System," Hansactions o f the ASM E Journal o f Solar Energy Engineering, Vol. I l l , p p . 89-95. 56. Zhang, Z., Bejan, A., and Lage, I.E., 1991, "Natural Convection in a Vertical Enclosure with Internal Permeable Screen," Transactions o f the ASM E Journal o f Heat Transfer, Vol. 113, pp. 337-383. 57. Cho, S.H., Shin, K.S., and Zaheer-Uddin, M., 1995, "The effect o f Slat Angle o f Windows with Venetian Blinds on Pleating and Cooling Loads o f Buildings in South Korea," Energy, Vol. 20, No. 12, pp. 1225-1236.

143

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

58. Breitenbach, J., Lart, S., Laiigle, I., and Rosenfeld, 2001, "Optical and thermal performance o f glazing with integral Venetian blinds," Energy and Buildings, Vol. 33, pp. 433-442. 59. Naylor, D. and Collins, M., 2004, "Evaluation o f an Approximate Method for Predicting the U-Value o f a Window with a Between-Panes Louvered Shade," Proceedings o f CHT-04, International Symposium on Advances in Computational Heat Transfer, Norway. 60. Eckert, E.R.G. and Goldstein, R.J., Hemisphere Publishing Corp. 1976, Measurements in Heat Transfer,

61. Naylor, D., 2003, "Recent Developments in the Measurement o f Convective Heat Transfer Rates by Laser Interferometry," International Journal o f Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 24, pp. 345-355. 62. Hauf, W., and Grigull, U., 1970, "Optical Methods in Heat Transfer," Advances in H eat Transfer, Vol. 6, pp. 133-- 366, Academic Press Inc., New York. 63. Tarasuk, J.D., 1968, "The Theory, Design and Operation o f the University of Saskatchewan 8-Inch Mirror Mach-Zehnder Interferometer," Teclmical Report C3, Mechanical Engineering Department, University o f Saskatchewan. 64. Von Bistram, P., 1995, "The Design, Development and Preliminary Testing o f the Ryerson Mach-Zehnder Interferometer," B.Eng. Thesis, Ryerson Polyteclmic University. 65. "FEHT Finite Element Analysis", Version 7.161, F-Chart Software, 2001. 66. "SolidWorks 2003 Personal Ediüon," 8P2.1, SolidWorks Corp., 2003. 67. Naylor, D., 2001, "Laser Interferometry," Development in Heat Transfer Series: Measurement o f Heat Flux, Wessex Institute o f Technology Press, Ashurst Southampton, U.K., Vol. 12. 68. "FIDAP Fluid Dynamics Analysis Package", Release 8.6.2, Fluent Inc., 2001. 69. Lai, B.Y. and Naylor, D., 2003, "A Numerical Study o f Free Convective Fleat Transfer from a Between-the-Glazing Venetian Blind Window Assembly," Proceedings o f the 19`'^ Canadian Congress o f Applied Mechanics, pp. 384-385. 70. Oosthuizen, P.H. and Naylor, D., 1999, Introduction to Convective H eat Transfer Analysis, McGraw-Hill, London. 71. Zienkiewicz, O.C., 1971, The Finite Element M ethod in Engineering Science, McGraw-Hill, London.

144

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

72. Engelman, M.S., Sani, R.L., Gresho, P.M., and Bercovier, M., 1984, "Consistent vs. Reduced Quadrature Penalty Metliods for Incompressible Media Using Several Old and N ew Elements," International Journal o f Numerical Methods fo r Fluids, Vol. 2, p. 25. 73. Naylor, D., 1991, "A Numerical and Interferometric Study o f Natural Convective Heat Transfer from Divided and Undivided Vertical Channels," Ph.D. Thesis, University o f Western Ontario. 74. Touloukian, Y.S., Saxena, S.C., and Hestemians, P., 1975, "Viscosity: Nonmetallic Liquids and Gases," Thermophysical Properties o f Matter, Vol. 11, Thermophysical Properties Research Center (TPRC), Purdue University, Plenimi Publishing Corp. 75. Touloukian, Y.S., Liley, P.E., and Saxena, S.C., 1975, "Thermal Conductivity: Nonmetallic Liquids and Gases," Thermophysical Properties o f Matter, Vol. 3, Thexmophysical Properties Research Center (TPRC), Purdue University, Plenum Publishing Corp. 76. Touloukian, Y.S. and Makita, T., 1975, "Specific Heat: Nonmetallic Liquids and Gases," Thetinophysical Properties o f Matter, Vol. 6, Thermophysical Properties Research Center (TPRC), Purdue University, Plenum Publishing Corp. 77. Kline, S.J. and McClintock, F.A., 1953, "Describing Experimental Uncertainties in Single-Sample Experiments," Mechanical Engineering, Vol. 75, pp. 3-8. 78. "M aple," Release 9.03, Waterloo Maple Inc., 2003.

145

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


