BIODEGRADATION OF DIESEL CONTAMINATED WASTEWATER USING A THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED BED REACTOR

BY GISSELLY ANANIA MUNOZ Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering Jose Antonio Echeverria Polytechnic University Havana, Cuba, July 1997

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science In Chemical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004

©Gisselly Anania Munoz, 2004

' PfiOPERTYOF RYERSON yw iV E R S in LIBRARY

Number: EC53414

INFORMATION TO U SE R S

The quality of this reproduction Is d e p e n d e n t upon th e quality of th e copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality iiliiustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, su b sta n d a rd margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In th e unlikely event that the author did not s e n d a com plete manuscript and th e re are missing p a g e s , th e s e will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to b e rem oved, a note will indicate th e deletion.

UMI Microform E C 5 3 4 1 4 Copyright 2009 by P ro Q u est LLC All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying u n d e r Title 17, United S ta te s Code.

P ro Q u e st LLC 789 E a st Eisenhow er Parkw ay P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

I hereby declare that I am the sole author o f this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f sch o tely research.

Gisselly Anania M unoz

I fiirther authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request o f other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

Gisselly Anania M unoz

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

1. 2.

3. 4. 5.
6.

7.
8.

9.
10 .
11 .

12.

13. 14. 15.

in

ABSTRACT BIO DEGRADATIO N OF DIESEL CO NTAM INATED W A STEW A TER USING A TH REE-PH ASE FLUIDIZED BED REA CTO R M aster o f Applied Science in Chemical Engineering (2004) Gisselly Anania M unoz Chemical Engineering Departm ent Ryerson University

The use o f petroleum-derived products has given rise to environmental concerns reg ^ d in g hydrocarbon pollution. Therefore, the development o f innovative technologies for the clean up o f contaminated sites is a challenge. This thesis is an investigation o f a three-phase fluidized bed biofilm reactor, as an effective technology for biological treatm ent o f dieselcontaminated wastewater. The three-phase fluidized bed utihzed in tliis research consists o f support media (diameter o f 600 Jim ) with biofilm, and gas phase (air at 1.0 cm/s) in up flowing liquid (feedwater at 0.02 cm/s). The reactor influent is synthetic w astew ater varying in COD concentrations in the range o f 550-1300 mg/1 and diesel concentrations between 70 and 200 mg/L. The results indicate that diesel fuel can be removed in the reactor with efficiencies up to 100 % at a hydraulic detention time o f 4 hours. G ood quality efiQuent means a good reactor performance, where 55 % o f the diesel fuel was removed due to biological process.

IV

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to offer special thanks to Dr. Alvarez Cuenca, for many help&il discussions on wastewater engineering and especially for superwsing this thesis. His guidance in this research was crucial for the success o f this investigation. Thank you for allowing me to present this research at two international congresses: "2"`* International Environmental Congress o f the Caribbean'' held in Colombia and "Water and Wastewater Europe 2004" held in Spain where I personally presented this research. I would also like to acknowledge Dr. All Lohi, for his support in this research and for providing guidance at "Water and Wastewater Europe 2004". I also v^sh to thank the following people at Ryerson University who supported the investigation and gave me helpful comments and suggestions: Dr. Mario Estable, Mr. Dennis Walmsley, Mr. Ali Hemmati and Mr. Peter Scharping, I also wish to thank Sean Black, my partner in life, thanks for so much advice... thanks for supporting me with your love, patience and unconditional help. I would like to offer my special gratitude to Randall for so many wonderful nights alone just you and me rubbing your belly, you brought me much needed support wMe in front o f the computer. I also wish to thank to Peter Weeks (President o f "Nuco Products"), Robin Since (General Manager) and Marjorie Blumfald (Manager) for the support and help during two years. Thanks for trusting in me and teaching me all I know about the jewelry business. I will always have beautiful memories from such a beautiful workplace. Me gustaria ofrecer mis mas sinceras gracias para mi familia en Cuba, por confrar en mi en todos estos anos, en especial para mi mama Graciela, mi hermana Greisy y mi papa Jose ... tanta dedicacion y amor seria hnposible plasmar en estas cortas lineas.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

A uthor's Declaration Borrow er's Page Abstract Acknowledgements Table o f Contents List o f Tables List o f Figures List o f Appendices Nomenclature Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Literature Review 2.1 Aerobic Biofîlm Processes Applied to W astewater Engineering 2.1.1 Substrate Utilization in Biofilm Reactors 2.2 Three-Phase Fluidized Bed Biofilm Technology 2.2.1 Process Description 2.2.2 Industrial and Municipal Applications 2.2.3 Bioreactor Performance 2.2.4 M odels o f Three-Phase Fluidized Bed Biofilm R eactor 2.2.5 Validation and Use o f the Larachi's M odel

iî iü iv v vi ix xi xüi xiv 1 5 5 7 10 13 16 21 22 24

VI

2.3 Diesel Fuel Biodegradability Chapter 3: Experimental 3.1 Experimental Program 3.2 Experimental Facilities 3.2.1 Three-Phase Fluidized Bed Bioreactor 3.2.2 Biofilm Support 3.2.3 Instrumentation 3.3 Analytical Methods 3.3.1 Chemical Oxygen Demand Determination 3.3.2 Liquid-Liquid Extraction and Gas Chromatography Technique 3.3.3 Microscopy 3.3.4 Total Suspended Solids Determination 3.4 Experimental Procedure and Data Collection 3 .4.1 Phase I: Preparation o f Micro organisms Inoculum and Reactor Start-Up Procedure 3.4.2 Phase II: Reactor Operation in Intermittent Mode 3.4.3 Phase III: Reactor Operation at Steady-State 3.4.4 Phase IV: Validation o f Diesel Biodégradation Chapter 4: Interpretation and Discussion of Experimental Data 4.1 Interpretation o f the Experimental Results Obtained in Phase II: Reactor Operation in Intermittent Mode 4.2 Interpretation o f the Experimental Results Obtained Phase III:

27 32 32 33 36 41 42 44 44 46

46 47 47 48

50 52 53 55 56

63

V II

R eactor Operation at Steady-State 4.2.1 Estim ation o f the A ttached Biomass Concentration using Larachi's M odel 4.3 Interpretation o f the Experimental Results Obtained in Phase IV: Validation o f Diesel Biodégradation 4.4 Sources o f E rrors Chapter 5 : Conclusions and Recommendations 5.1 Conclusions 5.2 Recommendations and Future W ork Bibliography Appendices 80 81 81 83 84 95 77 73

VI u

LIST OF TABI ES

Page Table 1.1 Table 1.2 type Hydrocarbons standards guideline for soil and groundwater clean-up criteria Table 2.1 Table 2.2 Different support particles employed for various investigators Commercial applications o f the TPFBR reactor; Municipal Wastewater Treatment Table 2.3 Commercial applications o f the TPFBR reactor: Industrial Wastewater Treatment Table 2.4 Table 2.5 Selected application o f three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor Summaries o f operating conditions o f fluidized bed bioreactors for aerobic wastewater treatment employed by various investigators Table 2.6 Table 2.7 Table 3.1 Table 3.2 Table 3.3 Correlation used in the three-phase fluidized bed biofilm reactor Compo sition o f diesel fuel # 2 used in this research Description o f the equipments used in this research Lava rock characteristics Essential nutrients added into the reactor for bacterial growth of diesel degrading organisms Table 4.1 Table 4.2 Operational conditions during intermittent mode Biofilm properties and hydrodynamic parameters at steady state operation 57 67 23 2« 34 41 49 19 20 18 14 17 2 3

-ÎK

Table 4.3 Table 4,4

Characteristics o f the regions formed in the reactor Param eter used in simfluiBp and for prediction o f the biomass concentration

71 73

Table 4.5 Table 4.6 Table 4.7 Table 4. 8

Hydrodynamic param eters Estim ated and experimental solids hold-up Biomass concentration determined by other investigators S ummaries o f selected param eters o f steady state operation

74 75 76 79

LIST OF FIGURES
Page Figure 2.1 Biofilm reactor types used in wastewater treatment engineering Figure 2.2 Figure 2.3 Figure 2.4 An idealized bio film Schematic diagram o f a three-phase fluidized-bed bioreactor Flow chart to predict the biomass concentration in the three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor Figure 2.5 Ring structures o f representative polycyclic aromatic compounds in diesel fuel Figure 2.6 Figure 2.7 Figure 3.1 Figure 3.2 Figure 3.3 Figure 3.4 Figure 3.5 Figure 3.6 Figure 3.7 Figure 3.8 Figure 3.9 Figure 3.10 Figure 4.1 Pathway o f diterminal alkane oxidation under aerobic conditions Pathway o f benzene oxidation under aero bic conditions Schematic o f the three-phase fluidized bed reactor set-up Air and liquid distribution in the reactor The fiiU-scale equipment used for the experimental resem'ch Three-phase fluidized bed dimensions Lava rock photograph Dissolved oxygen meter and probe used in this research pH meter and turbidity meter used in this research 30 31 35 37 39 40 42 43 43 27 8 16 26 6

Colorimeter and heater block set up for the measurementso f COD 45 Microorganisms inoculums Diesel concentrations during intermittent mode Diesel loading rates during the 12 days o f intermittent mode 50 52 56

XI

Figure 4.2

Percent o f diesel rem oved and diesel loading rate during intermittent mode

58

Figure 4.3

Percent o f COD rem oved and COD concentrations during intermittent mode

59

Figure 4.4 Figure 4.5 Figure 4.6 Figure 4.7

Dissolved oxygen during intermittent mode pH during intermittent mode Percent diesel removed and diesel loading rate during steady state Percent COD rem oved and COD concentrations during steady state

61 62 63 64

Figure 4.8 Figure 4.9 Figure 4.10 Figure 4.11

Dissolved oxygen versus height o f the reactor Total suspended solids at steady state Turbidity values during steady state M icroscopy photograph o f active biofilm developed in the lower part o f the reactor

64 65 66 68

Figure 4.12

M icroscopy photograph o f active biofikn developed in the upper part o f the reactor

69

Figure 4.13 Figure 4.14

R eactor operation at steady state Diesel volatilization in the reactor

72 77

X II

LIST OF APPENDICES
Page

APPENDIX A APPENDIX B

CALIBRATION CURVE GAS CHROMATOGRAMS RAW DATA AND GAS CHROMATOGRAMS FOR PHASE II: REACTOR OPERATION IN INTERMITTENT MODE

96

101

APPENDIX C

RAW DATA AND GAS CHROMATOGRAMS FOR PHASE III REACTOR OPERATION AT STEADY STATE

115

APPENDIX D

RAW DATA AND GAS CHROMATOGRAMS FOR PHASE IV VALIDATION OF DIESEL BIODEGRADATION

122

APPENDIX E

SimfluiSp SOFTWARE: DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS

128

xm

NOM ENCLATURE

A Df DO dp g H Ks

Column Cross Sectional Area Diffusion Coefficient o f Substrate in W ater Dissolved Oxygen Clean Particle Diameter Gravitational Acceleration Coefficient Fluidized Height o f Bioparticles Substrate Concentration at O ne-H alf the M aximum Substrate Utilization Rate /d mg/L m 9.8 m/s^ m g/m^

k N TU rdiff rsub Sf TPFBR Ug Ul V Wpt X

Maximum Substrate Utilization Rate Nephelometric Turbidity Units Rate o f Substrate Flux Rate o f Substrate Utilization in Biofilm Substrate Concentration Three-Phase Fluidized Bed Biofilm R eactor Superficial Gas Velocity Superficial Liquid Velocity R eactor Volume Weight o f Clean Particles Biomass Concentration

g s f/g m ic ro r g * d

(-) g/m^d g/m^'d g/m^ (-) m/s m/s m^ g Kg/m^

XIV

Greek Letters Ô 8 Sg 6s 6l Biofilm Thickness Bed Porosity Gas Hold-up Solids Hold-up Liquid Hold-up Gas Viscosity Hi 7 C Pwb Pdb Pi Pg Pp Y GL
X

pm (-) (-) (-) (-) Kg/m.s Kg/m.s (-) Kg/m^ Kg/m^ Kg/m^ Kg/m^ K gW (-) Kg/s^ Time

Liquid Viscosity Sphericity Factor of Bioparticles Biofilm Wet density Biofilm Dry Density Liquid Density Gas Density Clean Particle Density Recycle Ratio Liquid Surface Tension Hydraulic Detention Time

XV

CHAPTER ONE INTRODUCTION

As tw o billion tons o f petroleum are refined each year worldwide, accidental releases o f petroleum and its products mto the environment is a widespread problem. Therefore, the development o f effective technologies to treat industrial w astew ater is a challenge. Since diesel fuels are commoifiy used, large quantities are accidentally released into groundwater environment e.g. accidental spills, leaking o f storage tanks, or through inadvertent releases during use, transportation or disposal. D ow d (1994) has estimated that up to 400,000 leaking underground storage tanks in the United States have prom oted soil and groundwater remediation. Diesel fiiel toxicity is due to the presence o f aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzene, alkylbenzenes and naphthalene. A typical diesel fiiel com position based on type o f hydrocarbon is shown ki Table 1.1. Paul and Edw ard (1992) have indicated that the carcinogenic potential o f diesel fuel is because o f the presence o f co-carcinogens such as Cio and C 20 aUcenes and alkylated benzenes. Humans and animals can be exposed to diesel-

contaminated sites by inhalation, dermal and ingestion; thereby diesel fuels also represent a health hazard for aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. HYDROCARBON TY PE Paraffins Cycioparaflins Alkylbenzenes Indans + Tetralins Indenes Naphthalene Alkyl Naphthalenes Acenaphthenes/Biphenyls Acenaphthenes/Fluorenes Adapted from Song et al. 2000 TABLE 1.1 COMPOSITIONS OF DIESEL FUELS BY HYDROCARBON TYPE MASS % 39.7 50.8 3.2 0.8 0.1 0.2 1.6 2.2 1.7

Environmental regulations have become more and more strict regarding hydrocarbon pollution and green house gas emissions. Standards applicable to pollution by hydrocarbons are well developed in countries such as Germmiy and Canada. The clean up reference levels for aquifer protection is shown in Table 1.2. Several methods for remediation o f petroleum-contaminated sites such as mechanical (oilwater separators), chemical (chemicals dispersants such as surfactants) and biological treatment (bioremediation) already exist. Yang et al. (2000) have indicated that the removal o f spilled oils by mechanical means is usually incomplete and chemical dispersants tend to increase the dissolution o f oil in the water. Sepic et al. (1996), Margesin and Schnner (1998) and Erickson et al. (1998) have suggested that aerobic biodégradation by natural population o f microorganisms is a favorable possibility by which diesel fuel can be eliminated from a

contaminated environment. Yang et al. (2000) have also indicated the potential o f biological degradation o f diesel fuel in w ater using a trickling filter. C L E A N U P V A LU ES COUNTRY Soil (m g/K g DS) B enzene Germany* Canada^ 0.5 0.05-0.5 T oluene 5 3 X ylene 5 5 G ro u n d w a te r (pg/L ) B enzene 5 5 T oluene 20 24 Xylene 20 30

®D ata were adapted firom Lecomte and M ariotti, 1997 * ' Abstracted fi-om Environment Canada, 2002 N ote: DS, dry substance TABLE 1.2 HYDROCARBONS STANDARDS GUTOELINE FOR SOH. AND GROUNDWATER CLEAN-UP CRITERIA

Over the last few years, considerable attention has been devoted to biological three-phase fluidized-bed as an effective technology for treating organic pollutants. This technology seems to be m ore effective than both dispersed biomass processes and fixed bed systems such as trickling filters and activated sludge. The main advantage o f this technology is that it retains a higher biomass concentration when com pared with suspended biomass growth, allowing higher loading rates at lower hydraulic detention times as well as smaller area requirements. There are a number o f advantages o f fluidized beds compared to other processes. Rittmann (1982) has reported biomass concentrations up to 50 g/L, this value is higher than that found with activated sludge. Tavares et al. (1995) have reported COD removal efiSciencies o f 82 percent at a hydraulic detention time o f 30 minutes. This is a very

low detention time when compared to 1 to 3 days in activated sludge systems (AlvarezCuenca, 2003). Three-phase fluidized bed has been investigated for BOD removal, nitrification,

denitrification, and industrial efiluents (Boaventura and Rodrigues 1988, Harada et al. 1987, Hermanowicz and Cheng 1983, Mulcahy and Shieh 1987 and Trinet et al. 1991). In addition, Alvarez-Cuenca (2004) has indicated the potential o f rotating biological contactors and three-phase fluidized beds as effective technologies for treating wastewater

contaminated with organic pollutants. This thesis describes a laboratory investigation that took place at the "Water and Wastewater Treatment Technologies" laboratory at Ryerson University. The main objectives o f this research are: ^ To determine experimentally the feasibility and performmice o f a three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor for treatment o f feedwater contaminated with diesel fuel. ^ To determine the optimal operational conditions for the three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor treating feedwater contaminated with diesel fuel. ^ To assess biofilm characterization mid hydrodynamic properties at the optimal operating conditions to enable process scale-up. The secondary objective o f this thesis is; ^ To set-up an appropriate technique for biomass immobilization and start-up procedures in a three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor.

CHAPTER TWO LITERATURE REVIEW

2.1

AERO BIC

BIO FILM

PRO CESSES

APPLIED

TO

W ASTEW ATER

ENGINEERING In aerobic biofilm processes, a film consisting o f natural aggregations o f microorgmiisms and their extra eellular substances are attached and cover a solid surfece. The solid surface can be plastic, rock, activated carbon or other materials attractive for bacterial growth. The attached microbial grow th is responsible for the removal, through microbial metabolism, o f the biodegradable components in the wastewater. Complete oxidation o f organic m atter in aerobic biofilm processes is carried out inside the biofilm in presence o f oxygen and nutrients. During aerobic oxidation, part o f the organic m atter is oxidized to maintain bacteria cells essential processes and part o f it is used for synthesis o f new cells tissue. Furthermore, if there is no organic m atter available, the new cel! tissue will begin to consume their ow n cell tissue as a source o f energy. The processes o f oxidation o f the substrate are presented as follows:

Oxidation and Synthesis:
BACTERIA

COHNS +
ORGANIC

Ü2

+

NUTRIENTS

COz + NHs + C^H^Oz 4
CELLS

MATTER

Endogenous respiration: C5 H 7NO 2 + 50z
CELLS

--V

SCOz + 2HzO + NH 3 +

energy

In this oxidation-reduction reactions, the electron acceptor (oxygen) is consumed in proportion to the electron donor (substrate) utilization. Trickling filters, rotating biological contactors, fixed-beds and fluidized-beds mre examples o f biofilm processes that can achieve aerobic biological oxidation o f the organic matter and organic pollutants. Attached biofilm processes have many advantages over suspended growth processes such as activated sludge. The advantages, due to the accumulation o f a large amount o f biomass, include high volumetric removal rates, short liquid detention times, and good performance stability. Figure 2.1 shows three t>pes o f biofilm reactors applied to wastewater treatment.

Rotating Biological Contactor

Trickling Filter

Fluidized Bed Reactor
f ig u r e

2.1

BIOFILM REACTOR TYPES USED IN WASTEWATER TREATMENT ENGINEERING

In the tricking filter the media is fixed and the w astew ater flows passing the film while exposed to air for aerobic purposes. In the rotating biological contactor the media rotates and the w astew ater to be treated passes through the stages. In the fluidized bed the media consisted o f solid particles covered with a biofilm, forming a bioparticle while the wastewater to be treated is passed upw ard through the fluidized bed o f particles.

2.1.1 Substrate Utilization in Biofilm Reactors Various models have been developed by a number o f investigators to describe the phenomena inside a biofilm (Rittmann and M cCarty 1980; 1981; 1982 and Ngian and M artin 1980). It is generally accepted that biofilm kinetics o f substrate utilization is due to molecular diffusion, m ass transfer o f substrate and subsequent oxidation o f the substrate inside the biofilm. Substrate, nutrients and oxygen diffuse into the biofilm and products o f biodégradation fi"om the biofilm are released into the liquid. Substrate, either carbonaceous material or organic pollutant, is consumed within a biofilm. Arvin and Harrem oes (1990) suggested that the degradation o f the substrate takes place by hydrolysis through the action o f extracelular enzyme releasing soluble products into the liquid medium. Rittmann and M cCarty (1981) have shown that a substrate utilization reaction and molecular diffusion are two primary phenomena that describe the accumulation o f substrate in a control volume o f the biofilm. This phenomenon is depicted in Figure 2.2. M ass transfer o f the substrate within a biofilm, is given by Pick's second law:

r d iff-D f^ -~

dz^

( 1)

Where, rdiff is the rate o f substrate flux into the biofilm, D f is the molecular diffiisivity o f the substrate into the biofilm, and -- ^ is the gradient o f the substrate concentration. dz
Biofilm Liquid

X
Support

z

(A)
Liquid Biofilm

Support Air

o
Outdiflusion Shear

Reaction

Wastewater
(Substrate)

(B)

" Developed in part fi/om Rittmann and McCarty, 1981.
f ig u r e

2.2

AN IDEALIZED BIOFILM (A) PHYSICAL PROPERTIES (B) PHENOMENA IN THE BIOFILM'

The substrate utilization rate at any point in the biofilm is assumed to follow the Monod kinetic model for the specific growth rate o f bacteria. This model for substrate removal has been referred to as the Michaelis-Menten equation (Metcalf and Eddy, 2003) and it is given by:

k S /X

In which^ rsub is the rate o f substrate utilization in biofilm, Sf is the substrate concentration at a point in the biofilm, k is the maximum specific substrate utilization rate, X is the biomass concentration, Ks is the substrate concentration at one-half the maximum specific substrate utilization rate. Since dififiision and utilization o f the substrate occur simultaneously, by combining equation (1) and (2), the overall mass balance on substrate for a steady-state concentration profile in the biofilm that the substrate utilization is according to Michaelis-M enten relationship can be obtained as:

Df

dz ^

Ks + S f

(3}

Although M onod kinetics have been widely used to describe w astew ater treatm ent process, other kinetics models have also been suggested depending on the substrate mid the microbial species used. Tsuneda et al. (2002) suggested that Haldane M odel and Edwards M odel might also be applicable to describe biodégradation kinetics for phenol and other aromatic substrates. The assumptions for the model presented in equation (3) are: 1. Steady-state conditions. 2. Spherical support particles. 3. Homogenous biofilm o f uniform thickness. 4. Values o f biokinetics and diSusivity param eters are constant within the biofilm.

Solutions for equation (3) require knowledge of all kinetic and mass transfer parameters as well as biofilm properties. Rittmann and McCarty (1981) and Suidan et al. (1987) demonstrated that the solution o f the equation (3) varies depending on conditions o f biofilm: (a) deep biofilm (b) shallow biofibn or, (c) fully penetrated bio film. Detailed information for the solution o f these three cases can be found in the above-mentioned reference and at Lewandoski et al. (1994) and Bignami et al. (1991). Due to the complexity o f the kinetics and the inability to define accurately the parameters for each substrate, empirical correlations are used for the design of bioreactors.

2.2 THRE&-PHASE FLUIDIZED BED BIOFILM TECHNOLOGY Three-phase fiuidized bed biofilm reactor (TPFBR) is an effective wastewater treatment technology based on biofilm processes. Three-phase fiuidization involves a solid-liquid-gas bed, where the solid particles are caUed bioparticles, and air is supplied for aerobic processes. Sutton and Mishra (1993) have indicated the potential o f this technology as a high-rate unit for both industrial and domestic wastewater treatment. Lazarova and Manem (1994) have also indicated that this tecluiology combines the best features o f activated sludge and trickling filtration into one process. The first patent was conceded to Matfiiattan College researchers, assigned to Ecolotrol, Inc., in 1974 for the application o f TPFBR for denitrification processes. The first commercialscale plant for municipal wastewater treatment was installed in Florida around 1975 and it was used for denitrification processes. The first commercial-scale plant for industrial application occurred around 1980 in Alabama, USA for the anaerobic treatment o f wastewater fi-om a soft drink bottling plant (Mishra and Sutton, 1990).

10

Since the implementation o f the first commercial fluidized-bed for municipal w astew ater treatment, other design have been developed such as: OXITRON activated Carbon system by D orr Oliver. The GAC-Fluid Bed developed and supplied by Envirex Ltd. The BIOLIFT Fluidized-Bed system developed by OTV (Badot et al. 1994) Detailed information about these innovative biofilm technologies for w ater and wastew ater treatment can be found at Bryers (2000). Other investigators such as W u and Huang (1996), and Diez-Blanco et al. (1995) have reported the use o f fiuidized bed bioreactor for anaerobic treatments. Anaerobic fiuidized bed reactors are capable o f treating low strength municipal sewage. Polanco et al., (1994) and Wilson et a l, (1998) have found that anaerobic fiuidized bed is m ore efiicient when used as a pretreatment step followed by conventional aerobic treatment. The following points summaries the m ajor advantages and disadvantages associated with the use o f TPFBR for industrial and municipal w astew ater treatment: ADVANTAGES 1. TPFBR retain higher biomass concentration when compared to suspended biomass growth such as activated sludge processes. M ishra and Sutton (1990) have indicated that the biomass concentration in fiuidized bed is approximately 5-10 times greater than that normally achieved in activated sludge reactors. 2. Three-phase fiuidized bed biofilm reactors operate at a significantly reduced hydraulic detention time with high removal efficiencies. Typical hydraulic detention time for the BOD removal in a fiuidized bed ranges fi-om 30-100 minutes, compare

H

to activated sludge that takes 1 to 3 days for aerobic processes (Alvarez-Cuenca, 2003). 3. Reduction in reactor size due to the development o f a high biomass concentration. 4. Three-phase fiuidized beds solve the problems o f oxygen demand by using simultaneous injections o f air and liquid. This also induces high shear stress that controls biofilm thickness and sludge production. 5. Fiuidization overcome problems such as bed clogging, poor mixing, sludge recycle and low transfer o f substrate between the liquid and the biomass. 6. Absence o f mechanical moving parts.

DISADVANTAGES 1. Complex interrelation between kinetic processes and fiuidization makes it difiScult to model mathematically the fluidized-bed biofilm process. 2. It is difBcult to maintain homogenous biofilm formation otherwise particle élutriation and bed stratification, two unwanted phenomena, will arise in the reactor. 3. There is a limit on operating velocities and support particle size.

Substrate removal in fiuidized bed biofilm processes can be performed either ir. aerobic or anaerobic reactors. The power economy is one o f the most important factors in evaluating the feasibility o f aerobic versus anaerobic operation. The power economy o f organic removal is expressed as the amount o f pollutant (BOD or COD) removed per unit power consumption.

12

In three-phase fiuidized bed aerobic reactor, the energy is mainly consumed by supplying oxygen to the reactor and by the liquid pump for fiuidization o f bioparticles. Fan (1989) has indicated that under optimum operating conditions, the pow er consum ption by the liquid piunp for fiuidization o f bioparticles amounts to one-third o f the total pow er consumption. According to Lazarova et al. (1994), the energy consum ption in these reactors is around 1 KW h/ Kg COD removed, similar to that in activated sludge processes and lower than that in two-phase fiuidized bed reactors with pre-ojq^genation (Bryers, 2000; M etC alf and Eddy, 2003). Anaerobic reactors have been considered as energy producers instead energy users, as is the case o f aerobic processes. This statement is due to the production o f methane as a product o f biodégradation. M etcalf and Eddy (2003) have indicated that a net energy production on the order o f 10.4 x 10^ kJ/d can be achieved with anaerobic treatm ent. This value is about 5 times the energy required for aerobic treatment. Anaerobic conditions require constant checking o f tem perature and alkalinity because o f it is very sensitive to the effect o f low tem perature and low pH in reaction rate. M etcalf and Eddy (2003) recom mend alkalinity

concentration o f 2000 to 3000 mg/1 as CaCOs to maintain an acceptable pH. A significant cost may be incurred to purchase CaCOg, which can affect the overall economics o f the process. The effluent fi'om anaerobic reactors may require further treatm ent in an aerobic reactor to meet discharge requirement

2.2.1 Process Description A three-phase fiuidized bed biofilm reactor consists o f a fiuidized bed o f support particles favorable to microbial growth. Organisms grow on the support particles in the form o f biofilm and inside the pores o f the particles to form a bioparticle. Bioparticles remain

13

suspended while the contaminated water or wastewater passes continuously throughout the reactor. Fan (1989) has suggested that the density o f optimal support for biological growth and fiuidization purposes ranges from 1015 to 1600 Kg/m^. Table 2.1 shows various support particles with higher density that has been used for cell immobilization.

R EFEREN CE Coelhoso et al. (1992) Eggers mid Terlouw (1979) Boaventura and Rodrigues (1988)

SUPPORT PA R TIC LE Activated carbon

D IA M ETER (mm) 1.69

DENSITY (kg/m^) 1180

ÜL (cm/s) 1.4

Sand

1.0

2650

1.34

Sand Polypropylene with mineral inclusions Sponge surrounded by stainless steel wires

0.4

2150

1.4

Briens et al. (1997)

3

2471

2.3

Karapinar and Kargi (1996)

4

1350

4.5

TABLE 2.1

DIFFERENT SUPPORT PARTICLES EMPLOYED BY VARIOUS INVESTIGATORS

When the wastewater to be treated passes upward at a sufiScient velocity to bring particles in the bed from rest to motion, it is said to be at the point o f incipient fiuidization at a minimum liquid velocity. At this point, the bed media particles provide a large surface area for microbial growth. The attached microbid growth is responsible for the removal, through microbial metabolism, o f the biodegradable components. Fan (1989) also reported that the

14

classic equations used to calculate the minimum liquid velocity and terminal velocity o f rigid particles could be used for bioparticles. Larachi et al. (2000) have also reported dimensional and dimensionless correlations describing minimum liquid velocity, terminal velocity and phase hold ups for TPFBR. The authors claim that these correlations can be used with bioparticles. The upper and lower limit o f operation can be set at the minimum fiuidization velocity and at the terminal velocity o f the particles. The lower level is the minimum fiuidization velocity since velocity below this value will not produce fiuidization. The upper level is set at the terminal velocity since velocity higher than this value will cause particle élutriation. A schematic diagram o f a three-phase fiuidized bed bioreactor is shown in Figure 2.3. The most important mechanical components o f the reactor are: 1. Liquid distributor. 2. Air distributor. 3. The device used to control bed expansion due to biomass growth.

15

Gas

Air Distributor
· Bioparticle o A ir bubble
/ A\ Gas \ Superficial \ V elocity (Ug) Liquid Superficial /elocity (% )

^ '

Support Particle

Attached Microbial

Growtli
dp-Particlc diameter dbp- Bioparticle diameter

f ig u r e

2.3

SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF A THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED-BED BIOREACTOR (A) THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED BIOREACTOR (B) SOLID PARTICLE WITH A LAYER OF ATTACHED MICROBIAL GROWTH

2.2.2

Industrial and Municipal Applications

Fiuidized bed bioreactors have shown to be an effective technology in carbonaceous oxidation, nitrification and denitrification o f a wide variety o f wastewaters. Detailed descriptions o f these applications can be found elsewhere (Mulcahy and Shieh 1987, Harada

16

et al. 1987, Trinet et al. 1991, Boaventura and Rodriguez 1988, Hermanowicz and Cheng, 1983). A number o f full-scale fiuidized beds are currently in operation for treating industrial effluents as well as municipal wastew aters. These applications are shown in Table 2.2 and 2.3, respectively.

F A C IL IT Y AND L O C A T IO N Bay Park W astewater Treatm ent Plant, East Rockaway, N Y , U SA ^ Hayward W astewater Treatment Plant, Hayward, CA, USA" Pensacola W astewater Treatment Plant, Pensacola, FL, USA''

A P P L IC A T IO N Aerobic carbonaceous oxidation o f sanitary wastew ater Aerobic carbonaceous oxidation o f sanitary wastew ater

SY ST E M IN F O R M A T IO N Five reactors, each 37.2 m^ by 9 m high

Two reactors, each 47.6 m^ by 7 m high

Denitrification o f nitrified sanitary wastew ater

Two reactors, each 33.5 m^ by 5.8 m high

Lansing W astewater Anaerobic treatm ent o f Four reactors, each 35.3 m^ by Treatm ent Plant, Lansing, liquor from solids heat 11.3 m high M I, USA'' treatm ent process ® Adapted from M ishra and Sutton (1990), A dapted from Sutton and M ishra (1993)

TABLE 2.2

COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS OF THE TPFBR REACTOR: MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER TREATMENT

Some other applications for fiuidized bed reactors have been explored at the laboratoiy and pilot-scale levels for complex organic pollutants in recent years. These applications are summarized in Table 2.4.

17

FA CILITY AND LOCATION Algoma Steel Plant, Sauk Ste, Marie, Ontario, Canada " General Motors Plant, Lansing, MI, USA * *

APPLICATION Aerobic carbonaceous oxidation o f wastewater j&om coke-making operations Aerobic carbonaceous oxidation o f wastewater fi'om automotive manufacturing operation Aerobic carbonaceous oxidation o f wastewater firom chemical operations. Aerobic carbonaceous oxidation o f wastewater ftom coke-making operations Aerobic treatment o f chemical plant wastewater for organics removal

SYSTEM IN FO RM A TIO N Two reactors, each 65.6 by 8.5 m high One reactor, 18.7 m high by 6.7

Grindsted Products Plant, Grindsted, Denmark Hoogovens Plant, Ijnuiden, Holland " Formosa, Point Comfort, TX, USA*'

Two reactors, each 59.8 m'* by 6.1 m high Two reactors, each 84.3 by 8.7 m high Two reactors, each 23.6 m by 7.3 m high

TABLE 2.3

COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS OF THE TPFBR REACTOR:

Badot et al. (1994) reported the results o f the three-phase fiuidized bed process applied to tertiary treatment in a municipal wastewater treatment plant filled with, sand (0.2-0.6 mm diameter). Polanco et al. (1994) reported a use o f 6.5 anaerobic/aerobic fiuidized bed for

carbonaceous removal in a municipal wastev/ater treatment plant. Over 80 % o f COD were removed at organic loading o f around 0.2 and 1.2 Kg/m^d. Other applications and a summary o f the operating conditions o f fiuidized bed bioreactors employed in aerobic treatment are shown in Table 2.5.

18

SY ST E M S B ench scale aerobic fiuidized bed reactor used to treat simulated acetic acid wastew aters Lab-scale fluidized bed for quinoline degradation

REFEREN CE Safierman and Bishop (1997)

Buchtm ann et al. (1997)

Lab-scale aerobic fluidized bed for reduction o f chlorophenol in groundwater Lab-scale anaerobic/aerobic fluidized bed system for degradation o f pentachlorophenol Pilot-scale fluidized bed for the treatm ent o f aqueousphase dichloromethane Lab-scale fluidized bed for treatm ent o f metalworking wastew ater Lab-scale fluidized bed for biodégradation o f phenolic Industrial w astew ater Pilot-scale fluidized bed for COD reduction o f a brewery w astew ater

Melin et al. (1998)

W ilson et al. (1998)

Flanagan (1998)

Schreyer and Coughlin (1999)

Gonzales et al. (2001)

Ochieng et al, (2002)

TABLE 2.4

SELECTED APPLICATION OF THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED BED BIOREACTOR

In general, the main applications o f this technology when used in industrial wastew ater treatm ent are: 1. To rem ove large quantities o f substrate generated in industrial processes. 2. To treat w astew ater that is not continuously discharged into the reactor (Intermittent loading).

19

I

AUTHOR

1 D IM ENSIO N ' OF THE BIOREACTOR

SOLID SUPPORT

^ WASTEWATER (SUBSTRATE)

OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS

LOADING AND REMOVAL RATE

1 COMMENTS 1

Gonzales et al. (2001)

Lab scale H r= 42 cm V ^3L Lab scale H r= 96,5 cm V =10L

Calciumalginate gel beads. dp= 1-2 mm Granular activated carbon 16x20 mesh Granular activated carbon 10x30 mesh Bayvitec® Aquacel® dp-100700pm Activated carbon particle dp- 272 pm

Phenolic industrial wastewater S= 250-2500 ppm Pentaclorophenol artificial wastewater (PCP) S= 200 ppm Dichloromethane artificial wastewater (DCM) 8=2018-2596 ppm Artificial quinoline wastewater 8=390-980 ppm Artificial phenol wastewater S - 100-120 ppm

Wo= 62,5 - 625.0 mg/L d Q= 85 L/h Phenol Removed 100% Wo= 0.6-4.8 g/Ld PCP Removed 95% Wo= 28.3-48.7 KgDCM/m^day DCM Removed 100 %

x= 4h D O 2-4.5 mg/L pH= 4.5 Anaerobic/ Aerobic System X= 2.3 h x = 1.72 h y=23.6 pH= 7.0±0.5

Wilson at al. (1998)

Q= 3-24 L/d

Flanagan (1998)

Lab Scale H r= 244 cm V= 12.7 L

Q= 65.4 L/d U l= 4 cm/s Y= 23.6

Buchtmann et al. (1997)

Lab Scale H r= 58 cm V =5L Lab Scale H r= 240 cm V = 8 .1 L

Ug= 1.5 cm/s Q= 14.4-17,3 L/h TJl= 7.3-8,8 m/h U g=9m /h y= 0

Wo= 0.31-0.35 g/L h Wo= 4-6 Kg/m^day Phenol removed 100 %

pH=7.2 Xvary upon support D0= 2-4 ppm 5= 50-100 pm x -4 h

Hosaka et al. (1985) and Fan (1989)

Note: S, substrate concentration in p p m ; H r, Height o f the reactor TABLE 2.5 SUMMARY OF OPERATING CONDITIONS OF FLUIDIZED BED BIOREACTORS FOR 4^EROBIC WASTEWATER TREATMENT EMPLOYED BY VARIOUS INVESTIGATORS 20

2.2.3 Bioreaetor Perform ance The performance o f fluidized bed biofilm reactors depends in general on the biomass concentration, the overall biodégradation rates and the reactor configuration (Fan, 1989). The biomass concentration within the reactor depends on: 1. Biofilm thickness 2. Biofilm detachment 3. Support particle characteristics 4. Dissolved oxygen and pH Ruggiere et al. (1994) have shown how with an increase o f biofilm thickness, anaerobic activities in deeper biofilm layers occur due to the mass difiusion limitation o f essential nutrients, the substrate or oxygen. This phenomenon reduces the reaction rate or the

formation o f other by products due to anaerobic reactions. NicoleUa et al. (1996) have pointed out that biofilm detachment in fiuidized beds increase

with increasing the shear stress produced due to high liquid and gas velocities.Therefore, particle interaction and liquid turbulence make the biofilm denser and thinner. Information about biofilm detachment models in fiuidized bed biofilm reactors can be found elsewhere (Nieolella et al., 1996; 1997; Ficioreanu et al., 1999; 2000, Chang et al. 1991). One o f the m ost im portant aspects o f the fluidized bed biofilm reactor is the fact that the biomass growth around the support particle decreases the overall density o f the particle. This phenomenon leads to diflferent segregation o f the bioparticles in which the bigger particles arise to the top o f the reactor and the smaller remain at the bottom o f the reactor. This problem arises when the support particles are not uniform in size.

21

The pH, dissolved oxygen and the presence o f inhibitors can increase or decrease the substrate Bux into the bioHm. M etcalf and Eddy (2003) have shown that the optimal pH for microorganism growth is around neutral values o f 6-8. The text also recommends a dissolved oxygen concentration around 2-4 mgÆ to achieve aerobic processes. Ngian and Martin (1980) have reported change in the biodégradation pathway o f the substrate due to the lack o f dissolved oxygen. The overall hiodegradation rates depend on the type o f substrate and the nucrobial species used. Several kinetic models for substrate biodégradation and their corresponding rate constant for aromatic hydrocarbons have been given by ArcangeU and Arvin. 1995 and Zhang et al. 1995. These kinetic models include rate expressions with respect to the substrate o f zero order, first order, Monod type and Haldane type. With respect to reactor configuration, one o f the most important engineering features o f fluidized beds is liquid and airflow distribution. Poor flow distribution allows shortcircuiting and imeven bed expansion.

2.2.4 Models

o f

Three-Phase Fluidized Bed Biofilm Reactor

In general, the model discussed in section 2.1.1 applies to three-phase fluidized bed bioreactors. However, due to the inability to define accurately the physical and biokinetic parameters and model coefficients, empirical corteiations based on experimental works are used for design and modeling purposes. Several models have been developed to calculate the bed height, phase holdups and overall biomass concentration in a three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor. Ngian and Martin (1980), Shieh et al. (1981) and Hermanowicz and Ganczarczyk (1990) found that the same

22

expression that is applied to a liquid fluidized bed o f rigid particles is applicable to bioparticle as well. Different models can be applied depending o f the nature o f the process. M ulcahy and Shieh (1987) have proposed a model for denitrify biofilm in fluidized beds. O zturk et al. (1994) have proposed a m odel for anaerobic biofilm in fiuidized beds, using the well-known Richardson-Zaki correlations for rigid particles. NicoleUa et al. (1995 and 1998), AbdulAziz and Asolekar (2000) and Andrews and Trapasso (1985) have developed empirical correlations for the calculations o f density and terminal velocity o f bioparticles for aerobic biofilm. Some o f the correlations used for biofilm-covered particles in fluidized systems are shown in Table 2.6.

CO RR ELATIO N H = (W p t/8 s P p A )(l+ 2 0 /d p )'

EQ UATIO N

UNITS

R EM ARK S

(4)

m

Fluidized Bed Height Yu and Rittmann (1997)

X=

pdb (1- e) [ 1 - (fij/fibp)] ^

(5)

Kg/m"

Biomass Concentration Chang and Rittmann (1994)

Pbp=

pp (1+ 25/dp)'" + pwb [1-(1+ 25/dp)-"]

(6 )

Kg/m"

Bioparticle Density Trinet et al. 1991

dbp= dp+25

(7)

m

Bioparticle Diameter

TABLE 2.6

CORRELATIONS USED IN THE THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED BED BIOFILM REACTOR

23

2.2.5 Validation and Use of the Larachi's Model The software used m this research predicts the hydrodynamics o f the three-phase fluidized bed reactor based on Larachi's Model, Larachi et al. (2000) have developed the most recent model for predictions o f phase's hold ups for a three-phase fluidized bed reactor. Using the basis o f multilayer perceptron artificial neural network, modeling technique and dimensional analysis, the authors established simfluBp software for prediction o f the hydrodynamics o f the three-phase fluidized bed. This software is appropriate for a number o f applications where three-phase fiuidized bed technology is used (fermentation, wastewater treatment and coal liquefitction). The authom elaborated the simfluifip software based on data published since 1970. Description o f this software as well as the results obtamed in this study can be found in Appendix E. The mentioned software ofiered by Laval University, Quebec, Canada is used in this research to predict fiuidization paranreters mainly bed porosity and phase's hold-ups. The model assumption are: The individual bioparticle is assumed to have smooth surface and a spherical shape. The wastewater properties were taken as clean water properties. Type o f system*. Foaming The biofilm dry density and wet density were adopted from Zhang and Bishop, 1993 and 1994, and its value is shown as follows. p^b= 1020.0 Kg/m^ pdb= 1170.0 Kg/m^ The support particle is assumed to be uniform in size with 600pm o f diameter.

24

Once £,

Eg, El . Es

are known, the prediction o f the attached biomass concentration is

estimated from eorrelations used for biofilms in fluidized reactors showed in Table 2,6. A step-by-step procedure to com pute the attached biomass concentration is presented in the flowchart in Figure 2.4. Once hydrodynamics and biofilm param eters are known, the calculation o f the bioparticles properties is perform ed in step 2. The calculation o f fiuidization param eters (bed porosity and phase's hold-ups) is perform ed using sknfluiSp in step 3. Validation o f Larachi's M odel (simfluiSp) is perform ed in step 4, comparing the experimental and estimated values o f solids hold-up (Eg) with an acceptance o f 10 % relative error. Once fiuidization param eters are know n the attached biomass concentration is predicted using Equation 5. It is important to point out that the procedure to estimate attached biomass concentration was selected over other procedures based on the following considerations: 1. Fiuidization and biomass correlation have been developed for denitrification data, anaerobic systems, two-phase fiuidized beds and carbonaceous removal. Mulcahy and Shieh (1987) have recommended further refinement o f these correlations with other types o f substrate. 2. The inability to accurately estimate the bubble rising velocity and gas hold-up. 3. The inability o f experimentally determining the attached biomass concentration using biological analytical m ethods such as confocal scanning electron

microscopy.

25

1. Input Parameters
^ L j U g j A , Ô , d p , P p , p i , P i , , p g , P g , W p t , P w b , p< ib,

^

o f bioparticle properties (dbp,
Pbp)

dbp using equation (7) P b p using equation (6)

3. Calculation o f fiuidization parameters (8 ,8g, £l, £s) using simflui3p, developed by Larachi et a i (2000) and using bioparticle properties ( d b p ,
Pbp)

4. Comparison o f the B s found by Larachi et al. ( 2 0 0 0 ) with the Bs obtained using equation (4) and using the expanded bed height found experhnentaly 5. Calculation o f the relative error (RE) measured value-predicted value xlOO R E = ---------------measured value

RE> 10 %, return to the beginning and repeat the process with a new S

6. Calculation o f the attached biomass concentration, using bed porosity £ obtained by simfluiSp and equation (5) if RE is acceptable.

f ig u r e

2.4 FLOW CHART TO PREDICT THE BIOMASS CONCENTRATION IN THE THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED BED BIORE ACTOR

26

2.3 DIESEL FUEL BIO DEG R AD ABILITY Diesel fuels are a complex mixture o f hundreds o f different hydrocarbons, mainly nparaffin, branched paraffin, cyclo-paraffin and aromatic hydrocarbons. Generally long chain alkanes with carbon numbers in the range o f Cio to C 20 are the major paraffinic components. The aromatic and polynuclear aromatic compounds in diesel fuels include alkylated benzenes, indanes, naphthalenes, biphenyls, acenaphthenes, phenanthrenes, and pyrenes (Song et al, 2000). Diaromatic hydrocarbons w ith naphthalene-type structure are the more abundant aromatic com ponents in diesel fuels. Figure 2.5 shows the ring structures o f representative polycyclic aromatic compounds in diesel foels. M ost sulfur compounds in

diesel fiiel are alkylated benzothiophene-type and dibenzothiophene-type (Sepie et al. 1996). Trace amounts o f nitrogen compounds in diesel fuels include indoles, carbazoles, quinolines, acridines, and phenanthridines. The oxygen compounds are alkylated phenols and dibenzofiiran. Form ulated diesel ffiel also contains trace amounts o f additives. Table 2.7 shows the composition o f diesel fuel # 2 used in this research.

n Benzene n Naphthalene Phenanthrene

Pyrene

Adapted from Song et al.''2000. FIGURE 2.5 RING STRUCTURES OF REPRESENTATIVE POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC COMPOUNDS IN DIESEL FUEL

27

COMPONENT Cio ParafiBns Cio Cycloparaflôns Cio Aromatics Cii Paraffins Cii Cycloparaffins Cii Aromatics Ci2 Paraffins Ci 2 Cycloparaffins C |2 Aromatics Ci3 Paraffins Ci 3 Cycloparaffins Cv3 Aromatics Ci4 Paraffins Ci 4 Cycloparaffins C }4 Aromatics

CONCENTRATION (% VOLUME) 0.9 0.6 0.4 2.3 1.7 1.0 3.8 2.8 1.6 6.4 4.8 2.8 8.8 6.6 3.8

COMPONENT Cl 5 Paraffins Ci 5 Cycloparaffins Cl 5 A om atics Ci6 Paraffins Ci6 Cycloparaffins Ci6 A 'omatics Ci 7 Paraffins Ci 7 Cycloparaffins Ci 7 A om atics Ci8 Paraffins Ci8 Cycloparaffins Ci8 A om atics Ci 9 Paraffins Ci 9 Cycloparaffins Ci9 A om atics

CONCENTRATION (% VOLUME) 7,4 5.5 3.2 5.8 4.4 2.5 5.5 4.1 2.4 4,3 3.2 1.8 0.7 0.6 0.3

Adapted from Perryman, 2003. T a b le
2 .7

c o m p o s itio n o f d d e s e l f u e l # 2 u s e d in t h i s r e s e a r c h

Diesel fuels have been previously degraded in soils, water, and groundwater using microorganisms under aerobic and anaerobic conditions (Marquez-Rocha et al. 2001. Cassidy and Irvine 1997, Gao et al. 1999). It has been reported that microorganisms such as Pseudomonas aerugnosa. Pseudom om putida, A zo lla -im yed bacterial consortium can successfully degrade diesel fuel under aerobic conditions (Cohen et al. 20D2, Rahman and Rahman 2002, Richard and Vogel 1999 and Sepie et al. 1996). Bioremediation o f contaminated environments can take place on the affected area or in a bioreactor and can be performed under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Zhang et al. (1995) have indicated that

28

transformation o f petroleum hydrocarbons in general under aerobic conditions takes place faster than under anaerobic conditions. In addition to the electron acceptor (oxygen), and the substrate (the carbon in diesel fuels), another factor that can control the success o f biodégradation is an adequate supply o f nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur). Microbial populations in diesel-contaminated environments are likely to be under deficit o f nitrogen due to the fact that diesel only contains trace amounts o f nitrogen containing compounds. Another factor that control the success o f biodégradation is the structure o f the substrate. It has been dem onstrated that alkanes in the range o f Cio to C 2 6 show the m ost rapid biodégradation, and complex structures (branches and ring structures) are more resistant to biodégradation processes (Sepie et al. 1996). Rittmann and M cCarty (2001) have indicated that the greater the complexity o f the hydrocarbon's structure, the slower the rates o f degradation and the greater the possibility o f intermediary metabolites products. Although diesel fuels are an essentially water-insoluble compound, microorganisms posses a mechanism for the uptake o f hydrophobic, water-insoluble compounds across the cell. The processes o f hydrocarbon utilization, transport and uptake by microbial cells have been widely reviewed by Atlas (1984). The major metabolic pathway for hydrocarbons has been elucidated in recent years. It is generally accepted that either short or long chains alkane are oxidized to the corresponding alcohol, aldehyde and fatty acid via p-oxidation using oxygenases enzyme for which molecular oxygen is required (Atlas 1984 and 1985, Rittmann and M cCarty, 2001). The m ajor metabolic pathw ay for aromatic hydrocarbons involves the form ation o f catechol (Smith, 1990). Figures 2.6 and 2.7 show the major metabolic pathw ay for a diterminal

29

alkane and part o f the biodégradation routes o f benzene. It is important to point out that little information is available related to the kinetic o f biodégradation o f aromatic hydrocarbons in bioJBlm system, Arcangeh and Arvin (1995) have reviewed some kinetics o f biodégradation o f aromatics compounds such as benzene, toluene, phenol and ethylbenzene.

H3C-(CH2)n-CH3 (n-AJkane)

H

3C

-(C H

2) ,, - C

H

20H

(Primarily Fatty Alcohol)

HjC- (CH2)n-CH0 (Fatty Aldehyde)

HsC-(CH2)n-C00H (Monocarboxylic Fatty Acid)

HOH 2 C -(C H 2),,-C 00H (Hydroxy Fatty Acid)
Ï

oec- ( C H 2)

n -c o o H

(Aldehyde Fatty Acid) i HOOC- (CHz)n- COOH (Dicarboxylic Fatty Acid)

Adapted from Atlas, 1984. f i g u r e 2.6 PATHWAY OF DITERMINAL ALKANE OXIDATION UNDER AEROBIC CONDITIONS

30

NADH

NAD

H NAD+ OH \;-O H

NADH +

w e i/3 -c le a v a g e r o u te

OH 'O H Catechol or//io-cleavage route

Benzene

cis- Benzene H Dihydro diol

Adapted from Smith, 1990. FIGURE 2.7 PATHWAY OF BENZENE OXIDATION UNDER AEROBIC CONDITIONS

A common characteristic o f the biodégradation o f hydrocarbons under aerobic conditions is the introduction o f oxygen into the hydrocarbon molecule, which requires an energy investment in the form o f NA D H (Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide). Oxygenation reactions introduce one or tw o -O H groups into the hydrocarbon structure. Figure 2.7 shows the two divergent pathways during benzene biodégradation. B oth share the same initial steps resulting in the formation o f catechol. The ortho-cleavage route and the meta-cleavage route involve the form ation o f the dérivâtes o f the catechol. Figure 2.6 shows the major metabolic pathway for a diterminal alkane with the formation o f a fatty alcohol.

31

CHAPTER THREE EXPERIMENTAL

3.1 Experimental Program To evaluate the performance o f the three-phase fluidized bed reactor for the treatment o f wastewater contaminated with diesel, and the hydrodynamic properties and biofilm characterization, the experimental program was developed in four phases. Phase I: Preparation o f microorganisms inoculums and reactor start-up procedure. Phase II: Reactor operation in intermittent mode. Phase III: Reactor operation at steady state. Phase IV: Validation o f diesel biodégradation. In Phase I, flesh biomass collected from the rotating biological contactor (RBC), located in the same laboratory, was inoculated in the fluidized bed. The reactor was set to work in batch conditions to ensure immobilization o f the microorganisms on the support particles. The objective o f Phase II is to evaluate the maximum concentration o f diesel able to be removed in the reactor in intermittent mode.

32

In Phase III the reactor was set to w ork at steady state with respect to diesel biodégradation. The objective o f Phase III is to obtain steady state data with respect to diesel biodégradation to enable process scale-up. The objective o f Phase IV is to evaluate the losses o f diesel due to volatilization and adsorption into the packing material.

3.2 Experim ental Facilities The experiments were conducted at the "W ater and W astewater Treatm ent Technologies" laboratory at Ryerson University. A schematic drawing o f the experimental system is shown in Figure 3.1. The experimental unit consisted o f a column, a feedw ater tank, a feeding pump, a flow meter, an air flow meter, valves and circulation pipes. The system can be operated as a batch o r continuously with or without recycle. A brief description o f the equipment and instrumentation used in this research are summarized in Table 3.1. The vial samples for the measurements o f the concentration o f diesel in the w astew ater and in the liquid effluent w ere taken to the chrom atograph analysis. The bioparticles samples were taken to the "Advanced M icroscopy Facilities" at the Department o f Applied Chemistry and Biology for microscopy inspection. "Ryerson University Analytical Center " for gas

33

EQ U IPM EN T Column (Fluidized Bed) Feedwater Tank Liquid Flow M eter Air Flow Meter Feedwater Pump DO M eter's Probe DO Meter

D ESCR IPTIO N 170 ram diameter, 3.0 m in height, 73 L capacity 200 L capacity 1.0 - 6.0 L/min 4 - 4 5 L/min 14 HP, 1725 RPM YSI Model 5739 Probe YSI Model 58 Orbcco-Helige 975 MP

Colorimeter (Water Analysis System) COD Heater Block Turbidity Meter 1-15 Tube heater block Turbidity model 800 Perkin/Elmer AutoSystem XL Gas Chromatograph, Gas Chromatography Turbomass Software Renishaw Raman imaging Microscope WiRe `^ Microscopy (Windows-based Raman Environment) pH Meter pH Electrode Furnace HI 9025C pH Meter HI 123 OB pFI Electrode General-Purpose Furnace FB 1300 Model.

TABLE 3.1

DESCRIPTION OF THE EQUIPMENTS USED IN THIS RESEARCH

34

(A) Feed Tank (B) Column (C) Feeding pump (D) Flow m eter (E) Air Flow meter (F) Air distributor (G) Bed Support

A ir

In le t

(G)

Sewer /

(D)

-(C)

FIGURE 3.1

SCHEMATIC OF THE THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED BED I^EACTOR SET-UP

35

3.2.1 Three-Phase Fluidized Bed Bioreactor A pilot-scale fluidized bed bioreactor shown in Figure 3.3 was employed to obtain required experimental data. The reactor was divided into different parts including; liquid inlet, air inlet, air distributor, column, liquid drain, air outlet and recycle pipe. The liquid inlet was located at the bottom o f the reactor. This device is made o f PVC with pipes for the liquid exits. The liquid is pumped from the feedwater tank through a pump connected to a 20 mm (internal diameter) PVC pipe. The Mquid flow rate was adjusted using a liquid flow meter from 1 to 6 L/min. Compressed air was injected into the bioreactor, directly from the bottom o f the bed, through a U-tum pipe, which was necessary to prevent back flow o f liquid into the air flow meter, in case o f power faiure. A central air compressor, situated in the basement o f the Ryerson University building, supplied the air necessary for the experiments. Figure 3 .2 sho ws an actual picture o f the air-liquid device to distribute air and liquid into the column. The system was made o f a PVC material, with exception o f the copper tubing device (13 mm o f internal diameter) used for the injection o f air. Liquid entered the column through a PVC pipe 50 mm diameter. The liquid flows into the distributor and mixes with the air that is injected into the column. An air distributor plate (135 mm o f diameter) was placed at the end o f the air inlet. The air distributor plate was perforated with 1.9 mm holes that produced small and smooth air bubbles. The air leaves at the top o f the column through an 80 mm pipe. The reactor consists o f a straight constant diameter column made up o f Pyrex glass with an inner diameter o f 170 mm, 3.0 m in height, and 73 L capacity, with sampling ports installed

36

in

hûu-d :i'iJ hk'pa' î.k.'L"'- \,!nîpk'S i he

ol die column

vrt'-y^-i^CL'ncnr:: ,.ceu \'r'(.'.'*d27 m

A^r (b' M R ## mm #0

...................

MM
*

< #10

(IT)
FB':1iRr. 3 . : AIR AND L.RJDD) DiAl R ! H l : l l O N *N THE RFACT OK
(A ) : R O M ' V H A V

4H? ; f ) r A!* \v
Inc :rou!u a/cvcs inc column U-iouc!) j u;
: C C J : . | : A . O'! O A C C lC O .

lAt.' icv\cliuc pipeline i.Iku. rcluois lo il;c
X :im m i t l c i l'.'C ;U C (i u i

I H C I r Q U k i JlS O - IC -'A C ': U 'C S y C lC T U ll'ir u U c I '! 3 2 2

:hc !.>p

n-r -c n c b c . ..^ncic.cr CTumc/zc pipcimc v..k::\ l-jcnlvU ai ihc IxMRun ojHtc i'caci(.u\cnd

-' IS 'ACC i'-xsm us

ihc coinnin and a.\ n dtum in cmcrccuLA siiuanons.

Meshes were put in place to prevent particles from getting into the tank or falling to the lower part o f the column. The top o f the column was covered with an iron mesh to retain the solids from getting into the feeding tank. The lower part o f the column was covered with a stainless steel golden mesh filter to retain the 600 pm particles used for microorganisms immobilization. There were 8 sampling ports along the experimental unit from which liquid samples could be taken. However, only 3 sampling ports were used due to the configuration of the reactor. The sampling port # 1 (SP #1) was located at the bottom o f the feeding tank and it was used to take Equid san%>Ies. The sampling port # 2 (SP #2) is located at 250 mm from the air distributor and it was used to take liquid and bioparticles samples. The sampling port # 3 (SP #3) was located at the top o f the column and it was used for both liquid sampling and for bioparticles sampling from the upper part o f the column. Dissolved oxygen meter, pH meter and turbidity meter were placed in a table near the experimental unit for fast measurements. Liquid samples were taken from SP #1, SP #2 and SP #3 at fixed time intervals every day during operation. Full-scale view o f the experimental facilities and a detailed description o f the three-phase fluidized bed dimensions are shown in Figure 3.3 and Figure 3.4 respectively.

38

3;^
0

0 0 0

I '# M K 10#0 0 d # 0 0 K # g K ^ # g :# 1 N M w M B Ê UK u#

N*?tv: S r i Sampling (*oM ) FH.'LRF. 3.3 TUF: Kll.L-SCALK EQ^iPMKiM' ESED F(?K THE TXPERIMENTAL Ri:SEARCH

GAS SAHPtE VALVE «

+

--

GAS SAMPLE VALVE UQUID SAMPLE VALVE RECYCLE PfPE U Q U ro STAGNANT SAMPLE VALVE

tx3 4
IX -

D ·»1 7 0

UQUIP SAMPLE VALVE - LIQUID SAMPLE VALVE LIQUID SAMPLE VALVE UQUID SAMPLE VALVE
PARTICLE INLET

< ® JRDCSTRIBirrOR

GAS INLET

WATER INLET

TM REE M 1 F .T O J 1 S C Î4 1T 1'>' T T/15F'31'T'y
S O L a n iE M T E S

BED m O R E A C T O R
W A S T E W A T E R T E C H N O L O G IE S FCnRUARY

17. 2003

(Adapted from Cifuentes, 2003) FIGURE 3.4 THREE-PHASE FLUIDIZED BED DIMENSIONS

40

3.2.2 Biofilm S upport The biofiJm support used in this research was lava rock. Lava rock was mechanically crushed at the engineering facilities at Ryerson University prior to sieving to obtain an average particle diameter o f 600 pm. The solids were washed with distilled water and dried overnight at 103°C, and then added into the fluidized bed. A photograph o f the support particles used in the fluidized bed is shown in Figure 3.5 and properties o f the lava rock are shown m Table 3.2.

PARAM ETERS Average diameter, dp (pm) Particle density^ Pp (Kg/m^) Total particle weight, Wpt (g) Minimum fluidization velocity (cm/s) Porosity ° (%) " Cifuentes, 2003 Measured in water " Taken as volcMiite material. Adapted from Melin et al. 1998

VALUE 600 1790 1000 0.3 35.6

TABLE 3.2

LAVA ROCK CHARACTERISTICS

It is important to point out that lava rock was selected as the support particles due to the advantages that it gives for bacteria knmobHization. Properties such as a high porosity, adequate density and low cost were prioritized for the selection o f the support particle.

41

iXs-Xii'. :J

-

r;ai-.L. i'lJ. L:

1 1 '

:,ÿ U'j

% :

:1

-

Turbidity values were also monitored in this investigation. A Turbidity M eter Model 800 manufactured by VWR, INTERNATIONAL was used to measure the quality o f the feedwater and the liquid efQuent. The measured turbidity was assessed immediately after

the sample was taken in order to prevent particle flocculation and sedimentation. The measurement unit was in NTU (nephelometric turbidity units). The turbidity meter was pre calibrated with a solution o f turbidity 0 and 10, respectively. The technique for the turbidity measurements follows the same protocols for 2130 Turbidity used by Standard Methods for the Examination o f Water and Wastewater (APHA, 1998).

3.3 Analytical Methods The performance deterrnination, gas o f the TPFBR was evaluated using technique, and chemical oxygen demand solids determination.

chromatograph

suspended

Microscopy inspection was performed to determine the thickness o f the biofilm for the estimation o f the attached biomass concentration.

3.3.1 Chemical Oxygen Demand Determination Chemical oxygen demand (COD) is defined as the amount o f a specified chemical oxidant that reacts with the sample under certain conditions. The MICRO-COD test method developed by Bioscience, Inc. is used to determine COD o f the liquid samples. This method is based on a colorimetric technique, where the sample is digested with a solution o f dichromate ion (CrzO?^') oxidizing COD material in the sample. The method used was Test Kit No. 975-62 for high range COD between 100-4500 mg/L. The twist-cap vials were

44

1 '/if-

HK \ »IZK I'X ÂH' K .

/. K '^,

I i ?

3.3.2 Liquid-liquid extraction and Gas Chromatography Technique To assess a gas chromatography technique liquid -liquid extraction was performed to extract diesel from the liquid phase using a solvent. The liquid-liquid extraction technique follows similar protocol used by Environmental Protection Agency (EPA M ethod 8041). The solvent used for the extractions was dichloromethane (DCM), also known as ethylene chloride. To determine the unknown concentration o f diesel it was necessary to establish a calibration curve with known concentrations o f a modified Diesel Range Organics (DRO) and 5-Alpha Androstane as an internal standard (IS). Refer to Appendix A for a series o f chromatographs used at different diesel concentrations to assess the calibration curve. Samples o f feedwater and liquid effluent were taken at the feeding tank (SP #1) and at the top o f the column (SP #3) respectively. The samples were transferred to a 1 L separatory funnel where DCM was added. The separatory ftinnel was shaken for about 2 minutes. The lower organic layer was drawn from the bottom o f the flask, after it rested for 15 minutes, and then passed through a funnel containing a plug o f glass wool with 20 g o f anhydrous sodium sulfate. The samples ready for gas chromatographic analysis were transferred to an auto sampler vials with twist tops. The amount o f diesel isolated from feedwater a n i effluent samples was determined using a gas chromatograph coupled with a mass spectrometer. The total area o f peaks between Ci o to C 20 was considered to represent the to tal o f DRO.

3.3.3 M icroscopy Microscopy inspection was performed to determine the thickness o f the biofilms. This parameter is used to calculate the attached biomass concentration in the reactor. A Renishaw

46

Raman imaging M icroscope WiRe

(W indows-based Environment) was used in this

research to measure the thickness o f the biofilm. The bioparticles samples fi*om SP #2 and SP #3 were placed in crystal slides and taken to the "Advanced M icroscopy Facilities" at the Departm ent o f Applied Chemistry and Biology.

3.3.4 Total Suspended Solids Determ ination Total suspended solids are defined as those solids that are retained by the filter and dried to constant weight at 103-105 °C, and it represent the suspended biomass in the reactor. Measurement o f the total suspended solid follows the same protocol used for Standard M ethod for the Exanunation o f W ater and W astewater, 1998 (Test 2540). A well-mixed sample fi-om SP # 3 is filtered through a standard GF/F glass fiber filter disk. The residue retained on the filter is transferred to an inert aluminum dish and dried to constant temperature at 103-105 °C in a general-purpose Furnace FB 1 /OO.

3.4 Experim ental Procedure and Data Collection Experiments w ere carried out in four phases as previously mentioned. Preparation o f microorganism's inoculums and reactor start-up was carried out in Phase I. The first set o f experiments was perform ed in Phase II to evaluate the maximum concentration o f diesel able to be removed in the reactor in intermittent mode. The second set o f experiments was performed in Phase III to obtain data w ith respect to diesel biodégradation in steady state conditions. The third set o f experiments was carried out in Phase IV to evaluate losses o f diesel due to volatilization and adsorption.

47

3.4.1 Phase I: Preparation of Microorganisms Inoculum and Reactor Start-Up Procedure The experimental procedure used for microorganism's inoculums and reactor start-up is described as follows: 1. One kg o f clean lava rock was placed at the bottom o f the column. 2. Cold and hot water taps were opened simultaneously to create the desired water temperature. The water temperature was adjusted and kept constant throughout the experiment at 2ü±5 °C. 3. The feeding tank was filled with tap water at the desired temperature; nutrients and 50 mg/L o f diesel were added. The pH was set to 7.0±0.3 with the addition o f KaOH when it was required. The essential nutrients for bacterial growth are described in Table 3.3. 4. 5L o f fiesh biomass solids were collected from the first stage o f the Rotating Biological Contactor (RBC), and added to the column through the device located in SP #2. 5. The start-up operation was set at a minimum fluidization velocity o f 0.3 cm/s corresponding with a liquid volumetric flow rate o f approximately 4 L/min. The injection o f air at 1.0 cm/s (superficial velocity) increased the DO in the liquid phase. The system was set to work during batch conditions to ensure biofilm attachment into the support particles. 6. Every four hours, 1 L and 100 ml o f samples was taken from SP #1 and SP #2 for DO and pH measurements.

48

7. Renewal o f the feedwater was earned out approximately every three days. pH o f the synthetic wastewater feed was set at 7.0±0.2 with periodical addition o f NaOH upon need. 8. Ten Particle samples were taken from the middle region o f the fluidized bed (SP #2) for microscopy inspection every five days. Biomass growth was visually observed as gray and sometimes light gray coatings on the support particles. At this point the fluidized bed was set to work at intermittent mode (Phase II) with periodical additions o f diesel and nutrients.

NUTRIENT NH 4CI CaCb.ôHzO MgCl2.4H20 Na2lIP04

AMOUNT (g) 15.4 0.06
0 .1 2

NUTRIENT KH2PO4 MgS04.7H20 FeS04.7H20 NaCl

AMOUNT (g)
6.1 1.2

0.06 30.5

61.0

TABLE 3.3

ESSENTIAL NUTRIENTS ADDED INTO THE REACTOR FOR BACTERIAL GROWTH OF DIESEL DEGRADING ORGANISMS

49

F' ne

developed oo rhe elciss ..Invînu b-ilcii i.^peruuon

a#

1...
jhî
.

m (A) iB)

i K ;i RF 3d)

MK RO O R <B \\;xM S (NU( I l IM S
p/t) MKSl' STACF t)F THF KOI ATIM,' 0K.H.< KJC AF

COISTACTOR (RWC) <a> LOWKk PAR ! OF ! !*! Kl l ÎDIZEB RFD

3 4 /2 Phaïse H : R o c t o r U p e r a M u n u) k k ic r m ilte u n M *)de Àl dit' end o f ihe c n lliv n h o n r e ii o d . ih e s y s ic m ^\-ns se l k.f vvoik n! h n ernuu en ; n \ ) ü e e/jiheu; t'cc\'e.linu oiki w k b dudv udUiuons o 'A u e s è l JitW üuinent;> )n d u s phusc diesel eou^èziiret.cn:; w ere gieidnal!} Increased m ord er io nxsesx H'e inexùnorn dicsei. eoncend'uCio!,' diù.; ean l-e rem oved in die renelor. B \ e r y du.v rhe reneioi w;w cliaryed w u h fresn. :é c d \w u e r ineréusine

(he ninounl ofdicsel. The expcriinenln! procedure is dcse' ihed os lôlk'W

L Day one: 75 mg/L o f diesel and nutrients were added into the fluidized bed. The reactor was set to the new operating conditions of: -Liquid superficial velocity was set to 0.02 cm/s corresponding to a flow rate o f 0.3 L/min. -Air superficial velocity was kept to 1 cm/s. -The experimental unit was set to work at once-through process at the hydraulic detention time o f approximately 4 hours. 2. Samples o f 100 ml, 50 ml, IL, and 100 ml were taken from the feedwater (SP #1) for determining diesel concentrations, COD, DO and pH measurements respectively. 3. After two hours o f operation, 1 L and 100 ml samples were taken from SP #2 for DO and pH inspection, respectively. Tills procedure was repeated one hour later. 4. After five hours o f operation 100 ml, 50 ml, 1 L, and 100 ml samples were taken fi^om the liquid efiQuent (SP #3) for determination o f diesel concentrations, COD, DO and pH measurements, respectively. 5. Day two: 140 mg/L o f diesel and also nutrients were added into the system folloi^nng the same operating conditions and the same nutrient composition. The sampling followed the same procedure explained fi-om point 2 to 4. 6. Day three: The same amount o f 140 mg/L o f diesel and nutrients were added into the reactor. Diesel concentrations in the feedwater were gradually increased up to 700 mg/L during 12 days o f intermittent operation. The sampling

procedure was same as that explained from point 2 to 4 for day one o f operation.

51

Figure 3.10 shows the diesel concentrations during the 12 days o f intermittent operation. These concentrations were chosen based on the RBC performance during treatment of wastewater contaminated with diesel.

*00 T 700 bf) 600 6 500 % 400 1 i u 300 200 100

! DiescL Concentrations in the Feedwater

Î
S

M O

M O

1I
2 .1

I
4

--

M O

M O

M

^

3 i i I
.S 6 7 X Day.s o t Operation

1 0

11

12

FIGURE 3.10 DIESEL CONCENTRATIONS DURING INTERMITTENT MODE

The maximum diesel concentration that can be removed in the reactor at the operating conditions and with the biofilm formed is experimentally determined during intermittent mode.

3.4,3 Phase ÏÏI: R eactor O peration a t Steady State The fluidized bed was set to work at steady state with daily addition o f the maximum concentration o f diesel that can be removed in the reactor (determined in Phase IF). To obtain steady state data (hydrodynamic and biofilm parameters) the experimental procedure is described as follow: 1. 1 he reactor was set to treat the mtiximum concentration o f diesel that the reactor could remove at the following operating conditions:
52

-Liquid superficial velocity o f 0.02 cm/s. -Air superficial velocity was kept to 1 cm/s (superficial velocity) -Hydraulic detention time o f 4 hours. 2. Diesel concentrations, COD, DO, pH and tem perature w ere m onitored following the same procedure explained from point 2 to 4 in intermittent mode. 3. For the m icroscopy measurement o f biofilm thickness, ten bioparticles w ere taken from both the middle region o f the fluidized bed and from the top o f the reactor (SP #2, SP #3). 4. To determine the total suspended solids, 100 ml o f the liquid sample were taken from SP #3. The turbidity was determined by taking 100 ml o f the feedwater and the liquid effluent (SP #1 and SP #3). 5. This experiment was repeated for 5 days o f steady state following the same operating conditions and repeating the same procedure explained from 2 to 4.

3.4.4 Phase IV: Validation o f Diesel Biodégradation To examine the am ount o f diesel that could be volatilized in the reactor, four experiments were run following the same operating conditions than in intermittent m ode. During the performance o f these experiments, the fluidized bed reactor was operated as follows; 1. Initially, one K g o f clean lava rock was placed at the bottom o f the column. No microorganisms were added into the reactor. 2. Cold and hot w ater taps w ere opened simultaneously to create the desired w ater tem perature o f 20±5 ®C. The operating conditions w ere set at; -Liquid superficial velocity o f 0.02 cm/s

53

-Air superficial velocity o f 1 cm/s. -Hydraulic detention time o f 4 hours. -Dissolved oxygen concentrations were kept in the same range o f operation during intermittent mode (4 -8 mg/L). 3. A known amount o f diesel (100 mg/L) was added to the reactor eveiy day during six weeks to achieve equilibrium between adsoqjtion o f the diesel into the lava rock. 4. After six weeks, a set o f four experiments was carried out varying the diesel concentrations in the feedwater. Samples were taken for gas chromatography inspection fi^om both the feedwater and liquid effluent.

54

CHAPTER FOUR INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION OF EXPERIMENTAL DATA

Tlie experimental data w ere obtained when the acclimatizing period o f the microorganisms was achieved and it was visually observed immobilized on the support particle. The experimental values were obtained from three groups o f experiments. G ro u p 1 refers to the experimental values obtained during Phase II o f this research: R eactor operation in intermittent mode. => G ro u p 2 refers to the experimental values obtained during Phase III: R eactor operation at steady state. => G ro u p 3 refers to the experimental values obtained during Phase IV: Validation o f the biodégradation o f diesel. Interpretation and discussion o f the experimental data will fhllow the same order mentioned before.

55

4.1 Interpretation of the Experimental Results Obtained in Phase II: Reactor Operation in Intermittent Mode The experimental data analyzed in this section correspond to the set o f ejq^eriments carried out during the days 1 to 12 o f intermittent mode. Following the 3-months batch acclimatizing period, diesel and bacterial nutrients were introduced in the reactor every day during 12 days. The; diesel-loading rate during intermittent mode can be seen in Figure 4.1.

I 4
§3:5 Ü 3

^ 4.5 4

H Diesel Loading Rale

I

O 1.5 4

% 1^ g 0.5
0
1  2  3 I 4 I 5 I 6 ! 7 8 9

10

11

12

Time (Days of Operation)

FIGURE 4.1

DIESEL LOADING RATES DURING THE 12 DAYS OF INTERMITTENT MODE

As a general remark related with the reactor start-up procedure, it should be pointed out that the nature o f the inoculums and fluidization conditions govern the adhesion o f

microorganism into the lava rock. The duration of the 3 months acclimatizing period was considered excessive for industrial applications, where short start-ups are required. The reactor apparently showed good operational characteristics, but a power blackout in the Toronto area (August 2003) led to the shutdown o f the reactor for 7 hours. As a result, the

56

reactor did not receive enough oxygen and septic conditions occurred in the reactor. This problem was overcom e with the injection o f two liters o f fresh biomass collected from the rotating biological contactor and the re-establishment o f the injection o f air. The favorable conditions for m icroorganism 's grow th were reached after tw o weeks o f the shutdown. The diesel was fed at an initial loading rate o f 0.43 Kg diesel/m^day (69 mg/L o f diesel at a flow rate o f 0.3 L/min) and was gradually increased throughout 12 days o f continuous operation until the diesel loading rate reached a value o f 4.33 Kg diesel/m^day (693 mg/L o f diesel). The objective o f these experiments was to investigate the maximum concentration o f diesel that could be rem oved with the biofilm formed and at the operating conditions shown in Table 4,1.

PA RAM ETER Ul Ug
T

V A LU E 0.02 cm/s 1 cm/s 4 hours 0.43-4.33 Kg diesel/m^day 550-4000 mg/L

Diesel Load Range COD Concentration Range

TABLE 4.1

OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS DURING INTERMITTENT MODE

Figure 4.2 show s the percent o f diesel removed versus the diesel-loading rate during 12 days o f intermittent mode. Removal efficiencies up to 100% were achieved, when the diesel loading rate varied betw een 0.4-- 1.2 K g diesel/m^day corresponding to diesel concentrations in the range o f 70-200 mg/L. Within the range o f the aforem entioned concentrations the 57

operation o f the experimental facility was very stable and the diesel concentration in the liquid effluent was always lower than 0.5 mg/L. Breakthrough o f diesel was detected in the effluent after 6 days at a diesel-loading rate of 1.5 Kg diesel/m^day. At a higher dieselloading rate o f 2.0-4.3 Kg diesel/m^day, corresponding to a diesel concentration in the range of 350-700 mg/L, the removal efficiencies dropped up to 10%. At higher concentrations, the operation in the reactor became unstable and the diesel concentrations and chemical oxygen demand increased progressively. As an important remark, it should be pointed out that very high diesel removal efficiencies o f 100% were achieved at a very low hydraulic detention time o f 4 hours.
100 90 80 70 60 50 "A % D iesel Removed D iesel Loading Rate

r 5

"A

4.5 4

.8
S

40
20
10

-

1 II I » I

-3

a
i

M ^

r

|

30 -

A"
4 5

.A
6 7 8 9
10 11

k 1.5 % ^ s A hi
0.5

0
12

-0
Time (Day of Operation)

FIGURE 4.2

PERCENT OF DIESEL REMOVED AND DIESEL LOADING RATE DURING INTERMITTENT MODE

Higher concentrations o f diesel in the liquid phase and in the biofilm surrounding could lead to a metabolic inhibition o f the cells decreasing the specific conversion rate (Rittmann and McCarty, 2001 and Lai and Shieh, 1997). Inhibitors can affect either an enzyme active for substrate utilization or it can affect cell function such as respiration. This phenomenon can

58

cause reduced biomass levels that m ay slow degradation o f the substrate. Rittm an and M cCarty (2001) have indicated that self-inhibition is a common type o f inhibition for microorganisms in the presence o f high concentrations o f aromatic hydrocarbons. The formation o f white-foam products know n as soluble microbial products (SM P), observed near the distributor o f the fluidized bed, was taken as a sign o f biodégradation processes. Lai and Shieh (1997) agree that microorganisms besides consuming substrate and producing new biomass will also generate SMP that can cause a white color or foam in the reactor. Overall removal efficiency as a flmction o f the chemical oxygen demand concentrations o f the feedwater is presented in Figure 4.3.

too
90 80 H S 70 60 50 40 4 30 Jk ^ "A - A g - % COD Removed - COD Concentration t M Ê A . %'  ' i \ % A -  %
X

4500 4000 3500 3000 2500 ^ "à -3

I

JL -

o

§

2000
1500 500 0

S

20
10 H 0
1 2 3 4

1000 Q
U

U o

i

5

6

1

8

9

10

11

12

Time (Day o f Operation)

FIGURE 4.3

PERCENT OF COD REMOVED AND COD CONCENTRATIONS DURING INTERMITTENT MODE

59

The COD o f the feedwater is mainly composed o f nutrients and diesel. As shown in Figure 4.3, removal efBciencies around 90 % were achieved when the COD o f the feedwater ranged between 500 and 2500 mg/L. The COD removal efiBciency dropped up to 30 % for COD values around 4000 mg/L. As noted earlier, the COD removal efBciencies were obtained at a low hydrauhc detention time o f 4 hours. Biological aerobic oxidation o f hydrocarbons is a complex process that can be affected by various parameters such as dissolved oxygen concentrations, pH and temperature. It is well known that the DO concentrations ranging between 2 and 4 mg/L are favorable for aerobic processes. MetCalf and Eddy, 2003 and Rittmann and McCarty, 2001, support this statement. In this research DO concentration in the feedwater was kept above 8 mg/L to ensure that enough dissolved oxygen is available for aerobic biological oxidation o f the substrate. Figure 4.4 shows the dissolved oxygen variation during intermittent mode. As we can see, DO concentration drops considerably at the lower section o f the fluidized bed suggesting both dissolved oxygen utilization for oxidation o f the substrate (diesel) and an increase in aerobic biological activity. The oj^gen concentrations increase again at the liquid efiBuent due to the injection o f air near the distributor. Diesel biological oxidation and the COD utilization during Phase I was observed at DO concentration between 4-10 mg/L. Thus, the oxygen was not a limiting Actor for microbial activity during the degradation o f the diesel and during COD utilization. These results are in agreement with Karapinar and Kargi (1996) and Metcalf and Eddy, 2003 who believe that this is one o f the main advantages o f the TPFBR, which overcomes oxygen transfer problems encountered in both activated sludge processes and tricking jSlters.

60

12
IG

-

-

*

-

-

A

-

-

-

-

A

A -

- i

A

è

J

§
2DO Feedwater - Near The Distributor - A - E (Huent

6

7

8

10

11

12

T im e (D ay o f O peration)

FIGURE 4.4 DISSOLVED OXYGEN DURING INTERM ITTENT MODE

It should be also noted that the DO concentrations o f the liquid effluent are above 6 mg/L. This indicates that the discharge o f this effluent into rivers o r estuaries is not considered to be a hazard for aquatic life because it is no t depleted o f oxygen. Another important factor to consider in aerobic biological oxidation is the pH. Figure 4.5 shows the pH o f the feedw ater and the liquid effluent during the 12 days o f intermittent mode. The pH was controlled at 7.5±0.3 in the feedwater and it was found to decrease along the reactor. It is important to point out that complete biological aerobic oxidation tends to increase the pH in fluidized biofilm process, and in other processes where biofilm teclinology is applied. The results obtained in this research suggest the presence o f extracelluW products like fatty acids resulting jhom the microbial utilization o f straight-chain hydrocarbons (Atlas, 1984).

61

8
7.8 7.6 7.4 % 7.2 7 - Fecdwaler
6.8
-

-A

* -A
"A
- A ~ EfHwcnt

6.6

A
5 6 7 8

10

11

12

Tim e ( Day o f Operation)

FIGURE 4.5

PH DURING INTERMITTENT MODE

Metcalf and Eddy (2003) have suggested that for treated effluent discharged to the environment the allowable pH range varies from 6.5 to 8.5. In this investigation the pH o f the liquid effluent is still within the aforementioned recommendation that is between 6.5 and 7.5. This effluent is not considered to be hazardous to the environment. The temperature is another factor to count m aerobic processes. M etCalf and Eddy (2003) have indicated that the most favorable temperature range for aerobic oxidation lies between 15 to 30 °C. During this experiment, the temperature was always kept above 15 °C up to 25 °C. It was well established that 1.2 Kg diesel/raMay (200 mg/L) was the maximum load that could be removed in the reactor with no detectable diesel concentration in the effluent.

62

4.2 In te rp re ta tio n o f th e ex p erim en tal results o b tain ed in P h a se III; R e a c to r O p e ratio n a t S tead y S tate To collect both steady-state data on diesel biodégradation, and to evaluate biofilm thickness to estimate the attached biomass concentration, the reactor was set to treat 200 m g/L o f diesel (1.2 Kg diesel/ m^day) on day 13 through day 17. Diesel concentration, COD

concentrations, DO concentration, pH, total suspended solids, turbidity and biofilm thickness were m easured in every run. A constant rate o f diesel was added to the feedwater, and diesel concentrations in the effluent showed 100% o f removal at all times (Figure 4.6). Also, the COD values in this phase w ere around 1200 mg/L. The COD rem oval efficiencies were higher than 95 %. The percent o f diesel rem oved and the percent o f COD removed are shown in Figure 4.6 and 4.7 respectively. In this phase, steady state conditions prevail, that is the processes in the biofilm (endogenous metabolism, cell maintenance, cell losses due to shear) are balanced.

100

1.5 1.4

1

1

90

I Î
80 70 60 50 13 14 15 Time (Day o f Operation) 16 17

" i" i
% Diesel Removed - Diesel Loading Rate

I ' l l 0.8 .5 W
0 .7 «

0.6
0.5

FIGURE 4.6

PERCENT D IESEL REMOVED AND DIESEL I.OADING RATE DURING STEADY STATE

63

1200 E
1000 o 800 " % COD Removed - m - COD Feedwater 400 I

g

I

200
13 14 15 Time (Day of Operation) 16 17

8

FIGURE 4.7

PERCENT COD REMOVED AND COD CONCENTRATIONS DURING STEADY STATE

The dissolved oxygen concentration foMows the same trend than in Phase II. Figure 4.8 shows the DO concentrations versus height o f the reactor on day 13 trough days 17. In this figure, SP #2 and SP #3 are considered to be at 25 cm and 280 cm above the distributor respectively.

1
§ 6 Î
I

O

D ay 13 D ay 16

--n -- Day 14 --O-- D ay 17

D ay 15

i s -n5.5

o

0

25 Heiglit (cm)

280

FIGURE 4.8

DISSOLVED OXYGEN VERSUS HEIGHT OF THE REACTOR

64

pROPurrYOF RYESSOa USmV

Dissolved oxygen concentrations around 7.5 mg/L w ere kept in the feedwater, and it dropped near the distributor (SP #2) due to an increase in aerobic biological activity, DO increased w ith high due to aeration. The effluent produced has approximately 7.0 mg/L o f dissolved oxygen. The fluidized bed does not behave as an activated sludge processes where the biomass is suspended in the liquid phase; in this experiment the biomass was visually observed attached to the solid support. This statement can be seen in the total suspended solids values that were collected from the effluent. Values o f total suspended solids can be seen in Figure 4.9. As we can see in this figure, suspended solids average o f 0.9 g/L where found in the effluent. The low production o f suspended biomass, suspended floes and sludge represent one o f the main advantages o f this technology over other attached biomass processes.

s 0 .8
§

0.6

-

Total Suspended Solids
f 0 .2 -

T im e (D a y o f O pcralion)

FIGURE 4.9

TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS AT STEADY STATE

The turbidity values m easured as N TU (nephelometric turbidity units) were collected at the feedwater and liquid effluent during days 13 through 17 and it is shown in Figure 4.10. The maximum value o f turbidity for an effluent to be discharged into the environments is around 65

10 NTU. In this investigation was observed a good quality effluent with average value o f turbidity o f 5 NTU. This effluent does not constitute a potential hazard for the environment.

14

12

t
'P

lO

A
A - -

8 64 A
4 A A - A · EfFIuent

Feedwater - A -

13

14

15 Time (Day o f Operation)

16

17

FIGURE 4.10 TURBIDITY VALUES DURING STEADY STATE

In general, the bed o f bioparticles did not show homogeneous biofilm thickness in every section o f the reactor. Particles with thicker biofilm where observed at the top o f the reactor and particles with thinner biofilm where observed at the bottom o f the reactor. Thus, it appears that turbulence, shear stress, and high particle collisions in the lower part o f the reactor, could cause the formation o f thin biofilms. This phenomenon was observed by Schreyer and Coughlin (1999) and Trinet et al. (1991). The expanded height o f the fluidized bed gradually increased throughout the first 12 days o f continuous operation showing different region depending on the biofilm thickness. Biofilm with a thickness between 50-700 pm (average) were observed microscopically. A microscopy photograph o f the bioparticles can be observed in Figures 4.11 and 4.12. Figure 4.11 shows a microscopic view o f active biofilms developed in the lower part o f the reactor.

66

Figure 4.12 shows a microscopic view o f active biofilms developed in the upper part o f the reactor. The nature o f the biofilm and their microbial composition is not covered in this study. However, it is important to note that aerobic attached growth processes have more complex microbial ecology than the activated sludge processes (M etCalf and Eddy, 2003). At steady state, values o f biofilm tllickness, total suspended solids and turbidity were collected. As we can see in Table 4.2 bioparticles with a thickness between 50-700pm, treated approximately 1.2 kg diesel/m^day, with no detectable diesel concentrations at the liquid effluent. The COD is reduced fiom 1300 mg/L to 65 mg/L witlfin a hydraulic detention time o f 4 hours. Good quality effluent, with turbidity value around 5 NTU and a low production o f suspended solids o f 0.9 g/L were achieved at steady state.

PA R A M ET ER Bioparticle thickness (average) Total Suspended Solids (average) Diesel Loading rate Feed Diesel Concentration (average) Effluent Diesel Concentration Hydraulic Detention Time NTU Effluent (average) COD Feedwater (average) COD Effluent (average) Diesel Removed

STEADY-STATE VALUE 50-700 pm 900 mg/1 1.2 kg diesel/m^d 190 mg/L ND" 4 hours 5.4 1300 mg/1 65 mg/1 100 %

TABLE 4.2

BIOFILM PROPERTIES AND HYDRODYNAMIC PARAMETERS AT STEADY STATE OPERATION

67

-400 i
308-

30#

?*;»

too

100

200

300

^00
100-

! -IRO-ZOO

-3 0 0

SS.ITORT

I K

4U U too
208

300

200

-100

0

100

/no

oio

400

100-

!H W ^nu 30&

'1,(1

:^v5(

i 'âStàli

TSK'/'

##CK

; ;rri.K r.\K r o r l'HK Rr.A('TOR

.

jüH

4H #

" ^ O O 'O sp c :T .; b^op.:,;ikoO

i r u i a r 402

K W S C O ^ V O ü O T f X ' iR s r H 0(' \ r n . \ ' R

\ f LOMO^

nO':. MOi:H p.^.RT O^ :1 0 . [0 0 \( HO-i

As mentionated before, bioparticles stratified in the fluidized bed, this phenomenon lead to the formation o f three visible regions along the column. 1. Region I: Dense Bed 2. Region II: Stratified Bed 3. Region III; Dispersed Bed A photograph o f the reactor in operation and the formation o f these regions can be seen in Figure 4.13. This figure also displays the regions' length, visible bioparticles, floes, and air bubbles developed in the reactor. The Region I, located above the air distributor up to 25-30 cm along the column, is characterized by particles sparsely covered by biofilm and it had the appearance o f no biofilm immobilized on it. Particles with thinner biofilm and the highest settling velocity were observed in this region, where shear stress, turbulence, and particles collisions were present. The thickness o f these bioparticles was found to be around 50 pm (average). In Region II, the particles were noticeably larger and the biofihn was visually observed as dark and light coating in the lava rock. In this region lava rock appears to be completely covered by a large layer o f biofilm. In this region the turbulence was lower and it could have permitted much thicker biofilm to develop on the lava rock. However, sampling was not possible in this region due to the characteristics o f the column (glass wall). It was visuaUy noticed in Region III, at the upper part o f the reactor, larger bioparticles, floes and biofilm covering the glass o f the column. Particles with thicker biofilm and lowest settling velocity were observed in this region. The thickness o f these bioparticles was found to be around 700 pm. The lower shear at the top o f the bed permitted the formation o f large biomass floes containing embedded particle grains. These large floes f particles were most

70

susceptible to washout because o f their large cross-sectional area. When particles washed out o f the column, they returned to the feedwater tank, and then returned into the column through pumping. Although particles were considered spheres, irregularities on the shape could lead to a formation o f filamentous in the biofilm as observed in the microscopic photograph in Figure 4.11. In general, the bed behavior was dominated by an unstable stratification due to solids mixing. This phenomenon is undesirable in the reactor because it tends to even out the film thickness throughout the bed. It is important to note that although uniforms holes (1.9 mm) in the air distributor system were used a multi-bubble system was observed. Bubbles o f near the distributor region were small and smooth. As the bubbles rose, they coalescenced and broke-out forming a bigger bubble size o f lower interfacial area. Accurate and simple predictions o f bubble-rise velocity and size distribution proved to be complex during the operating conditions established in this study (low gas hold-up for optimal iiquid-solids contact). Table 4.3 shows the characteristics o f the regions formed in the TPFBR. PA R A M ET ER Bed Height R EG IO N I R E G IO N II NA Biofilm: Visually observed Bubbles: Larger than Region I R EG IO N in NA Biofilm: Visually observed Bubbles: Larger than Region I and Region II NA

250-300 mm
Biofilm: Not visually observed

Characteristics

Bubbles: Small and Smooth

:B io fil m Thickness (pm) Note: NA, not available TABLE 4.3

50

700

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE REGIONS FORMED IN THE REACTOR

71

I
*

4.2.1 Estim ation o f the A ttached Biom ass Concentration U sing Uarachi's M odel The simfluiSp software developed by Larachi et al. (2000) was used for predicting bed porosity and hold-ups o f solids, liquid and air. predicted once Larachi's M odel w as validated. The param eters used for the estimation o f the hold-ups (Ss, in the fluidized bed is summarized in Table 4.4. PA RAM ETER Column Cross Sectional A rea (m^) Biofitei Thickness (m) Biofilm Wet density (Kg/m^) Biofilm Dry Density (Kg/m"*) Clean Particle Density (Kg/m^) Sphericity Factor o f Bioparticles (-) Type o f System (-) Clean Particle Diameter (m) W eight o f Clean Particles (Kg) Superficial Gas Velocity (m/s) Superficial Liquid Velocity (m/s) Liquid Surface Tension (Kg/s^) Liquid Viscosity (Kg/m.s) Liquid Density (Kg/m^) Gas Viscosity (Kg/m.s) Gas Density (Kg/m^) V A LU E 0.0227 Variable 1020 1170 1790 1 Foaming (2) 0.0006 1 0.01 0.0002 0.072 0.001 1000 0.0000125 1.2 SY M BO L A 8 Pwb Pdb
Pp
71

The attached biomass concentration was

sl.

Eg) and biomass concentration

(-) dp Wp.
Ug

Ul
OL

ftl Pi
ftg Pg

TABLE 4.4

PARAM ETER USED IN SIM FLUI3P AND FOR PREDICTION OF THE BIOMASS CONCENTRATION

73

Following the procedure discussed in section 2.2.5 The bioparticle diameter using 50 and 700 pm thickness o f biofilm is: dbp= dp+20 dbp=0.0007m for bioparticles with 50 pm o f thickness and, dbp=0.002 m for bioparticles with 700 pm o f thickness (7)

And the bioparticle density was estimated as:
pbp=Pp(l+20/dp)"^ + p w b [l-(l+ 2§/d p )'^ ] (6)

Pbp= 1505.74 K,g/m^ for bioparticles with 50 pm o f thickness and, pbp= 1040.79 Kg/m^ for bioparticles with 700 pm o f thickness These results seem to agree with the postulate that the biomass growth decreases the overall density o f the particles. Bioparticles with density o f 1040.79 Kg/m" migrate to the top o f the bed, although the high solids mixing modified this tendency making them return to the middle part o f the column. The hydrodynamic parameters obtained by simfluiSp are presented in Table 4.5 and in Appendix E.

PA RA M ETER Bed Porosity (e) Gas Hold-up (eg) Liquid Hold-up (et) Solids Hold-up (e^)

B IO PA RTICLES O F 50 pm O F THICK N ESS 0.856 0.355 0.501 0.144

BIO PA R TIC LES O F 700 pm O F TH IC K N ESS 0.758 0.179 0.579 0.242

UNIT (-) (-) (-) (-)

TABLE 4.5

HYDRODYNAMIC PARAMETERS

74

To validate the param eters obtained by simfluiSp (hold-ups Es, El, Eg), the estimated Sg is compared with the Eg that can be calculated from the observed fluidized height for Region I, using the following equation: Eg =(W p/ H Pp A) (1 + 25/dp) " (4)

Particles in Region I form ed a bed o f fluidized particles between 25 and 30 cm from the air distributor. The estim ated and experimental solids hold-up (Sg) for bioparticles from Region I is shown in Table 4.6.

BIOPARTICLE DIAM ETER 700 pm

ESTIMATED % 0.144

EXPERIM ENTAL E g 0.156

TABLE 4.6

ESTIM ATED AND EXPERIMENTAL SOLIDS HOLD-UP

The estimated Eg is in accordance w ith the experimental Eg with a relative error o f 8%. The fluidization param eters developed by Larachi's M odel are capable o f predicting the bed porosity w ith good accuracy. The simulated bed porosity for both bioparticles with 700 and 2000 pm o f diameter is used for the calculation o f the attached biomass concentration in the reactor. The procedure used to predict the biomass concentration in the reactor was discussed in section 2.2.5 and it is also shown in Figure 2.4 (Flow chart to predict the biomass concentration in the three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor). The biomass concentration, X, which is defined as dry weight o f biomass per unit volume o f bed, is predicted using the follo wing equation.

75

x= pdb (i- e) [1- (dp/dbp)l

(5)

Minimum and maximum thickness o f 50 pm and 700 pm produce a total biomass concentration (attached) between 0.50 and 97
qPL

respectively. Based on the results

displayed before, it can be assumed that an average biomass concentration o f 49 g/L is found along the reactor column. The total biomass concentration (attached) o f 49 g/L is higher than the total suspended sohd (0.9 g/L) found for steady state during phase III o f this research. Tins result shows a good reactor performance where obviously diesel degradation was mainly performed by the attached biomass. Table 4.7 lists total biomass concentrations values determined from several biofilm systems treating different types o f wastewaters. Trinet et al. (1991) found biofilm thickness o f 1.8 and 12 pm that produced a 14-212 gfL o f biomass concentrations with approximately 6500 o f clean paiticles. In other studies, including this one, the biomass concentrations were found to be strongly dependent o f the density o f the bioparticles and the operating conditions. Ozturk et al. (1994) also encountered this problem.

REFERENCE Trinet et al. (1991) Hermanowicz and Cheng (1983) Ozturk et al. (1994)

BIOMASS CONCENTRATIONS (g/1) 14-212

COMMENTS Wpt=6661, COD removal. Thickness o f 1.8 and 12 pm

4-24

Denitrification with support particles o f dp=0.5 mm

3-23

COD removal treating 1960-3500 mg/L, thickness o f 9-108 pm

TABLE 4.7

BIOMASS CONCENTRATION DETERMINED BY OTHER INVESTIGATORS

76

4.3 Interpretation o f the Experim ental Results O btained in Phase IV: Validation of Diesel Biodégradation A set o f four experiments was performed, with clean particles and without microorganism following the same operating conditions, to validate diesel volatilization in presence o f diffusive air. It was considered that losses in the system occur by air stripping due to injection o f the air at 0.01 m/s. A dsorption o f diesel into the packing material was considered negligible due to the reactor was working during 3 months w ith periodical addition o f diesel. Furtherm ore affer this time the support particle became saturated with diesel. The results (Figure 4.14) show that for diesel concentration o f 255 mg/L there is a 120 mg/L o f diesel at the liquid efiQuent, showing that 50 % o f the diesel w as volatilized in the presence o f air. For higher concentration o f diesel in wastew ater (1038 and 1051 mg/L), there is a 37 % o f diesel volatilized in the system.

60 "S 50 1 40

800

700 g

 g

600 w

"o

500 .2 400 -g 300 I
Percent o f D ie se l V olatalizcd D iesel Concentration Effluent

> 30 " 33

§

.S 20 Q 5? 10
0
255 397

200

§

100 I 0 «

1038

1051

D iesel Concentration Feedwater (m g/L)

FIGURE 4.14

DIESEL VOLATILIZATION IN THE REACTOR

The results show that average 45 % o f the diesel is volatilized in the presence o f difiiisive air, and 55 % o f the diesel is biodegraded along the reactor. The results obtained in this research are in accordance for the use o f the three-phase fluidized bed aerobic reactor using volatilized component found by Flanagan (1998) and Gonzalez et al. (2001). As a summary o f this research, it is important to note that bioparticles with a diameter between 700-2000 |rm produced an average biomass concentration o f 49 g/L, The reactor treated approximately 1.2 kg diesel/m^day, with no detectable diesel concentrations at the liquid effluent. The COD was reduced from 1300 mg/L to 65 mg/L at a hydraulic detention time o f 4 hours. A good quality effluent, wdtli turbidity value around 5.4 NTU and low production o f suspended solids o f 0.9 g/L were achieved. The diesel removed due to biodégradation and volatilization was 100 %. The diesel removed due to biodégradation processes was 55 %. A Summary o f selected parameters for steady state operation can be seen in Table 4.8.

78

PA RA M ETER Bioparticle Diam eter (average) Total Suspended Solids (average) Fluidized Height o f Bioparticles (stable) Feed Flow Rate Diesel Loading Rate Feed Diesel Concentration (average) EfiQuent Diesel Concentration Hydraulic D etention Time Superficial Air velocity Superficial Liquid velocity N T U Effluent (average) COD Feedw ater (average) COD Effluent (average) Biomass Concentration (estimated) Diesel Removed Diesel Biodegraded N ote: N D , not detected TABLE 4.8

ST E A D Y -ST A T E V A LU E 700-2000 pm 900 mg/1 25-30 cm 0. 3 L/min 1.2 kg dieseVm^d 190 mg/L ND 4 hours 1. 0 cm/s 0.02 cm/s 5.4 1300 mg/L 65 mg/L 49 000 mg/L 100 % 55%

SUMMARY O F SELECTED PARAMETERS O F STEADY STATE OPERATION

79

4.4 Sources of E rrors During the collection o f the experimental data, sources o f variability were identified in the COD measurements and the liquid-liquid extraction technique. COD measurements were taken by triplicate and samples varied approximately 10 %, a mean value was taken as a representative value. Tliis variability is due to the characteristics o f the sample. Liquid and Liquid extraction showed efBciencies o f approximately 17 %. The extracted diesel samples were not stored due to its volatility; losses o f diesel could be present during the handling and procedure. There are parameters that could affect the accuracy o f the estimated bed porosity and phase's hold-ups for bioparticles. These include: 1. Inaccuracy in the measurements o f biofilm tllickness. 2. Inaccuracy in the measurement o f fluidized height o f bioparticles. The above sources o f error could be quite significant and their elimination will require further research. However, the agreement between measured and predicted values is certainly acceptable for quality work. The deviation between predicted and measured value is 8%.

80

CHAPTER FIVE CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDA TIONS

5.1 C O N C L U SIO N S A three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor was used for the aerobic rem ediation o f dieselcontaminated wastew ater. The following conclusions can be draw n from this research. 1 A good reactor performance and good quality effluent w ith no detectable diesel concentration was achieved in the reactor. Low turbidity values (5.4 N TU ), low chemical oxygen demand (65 mg/1) and low production o f suspended solids (0.9 g/L) were attained. 2 Biofilm properties and hydrodynamic param eters at steady-state can be used for industrial scale up fluidized beds for treating diesel-contaminated wastew ater. 3 Diesel removal efficiencies o f 100 % were obtained at a very low hydraulic detention time o f 4 hours. 4 5 55 % o f diesel is rem oved due to biodégradation processes. An average o f 49 g/L o f biomass was developed in the reactor. This value is higher than that found in activated sludge.

81

6 The diesel biodégradation rate appeared to be limited by microbial inhibition rather than oxygen availability, suggesting that there may be opportunities for process improvement. 7 The microorganisms used in the fluidized bed can successfully carry out biodégradation o f diesel and it could be extended for remediation o f hydrocarboncontaminated sites. 8 The dynamic behavior o f the three-phase fluidized bed reactor was simulated by combining simfluidSp software and weft knows biofilms correlation. The procedure developed in this research was capable o f predicting the biomass concentration in the reactor with good accuracy. The relative error is 8 %.

82

5.2 R E C O M M E N D A T IO N S AN D FU T U R E W O R K Three-phase fluidized bed bioreactors are a relatively new technology when applied to w astew ater treatm ent technologies. The recom mendation presented in this research can be used succesfully for future work. 1. The time for biomass adaptation and biomass immobilization o f 3 m onths was considered excessive for industrial applications and it is suggested an aggressive diesel loading soon after inoculation. 2. Proper choice o f the support particles could increase the reactor stability and perform ance to overcom e stratification and therefore particles élutriation. 3. Cost-effective operation o f fluidized beds can be obtained w ith uniform and lowdensity particles (e.g. activated carbon) achieving bed hom ogeneity at lower gas flow rates. 4. Diesel volatilization can be reduced by considering pre-oxygenated fluidized bed or the use o f emulsifiers in the wastew ater for a better partitioning o f diesel fuel in the w ater phase. 5. Future w ork has to be done to have a better understanding in modeling the substrate utilization in the three-phase fluidized bed bioreactor.

83

BIBLIO G RA PH Y

1. Abdul-Aziz, M. and Asolekar, S. R., (2000). "Modeling o f biological particle mixing in a fluidized-bed biofilm reactor". Water Environment Research. Vol. 72, No. 1, pp. 105-114. 2. Alvarez-Cuenca, M. (2003). Fundamentals, Design and Operation o f Small Wastewater Treatment Plants Class Notes, Department o f Chemical Engineering. Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada. 3. Alvarez-Cuenca, M. (2004). "Rudimentary Wastewater Treatment Technologies Hurt the Bottom Line". Water and Wastewater Europe 2004 Conference. Barcelona,

4. Andrews, G., and Trapasso, R., (1985). "The optimal design o f fluidized bed bioreaetors" . Journal WPCF. Vol. 57, No. 2, pp. 143-150. 5. APHA (1998). "Standard Methods for the Examination o f Water and Wastewater". 20 Edition. American Public Health Association, Baltimore. (1995), "Biodégradation rates o f aromatic

6. Arcangeli, J-P, and Arvin, E.,

contaminants in biofilm reactors". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 31, pp. 117-128. 7. Arvin, E., and Harremoes, P., ('1990). "Concepts and modeling for biofilm reactor performance". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 22, No. 1/2, pp. 171-192. 8. Atlas, R. (1985). "Petroleum biodégradation and oil sphl bioremediation", Mm-ine Pollution Bulletin. Vol. 31, No 4-12, pp. 178-182. 9. Atlas, R. (1984). "Petroleum Microbiology". Macmillan Publishing Company, New York.

84

10. Badot, R., Goulom, T., Longeaux, N ., Badard, M ., and Sibony, J., (1994). "A fluidized-bed reactor: The biolift process". W at. Soi. Tech. Vol. 29, N o. 10-11, pp. 329-338. 11. Bignami, L., Eram o, B., Gavasci, R., Ramadori, R., RoUe, E., (1991). "M odeling and experiments on fluidized-bed biofilm reactors" . Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 24, N o.7, pp. 47-58. 12. Boaventura, R. A, and Rodrigues, A. E. (1988). "Consecutive reactions in fiuidized bed biological reactors: Modeling and experimental study of wastew ater

denitrification". Chemical Engineering Science. Vol. 43, N o. 10, pp. 2715-2728. 13. Briens, L., Briens, C., M argaritis, A., and Hay, J., (1997). "Minimum liquid fluidization velocity in gas-liquid solids fiuidized beds o f low-density particles'% Chemical Engineering Science. Vol. 52, N o. 21/22, pp. 4231-4238. 14. Bryers, J. D. (2000). "Biofilm II: Process Analysis and Applications" . John Wiley & Sons, Inc, N ew York. 15. Buchtmann, C., Kies, U ., D eckw er, D., and Hecht, V. (1997). "Perform ance o f threephase fiuidized bed reactor for quinoline degradation on various supports at steady state and dynamic conditions". Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. 56, N o. 3, pp. 295-302. 16. Cassidy, D ., and Irvine, R., (1997). "Biological treatm ent o f a soil contam inated with diesel fiiel using periodically operated slurry and solid phase reactors". W at. Sci. Tech. Vol. 35, N o . 1, pp. 185-192.

85

17. Chang, H., Rittmann, B. E., Amar, D., and Lesty, Y., (1991). "Biofiltn detachment mechanisms in a liquid-fluidized bed". Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 38, pp. 499-506. 18. Chang, H. and Rittmann, B. E., (1994). "Predicting bed dynamics in three-phase fiuidized bed biofilm reactors". Wat. Sci. Tech, Vol. 29,No. 10-11, pp. 231-241. 19. Cifuentes, S. (2003). "Oxygen Transfer in a Three-Phase Fiuidized Bed Reactors", Bachelor in Engineering Thesis Report. Ryerson University. Toronto, Canada. 20. Coelhoso, I. Boaventura, and Rodrigues, A., (1992). "Biofilm reactors: An experimental and modeling study o f wastewater denitrification in fluidized-bed reactors o f activated carbon particles" Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol, 40, pp. 625-633. 21. Cohen, M., Williams, J., and Yamasaki, H., (2002). "Biodégradation o f diesel fuel by an Azo/la-derived bacterial consortium". Journal o f Environmental Science and Health. Vol. A37, No. 9, pp. 1593-1606. 22. Diez-Blanco, V., Garcia Encina, P., and FDZ Polanco, F., (1995). "Effects o f biofilm growth, gas and liquid velocities on the bed expansions o f an anaerobic fiuidized bed reactor (AFBR)". Wat. Res. Vol. 29, No. 7, pp. 1649-1654. 23. Dowd, R. M. (1994)., "Leaking underground storage tanks". Environ. Sci. Technol. Vol. 18, No. 10. pp 309-310: 24. Eggers, E., and Terlouw, T., (1979). "Biological denitrification in a fiuidized bed with sand as carrier material". Wat. Res. Vol. 13, pp. 1079-1090. 25. Environment Canada, 2002. " Canadian Environmental Quality Guidelines", URL: http: //www.ec.gc.ca/water/index.htm. Last update: Januaiy 2002.

86

26. Erikson, M ., Swartling, A., and Dalhammar, G., (1998). "Biological degradation o f diesel fiiel in w ater and soil m onitored w ith solid-phase m icro-extraction and GCM S". Appi. M icrobiol Biotechnol. Vol. 50, pp. 129-134. 27. Fan, L-S. (1989). "Gas-Liquid-Solid Fluidization Engineering". Butterw orth

Publisher, Stoneham, MA. 28. Flanagan, W. P. (1998). "Biodégradation o f dieliloromethane in a granular activated carbon fluidized-bed reactor" W ater Environment Research. Vol. 70, N o. 1, pp 60-

66 .
29. Gao, B., Yang, L., W ang, X, Zhao, J., and Sheng, G., (1999). "Influence o f modified soils o n the rem oval o f diesel fuel oil from w ater and the grow th o f oil degradation microorganisms". Chemosphere. Vol. 41, pp. 419-426. 30. Gonzales, G., Herrera, G., Garcia, M a.T and Pena, M., (2001) " Biodégradation o f phenolic industrial w astew ater in a fiuidized bed bioreactor w ith immobilized cells OÎP seudom onaspiitidd'\ Bioresource Technology. Vol. 80, pp. 137-142, 31. Harada, H ., Ando, H., and M omonoi, K., (1987). "Process analysis o f fiuidized bed biofilm reactor for denitrification". W at. Sci. Tech. Vol. 19, pp. 151-162. 32. Hermanowicz, S. W and Cheng, Y.W ., (1983). "Biological fiuidized bed reactor: Hydrodynamics, biomass distribution and perform ance". W at. Sci. Tech. Vol. 22, N o. 1/2, pp. 193-202. 33. Hermanowdcz, S. W and Ganczarczyk, J. J. (1990)., "Som e fluidization

characteristics o f biological beds". Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 25, pp 1321-1330.

87

34. Hosaka, Y., Kaihou, M., and Hirata, A., (1985). "Biological treatment o f phenolic wastewater in a three-phase fiuidized bed". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 17, pp. 1437-1439. 35. http://www.gch.ulaval.ca/bgrandieaii/ulmfiulmf.html 36. Karapinar, I., and Kargi, F. (1996). "Effect o f particle number density on wastewater treatment performance o f a fluidized-bed bioreactor". Enzyme and Microbial Technology, Vol. 19, pp. 140-144. 37. Lai, B., and Shieh, W. K. (1997) "Substrate inhibition kinetics in a fiuidized bioparticles" Chemical engineering Journal. Vol. 65,pp. 117-121. 38. Larachi, P., Iluta, I., and Rival, O. (2000). "Prediction o f minimum fluidization velocity in three-phase fluidized-bed reactors" . Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. V ol 39, pp. 563-572. 39. Lazarova, V., and Manem, J. (1994). "Advances in biofilm aerobic reactors ensuring effective biofilm activity control". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 29, No. 10-11, pp. 319-327. 40. Lazarova, V., Pierzo, V., Fontvielle, D, and Manem, J., (1994). "Integrated approach for biofilm characterization and biomass activity control". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 29, No. 7, pp. 345-354. 41. Lecomte, P., and Mariotti, C. (1997). "Handbook o f Diagnostic Procedure for Petroleum- contaminated Sites" John Wiley & Sons, Inc, N ew York. 42. Lewandowski, Z., Stoodley, P., Altobelli, S., and Fukushima, E., (1994).

"Hydrodynamic and kinetics in biofilm systems- recent advance and new problems". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 29, No. 10-11, pp. 223-229.

88

43. Margesin, R., and Schnner, F., (1998). "Low-tem perature biorem ediation o f a wastew ater contam inated with anionic surfactants and fuel oil". Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. Vol. 49, pp. 482-486. 44. M arquez-Rocha, P., Hernandez, V., and Lamela, T., (2001). "Biodégradation o f diesel oil in soil by a microbial consortium ". W ater, A ir and Soil Pollution. Vol. 128, pp 313-320. 45. Melin, E. S., Jarvinen, K. T., and Puhakka, J. A. (1998). "Effects o f tem perature on chlorophenol biodégradation kinetics in fluidized-bed reactors with different biomass carriers" . Wat. Res. Vol. 32, N o .l, pp. 81-90. 46. M etC alf & Eddy, Inc. (2003). "W astewater Engineering: Treatm ent and Reuse". 4 Edition, M e G raw - Hill, N ew York. 47. Mishra, P. N ., and Sutton, P. M. (1990)., "Biological fiuidized bed for w ater and w astew ater treatm ent: A state of-the-art review". Biodeterioration and

B iodégradation (Edited by Rossm oore H. W), pp. 340-357. Elsevier Science, N ew

48. Mulcahy, L. T and Shieh, W. K., (1987). "Fluidization and reactor biomass characteristics o f the denitrification fiuidized bed biofilm reactor". W at. Res. Vol. 21, N o. 4, pp. 451-459. 49. Ngian, K ., and M artin, W ., (1980). "Biologically active fiuidized beds: mechanistic considerations" . Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. X X II, pp. 1007-1014. 50. NiooleHa C., Chiarle, S., Di Felice, R., and Rovatti, M ., (1997). " M echanisms o f biofilm detachm ent in fiuidized bed reactors". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 36, N o. 1 pp. 229-235.

89

51.Nicolella C., Di Felice, R., and Rovatti, M., (1996). "An experimental model o f biofilm detachment in liquid fiuidized bed biological reactors". Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. 51, pp. 713-719. 52. Nicolella, C., Converti, A., Di Felice, R., and Rovatti, M (1995). "The estimation o f the solid size and density in liquid fluidized-bed biological reactors". Shorter communication. Chemical Engineering Science, Vol. 50. No.6, pp. 1059-1062. 53. Nicolella, C., Loosdrecht, M. C , Di Felice, R., and Rovatti, M., (1998), "Terminal settling velocity and bed-expansion characteristics o f biofilm-coated particles". Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 62-70. 54. Ochieng, A., Ogada, T., Sisenda, W., and Wambua, P., (2002). "Breweiy wastewater treatment m a fiuidized bed bioreactor". Journal o f Hazardous Materials. Vol. B90, pp. 311-321. 55. Ozturk, I., Turan, M. and Idris, A. H. (1994). "Scale-up and biomass hold-up characteristics o f biological fiuidized bed reactors" Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 29, No. 11, pp. 353-360. 56. Paul, T. and Edward, J. (1992).," Contaminated Soil: Diesel Fuel Contamination". Lewis Publishers, Michigan. 57. Perryman, J. (2003)., "Degradation o f diesel in a rotating biological contactor". Bachelor in Engineering Thesis Report. Ryerson University. Toronto, Canada. 58. Picioreanu, C., Loosdrecht, M., Heijnen, J., (1999). "A theoretical study on the

effect o f surface roughness on mass transport and transformation in biofilm". Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol, 68, No. 4, pp. 355-361.

90

59. Picioreanu, C , Loosdrecht, M ., Heijnen, J., (2000). "Tw o- dimensional model o f biofilm detachm ent caused by internal stress from liquid flow". Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. 72, N o. 2, pp. 205-218. 60. Polanco, P., Real, F. J., and Garcia, P. A. (1994). "Behavior o f an anaerobic/aerobic pilot scale fiuidized bed for the rem oval o f carbon and nitrogen" . W at. Sci. Tech. Vol.29, N o. 10-11, pp. 339-346. 61. Rahman, K., and Rahman T., (2002). "Occurrences o f crude oil degrading bacteria in gasoline and diesel station soils" . J. Basic Microbiol. Vol. 42, pp. 284-291. 62. Richard, J., and Vogel, T., (1999). "Characterization o f a soil bacterial consortium capable o f degrading diesel fuel". International Biodeterioration & Biodégradation. Vol. 44, pp. 93-100. 63. Rittmann, B., and M cCarty, P., (1982), "Comparative perform ance o f biofilm reactor types". Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. XXIV, pp. 1341-1370. 64. Rittmann, B., and M cCarty, P., (1980-a). " Evaluation o f steady-state biofilm kinetics" . Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. XX II, pp. 2359-2373. 65. Rittmann, B., and M cCarty, P., (1980-b). " M odel o f steady-state biofilm kinetics" . Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. X X II, pp. 2343-2357. 66. Rittmann, B., and M cCarty, P., (1981). " Substrate flux into biofilm o f any thickness". Journal o f the Environm ental Engineering Division. Vol. 107, N o 4, pp. 831-848. 67. Rittmann, B., and M cCarty. (2001). "Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications". M e Graw-Hill, N ew York.

91

68. Ruggieri, B., Caire, G., Specchia, V., Sassi, G., Bosco, F,, and Gianetto, A., (1994). "Determination o f optimal biofilm activity in a biological fiuidized bed (BFB) reactor". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 29, No. 10-11 pp. 347-351. 69. Safifcrman, S. I., and Bishop, P. L., (1997). "Operating strategies for aerobic fiuidized bed reactors". Journal o f hazardous materials. Vol. 54, pp. 241-253. 70. Schreyer, H. B., and Coughlin, R. W., (1999). "Effect o f stratification in a fiuidized bed bioreactor during treatment o f metal working wastewater". Biotechnology and Bioengineering. Vol. 63, No. 2, pp. 129-140. 71. Sepic, E., Trier, C., and Leskovsek, H., (1996). " Biodégradation studies o f selected hydrocarbons irom diesel oil". Analyst. Vol. 121, pp. 1451-1456. 72. Shieh, W. K., Sutton, P. M., and Kos^ P., (1981). "Predicting reactor biomass concentration in a fluidized-bed system". Journal WPCF. Vol. 53, No. 11, pp. 15741584. 73. Smith, M., (1990). "The biodégradation o f aromatic hydrocarbons by bacteria". Biodégradation. Vol. 1, pp. 191-206. 74. Song, C., Hsu, C., and Mochida, I. (2000). "Chemistry o f diesel fuels". Taylor & Francis, New York. 75. Suidan, M., Rittmann, B., and Traegner, U., (1987). "Criteria establishing biofilmkinetic types". Wat. Res. Vol. 24.No. 4, pp. 491-498. 76. Sutton, P. M, and Mishra, P. N., (1993). "Activated carbon based biological fiuidized beds for contaminated water and wastewater treatment: A state o f art review". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol.29, pp. 309-317.

92

77. Sutton, P. M ., and M ishra, P. N ., (1990). "Fiuidized bed biological w astew ater treatm ent: Effects o f scale-up on system performance". W at. Sci. Tech. Vol. 22, N o. 1/2, pp. 419-430. 78. Tavares, C. R. G., Sant'Anna, G. L., and Capdeville, B. (1995). "The elfect o f air superficial velocity in a three-phase fiuidized bed reactors". W at. Res. Vol. 29, N o. 10, pp. 2293-2298. 79. Tsuneda, S., Auresenia, J., M orise, T., and Hirata, A., (2002). "Dynamic modeling and simulation o f a three-phase fiuidized bed batch process for w astew ater treatm ent". Process Biochemistry. Vol. 38, pp. 599-604. 80. Trinet, P., Heim, R., Am ar, D ., Chang, H. T., and Rittmann, B. E., (1991). "Study o f biofilm and fluidization o f bioparticles in a three-phase liquid-fiuidized-bed reactor". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 23, pp. 1347-1354. 81. Wilson, G., K hodadoust, A. P., Suidan, M .T, Brenner, C., and Acheson., (1998). "Anaerobic-Aerobic biodégradation o f pentachlorophenol using gas fiuidized bed reactors: Optimization o f the em pty bed contact time" Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 38, N o.7, pp. 9-17. 82. Wu, C., and Huang, J., (1996). "Bioparticle characteristics o f tapered anaerobic ' fluidized-bed bioreactors". W at. Res. Vol. 30, N o. 1, pp. 233-241.

83. Yarig, L., Lai, C., and Snieh, W ., (2000). "Biodégradation o f dispersed diesel fuel under high salinity conditions" . W at. Res. Vol. 34, N o. 13, pp. 3303-3314. 84. Yu, H ., and Rittm ann, B. E., (1997). "Predicting bed expansion and phase holdups for three-phase fluidized-bed reactors w ith and without biofilm" . W at. Res. Vol. 31, N o. 10, pp 2604-2616.

93

85. Zhang, T. C., and Bishop, P. L.,

(1993). "Structure, activity and composition o f

biofilm". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 29, No. 7, pp. 335-344. 86. Zhang, T., Bishop, P. L., (1994). "Density, porosity, and pore structure o f biofilm". Wat. Res. Vol. 28, No. 11, pp. 2267-2277. 87. Zhang, W., Bouwer, E., Wilson, L., and Durant, N., (1995). "Biotransformation o f aromatic hydrocarbons in subsurface biofilms". Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol.31, N o .l, pp. 114.

94

APPENDICES

95

__________
C A LIBRA TIO N CURVE GAS CH RO M A TRO G RA M S

Appendix A

96

to o -

ia .a 4 ;B T ;2 8 e 9

1 0 .7 3

2 1 .8 0

.0 0

10.00

20.00

Gas chrom atogram for the calibration curve (50 ppm o f D RO )

100-

1 0 .7 S ;5 7 :3 2 6 8

y 2.0 9 -5 7 :3 1 5 0

Art!
15 .0 2 87 2771 1 5 .2 6 87 2529 18 .8 9 87 2461

5 .8 7 57 2706

18 .6 2 57 1846

20.21
57 1602 2 1 .0 0 57 1058 6 .0 9 73 102 1 0 .0 0 1 2 .0 0 1 4 .0 0 1 6 .0 0 1 8 .0 0 2 0 .0 0 ' ggJoO

3 .2 5 57 1622

1

G as chrom atogram for the calibration curve (IGO ppm o f DRO)

97

57 6705

15.02
5.65 57 5533 5739

15.26 67 224 0 3.3 5 3190

18.62 57 57 31.90 57 2205

0 4

4 .0 0

6.0 0

1 0 .0 0

1 2 .0 0

2 0 .0 0

T»rn#

100-1
A r« t

8.30
57 0973

12.97 57 8517 15.02 57 8238 16.69 57 7473 16,62 57 6439 20.21 57 5276 15.26 67 3033

9,67 57 7623

3 .3 5 67 4323 3 .5 5 57 4 .0 0 5.78 57

21.90 57 4026

6 .0 0

98

1 0 .7 9 :9 7 :1 2 3 4 4

1 8 . 0 3 :9 7 :1 1 2 5 3

· .2 «

1 1 0 8 3
87

1 8 .0 3 870

9 .2 S

sr

1

8 bo

'

i b ! o 'o

'

12"6o

' ' ' ü lo V

' ' '

' ' i b !6 o' ' ' '

' i ' a 'o'o '

'

'3 o \o o

'

j i ' o 'o

Gas chromato gram for the calibration curve (400 ppm o f DRO)

99

45 40 35 -

y = 0 .1 2 1 3 x - 2.1572 = 0 .9 9 9 5

W 30I -

Linear (Calibration curve)

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

Gas chromatogram calibration curve

100

RAW DATA AND GAS CHROMATOGRAMS FOR PHASE II: REACTOR OPERATION IN INTERMITTENT MODE

101

PA RA M ETER Diesel Concentration Feedwater (mg/L) COD Feedwater (mg/L) pH Feedwater (-) Temperature Feedwater ("C) Dissolved Oy^gen Feedwater (mg/L) Dissolved Oxygen Bed (mg/L) Diesel Concentration Effluent (mg/L) COD Effluent (mg/L) pH Effluent (-)

DAY 1 69.0 547.0 7.61 20.0 9.1 6.8 ND 37.6 6.55

DAY 2 128.0 980.3 7.67 25.0 8.2 3.9 ND 46.7 7.31 25.6 6.7

DAY 3 116.0 937.7 7.74 15.8 10.2 7.8 ND 56.8 7.56 16.5 7.4

DAY 4 166.0 1345.0 7.77 24.8 8.4 6.5 ND 59.6 7.52 25.4 7.0

DAY 5 122.0 867.0 7.71 19.9 8.9 4.6 ND 27.6 7.61 21.4 7.2

DAY 6 119.0 780.0 7.6 22.1 8.7 5.4 ND 34.7 7.38 23.7 7.3

DAY 7 248.6 2400.8 7.63 22.5 8.6 7.5 37.0 345.9 7.44 23.2 8.3

DAY 8 332.0 2789.0 7.42 19.3 9.4 8.3 43.0 362.5 7.37 20.4 8.1

DAY 9 427.0 3100.6 7.58 22.8 7.9 5.9 228.0 1200.0 7.46 23.5 7.3

DAY 10 530.0 3773.0 7.51 23.4 9.8 6.6 233.0 2156.0 7.2 24.2 7.8

DAY 11 693.0 4025.0 7.51 19.8 8.9 7.9 626.0 2897 7.55 20.3 8.0

DAY 12 141.0 934.0 7.66 20.5 8.5 7.0 ND 19.7 7.56 21.2 7.6

j

Temperature Effluent 23.5 C O Dissolved Ojg^gen 5.2 Effluent ( m ^ ) Note; ND Not Detected

Raw data for the 12 days o f intermittent mode

102

J
1 0 5 7 U '_ ,a niiu 10L x ; 17:/: iA) icon it'üo 2or-c z^'O v

X X :1

fiou

.'00

iiiX'

I:!.'!.!

^/,cf

I-":':. ; X nun lü ':);-:

:n,xi

I.......... z:.%

T im p

Gas Chromatogram tor day ) id'operation

( A) KeeiKvaier i B) Biïluent

t03

fA)

0

,100

Koo

< ^ 00

T ',|U '

I

loue

141IU

î ^^v.irnTT ^T 'r,'" -'"! H, .' , , ,
1 6 0 ^ ,1 ictx.

,'o.:)ü

:oa)

4 T ,r% '

iBl

G(is Chminatügmm tbr day Z o f oneraiioiit
f A) f e e d w a te r (B t E tn aen t

iw

u
t A.)

..:

:-r-

.:.;o

cO C '

:/'X;

'400

lïH À ;

'^o.ün

Tn

( las Ci^roni^iîo^mm 3i)r day 3 u) opemdon
(A i i'eedw ai:er(H ) Kdlucnt

05

(A)

Gas CAroniaiogram tor da) 4 ofr,pe,'al(0;T
(A) Kccdwater t4ilueni

'3'Y;

1 -* 0 0

'? ;>C " j

" « I -M 'l'V IV T'' '"1'" 'I'T'M

.1------

'?"'"I''*' Î

. Ij ,

10'J Ü

,

,

-

r,

1 -iü O

'8C Ù (H)

" fW 'P

'n i:

( ;aü Chromalogram li)r Jay 5 oi'ojxrration (/\) Feedwater idDuent

107

:

(A)

1
r, «lu

1 -; Âo

M .h''

''.'V f

-

I J.ü O

BZ

'y v!.`

70 X!

X ' 70

(B)

( h s C hm m atogram for day 6 o f operation

(Al Feedwater (B) EMInenf

W

1 4U :.'
(A)

ir :;0

iM < X j

'? r: rf':

!n " f/

T m > e

n

^ .L X :

--av L

,,J,,

If: D C in

'' 1*00

T"

IT-- w f w - ' .

T im e

Cas^ChmiTioUigrain tor dm 7 ot'opcmtion (A) (\iWwaKT (B) liilhicnl

in.v

ro ry i

:m .C K '

T i'ne

9M 57 v cm ;
.... i
, * T ,'|T < v ,'{ ,'T , , , . " - ' ' | i ' i I , , 7^ n .................................. i z m i&t'u
, r , 'i .',<r ,

0--,

i . t ü

70'X:.

-Vtn

, , 'v , r . 'f i - r i T T ' T i n w

1':')')

(B)

(ïAS Cham%(ogrmi ^br da)' H of opemUon
(A ) l'e c d w a ic r (B ) L B luenl

HO

T
(A )

,K

(B)

lor d^iy

oi'opcnihon

(A) i'reU''-va^cr(B} Hniucnl

-y 00 (A)

^im «

( ias Chromatograni fbr day (0 c t opcradon

( A) I'cedvvater ( B) EBkieni

Ai

(in

(jaü

K .;)' üuy ) I of oncrafi< :tfuui.Hor (Mi r.niucm

(A )

üas

me day iz ot opera;

L\) FeedwaierfB) Kjlluen;

Appendix C
R A W D A TA AND G A S C H R O M A T O G R A M S F O R P H A S E III; R E A C T O R O P E R A T IO N A T ST E A D Y ST A T E

115

PARAM ETER Diesel Concentration Feedwater (mg/L) COD Feedwater (mg/L) pH Feedwater (-) Temperature Feedwater ("C) Turbidity Feedwater (NTU) Dissolved Oxygen Feedwater (mg/L) Dissolved Oxygen Bed (mg/L) Total Suspended Solids (mg/L) Diesel Concentration Effluent (mg/L) COD Effluent (mg/L) pH Effluent (-) Temperature Effluent (°C) Dissolved Oxygen Effluent (mg/L) Biofilm thickness (pm) Turbidity Effluent (NTU) Note: NO (Not Detected), NA (Not Available)

DAY 13 193.0 1389.6 7.52 20.4 12.35 8.2 6.1 0.86 ND 25.6 7.45 22.3 7.1 NA 4.75

DAY 14 175 1195.0 7.5 22.7 11.13 7.7 5.9 1.12 ND 93.6 7.58 22.9 7.0 60-700 5.9

DAY 15 198.0 1156.0 7.57 23.2 9.23 7.4 5.7 0.94 ND 73.6 7.52 23.8 6.9 70-800 5.3

DAY 16 200.0 1262.0 7.49 19.2 10.7 8.0 6.7 0.64 ND 65.0 7.44 20.4 7.2 40-700 6.5

DAY 17 198.0 1182.0 7.54 22.1 10.36 7.6 6.2 0.79 ND 29.7 7.3 23.4 6.5 50-700 5.6

Raw data for day 13 through day 17 o f steady state operation.

116

20 00

30.Ü 0

'T ' '

(A)

(B)

CkisChmnutogram fbr day )1 ijibo^oerafion
I A) Feedwater (B) KOlueni

0

. r ..,

15cc

,

ai. R , . vi w

T

,

7

'

v

T

r

n

*

aO r. ^ 0O U ^ a ! )r .

ir ^ n o

U üG

:^ 0 0

. r ; ': )

(B)

(Jas L hrom alogram Ibr day 14 orO jieration

(A^ Koedwatcr (B) E!t1uen(

: 3 no

ion

'0 ;3

.i O '

o!,\i

n.'oo

I'tnu

inrio

ZJixi

" r'

T im e,

(.4) Fecdwuier (B) {-jllueül

19

' u jC
(B)

i> !v o

& \ic

;c !o { i ^

Gas ChmmaWgram lor day 16 u('oj.x:m6on (A) i eedwater (B'l HiHuenl

120

X IV O (A)

1200 . -IVV O

L

u

X I no

f W , ,-- . , , , ,"VI

1 300

;:O tm

-M .T

ZrO O

:-X '

-i iX :

000

^i/xi

1?M I

1400

Xlltn

18.00

I

V O00

"»"'' " I T ' " ' " I T "

::200

T im e

Gns I :hromaWgram ior day 17 ol'operation
! A ) F e e d w a te r ( H i E A in e n i

(31

RAW DATA AND GAS C H R O M A T O G R A M S F O R PH A SE IV : V A LID A TIO N O F

122

PARAM ETER Diesel Concentration Feedwater (mg/L)

SET#1

SET # 2

SET # 3

SET#4

255.1

397.0

1038.0

1051.0

Dissolved Oxygen Feedwater (mg/L)

7.7

7.9

7.3

7.1

Dissolved OîQ^gen Effluent (mg/L)

8.1

8.2

7.8 697.5

7.8

Diesel Concentration Effluent (mg/L)

119.2

172.0

595.6

Diesel concentrations for validation o f diesel volatilization in presence o f difiusive air.

îj T 'j 00

V 0

OE)

Gas chrom atogram tor validation o f diesel biodégradation (A) Feedwater (255.1 mg/L) (D K n iu e n t

,

r* -. -., .............

-------- -

chro;n;xt<igvam k?v viUdeiwn o f jiese^ bk^dcj^^aiialion (A) rw A v::aer(l^)7jjm u/L) (B; I.illneni

se ses7

 ^ i'.-A

' ' ' " ? .fri'/

0

;:' O ù

jnI:'j \B)

TT 1

IW chiomal'oü.ram K >r validancn oi'dier^el bitWeeradauon
(A ) FvcJvvatec { I Ù3X.0 m g d .) ( B ; I diiucaf

I:
--r t : . ', 0 .h :3 ") -f. :=?.': ir-C !:

;riî
;d o

-J :

dfn :

Gdb chron^nTOgram { . - .'I

\ aiidaàon of die^^el hiodegradalion ' : d' ,'

' ! I '

SimfluiSp SO FT W A R E: D E SC R IPT IO N AND RESU LTS

128

SimfuiSp software has its basis in Laraehi's Model. This m odel w as based in multilayer perceptron artificial neural netw ork, modeling techniques and dimensional analysis. Some o f the upper and lower limits o f operating conditions, fluid physical properties and packing properties are summarized in the following table.

F L U ID P H Y S IC A L O P E R A T IO N C O N D IT IO N S P R O P E R T IE S 780 <p,< 1623 8.9x10 0.0719 P=0.1 M Pa 293 < T < 3 1 2 Distributors: T apered packed bed, perforated plate and nozzle-type distributor 1.145 < pg< 1.159 1 . 3 x 1 0 fig < 1.8x10"^ Gases: Air, Nz Solids: Alumina extrudate, glass bead, polypropylene bead, porous particles. Foaming System: Fermentation, W astew ater Treatm ent

0.025 < d( < 0.073

M ore information about the limitation o f this software can be found in Larachi et al.

129

UNIVERSITÉ

LAVAL

Liquid Properties: superficial liquid velocity density (kg/m^, viscosity (kg/m.s), surface tension(kg/s^), Gas Properties: density (kg/m^), viscosity(kg/m.s), superficial velocity(m/s),

ul roi mul sigi rog mug ug

Data Entry Dn= 700 um Liquid Properties: 2.000E-04 superficial liquid velocity ul 1.00E+03 density (kg/m^, rol 1.00E-03 viscosity (kg/m s), mul 7.2ÛE-02 surface tension(kg/s^), sigl Gas Properties: i.20E+00 density (kg/m^, rog 1.25E-05 viscosity(kg/m.s). mug 1.00E-02 superficial velocity(m/s), ug Particles and Bed Properties: 2.000E-03 grain equivalent diameter (m), dv 1 sphericity factor (-), phi 1.04E+03 density (kg/m^, ros 0.17 column diameter (m), Type of System : 2 coalescing 1 or foaming =2 dc

2.0G0E-04 i.OOE+03 1.00E-03 7.20E-02 1.20E+00 1.25E-05 1.00E-02

ParHcles and Bed Properties: grain equivalent diameter (m), dv phi sphericity factor (-), ros density (kg/m^, column diameter (m), Type o f System: coalescing 1 or foaming =2 do

7.000E-04 1 1.51E+03 0.17 2

130

R E SU L T S Data Entry Dn= 2 0 0 0 um

Liquid holdup Gas holdup Solid holdup Bed P orosity

= = = =

0.579 0.179 0.242 0.758

B u bble w ake m o d e l p a ra m eters k=
X =

0,80 1.34

R E SU L T S Data Entry Dn= 7 0 0 um

Liquid holdup G as holdup Solid holdup Bed Porosity

-0.501 =0.355 = 0.144 = 0.856

B u bble w ake m o d e l p a ra m eters k =0.80 X =2.07

131

