NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI

COMBINED PHOTOCATALYTIC AND ELECTROCHEMICAL TREATMENT OF ORGANIC MATTER AND HEAVY METALS

BY COLIN LAM B. ENG (RYERSON)

A Thesis Project Presented to Ryerson University In partial fulfillment o f the Requirements for the degree o f Master o f Engineering In Chemical Engineering Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004 ©Colin Lam 2004
.....rr.f'.

P R orcn r/O F

UMI Number: EC52935

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52935 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Author's Declaration
1 hereby deelare that I am the sole author o f this report. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this report to other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

Colin Lam

I further authorize Ryerson Polytechnic University to reproduce this report by photocopying or by other means, in total or parts, at the request o f other institutions or individuals for the scholarly research.

Colin Lam

1 1

Ryerson University requires the signature o f all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date. NAME ADDRESS DATE

1 1 1

A ck n o w led g em en ts
The author wishes to thank his family and friends who have been incredibly supportive throughout his years at Ryerson Polytechnic University and to Dr. Doan for his assistance in the completion o f this paper. The author also wishes to express his thanks to Mr. Ali. Hemmati, and Mr. P. Scharping for providing support in the laboratory.

IV

Abstract
Combined Photocatalytic and Electrochemical treatment o f organic matter and heavy metals, Colin Lam, Ryerson University, 2004, M aster o f Engineering in Chemical Engineering.

In the present study, simulated wastewater containing Methylene Blue, Zn^^ and Ni^' * ' was treated by two treatment methods; photocatalytic oxidation and electrochemical deposition. It is found that Methylene Blue could be degraded more efficiently by combined Photocatlytic and Electrochemical process than by photocatalytic oxidation or electrochemical deposition alone. The percentage removal o f Methylene Blue in combined Suspended Photocatalytic and Electrochemical process was 46.1% after 72 hours of treatment, while it was only 36.1% for a single Suspended Photocatalytic process and 23.5% for a single Electrochemical process. On the other hand, no significant effect were observed for the percentage removal o f Zn^^ and Ni^^ in combined Suspended Photocatalytic and Electrochemical process. The influence o f liquid flowrate, wavelength and pH to the removal o f Methylene Blue, Zn^^ and Ni^^ was also investigated.

T a b le o f co n ten ts
Page ii iv v vi viii x xi

A uthor's Declaration Acknowledgments Abstract Table of contents List o f Figures List o f Tables Nomenclature Chapter 1 - Introduction and Objective 1.1 Introduction 1.2 Objectives Chapter 2 - Literature Survey

I 3

2.1 Advanced Oxidation Process 4 2.2 Electrochemical Deposition 6 2.3 Fundamental engineering aspects o f Heterogeneous Photocatalytic reactors for water and wastewater treatment 7 2.4 Heterogeneous Photoreactors 9 Chapter 3 - Literature Background 3.1.1 Heterogeneous Photocatalysis 13 3.1.2 Nature o f light 15 3.1.3 Theory o f Semiconductor material and Titanium dioxide as the Photocatalyst 17 3.1.4 Thermodynamics and kinetics o f heterogeneous photocatalytic process 19 3.1.5 The Langmuir adsorption isotherm 23 3.2.1 Electrolytic process 26 3.2.2 The Nerst Equation 27 3.2.3 Anodic Processes 29 3.2.4 Cathodic processes 29 3.2.5 Choice o f materials for Anode and Cathode 30 3.2.6 Model for the electrochemical treatment 31 Chapter 4 - Experimental Methodology 4 .1.1 Setup o f the apparatus 4.1.2 Test equipment and reagents 4.1.3 Reagents 4.2 Flow o f water through apparatus 4.3 Experimental Procedure 4.4 Determination o f Methylene Blue concentration by Ultraviolet/Visible 35 36 37 40 41

VI

absorption spectrometry 43 4.5 Calibration o f the spectrophotometer for the determination o f Methylene Blue concentration 44 4.5 Determination o f Zinc and Nickel concentration in the wastewater 46 4.6 Immobilization procedure of the titanium dioxide 47 Chapter 5 - Results and Discussions 5.1 Effect o f photocatalytic treatment on Methylene Blue, Nickel and Zinc with suspended titanium dioxide as the photocatalyst 50 5.2 Effect o f photocatalytic treatment on Methylene Blue, Nickel and Zinc with immobilized titanium dioxide as the photocatalyst 53 5.3 Effect o f Electrochemical treatment on Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel 55 5.4 Effect o f combined Electrochemical and Suspended Photocatalytic Treatment on Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel 58 5.5 The behaviour o f Photocatalytic Treatment on Methylene Blue 65 5.6 The Effect o f flowrate for Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions by combined photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment 68 5.7 The Effect o f Wavelength for Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions by combined photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment 72 5.8 The Effect o f pH for the treatment o f Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions by combined photocatalytic and electrochemical method 74 Chapter 6 - Conclusions and Recommendations 6.1 Conclusions 6.2 Recommendations References Appendix A: Error Analysis Appendix B: Sample calculations Appendix C: Determination of the absorption peak for Methylene Blue Appendix D: Zinc and Nickel test methods 76 78 81 85 86 90 91

Vll

TJst of Figures Figure Description_______________________________________________________ Page
2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 4.1a 4.1b 4.1c 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 5.1 Immersion Well Photoreactor Annular Photoreactor An example o f thin film Photoreactor Examples o f Rotating Photoreactor The electromagnetic spectrum Simplified Energy Band Diagram for a semiconductor 9 10 11 12 15 17

An overall graphical representation o f the photocatalytic process with TiOa 20 An Electrolytic Cell Electrochemical Batch Reactor with Recycle Electrochemical Batch Reactor Experimental Setup - Suspended Photocatalyst mode Experimental Setup - Immobilized Photocatalyst mode Absorbance vs Methylene Blue Concentration Polycarbonate Sheet Unfinished immobilized titanium dioxide plate Immobilized titanium dioxide plate Used titanium dioxide plate Methylene Blue Percentage Removal vs Treatment Time in suspended photocatalytic treatment 50 26 31 31 38 39 45 48 48 49 49

5.2

Percentage Removal of Zinc and Nickel vs Treatment Time in suspended photocatalytic treatment 52

5.3

Methylene Blue Percentage Removal vs Treatment Time in immobilized photocatalytic treatment 53

5.4

Percentage Removal o f Zinc and Nickel vs Treatment Time in immobilized photocatalytic treatment 54 56 57

5.5 5.6

Percentage Removal o f Zinc and Nickel by electrochemical treatment Percentage Removal o f Methylene Blue by electrochemical treatment

vni

5.8

Comparison o f the combined effect o f Suspended Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal o f Methylene Blue 60

5.9

Comparison o f the combined effect o f Suspended Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal o f Zn^^ 60

5.10

Comparison o f the combined effect o f Suspended Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal o f Ni^^ 60

5.11

Comparison o f the combined effect o f Immobilized Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal of Methylene Blue 61

5.12

Comparison o f the combined effect o f Immobilized Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal o f Zn^^ 61

5.13

Comparison of the combined effect o f Immobilized Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal o f Ni^^ 62

5.14

Fraction o f Methylene Blue remaining vs Treatment Time for suspended photocatalytic treatment after 162 hours o f treatment 66 66 69 69 69 72 73 73

5.15 5.16 5.17 5.18

Determination of the decay rate constant for Methylene Blue Percentage Removal o f Methylene Blue vs Flowrate Percentage Removal o f Zn^^ vs Flowrate Percentage Removal o f Ni^^ vs Flowrate

5.19 Percentage Removal o f Methylene Blue vs Wavelength 5.20 5.21 Percentage Removal o f Zn^"^ vs Wavelength Percentage Removal o f Ni^" ^ vs Wavelength

5.22 Effect o f pH in Percentage Removal o f Methylene Blue by Suspended Photoeatalytic and Electrochemical treatment 74

IX

ïJst of Tables
Table Description_______________________________________________________ Page 3.1 4.1 5.1 Standard potential o f various metals Ultraviolet lamp characteristics Percentage Removal o f Methylene Blue in suspended photocatalytic treatment 5.2 Zinc and Nickel Percentage Removal vs Treatment Time in suspended photocatalytic treatment 5.3 Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel Percentage Removal vs TreatmentTime in immobilized photocatalytic treatment 5.4 5.5 5.5 Percentage Removal of Zinc by electrochemical treatment Percentage Removal of Nickel by electrochemical treatment Percentage Removal o f Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel in combined treatment 5.6 Individual and combined effects o f photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment after 72 treatment hours 5.8 5.9 5.10 5.11 5.12 5.13 Operating parameters for Section 5.3-5.6 Comparison o f decay rate constants with other researchers Effect o f flowrate in combined treatment for Methylene Blue Effect o f flowrate in combined treatment for Zn^^ Effect o f flowrate in combined treatment for Ni^"^ Linear velocity o f liquid in the reactor 58 59 67 68 68 68 70 58 53 55 56 51 50 28 36

Nomenclature
[AS] [S] Ae c C C i E Eh Eh,n Eg F h I i K k E ka kd m nio P R concentration o f occupied sites (mol/L) concentration of free sites (mol/L) Electrode Area (m^) speed o f the light (2.998 x lO^m/s in vacuum) concentration (mol/L) Initial concentration (mol/m^) Specific energy (kJ) potential (V) Ground potential or Standard potential (V) Band Gap energy (eV) Faraday's constant = 96500 (coulombs) Planck's constant (6.63 x lO'^'^Js) current (A) current density (EAg) ka/kd is the adsorption constant / apparent adsorption constant the rate constant kK (1/s) the rate o f constant o f adsorption (1/s) the rate o f constant o f desorption (1/s) mass o f metal ion concentration at time t mass o f metal ion concentration at time 0 partial pressure o f A (Pa) Gas constant = 8.31 m^.Pa/mol.K rate o f adsorption (mol/s) rd rate of desorption (mol/s)

XI

T t V V g 6 X

Temperature (°C) time (sec/min/h) frequency of the radiation (Hz) stoichiometric coefficient of electrons The coverage wavelength (nm)

Xll

CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES
1.1 Introduction
Most o f the industrial operations discharge some wastewater that goes into the environment. As the wastewater is hazardous to human and natural living things, wastewater treatments are necessary. W ater treatment is described as the removal of contaminants in wastewater or a water body. In practice, a wastewater treatment facility typically sets the goal to manage the waste stream to a higher quality and harmless to the receiving body given that the economic cost is reasonable (M etcalf & Eddy, 2003). Wastewater treatment process usually combines physical, chemical and biological methods. Wastewater treatment plants are classified as primary, secondary, or tertiary (advanced) treatment, depending on the purification level to which the plants treat (Drinan, 2001). However, as current and pending wastewater regulations require lower concentrations o f pollutants in industrial wastewater, advanced wastewater treatment is required to remove the pollutants that remain after conventional treatment technology. One such example is industrial wastewater containing both organic and inorganic (heavy metal) pollutants. There are very strict legislative requirements that govern the treatment and disposal o f such waste, mainly due to the potential o f severe environmental consequences in the event o f non-compliance. Advanced wastewater treatment is defined as the additional treatment needed to remove suspended, colloidal, and dissolved constituents remaining after the conventional secondary treatment. Dissolved constituents may vary from relatively simple inorganic ions, such as calcium, potassium, sulfate, nitrate and phosphate, to an ever increasing number o f highly complex synthetic organic compounds. In order to meet the increasing

1

stringent wastewater treatment requirements in terms o f both limiting concentration of many o f these substances in the treatment plant effluent and establishing effluent toxicity limits, advanced wastewater treatment is required to remove the pollutants which remain after conventional treatment technology. The need for advanced wastewater treatment is based on consideration o f the following factors; 1. The need to remove organic matter and total suspended solids beyond what can be accomplished by conventional treatment processes to meet stringent discharge requirements. 2. The need to remove residual total suspended solids to condition the treated wastewater for more effective disinfection. 3. The need to remove nutrients beyond what can be accomplished by conventional secondary treatment process to limit eutrophication o f sensitive water bodies. 4. The need to remove specific inorganic (e.g. heavy metals, silica) and organic constituents for industrial reuse, surface water disposal and for indirect potable reuse applications (eg., ground water recharge) (M etcalf & Eddy, 2003). This project was investigation o f the removal o f the organic and heavy metals in wastewater using photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment simultaneously.

1.2 Objectives
The objectives o f the present study were:  To investigate the individual and combined Electrochemical and Photocatalytic treatment o f model organics and heavy metals with suspended titanium dioxide.  To investigate the behaviour of the Photocatalytic treatment o f Methylene Blue

 To investigate the effect o f various process parameters on the pollutant removal including: 1. Liquid Flowrate 2. Wavelength o f the ultraviolet light 3. pH o f the wastewater  To test the immobilization o f TiOa in the Rotating Photocatalytic Reactor  To investigate the combined Electrochemical and Photocatalytic treatment of model organics and heavy metals with immobilized titanium dioxide

CHAPTER 2 - LITERATURE SURVEY
2.1 Advanced Oxidation processes
Chemical oxidation may not oxidize a given compound or group o f compounds completely. In many cases, partial oxidation is sufficient to render specific compounds more amenable to subsequent biological treatment or to reduce tbeir toxicity. Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) are used to oxidize complex organic matters found in wastewater, wbieb are diffieult to degrade biologically into simpler end produets. The oxidation o f speeific compounds may be characterized as follows: 1. Primary Degradation; A structural change in the parent compound 2. Acceptable degradation: A structural change in the parent compound to the extent the toxicity is reduced. 3. Ultimate degradation (Mineralization): Conversion o f organic carbon to inorganic CO2. 4. Unacceptable degradation: A structural change in the parent compound resulting in increased toxicity. Advanced Oxidation Processes typically involve the generation and use o f the hydroxyl free radical (HO*) as a strong oxidant to destroy compounds that cannot be oxidized by eonventional oxidants sueb as oxygen, ozone, and eblorine. The hydroxyl radical is one of the most active oxidants known. The hydroxyl radical reacts with the dissolved pollutants, initiating a series o f oxidation reactions until the constituents are completely mineralized. Due to their nonseleetive reaction with pollutants and their ability to operate at normal temperature and pressures, hydroxyl radicals are eapable of oxidizing almost all reduced materials present in wastewater without restriction to specific classes or

groups o f compounds, as compared to other oxidants. One of the major differences between advanced oxidation and other treatment processes (such as ion exchange or stripping) is that the pollutants in wastewater are degraded rather than concentrated or transferred into a different phase. Since secondary waste materials are not generated, there is no need to dispose o f or regenerate materials (M etcalf & Eddy, 2003). Among various Advanced Oxidation Processes, (AOPs), the heterogeneous

photocatalytic process with titanium dioxide for the destruction o f pollutants in water and air, has been the subject o f much research recently (Dionysiou et al, 2000). Through years o f research by various researchers, heterogeneous photocatalysis was found as an emerging destructive technology leading to the total mineralization o f most o f organic pollutants (Guillard et al, 2003). In the present study, heterogenous photocatalytic process was proposed to degrade organic matter in the wastewater.

2.2 Electrochemical Deposition
Industrial wastewater, which contains inorganic pollutants much as heavy metals, is not easy to treat as metal ions are generally non-degradable. They have infinite lifetimes and build up their concentrations in food chains to toxic levels. In recent years, numerous methods o f the treatment for metals increase significantly with the development of industry. Thus, waste metal recovery can potentially resolve two issues: metals pollution prevention and simultaneously resource conservation. Precipitation, activated carbon adsorption, ion exchange, and membrane separations are common methods currently adopted for the treatment o f metal ions in wastewater (Pelizzetti and Serpone, 1989). All these methods have their own advantages and disadvantages. One o f the emerging technologies that can potentially resolve the two issues is the electrochemical deposition of metal ions by electrochemical method. The electrochemical treatment o f metal ion pollutants has several advantages as compared to the ones stated above, including the following: 1. The metal is normally produced in its most valuable form, which is the metallic form, and may be reused or recycled. 2. No extra reagents are added, and so the treated water or solution can often be recycled. 3. Sludge production is minimized. 4. The corresponding anodic reaction can be advantageously used; for example, undesirable complexing agents such as cyanide and various chelating agents and other organics may be destroyed at the anode o f the same cell (Rajeshwar and Ibanez, 1997).

2.3 Fundamental engineering aspects of Heterogeneous Photocatalytic reactors for water and wastewater treatment
The effectiveness o f the Heterogeneous Photocatalytic process is strongly dependent on the reactor design. The utilization o f radiation and solid catalysts in a synergic effect for performing chemical transformations o f species present in liquid mixtures makes the heterogeneous photocatalytic process more complex than other systems. For example, when stirred dispersions are used, the presence o f suspended solid particles makes fluid dynamic complications. The opacity, light scattering and depth o f radiation penetrations are also important factors affecting the efficiency o f the process. In general, the main difficulties in the heterogeneous photocatalytic reactors are: 1. The fluid dynamics o f a fluid solid system is highly non-ideal so that modeling of the specific system is generally needed. 2. The kinetics of a heterogeneous photocatalytic reaction is affected in a complex way by the concentration and the radiation fields that are influenced by the fluid dynamics. The set of conservation equations that model the photoreactor can only be solved numerically. These challenges slowed down the application o f research findings on the photocatalytic oxidation o f pollutants in wastewater to commercial processes. In addition, the difficulty o f the eommercialization o f the photocatlytic oxidation method using suspended catalyst in water and wastewater treatment stems basically from the fact that the post-treatment removal o f the semi-conductor catalyst causes a significant off-set in the benefits that might have been derived from the photocatalytic mineralization process. The photocatalyst particle size typically falls in a range between

30-300 mm. Therefore, the removal o f materials o f these minute diameters necessitates the use o f costly phase separation processes. Several alternatives have been proposed for dealing with the problem o f the post-treatment removal o f the photocatalyst. The approach has generally been to anchor the semi-conductor photocatalyst particles onto supports that are more readily removable (Skelton and Fabiyi, 2000).

2.4 Heterogeneous Photoreactors
The design o f the heterogeneous photoreactors is vital to the performance o f the organic degradation process. Over the past decades, many types o f reactors have been developed. In this section, some of the common photoreactors will be described (Schizvello, 1997): 1. Immersion well photoreactors 2. Annular reactors 3. Film type photoreactors 4. Rotating photoreactors

1. Immersion well photoreactors
This is the simplest type o f photoreactor, typically used in a laboratory scale as well as in a pilot scale. It is basically a stirred tank reactor in which solid titanium dioxide particles are generally suspended in liquid. One or more lamps are immersed in the suspension. In many cases conventional reactors are modified by mounting lamps well through their covers.

A -Lam p B - Transparent medium C-Wastewater D-Cooling water inlet Figure 2.1 - Immersion Well Photoreactor (Schiavello, 1997)

It can operate in a batch or continuous way. The main advantage o f this type of photoreactor is simplicity and very high photonic efficiency, whereas the disadvantages are: 1. In prolonged use, a thin film of very fine titanium dioxide particles is usually deposited on the lamp surface. Thus, the radiation decreases with time. To avoid this problem the lamp must be cleaned at fixed intervals. 2. Scale-up is unreliable to certain extent depending on the difficulty o f modeling the very complex radiation field.

2. Annular Photoreactor
In this kind o f reactor the reactive zone is limited by two coaxial cylinders. The lamp is placed on the symmetry axis. It can operate in batch or continuous way. Practically all of the photons emitted by the lamp reach the reacting medium. This type of reactor can utilize immobilized photocatalytic process by immobilizing the titanium dioxide on the outer walls o f the reactor.

(a)

A) Waste water Inlet B) Waste water Outlet, C) Cooling medium D) Lamp Figure 2.2 - Annular Photoreactor (Schiavello, 1997)

10

3. Film Type Photoreactor
In this kind o f photoreactor the reacting mediums forms a thin film of flowing liquid on the reactor wall which is externally irradiated. Usually this type of reactor is used for the evaluation o f the immobilized titanium dioxide films. One o f the typical reactors is shown in the following figure 2.3.
parabsltc rateetor

Sam p

products

(c)

Figure 2.3 - An example o f thin film Photoreactor (Schiavello, 1997)

11

4. Rotating Photoreactor
Rotating photo-reactor makes use o f immobilized photocatalyst. The basic design o f this type o f reactor is shown as the figure below:

Mercury ultra violet lamp
Sun

/ / | \ \ 7/|\\

a) Solar light

b) Artificial light
(Zheng

Figure 2.4 - Examples o f Rotating Photoreactor

et al, 2001)

According to Dionysiou et al, the major advantages for this type o f reactor include (Dionysiou et al 2000): 1. Immobilization of the titanium dioxide photocatalyst. 2. Reaction within a thin liquid film. 3. Good mixing. The mixing in the rotating photoreactor resembles closely to a ideal CSTR. 4. Ability to replace commercial UV light with natural sunlight, which would reduce the operating cost. 5. No demand for oxygenation other than oxygen uptake from the surrounding air. In the present study, a Rotating Photoreactor was used to treat a simulated wastewater containing organics and heavy metals.

12

CHAPTER 3 - LITERATURE BACKGROUND
3.1.1 H e te ro g e n e o u s P h o to c a ta ly sis By definition, photocatalysis can be defined as "acceleration o f a photoreaction by the presence o f a catalyst" (Pelizzetti and Serpone, 1989). Heterogeneous photocatalytic procress for water and air purification is one o f the Advanced Oxidation Processes that have been studied extensively. Heterogenous photocatalytic process can be defined as catalytic process during which one or more reaction steps occur by means o f electronhole pairs photogenerated on the surface o f solid semiconductor materials illuminated by lights o f suitable energy. Heterogeneous photocatalysis can be carried out in various media: gas phase, pure organic liquid or aqueous phases (Schiavello, 1997). For heterogenous catalysis, the overall process can be decomposed into five major steps (Janssen and Van Satten, 1999): 1. Transfer o f the reactants in the fluid phase to the surface o f the solid photocatalyst 2. Adsorption o f the reactants to the photocatalyst 3. Reaction in the adsorbed phase 4. Desorption o f the products from the photocatalyst surface 5. Removal o f the products from the solid fluid interface region

In step 3, the photocatalytic reaction occurs in the adsorbed phase. The only difference between the photocatalytic reaction and the catalytic reaction is the mode of activation o f the catalyst in which the thermal activation is replaced by a photonic activation at a semiconductor surface. For the photocatalytic reaction the rate increases as a consequence of an optical excitation o f a solid that remains chemically unchanged

13

(Schiavello, 1997). It is evident that steps 1 and 5 o f the catalytic process must also occur for the photocatalytic process. Moreover, it must be outlined that the adsorptiondesorption processes (step 2 and 4) are also essential in the photocatalytic process and they are also affected by the light irradiation. A photocatalytic reaction can be described as occurring via the following steps: a) Photogeneration o f electro-hole pairs by exciting a semiconductor with radiation of suitable light energy; b) Separation o f electro-hole pairs by traps that have a trapping rate higher than the recombination rate; c) Redox reaction by the separated electrons and holes with adsorbed substrates; d) Evolution o f the products and regeneration o f the catalytic surface (Schiavello, 1987). The last step (step d) o f the photocatalytic process indeed includes steps 4 and 5. The peculiarity o f the photocatalytic process is in step 3 (surface reaction) which develops according to steps a, b and c. Therefore, a photocatalytic process is o f the redox type, occurring through the separated holes and electrons, photogenerated by exciting a semiconductor with light. This working mechanism for the photocatalytic process can be defined as "redox mechanism" and the role o f the light is mainly to excite the solid which must be a semiconductor (Janssen and Van Santen, 1999).

14

3.1.2 Nature o f light
In order to facilitate a photocatalytic process that can be used to degrade pollutants in water, the role o f excitation of the semiconductor by light is important. "Light" is the electromagnetic radiation in the visible, near-ultraviolet, and near-infared spectral range. In the wave model, electromagnetic radiation is characterized by a wavelength, X, a frequency, v, and a velocity, c. The three quantities are related by the general equation: (Zumdahl, 1995) Xv=c (3.1)

Wavelength is the distance between two consecutive peaks or troughs in a wave. The frequency is defined as the number o f waves per second that pass a given point in space (Zumdahl, 1995). The value o f c is the speed o f the light (2.998 x 10*m/s in vacuum), whereas X and v assume a wide range o f values. The SI values for X and v are meters and hertz, respectively. The electromagnetic spectrum encompasses a range o f radiation from gamma-rays to radio waves, distinguished by their wavelengths as shown in the figure below. I W*elmgth (ran) K iv i
G reen '/ r r g ed

R A M im

M n

(tSüpedrumi oflsdhtik

Livfay
Wavetenath I

Figure 3.1-The electromagnetic spectrum Source: http://www.arc-flash.co.jp/arc/e/02f.html

15

In photochemistry we are concerned with the region ranging from 100 to lOOOnm. In the quantum model a beam o f radiation is regarded as a stream o f photons. A photon has no mass but it has a specific energy, E, related to the frequency o f the radiation, v, by the Planck relation:

E=hv

(3.2)

Where h is the Planck's constant (6.63 x ICf^^Js). Substiuting equation (3.1), the above equation can be rearranged to:

(3.3)
A The interaction o f light with molecular systems is generally an interaction between a molecule and one photon. It can be written in the general form of:

/t t

(3.4)

Where A denotes the ground state molecule, hv the absorbed photon, and *A the molecule in an "excited state". The excited molecule is the molecule A with an extra energy hv. This extra energy and the particular properties, which confer on the molecule, cause the photochemical process (Pelizzetti and Serpone, 1989).

16

3.1.3 Theory o f Semiconductor material and Titanium dioxide as the Photocatalyst
As previously described, the first step o f the photocatalytic oxidation process is the photogeneration o f electro-hole pairs by exciting a semiconductor with radiation o f suitable light energy. Unlike metals, semiconductors are characterized by two separated energy bands: a filled low-energy valance band and an empty high-energy conduction band (Pelizzetti and Serpone, 1989) The energy difference between the filled valance band to the bottom o f the vacant conduction band is known as the energy band gap Callister, 1999):

Figure 3.2 - Simplified energy band diagram for a semiconductor twww.ndhu.edu.tw/~k12center/scshool/school6.ppt) When the semiconductor is irradiated with light energy, the light radiation is absorbed by two basic mechanisms. One o f these is electronic polarization which is important only at light fi-equencies in the vicinity o f the relaxation firequency o f the constituent atoms. The other mechanism involves valence band-conduction band electron transitions, which depends on the electron energy band structure o f the material.

17

Absorption o f a photon o f light may cause the excitation o f anelectron from the nearly filled valance band, across the band gap, and into an empty statewithin the

conduction band, as shown from the figure above (3.2); a free electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valance band are created. The energy o f excitation, AE, is related to the absorbed photon frequency through equation (3.3) The excitation with the accompanying photoabsorption can take place only if the photon energy is greater than that of the band gap energy. Eg, that is if

(3.4)
In practice, there are many semieonductors that functioned as the photocatalyst. It is well doeumented that titanium dioxide is one o f the best photocatalyst for environmental application. Advantages o f titanium dioxide over other semiconductors include: 1. High activity 2. Large stability to light illumination 3. Relatively low cost as compared to other semiconductors 4. Nontoxicity Based on the equation (3.4), for anatase-type titanium dioxide the band gap energy is 3.2 electron volts (eV), which corresponds to UV light with a wavelength o f 388 nanometers (Fujishima et al, 1999). In summary, light excitation of the semiconductor promotes the electrons from the valance to the conduction band. This UV irradiation generates an electron-hole pair which has an energy equal or greater than the energy band gap of a semiconductor (>3.2

18

eV for titanium dioxide), generates an electron-hole pair as described in the following equation (Malato and Dibier, 2002):

T 1O 2 + h v

Ccb' +

(3.5)

3.1.4 Thermodynamics and kinetics o f heterogeneous photocatalytic process
From a physical point o f view, light absorption by a semiconductor such as titanium dioxide, induces the formation of electron hole pairs. The photo produced pairs can subsequently evolve in different ways (Schiavello, 1997): 1. They can recombine with emission o f thermal energy and/or luminescence as shown below (Malato and Dibier, 2002):

6cb + hvb^ -- ^ TiOz + energy (heat)

(3.6)

2. They can react with electron acceptor or donor species giving rise to reduction and oxidation processes, respectively. In the area o f water and waster treatment, the 2"'^ pathway, redox reaction with the electron-hole pair leads to the oxidation o f aqueous pollutants. The reaction pathways can be summarized by the simple diagram below:

19

H arndess H arm ful
HCHO

CO*

Light

Radical

4^ * -- Electron Figure 3.3 - An overall graphical representation o f the photocatalytic process with TiOi (Source: httD://www.arc-flash.oo.ip/arc/e/02f.htnnl)

In order to drive the reaction to the 2"^ path, oxygen, the most common electron acceptor in aqueous system, would act as the electron scavengers to O s" as shown by the following equation: Cob + 0 2 - ^ 0 2 * ' (3.7)

A t the same time, the positively charged electron "holes" can either be neutralized by OH' groups or water molecules which produce OH* radicals (Malato, 2002): h v b ^ + O H '^ O H * + H hvb^ + H2O OH* + HT (3.8) (3.9)

Or direct oxidation with the organic reactant (R) hvb^ + R R^* degradation products (3.10)

As an example o f the last reaction, holes can react directly with carboxylic acids generating CO2: RCOO' + hvb^-^ R* + CO2 (3.11)

20

Also, the superoxide produced in equation (3.7) can further undergo neutralization by protons (3.12) The HO2' will lead to the formation o f hydrogen peroxide 2 H 02` ^ H2O2 + O2 Next, the hydrogen peroxide, H2O2 may decompose into H2O2 + e O H ' + OH" (3.14) (3.13)

The products would go back to reaction (3.8) and continue. These series o f reaction lead to the generation o f the extremely reactive hydroxyl radical, OH*. (Malato and Dibier, 2002) The hydroxyl radical, OH*, is a powerful oxidant (Lakeshmi et al, 1995). The hydroxide radical is a strong oxidizer, even stronger than the chlorine used as a sterilizer, hypochlorous acid, and ozone.

The overall reaction o f the photocatalytic reaction can be represented by the following equation: OH* + pollutant + 0 2 ^ products (C 02, H 20,...) (3.15)

In the present study, when hydroxyl radicals are in contact with the Methylene Blue, the Methylene Blue can be ascribed to the cleavage o f the bonds o f the C-S^=C functional group R-S^=R' + OH* -> R -S(=0)-R ' +H+ (3.16)

21

The product, R -S(=0)-R ', can react further with the hydroxyl radicals to carbon dioxide, nitrate ions, ammonium ions and water as products in the reaction (Houas et al, 2001; Lakeshmi et al, 1995).

22

3.1.5 The Langmuir adsorption isotherm
According to several researchers (Malato and Dibier, 2002; Houas et al, 2001; Lakeshmi et al, 1995), the photocatalytic reaction of many organics, including methylene blue, were found to conform to a Langmuir adsorption isotherm. The Langmuir isotherm involves the following assumptions: 1. The surface is uniform 2. The adsorbed molecules form a monolayer 3. The adsorption-desorption equilibrium is comparable to that o f the vaporization of a liquid. If the adsorption o f an adsorbate A on a site S is symbolized by A + S -^ A S The rate o f adsorption, is given by: (3.17)

(3.18)
where ka = the rate o f constant o f adsorption P - partial pressure o f A [S] = concentration o f free sites The rate o f desorption, ra, is given by: rd=kd[AS] where kd = the rate o f constant o f desorption [AS] = concentration o f occupied sites Introducing the total concentration o f sites [So] (3.19)

+ /Wg/
The coverage, 6, o f the surface by A is defined as the ratio of:

(3.20)

23

g= At equilibrium ra=rd, 6 can be rewritten as: d = KP/(l+KP) where K = kc/kj is the adsorption constant

(3.21)

(3.22)

Similar consideration can be made with liquids. For adsorption from a liquid phase, P is simply replaced by the concentration C o f the considered adsorbate if the adsorption is nondissociative ^ = (3.23)

W hen the isotherm o f the photocatalytic activity resembles a Langmuir adsorption isotherm, the kinetics is of the Langmuir-Hingshelwood type and is characterized by (Pelizzetti and Serpone, 1989). (3.24)

dt Where

\ + KC

C = the concentration k = the rate constant K = apparent adsorption constant

A standard way o f using equation (3.24) to plot the experimental data in the forms o f the inverse initial rate versus inverse the initial concentration as expressed below:

1-1
~k~

1 1
k K C

where k and K can be obtained from the intercept and the slope o f the line respectively. In the area o f water and wastewater treatment, the Langmuir-Hinshelwood equation can be simplified to a first-order expression since the concentration o f reagent is usually low such that KC « 1 . (Houas et al, 2001)

24

r = - -- = kKC dt The equation can be further simplified to: - -- = k'C dt where k ' = kK

(3.26)

(3.27)

Under this circumstance, the apparent reactivity is the product o f two characteristics: its tendency to be converted when adsorbed, k, and its apparent adsorption constant, K. The constant, k ', is very likely to be a function o f illumination intensity, I. Hence comparisons between reactants can only be made when using the same catalyst and the same illumination sources. Also, factors like temperature, nature o f the reactant, pH, wavelength o f the incident light are likely to affect the k ' value.

25

3.2.1 Electrolytic process
In an electrolytic cell as shown in Figure 3.4, two metal electrodes o f a suitable metal, eg. platinum, are immersed in an aqueous solution o f a salt, an acid or base, where these electrodes are connected to a direct current source, a current flows through the solution at a certain minimum voltage. Reactions take place at the same time at both electrodes. Solutions, which conduct electrical current are termed electrolytes, and the overall process which occurs at the electrodes is termed electrolysis. The positively charged ions in the electrolyte, the cations, migrate towards the cathode connected to the negative pole o f the direct current source. The negatively charged ions, the anions, migrate towards the anode connected to the positive pole o f the direct current source. (Raub and Muller, 1967)
D irection of curr^efit etc. s o u r c e E le c tro n flow

4 ^ (/A C urrent 1

-o------------- À n m n W
-b lG ctro cy te

Figure 3.4 An Electroyltie Cell (Raub and Muller, 1967)

26

3.2.2 The Nerst Equation
The Nerst equation describes the relationship between the electrode potential and the concentration o f the ionic species involved in the electrode reaction. The general form of the Nerst equation is written as follow: (Newman, 1991)

<7 A

f ' (3.28)

where

R = Gas constant = 8.31 8.31 m^.Pa/mol.K
T = 298°K (=25°C)

F = Faraday number = 96500 coulomb Cj = Initial concentration Eh= potential This potential, Eh,n, o f an electrode in a solution having unimolar ion activity is known as the normal potential, ground potential or standard potential. A collection o f these normal potentials, arranged in the order o f their magnitude, gives the well-known

electrochemical potential series as shown in the following table.

27

rv
A u/A u  A u/A u-'"

0^/2H+ Pd.'TdZ" l'b/T'b-'-'
A&f'Ag

bi.7 ·  · } ' 1.42 -bL%3 +1.2 + 0.83 + 0.60 fOJ99

Ke/Fc-" P b /I + `- -

--

-4.036 0.116
0.23

So/Sm^+ Nif-Nt'-"
In /ln '

--0 .1 4 0
--

--0.25

Co/Co'* C4,'Cd=^ FB/Pe4"^ Cr,'Cr»+ Zn/Zn:-^

Rh/Rb'"*
C u/C u '

+ 0.6
0.52 + 0.34 1 - 0.005 + 0.00
+

Cu/Cu'" So/Sa*" H2AH+

0.27 0.34 -- 0.402 -- 0.44 - 0.71 -- 0.763 --^1.66 -- 1.75
-- --

Table 3.1 - Standard potential o f various metals (Raub and Muller, 1967) The practieal application of the Nemst equation is subject to limitations, because, being a thermodynamic law, it applies only to the thermodynamics o f a reaction. Catalytic effects, kinetic processes, overvoltages, reaction inhibitions, etc. can significantly alter the behavior o f an electrode from the expected results on the basis o f the Nemst equation.

28

3.2.3 Anodic Processes
In a bath containing an anode the oxidation reaction which gives rise to the passage of current at the anode consists of the emission o f metal ions into the solution according to the following reaction:
M - ^ M ^ + ze" (3.29)

In the present project, the following reaction may occur: 2H2O - > 0 2 + + 4e (3.30)

3.2.4 Cathodic processes
The cathodic processes can be summarized with the following general equation
M ^ + z e '- > M (3.31)

This is often accompanied by hydrogen deposition
2 l f + 2e" H2 (3.32)

Other reactions may also take place at the cathode, such as
+e (3.33)

In the present project, nickel and zinc ions were removed electrochemically as shown in the following reactions
Ni^+ + 2e" ^ N i (3.34)

Zn^^ + 2e

Zn

(3.35)

29

3.2.5 Choice o f materials for Anode and Cathode
General criteria in selection o f materials for cathodes and anodes used in electrocells are: · The cathode must be electrochemically stable at the pH range used to avoid corrosion · · The cathode and anode should have a high surface area per projected area The materials used for both the cathode and the anode must be economically feasible · The anode should be coated with a thin layer o f conductive material such as novel eonductive polymer materials to prevent corrosion. Stainless steel electrodes did not corrode as much as tin or nickel electrodes. For the present project, considering the above factors, the best material for the anode was stainless steel. Aluminum was used for the cathode due to the following reasons (Storrar,

2002):
1. Metals like platinum and gold are very expensive 2. Corrosion o f nickel cathode was observed in previous studies. Nickel corroded in a study conducted by Eltech Systems Corporation 3. Aluminum has been proven to reduce both dissolved zinc and nickel in past studies at Ryerson University by other researchers. (Boithi, 2002)

30

3.2.6 Model for the electrochemical treatment
In electrochemical engineering, there are three major types o f electrochemical reactors, which include batch reactors, continuous stirred reactors and plug flow reactors. In the present project a batch reactor with recycle (as shown in figure 3.5) was used.

R eactor

V

R e s e r v o ir

V r Figure 3.5 - Electrochemical Batch Reactor with Recycle

Figure 3.6 -Electrochemical Batch Reactor

31

According to Wendt and Kreysa (1999), the general electrode reaction could be modeled as

5 + VfS

= jP (3.36)

where v, is the stoichiometric coefficient o f electrons. The number o f moles produced at constant current, which provides a charge Q -lft, is given by:

If one takes the derivative with respect to time, t, the above equation can be rewritten as:

Since the rate of charge transfer is proportional to the electrode area, by dividing both sides o f equation the electrode area, Ag, the following equation is obtained: \ drip 1 /

(3.39)

where (I/Ag) is the current density, i. The above equation became: I drip dt 1 v,,F
.

(3.40)

Multiply both sides by Ag

32

By dividing both sides o f the equation with volume, equation 3.41 could be expressed in terms o f concentration as:

dt

v^F

(3.42)

dt

v^F

(3.43)

The term (i/veF) can be simplified to:

Introducing variable, K

^ = ^r

(3.45)

Sub (3.46) into (3.45)

^

=

(3.46)

33

Equation 3.46 represents al®* order decay o f metal concentration in the solution. This model can be used to evaluate the performance o f the electrolytic cell. Also, it can he integrated to give the following equation:

In ^ =

(3.47)

Therefore, the concentration o f the metal at time t can be expressed as: C, = Co exp[- K{t^ - to )] Alternatively, the above equation can be rewritten as: (3.48)

Co -C , =Co(l-exp[-Jir(t,-to)]}
w=W o {l - exp}- K{t, - to )]}

(3.49)
(3.50)

34

CHAPTER 4 - EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY
4.1.1 Set
UP

o f the Apparatus

In the present study, the experiment was conducted in two modes o f operation. The first one involved the study o f the combined suspended photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment o f a simulated wastewater containing organic matter and heavy metals. The effect o f liquid flowrate, wavelength, and pH on the pollutant removal rate was investigated. The second mode o f operation involved the study o f the combined immobilized photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment o f the same simulated wastewater. An experimental apparatus as depicted in Figure (4.1a) & (4.1b) was used. It consists of: 1) Plastic storage tank (76cm long x 60cm wide x 45cm high) 2) */2 horsepower Jet pump 3) Cooling coils were installed at the bottom o f the reactor to maintain the wastewater temperature at a constant level 4) An AC electric motor (Dayton Model #62081) was used to drive the rotating discs at 16RPM 5) A liquid flowmeter (Hedland Inc, Racine, Wl, USA) was used to measure the liquid flowrate. 6) Three low pressure Mercury UltraViolet (UV) lamps were used to provide UV light.

35

Table 4.1 - Ultraviolet lamp characteristics Description 254nm Ultraviolet Lamp 302nm Ultraviolet Lamp 365nm Ultraviolet Lamp Wavelength 254nm 302nm 365nm Model # UVS-28 UVM-28 UVL-28

7) Rotating Discs - a)Suspended Operation mode. Four mixing paddles (20cm x 8cm) were attached to the two discs. b) Immobilized Operation mode. Four Immobilized TiOz plate

(as described in Section 3.4) were attached to the two discs. 8) Electrolytic Cell - Consists o f 6 metal strips o f 316 Stainless steel and Aluminum (54cm long x 3.5cm wide)

4.1.2 Test equipment and reagents
1) Stirrer - The Thermalyne Magnetic Stirrer was used for dissolving powders like Methylene Blue, Titanium dioxide . ...etc 2) Scales - The Scientech SA21OD 3-digital scale was used for measurements o f all components added to the wastewater. 3) Power Supply - The Hewlett Packard 6218A Power supply was used to provide the necessary current and voltage to the electrolytic cell 4) Colorimeter --The Orbeco-Hellige colorimeter (model 975-MP, Orbeco Analytical System, Inc, Farmingdale, New York) was used to measure the concentration o f Zinc and Nickel ions in the sample

36

5) Spectrophotometer - The Ultraviolet/Visible Spectrophotometer (Perklin Elmer, Lambda 20) was used to measure the concentration o f Methylene Blue in the sample

4.1.3 Reagents
1) Methylene Blue --Methylene Blue, Sigma Alderich M44907-100G CAS#61-73-4 2) Zinc Sulfate - Zinc, 7-Hydrate, Crystal, JT Baker. 3) Nickel Sulfate - Nickelous Sulfate, 6-hydrate, Crystal, JT Baker. 4) Potassium Sulfate - Potassium Sulfate, Crystal, A&K Petrochem. 5) Titanium Dioxide - Titanium Dioxide Degussa P-25. Stochem Inc, Brampton, Canada.

37

Figure 4.1 - SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP (Suspended TIP. Mode)
Electrolytic Cell

LEGEND
ElecWc ^ ^

line

Globa valves line splitter
w ate r flow line R eturn
Line

A

f

-

Photocatalytic Rotating Disc

Water Outlet 7

Aluminum Calhocte Stainless Steel Anode

Motor

Flowmeter

3/4" PVC Pipe valve
45cm

Storage Tank

#1
Power Supply

sosm

76cm

valve

73cm
Water Inlet

; ----- ; -------------Cooling coil j

Mixing paddle for Suspension Operation mode

Figure 4.2 - SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP fimmobilized TiO_ mode^
Electrolytic Cell

LEGEND
- f - Electric

line

1 ^

^

Globe valves line splitter water flow line

.

bd

___

R etu rn Line

-- ë -----  ------ £-

Photocatalytic Rotating Disc
Immobilized TIC, Plate

Water Outlet

Aluminum Cathode Stainless Steel Anode

Motor

Flowmeter

3 /4 " P V C Pip©

45cm

Storage Tank
Power Supply

60cm

76cm

Water Inlet Cooling c o l t ]

4.2 Flow of water through apparatus
For each cycle, the water was pumped out o f the storage tank into the reactor by means of a je t pump. The flowing stream was split into a bypass line and through a flowmeter towards inlet at the bottom o f the reactor. The bypass valve (#1) was used to adjust and maintain various water flow rates. At the bottom o f the reactor, cooling coils, were used to maintain a constant temperature throughout the experiment. Two operations took place in the reactor, in the suspended photocatalytic operation mode, the ultraviolet lamps irradiated the titanium dioxide particles in water. In the immobilized photocatalytic operation mode, the ultraviolet lamps irradiated the immobilized titanium dioxide plates. This irradiation generated the photocatalytic reaction. The water then came into the electrocell region. The electrocell region is composed o f 6 strips o f stainless steel as the anode and 6 strips o f aluminum metal as the cathode aligned parallel to the water flow. After that, the water flowed out o f the reactor through an outlet at the top-side o f the reactor and back into the storage tank, and then another cycle started over again.

40

4.3

Experimental Procedure

The following steps were followed for each experimental trial. 1. The experimental unit was cleaned with distilled water before each run. This is accomplished by running the system w ith distilled water for 24 hours. 2. The system was drained and the simulated wastewater was added to the tank. The composition o f simulated wastewater was: Distilled Water Nickel Sulphate Zinc Sulphate Methylene Blue Titanium Dioxide operation mode) Supporting electrode (Potassium Sulphate) 3. The pump was started, the water flowrate was regulated using the bypass valve (#1). The heat exchanger, and the motor for the rotating discs were turned on. 4. After an hour o f mixing, the ultraviolet lamps and the power supply the electrocell were turned on. 5. Samples were taken at 0 ,2 4 ,4 8 and 72 hours. The system was assumed to be well mixed. The samples were taken firom the return line o f the reactor as shown in figure 3.1 6. The concentration o f Methylene Blue was determined by using a spectrophotometer. 7. Zinc and Nickel in mg/L were determined. 320 Liters 40ppm 40ppm D igram s 20grams (for suspended photocatalytic

41

8.

The system was turned o ff after 72 hours. The apparatus was thoroughly flushed with water. All residual at the bottom o f the storage tank or reactor was vacuumed.

42

4.4 Determination of Methylene Blue concentration by UltravioietA^isibie Absorption Spectrometry
The concentration o f Methylene Blue was determined by absorbance using a UV/visible Spectrophotometer. (Perklin Elmer, Lambda 20) For the present study, most o f the sample contained significant amount o f titanium dioxide. Since titanium dioxide is white in color and it is not dissolved in water, the presence o f titanium dioxide directly affect the measurement o f absorbance by blocking the analyzing beam o f the spectrophotometer which would give a higher absorbance reading. Therefore, the samples had been allowed to settle for 24 hours in the dark before measurements o f Methylene Blue were carried out.

43

4.5 Calibration of the spectrophotometer for the determination of Methylene Blue concentration
The concentration o f Methylene Blue is determined by measuring the absorbance using a spectrophotometer. According to the Beers Law, the concentration is related to the absorbance as:

A =8bc
Where A is absorbance (no units, since A = logjo P o / P )

(5.1)

8 is the molar absorbtivity with units o f L m o f' cm ' b is the path length o f the sample - that is, the path length o f the cuvette in which the sample is contained. c is the concentration o f the compound in solution, expressed in mol L ' Samples o f known concentration o f methylene blue solutions were measured at 664nm wavelength and the data obtained is presented in table 5.1 Table 5.1 - Tabulated resu ts for Absorbance vs Methylene Blue concentration
[MB] (PPM) 0 0.504 1 2.09 2.532 3.046 3.514 4.06 25.18 40.12 Absorbance -0.0003 0.1254 0.2524 0.5134 0.6095 0.7233 0.8288 0.9334 1.9613 2.3595

The wavelength o f 664nm was used because methylene blue has a peak absorption at this wavelength as shown in the plot o f absorption scanning in appendix B. It is expected that the absorbance and concentration should be related linearly according to the Beers Law. However, at absorbance >1.0, the linear relationship did not apply. This was due to the

44

limitations o f the Beer's Law. According to Skoog et al (1998), deviations from the direct proportionality between the measured absorbance and concentration are frequently encountered. A t high concentrations, the average distance between the molecules is diminished to the point where each molecule affects the charge distribution o f its neighbors. This interaction, in turn, can alter the ability o f the molecules to absorb a given wavelength o f radiation. For example, the molar absorptivity at 436nm for the cation o f methylene blue in aqueous solution is reported to increase by 88% as the dye concentration increased from 10'^ to lO'^M. (Skoog et al, 1998) Therefore, only data points with absorbance <1 were used for the calibration o f Methylene Blue vs Absorbance as shown below. Figure 4.1c -Absorbance vs Methylene Blue Concentration

Absorbance v s |MB]
y = 0.2361X S

R2 = 0.9982
- absorbance -Linear (absorbance)

0.6 I Ô 0.4

c

r :
0

1

2

3

4

5

Concentration of MB (ppm)

Using Microsoft Excel's linear regression, the following linear relationship between MB concentration and absorbance was obtained: A= 0.2361 [MB] (5.2)

This equation was used for the determination o f the Methylene Blue concentration throughout the present study.

45

4.6 Determination o f Zinc and Nickel concentration in the wastewater
The dissolved metals, Zni^ and N i^ , were determined using a pre-calibrated colorimeter. (Orbeco - Helige Model 975-MP, Water Analysis system. Orbeco Analytical Systems, Inc, Farmingdale, New York.) The colorimeter instructions were followed for Nickel Test #41 and Zinc Test #27, as provided by the manufacturer. These tests are included in Appendix C. By using uncertainty analysis, the uncertainty o f the percentage removal o f nickel is found to be 6.1%. In section 5.3, after 72 hours o f treatment, the percentage removal o f nickel is 67.0 ± 6.1 %. Similarly, by using uncertainty analysis, the uncertainty o f the percentage removal o f zinc is found to be 9.1%. In section 5.3, after 72 hours o f treatment, the percentage removal o f zinc is 63.4 ± 9.1 %.

46

4 .7 Im m o b iliza tio n p ro ced u re o f th e tita n iu m d io x id e
In photocatalytic water treatment the difficulty o f the commercialization o f the photocatlytic oxidation method in water wastewater treatment stems basically from the fact that the post-treatment removal o f the semi-conductor materials utilized as the photocatalyst causes a significant off-set in the benefits o f the photocatalytic mineralisation process. The problem is due to the small particle size o f the photocatalyst. To solve this problem, numerous immobilization methods have been tested. A report written by Pozzo et al (1997) provided a summary o f the commonly used immobilized methods. A binding material is usually used to physically bond the titanium powder to a supporting material. Two conditions must be satisfied for the process to be feasible in photocatalysts onto supports: A good adherence catalyst/support, and nondegradation o f the catalyst activity by the attachment process (Skelton and Fabiyi, 2000).

The following section outlines the steps o f the immobilization method used in the present study: 1. 4 plates (48cm long x 16.5cm wide) were cut out o f a polycarbonate sheet. According to Kwon et al (2004), polycarbonate sheet is a good supporting material for photocatalyst as it exhibit minimum amount o f decomposition by UV light. 2. A plastic mesh was glued firmly to the polycarbonate plate with acrylate solvent (containing Methylene chloride, Trichloroethylene, Methyl Methacrylate

Monomer. IPS corporation, Gardena, CA) as shown in figure 4.2:

47

Figure 4.2 - Polycarbonate sheet The objective o f adding the plastic mesh was to increase the surface area for the attachment o f the binding material and the titanium dioxide. 3. A thin layer of PVC glue (binding material) was applied on top o f the polycarbonate plate. 4. Titanium dioxide powder was then sprinkled on top o f the plate immediately after step 3 as shown in figure 4.3. It is important that the powder is sprinkled as fast as possible since the PVC glue dries quickly.

Figure 4.3 - Unfinished immobilized titanium dioxide plate 5. Applied light pressure onto the titanium dioxide layer to ensure the titanium dioxide powder "stick" with the PVC glue.

48

6. The plates was placed in a ventilated place to dry at room temperature for 24 hours (Figure 4.4). The plates were then placed to a water bath for at least 3 hours to remove the unattached titanium dioxide.

I

Figure 4.4 - Immobilized titanium dioxide plate 7. The titanium dioxide was taken out o f the water bath and ready for use as shown in figure.

Figure 4.5 - Used titanium dioxide plate

49

CHAPTER 5 - RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
5.1 Photocatalytic treatment o f Methylene Blue, Nickel and Zinc with suspended titanium dioxide >

One o f the first objectives o f the present study is to investigate the effect o f photocatalytic treatment on water constituents with suspended titanium dioxide. To study the effectiveness o f the suspended photocatalytic treatment for organic matter, the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue was measured at 0 hours, 24 hours, 48hours and 72 hours and tabulated in the table 5.1: Table 5.1 - Percentage Removal of Methylene Blue in suspended photocatalytic treatment
Treatment Time (hours) 0 24 48 72

Absorbance 0.718 0.584 0.541 0.459

[MB] (mg/L) 3.04 2.47 2.29 1.94

[MB} Removal 0.0

%

18.7 24.7
36.1

The variation o f the removal o f Methylene Blue with treatment time is presented on Figure 5.1
Figure 5.1 - Methylene Bue Percentage Removal vs Treatment Time in suspended photocatalytic treatment

40.00 30.00 20.00
1 10.00 0.00
Treatment Time (hours)

50

As shown in Figure 5.1, the irradiated suspended titanium dioxide by UV lamp was capable to mineralize organic matter such as Methylene Blue using the apparatus developed in the present study. The percentage removal o f Methylene Blue increased with the treatment time. Due to the low percentage removal rate (36% in 72 hours), and the low number o f data points (4 data points), it is difficult to conclude whether the removal rates exhibit first order or zero order removal. In the present study. Zinc and Nickel were used as the model heavy metal ions. Semiconductor photocatalysis was reported to be able to eliminate certain types o f heavy metals such as: gold, platinum and mercury (Schiavello M, 2001). Thus, the percentage removal o f Zinc and Nickel was investigated under photocatalytic treatment and the results obtained are tabulated in Table 5.2 and plotted in Figure 5.2
Table 5.2 - Zinc and Nickel Percentage Removal vs Treatment Time in suspended photocatalytic treatment
Zinc Removal 0.00 1.85 7.04 4.07 % Nickel Removal 0.00 -0.72 3.24 2.64 %

Time 0 24 48 72

51

Figure 5.2 - Percentage Removal of Zinc and Nickel vs Treatment Time in Suspended Photocatalytic Treatment

I

29.00 s 24.00 19.00 0 > 14.00 S 9.00 4.00 Q. 1.00
(0

-- Zinc % Removal -- Nickel % Removal

I

-

0

20

40

60

80

Treatment Time (hours)

From Figure 5.2, it is observed that the photocatalytic treatment has insignificant effect on the removal o f the dissolved zinc and nickel metals after 72 hours o f treatment. It is believed that; 1) Photocatalytic treatment for heavy metal ions is only effective on some specific types o f heavy metals. In the present study, the photocatalytic treatment has no effect on zinc and nickel ions. According to a study by Ray, semiconductor photocatalysis is unable to remove nickel ions. (Chen and Ray, 2001) 2) The applied light intensity (0.5kW/cm^) does not provide enough energy to reduce the nickel and zinc ions into metals. A detailed explanation is given in seetion 5.7.

52

5.2 Photocatalytic treatment o f Methvlene Blue. Nickel and Zinc with immobilized titanium dioxide
As stated in the experimental section, titanium dioxide, the photocatalyst, was immobilized onto the polycarbonate sheets, which was the supporting material, by a binding material, PVC cement. Refer to the experimental section for the immobilization procedures. After 72 hours o f treatment, percentage removal o f Methylene Blue, Nickel and Zinc was determined and tabulated in Table 5.3;
Table 5.3 - Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel Percentage Removal vs Treatment Time in immobilized

Treatment
Time

(hours)
0 24 48 72

MB % Removal BLANK

Zinc % Removal Nickel % Removal

0.00 5.69 9.64 14.89

0 0.5 1.1 1.7

0.00 4.89 1.50 0.77

0.00
2.22

1.40 3.39

The change o f organic matter by the Rotating Photocatalytic Reactor can be investigated by plotting the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue vs Treatement Time;
Figure 5.3 - Percentage Removal of Methylene Blue Vs Treatment Time for Immobilized R.P.R. 16 14 O 12 3 10
c

T Û -- knmobiiized RPR 4-- Blank

u oc

II

8 6 4
2 0

0

20

40 T reatm ent Time (h o u rs)

60

80

53

The blank experimental trial was defined as an experiment with the same operating parameters as the one being compared without the photocatalyst, titanium dioxide, and no voltage through the electrocell. W ith the absence o f the photocatalyst, titanium dioxide, there was a slight percentage reduction (1.7%) o f Methylene Blue after the experiment was run for 72 hours. Figure 5.3 shows that the immobilized is effective for the treatment o f Methylene Blue. Although the rate o f removal is low (15% in 72 hours), significant amount o f methylene blue can be decolorized after extended period o f treatment. However, no significant reduction for dissolved zinc and nickel is observed as shown from figure 5.4. Any removal is believed to be contributed to the experimental error throughout the experiment as described in the error section.

Figure 5.4 - Percentage Removal of Zinc and Nickel v s Treatem ent Time for Immobilized photocatalytic treatm ent

30.00 T

^ 5 20.00
S 10.00 0.00 0 20 40 60 80
Treatment Time

-4-- Zinc % Removal Nickel % Removal

54

5.3 Electrochemical treatment o f Methvlene Blue, Zinc and Nickel
The electrochemical technology, which is well known as " a clean method o f wastewater treatment" , has lots o f advantages (An et al, 2002). The ability to retrieve precious metals from dilute solutions and eliminate unwanted toxic metals stimulated research on this technology. In the present study, the role o f electrochemical treatment was to remove dissolved Zinc and Nickel ions from the wastewater. The results on the electrochemical treatment o f wastewater containing Nickel and Zinc are presented in tables 5.4 and 5.5 and plotted in Figure 5.5 as: Table 5.5 - Percentage Removal o f Zinc by electrochemical treatment
C olorim eter R ead in g 3.06 2.15 1.75 1.12

T im e 0 24 48 72

C oncentration(m g/L ) 4 5 .9 3 2.3

26.3
16.8

P e rc e n ta g e 100.0 70.3 57.2 36.6

Z inc % R em oval 0.0 2 9 .7 4 2 .8 6 3.4

Table 5.6 - Percentage Removal o f Nickel by electrochemical treatment
C olorim eter R ead in g 9.13 7.01 4 .7 6 3.01 Nickel R em oval 0.000 2 3 .2 2 0 4 7 .8 6 4 %

T im e 0 24 48 72

C oncentration(m g/L ) 36.52 2 8 .0 4 19.04 12.04

P e rc e n ta g e 100.000

76.780
5 2 .1 3 6 3 2 .9 6 8

67.032

55

Figure 5.5 - Percentage Removal of Z n c and Nickel vs Treatment time by electrochem ical treatment

80.0

a.

II

o >

60.0 40.0
20.0 0.0
0 20 40 60 80

-$-- Zinc % Removal
-m --

Nickel % Removal

Treatment Time (hours)
Figure 5.5 shows that the electrochemical treatment is effective for the elimination o f Nickel and Zinc ions as more than 50% o f the dissolved metals were removed in 72 hours. The error bars for the percentage zinc removal was found to be ±9% using 2 standard deviations o f 6 measurements. Similarly, the error bars for the percentage zinc removal was found to be ±6% using 2 standard deviations o f 6 measurements. The standard reduction potential for Nickel ion, Ni^^, is -0.23V, which is higher than that o f -0.76V for Zinc ion, Zn^^ (Atkins, 1986). It was thus expected that Ni^^ would be removed more readily from the electrolyte than Zn^^ (Doan et al, 2003). However, Roventi et al reported that in the presence o f Ni^^ in the electrolyte, Zn^^ co deposited with Ni^^ at a lower potential than that for pure Zn^^ deposition. (Roventi et al, 2000). Nevertheless, in the present study as shown by the error bars in figure 5.5, no significant difference is observed between the rate o f deposition o f zinc and rate of deposition o f nickel.

56

N ot only the method o f electrochemical deposition is capable to remove the amount o f toxic metal ions in wastewater, it is also known to be effective for several organic and toxic pollutants (Vlyssides et al, 2000). Based on this fact, the removal o f Methylene Blue by electrochemical treatment was examined and plotted in figure 5.6.
Figure 5.7 Methylene Blue Percentage Removal vs Treatment Time in electrochemical Treatment
-

25.0 20.0 15.0
Removal -$-- Blank % Removal

5? 10.0
5.0 0.0 0 20 40 60 80

Treatment Time (hours)

After 72 hours o f electrochemical treatment at a current o f 200mA, Methylene Blue concentration was reduced by 23.5%. This demonstrated that a significant amount o f Methylene Blue was removed by the electrochemical treatment as compared to 3.5% removal without an external current. Similar observation were reported by with other researchers (Gulyas, 1997; Dziewinski et al, 1998).

57

5.4 Effect o f combined Electrochemical and Suspended Photocatalytic Treatment o f Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel
The major focus o f the present study is to investigate the combined Photocatalytic and Electrochemical Treatment o f the organic matter and metal ions in water. The preceding sections demonstrated the individual effect o f Suspended Photocatalytic, Immobilized Photocatalytic and Electrochemical technique for the reduction o f Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions in the simulated wastewater. To investigate the combined effect, an experiment using both suspended photocatalyic and electrochemical treatment was performed and the results obtained are tabulated in the following table: Table 5.6 - Percentage Removal of Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel in the combined treatment
T im e(hours) 0 24 48 72 MB R em oval 0 .0 0 13.80 3 1 .1 3 46.11 % Zinc R em oval 0.0 0 2 4 ,5 3 52.83 69.81 % Nickel R em oval 0 .00 29 .1 6 50.84 6 5 .5 4 %

Culminating the results o f the above table, the following table summarizes the individual and combined effects of the Immobilized, Suspended Photocatalytic and Electrochemical treatment on the removal of Methylene Blue, Zinc, and Nickel ions after 72 treatment hours. Table 5.7 Individual and combined effects of photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment after 72 treatment hours
UV light Intensity 0 0.5m W /cm ^ 0.5m W /cm ^ 0 Electrocell V o ltage & C u rren t 0 0 0 6V 200m A MB % R em oval 3 .39 36 .0 7 Zinc % R em oval Nickel % R em oval

Blank (N o T re a tm e n t) S u s p e n d e d Ptiotocatalytic tre a tm e n t Im m obilized Photocatalytic tre a tm e n t E lectro ch em ical T re a tm e n t C o m b in ed S u s p e n d e d P h o to cataly tic & E lectro ch em ical T re a tm e n t

4.87
4 .0 7 6 .7 7 6 3.4

3.38
2.64

14.89
& 2 3 .5 4

3.39 67.03

6V
0.5m W /cm ^ 200m A

&
46.11 69.81

65.54

58

Experiments, from which the data obtained are presented in table 5.7, were performed using the following experimental parameters: Table 5.8 - Operating parameters for Section 5.3-5.6
W a ste w a te r V olum e Flow rate T e m p e ra tu re .p H 320L 24L7min 24-25°C 5.5 -6 .0

.. ......

Based on table 5.8 and observations described in the previous sections, the following points can be drawn for 72 hours o f treatment: · Both Suspended and Immobilized Photocatalytic treatment were effective for treating Methylene Blue · Both Suspended and Immobilized Photocatalytic treatment were ineffective for treating Zinc or Nickel ions · Electrochemical Treatment was effective for treating Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions. · No difference was observed between the percentage removal o f Zinc ions and nickel ions in all treatments · Suspended Photocatalytic treatment for Methylene Blue appeared to be more effective than the Immobilized Photocataltytic treatment. This is attributed to the much larger catalyst surface area in suspended titanium dioxide particles The results on the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue, Z f^ and, Ni^^ with the treatment time for the combined suspended photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment are plotted in the figures 5.8 to 5.10.

59

Figure 5.8 - Com pars ion of the combined effect of Suspended Photocatalytic & Bectrochem leal Treatment to other m ethods on the removal of Methylene Blue

50

I
m

1

40

-e -- Blank Bectrochemical Suspended Photocatalysis Combined

30
20 10 0 0

I

20

40
Time (hours)

60

80

Figure 5.9 - C om paraon o f the com b ined effect of S u sp en d ed Photocatalytic & Electrochem ical Treatment to other m ethods on the rem oval o f Zn^*
80 Blank I 60

g c
N

I

40 30
on

^ -

- Bectrochemical Suspended Photocatalysis Contined

0

20

40

Time (h o u rs)

60

80

Figure 5.10 - Com pars ion of the combined effect of Suspended Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal of M2+

75

- e -- Blank -m-- Bectrochemical Suspended Photocatalysis

I
z ^

g 55
35 15 -5 0 20 40
Tim e (hours)

60

80

-- Combined

60

Similar trends were observed electrochemical or

with the treatment using individual effect, i.e. effect only and the combined immobilized

photocatalytic

Photocatalytic and Electrochemical Treatment on the removal o f Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions as shown in Figures 5.11, 5.12 and 5.13.
Figure 5.11 - Com pars ion of the combined effect of Immobilized Photocatalytic & Qectrochemical Treatment to other m ethods on the ____ removal of Methylene Hue
Blank

Bectrocherrical

immobilized Photocatalysis

0

20

40

60

80

Treatment Time (hours)

-K -- Immobilized photocatalysis & Bectrocherrical

Figure 5.12 -Comparsion of the combined effect of Immobilized Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal of 23^*

.
8

80

--4 --

Blank

5 ! 60
2 2 40

I

-- a-- Electrochemical Immobilized Photocatalysis -- X-- Irmobilized photocatalysis & Electrochemical

0

20

40

60

80

Treatment Time (hours)

61

Figure 5.13 - Comparsion of the combined effect of immobilized Photocatalytic & Electrochemical Treatment to other methods on the removal of Ni'* [%*ZBiank

A
40

Bectrocherrical

20 0 Treatment Time (hours)

tmiobilized Photocatalysis Immobilized

There was a synergy effect on the treatment o f Methylene Blue when the
photocatalytic and electrochemical method were used simultaneously. After 72 hours o f treatment, the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue in the combined Suspended Photocatalytic and Electrochemical method was 46.1%, while it was only 36.1% for the Suspended Photocatalytic method and 23.5% for the electrochemical method alone. The same observation was noted for the Immobilized Photocataltyic method, where the percentage o f Methylene Blue in the combined immobilized Photocatalytic and Electrochemical method was 28.9%, while it was only 14.9% for the Immobilized Photocatalytic method and 23.5% for the electrochemical method. It is believed that this enhancement effect is due to 3 major reasons: 1) Influence o f iron species on the photoactivity o f aqueous suspensions o f titanium dioxide. 2) Reduction o f recombination process o f the electron-hole pair by the external electric field. 3) The anodic oxidation o f organic by the external current. The photoreactivity was known to be strongly influenced by some inorganic species in the reacting system (Schiavello, 1987). One such species is the iron, Fe~^ & F e^\ ions. (Mrowetz and Selli, 2003). In the present study, it is believed that iron ions

62

were generated by anodic corrosion o f the anode at the electrocell. When suitable amounts o f iron ions are present, some processes having beneficial influence on the photoreaction can occur. Among them, the most relevant reactions are:
lFe}+ + e\cb) --»lFe2+
F e^^ + H 02*(surf) +H^( aq) -- + H 202(surf)

(5 .1 )
(5 -2 )

Fe^'^ + H202(surf) +H^(aq)-- » Fe^'^ + OH" + H2O
Fl202(surf)

(5.3) (5.4)

+ e (cb) -- » OH' + OH"

In reactions (5.1-5.4), Fe^^ behaves as cocatalyst and mediator. Fe^^ ions produced according to reaction (5.1) react with photo-produced H2O2 and/or peroxide radicals according to reactions (5.2) and (5.3). These last species can be photo-produced on the surface o f the catalyst according to the following reactions:
02(ads) + e'cb + H^(aq) --* H02"(surf)
H 02"(surf) + e cb + H^(aq) --^ H 2 O 2

(5 5)
(5 .6 )

By taking into account all the reactions described above, the concentration o f OH" radicals, i.e. the primary oxidant species o f the photodegradation process, increased. These increased hydroxyl radicals, as mentioned in the theory section, would be able to oxidize organic matters like Methylene Blue. The second possible cause o f the enhancement effect for the combined photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment is the reduction o f the recombination o f the electron-hole pairs at the catalyst surface. It has been repeatedly confirmed that the external electric field could enhance greatly photocatalytic efficiency, which is well known as an electric field enhancement o f synergetic effect (An et al, 2002; Pelegrini et

PROFEm yOF
RYER90N UNiVkdSITY UBRAIIV

63

al, 1999). As described in the theory section, after the photocatalyst is excited, the electron-hole pair can subsequently evolve in different pathways (Schiavello, 1997): 1. They can recombine with emission o f thermal energy and/or luminescence. The electrons and holes can recombine as (Malato and Dibier, 2002): Ccb + hvb^ --» T 1O 2 + e n e rg y (h e a t) (5.10)

W ith the combination o f the electrochemical technique, the external applied bias drives away the accumulated electrons via the external current, thereby promoting the selective oxidation o f the dye on the TiOi surfaces. Therefore by reducing the recombination pathway, the desired, 2"^ pathway increases. 2. React with electron acceptor or donor species giving rise to reduction and oxidation processes, respectively. 3. The final cause o f the enhancement effect for the combined phtocatalytic and electrochemical treatment is the anodic oxidization o f organic material. As described in section 5.3, Methylene Blue, which was the model organic used in the present study, was reduced by the electrochemical treatment after 72 hours o f treatment.

64

5.5 The Kinetic constant for Photocatalytic Treatment o f Methylene Blue
As mentioned in the theory section, the photocatalytic reaction with many organics, including methylene blue, were found to conform to a Langmuir absorption isotherm as

d C _ kKC d t X+KC (5.8)

In the area o f water and wastewater treatment, the Langmuir-Hinshelwood equation can be simplified to a first-order expression since the concentration o f reagent is usually low such that KC « 1 (Houas et al, 2001).

!

(5.9)

where k ' = kK = decay rate constant The above equation can be integrated to:

In

= -k't
(5.10)

where Q = concentration o f Methylene Blue at a give time t Co = initial concentration o f Methylene Blue in the batch k '= decay rate constant In previous sections, all experiments were performed in 72 hour period. Since a sample was acquired in 24 hours, only 4 data points was available. In order to study the trend o f the removal o f Methylene Blue vs treatment time, more data points were required. Therefore, a run o f 162 hours o f suspended photocatalytic was performed and the fraction o f Methylene Blue remaining in the holding tank with treatment time is plotted in Figure 5.14

65

Figure 5.14 - Fraction o f Methylene Blue remaining vs Treatment Time for suspended photocatalytic treatment after 162 hours o f treatment

0.8

0.2
0 30 60 90 120 150 180

Treatment Time (hours)
As shown in Figure 5.14, the concentration profile o f Methylene Blue show an exponential decay in the batch, which coincided with the Langmuir-Hinshelwood equation at low concentration. In order to determine the decay rate constant, k ', a plot o f -ln(Ct/Co) vs t had to be plotted as shown below: Figure 5 .1 5 - Determination o f the decay rate constant for Methylene Blue

-In (Ct/Co) v s Time

^ ° oi44x
= 0.9468
X

S uspended Photo.

50

100 Time (hours)

150

200

· Linear (Suspended Photo.)

Using linear regression, k ' was found to be 0.0144 If'. Similarly, this model was applied to the immobilized photocatalytic process and the decay rate constant was found to be 0.0022 h''. However, when the rate constants were compared to similar experiments by other researchers, the suspended and immobilized photocatalytic decay rate constant

66

appeared to be much smaller than those found in the present study as shown by the table 5.10. This was primarily due to the different process parameters used in the present study. To demonstrate the contribution o f the specific process parameters, the specific decay rate constant, k" can be defined as:

k' = k"-

V
(5.11)

Where k ' = decay rate constant (hour'') Asac = Surface area o f the photocatalyst (m^) V = Wastewater volume Therefore, by taking the volume o f wastewater, surface area o f the photocatalyst into account, it was observed that the results obtained in the present study are comparable to other researchers as shown in table 5.9. Further, the specific rate constant is directly related to the light intensity. Table 5.9 Comparison o f decay rate constants with other researchers
D ecay R a te C o n stan t, k' S u spended P h o to c a ta ly sis in th e p re s e n t study S uspended P h o to c a ta ly sis by R A JE SH W A R e t al, 1999 Im m obilized P h o to c a ta ly sis in th e p re s e n t study Im m obilized P h o to c a ta ly sis by Kuo e t al, 2 0 0 0 W a ste w a te r V olum e Specific R a te C o n stan t, k"

Light Intensity

0.0 1 4 4 h r^

320L

0 .5 m W /cm 2

0.0 7 3 L/m^.hr

4.65hr'^

1L

1.0 m W /cm 2

0 .0 9 3 L/m^.hr

0.0022hr"

320L

0 .5 m W /cm 2

2 .3 4 L/m^.hr

0.456hr^

8L

3 .0 m W /cm 2

14.59L /m ^hr

67

5.6 The Effect o f flowrate on the removal o f Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions by combined photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment
Liquid velocity influences both the mass transfer rate o f metal ions from the electrolyte to the electrodes, and the mass transfer rate o f organic matter from the bulk to the surface o f the photocatalyst, titanium dioxide. In the present study, experiments with various liquid flowrate o f 8, 16, 24, and 24 Liters per minute were performed to study the effect o f flowrate for Methylene Blue, Zinc and Nickel ions by combined photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment. The results obtained are tabulated in the following tables and plotted in Figures 5.16 to 5.18. Table 5.10 - Effect o f flowrate in combined treatment for Methylene Blue
M ethylene Blue T im e 0 24 48 72

Flowrate
8 0 .0 0 14.39 29.07 4 4 .4 9 16 0 .00 13.80 31.13 4 2 .7 3 24 0 .00

16.78
31.51 4 9 .9 3

32 0.00 12.25 2 7 .1 3 4 1 .8 7

Table 5.11 --Effect o f flowrate in combined treatment for Zn 2+
Zinc T im e 0 24 48 72

Flowrate
8 0.00 33.19 52.50 63.1 7 16 0 .00 2 6 .2 5 4 5 .9 4 6 8 .3 5 24 0 .0 0 2 4 .5 3 32 0.00 29.70

52.83
69.81 ^

56.15
65 .3 3

Tab e 5.12 - Efiect o f flowrate in combined treatment for Ni^^
Nickel T im e 0 24 48 72

Flowrate
8 0.00 33 .3 5 46 .1 5 6 2 .1 7 16 0 .0 0 2 7 .9 0 5 0 .8 7 60.31 24 0 .0 0 2 9 .1 6 5 0 .8 4 6 5 .5 4 32 0.00 30.50 52.25 68.86

68

CD

» m

60.00 50.00 40.00 0> 30.00
Q >

Figure 5.16 - Methylene Blue Percentage Removal vs Row rate

~k-- 24hrs

48hrs 72hrs

20.00
10.00 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 Flowrate (L/min)

Rgure 5.17 · Percentage Removal of Zn^* vs Row rate

80.00 O J 75 60.00 § 1 40.00
C l -~x

Ohr -m --24hr
-A --

i 5 20.00
0.00 10 20 30 40 Flowrate (L/min)

32hr 48hr

Rgure 5.18 - Percentage Removal of

vs Row rate

® 80.00 | » « 60.00 S I 40.00

->é=

-A

-s--Ohr
-a --

I g 20.00
o0.00 0 10 20 30 40 Flowrate (L/min)

24hr

-A-- 48hr

-^ 7 2 h r

69

As shown in figures 5.16-5.18, for the range o f liquid flowrate used in the present study, the liquid flowrate had no significant effect to the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue, Zn^^ and Ni^^. The main reason o f the ineffectiveness o f the flowTate to the Percentage Removal in the present study was due to the nature o f the experimental setup. In the combined suspended photocatalytic operation, the dispersed titanium dioxide in water required constant mixing in order to prevent the titanium dioxide from settling to the bottom o f the tank. Therefore, the effect o f hydrodynamic change by the inlet flowrate may be overshadowed by the effect o f vertical mixing due to the rotating paddles in the reactor. To demonstrate this in detail, the velocities o f water flowing across the reactor, Vh, was rather small as shown in Table 5.13 below: Table 5.13 - Linear velocity o f liquid in the reactor
Velocity of liquid across the reactor, Vh (m/min) 0.0222 0.0444 0.0667 0.0889

Flowrate (LPM) 8 16 24 32

Flowrate (m^/min) 0.008 0.016 0.024 0.032

On the other hand, the mixing paddle, as shown in the experimental setup, was rotating at 17 RPM. This is equivalent to a linear velocity, Vj, o f 6.67m/min. At the highest flowrate, which is equivalent to velocity, v^, o f 0.089m/min, the vertical mixing, Vj, which is the mixing caused by the mixing paddle, is much higher than Vh- Whether the flowrate is 8LPM or 32LPM, Vh is much smaller than Vj. This indicated that the effect o f the internal mixing, v;, on the treatment o f the wastewater was more significant than the effect o f v^. Therefore, the effect o f hydrodynamic change by the inlet flowrate is relatively

70

insignificant compared to the effect o f vertical mixing on the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue, zinc and nickel ions.

71

5.7 The Effect of Wavelength on the removal o f Methylene Blue. Zinc and Nickel ions bv combined photocatalytic and electrochemical treatment
In order to facilitate a photocatalytic process which can be used to degrade pollutants in water, the role o f the light is important. Theoretically, for titanium dioxide as a photocatalyst, the electron-hole can only be generated only if the wavelength is smaller than 380nm. In the present study, 3 UV lamps with wavelengths o f 254, 302 and 365nm were tested using the same experimental setup for the treatment o f Methylene Blue, Zn^^ and Ni^"^. The results obtained are plotted in figures (5.19-5.21)

Figure 5.19 - Percentage Ftemoval of Methylene Blue vs Wavelength

=

1 |

40
mtSm,

24hr -K-- 48hr

I Ï 30 i l 20 0 200 240
!I 1 0

-*H-72hr
Ohr -- -- I Linear (72hr) i Linear (48hr) ; Linear (24hr) !

280

320

360

400

Wavelength (nm)

The percentage removal of Methylene Blue only decreased slightly at higher light wavelength. Further, all o f the linear regression lines at 24, 48 and 72hours o f treatment have negative slope. This suggests that the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue isinversely related to the wavelength o f the incident light. This can be explained by the inverse relationship between the wavelength and the energy. hc/A.=E. With higher energy, the probability for an electron to be promoted to the excited state is increased.

72

Figure 5.20 - P e rc e n ta g e R em oval of Zn'* vs W avelength

^ 80 M

-------^---> < -

0 40 a:

i"
«

"

r-

--

48 72

1 20
C L

Ï

0

250

300

350

400

W avelength (n a n o m e te rs )

Figure 5.21 - Percentage Removal of W* vs Wavelength

80 z 70 o 60

Î 50 & 40

24hr 48 hr -X - 72 hr - 4 - Ohr 250 300 350 400

1 1 20 10 1 0

30

Wavelength (nanom eters)

As shown in figure 5.20 and 5.21, LTV wavelength had no significant effect on the percentage removal of Zn^^ and Ni*^. This is in agreement with the observation given in the previous section that the heterogeneous photocatalysis is ineffective for the treatment o f dissolved metals.

73

5.8 The Effect o f pH on the treatment o f Methylene Blue. Zinc and Nickel ions bv combined photocatalytic and electrochemical method
To determine the effect o f pH on the treatment o f Methylene Blue by combined photocatalytic and electrochemical method, 3 different initial pH levels (2.1, 5.6, 10) were tested. The results obtained are plotted in Figure 5.22:
I Figure 5.22 - B fect of pH in Percentage Removal vs Time by Suspended Photocatalytic & Bectrochemical treatment

100

ll

pH=2.1 pl-t=5.6 -M-- pH=10.0

P

1 1® a.

0

20

40

60

80

Treatment Time (Hours)

It appeared that the Percentage Removal o f Methylene Blue increased when the pH was lowered. The pH dependent behavior can be explained by the effect o f pH on both the semiconductor potential and the surface dissociation o f the hydrated Ti02. The Nerstian shift o f the band edges to more negative values w ith increase in pH, leads to a decreasing oxidiation potential o f hvb^ at high pH. Also, the change in photocatalytic activity may result from changes in pH. In water, the surface o f a TiO; crystals is covered with TiOH in water: TiOH < X > TiQ- + iT (5.15)

Since the dissociation does not proceed in acidic solutions, the photocatalytic activity is enhanced at lower pH (Chanda et al, 1998). Also, acidic condition at low pH caused anodic corrosion from the stainless steel anode generated iron ions, which might promote

74

the generation o f hydroxyl radicals as mentioned previously. On the other hand, during the experimental trial with high pH (pH=10), it was observed that most o f the zinc and nickel ions precipitated. These precipitated metals might block the incident light to reach for the photocatalyst.

75

CHAPTER 6 - CONCLUSIONS AND REMCOMMENDATIONS
6.1 Conclusions
From the results obtained in the present study, the following conclusions were drawn: 1. Suspended Photocatalytic treatment using suspended titanium dioxide as the Photocatalyst was effective for the removal o f Methylene Blue at low concentration. Immobilized Photocatalytic treatment using titanium dioxide immobilized by PVC resin on a supporting material was effective for the removal o f Methylene Blue at low concentration. The Removal o f Methylene Blue by photocatalysis conformed to P* order kinetics. The dissolved metals, Zn^^ and Ni^"^, however, did not exhibit change by photocatalytic treatment. 2. Methylene Blue, Ni^^ and Zn^^ at a low concentration were removed effectively using electrochemical deposition. 3. Methylene Blue could be degraded more efficiently by the combined

Photocatlytic and Electrochemical process than by the photocatalytic oxidation or the electrochemical deposition alone. The percentage removal o f Methylene Blue in combined Suspended Photocatalytic and Electrochemical process was 46.1% after 72 hours of treatment, while it was only 36.1% for the Suspended Photocatalytic process and 23.5% for the Electrochemical process. Similar observation was noted for the combined Immobilized Photocataltyic and Electrochemical process. The percentage removal o f Methylene Blue in the combined Immobilized Photocatalytic and Electrochemical process was 28.9%, while it was only 14.9% for a single Immobilized Photocatalytic method and 23.5% for the single electrochemical method.

76

4. The flowrate had no significant effect on the percentage removal o f Methylene Blue, Ni^^ and Zn^^. This was due to the hydrodynamic effect caused by the internal mixing which was much higher than that o f the change in flowrate. 5. A decrease o f 8% Methylene Blue removal was observed when the wavelength was increased after 72hours o f treatment. The dissolved metals did not have significant effect with different wavelengths.

77

6.2 Recommendations
From the observations obtained in the present study, the following recommendations were drawn: 1. Use higher light intensity Ultraviolet Lamps: One o f the most important factors that caused the low kinetic rate constant, K, for the removal o f Methylene Blue is the lack o f light intensity. For all experiments performed, an average light intensity o f 0.5mW/cm^ was recorded. Based on various reports such as those from Kuo & Ho and Rajeshwar et al, more than ImW/cm^ was used for water volumes smaller than 10 liters (Kuo and Ho, 2001 and Rajeshwar et al, 1998). Therefore, more than 30mW/cm^ was recommended for future study with the present experimental unit (about 320L). 2. Use a well-established immobilization technique According to Rao et al, the effectiveness for the photocatalyitc treatment o f water constituents in most commonly used immobilization method degrades after prolonged use (Rao et al, 2004). Although the immobilization method mentioned in the present study is relatively quick and simple, it was observed that the treatment efficiency slowly decrease to zero after prolonged use. Therefore, well established immobilization techniques or commercialized immobilization

techniques, which are typically more stable after prolonged use, such as ARCFLASH, are recommended. 3. Relocate the drain valve: Some sludge including titanium dioxide was leftover at the bottom o f the reactor after each experiment. It was due to the improper location o f the drain valve.

78

Therefore, it is recommended to change the location o f the drain valve to the bottom center o f the reactor to ensure complete removal o f sludge after each experiment. 4. Investigate other process parameters: Further study should be carried out in order to investigate the relationship between the concentration of the organic matter, dissolved metals in the wastewater and the required voltage at which the organics might be involved in the electrode reactions. Also, the effect o f the light intensity upon the removal o f the organic should be investigated since the light intensity is directly related to the excitation o f the electron-hole pairs, which lead to the oxidation o f the organic matters. In addition, the rotational speed o f the rotating disc in immobilized photocatalytic treatment on the removal o f organics should be investigated since the hydrodynamic effect at the photocatalyst surface influences the mass transfer rate of the organics from the water to the photocatalyst surface (Dionysiou et al,

2002).
5. Immobilize titanium dioxide at the anode o f the electrochemical cell According to Byrne et al, it is possible to immobilize titanium dioxide at the anode o f an electrocell (Byrne et al, 1999). This allows an enhanced photocatalytic oxidation o f organic matter at the anode due to the external current. At the same time, metal ions can be reduced at the cathode o f the electrocell. It is believed that the removal of the organic may be increased compared to the present study as the supporting material, which is also the anode, was externally charged.

79

6. Possible

study:

Triple

combination

of

electrochemical,

biological

and

photocatalytic treatment According to Anderson et al, photocatalytic treatment is capable o f increasing the biodegradability for some types o f compound (Anderson et al, 1997). For example, according to the results o f a report by Lam et al, wastewater generated from the electro-coating industry is typically contained dissolved metals and PGME, propylene glycol methyl ether. Since the PGME is not 100% biodegradable, it may be beneficial to investigate a triple combination of biological, photocaltytic and electrochemical degradation o f the organic and heavy metals in wastewater (Lam, 2002)

80

Reference
An C, Zhu H, Xiong Y. "Feasibility study o f photoelectrochemical degradation o f methylene blue with three-dimensional electrode-photocatalytic reactor" Chemosphere, Vol. 46, pp. 897-903 , 2002. An C, Xiong Y, Li G, Zha C, Zhu X. "Synergetic effect in degradation o f formic acid using a new photoelectrochemical reactor." Journal o f Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, Vol. 152 pp. 155-165, 2002. Anderson W; Bolduc L. "Enhancement of the biodegradability of model wastewater containing recalcitrant or inhibitory chemical compounds by photocatalytic preoxidation" Biodégradation Vol. 8, pp. 237-249, 1997. Atkins PW, Physical Chemistry. WH Freeman and Company, New York, 1986. Boithi E. "Remoyal o f Zinc and Nickel from Effluent Waters o f an electroplating plant using a batch reactor" Ryerson Uniyersity, 2002. Byrne J.A., Eggins B.R., Byers W, Brown N.M.D. "Photoelectrochemical cell for the combined photocatalytic oxidation of organic pollutants and the recoyery o f metals from waste waters" Applied Catalysis B: Enyironmental, Vol. 20, pp. 85-89, 1999. Callister, W. Materials Science and Engineering An Introduction. 5* Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Toronto, 1999. Chanda M, Naskar SS, Pillay A. "Photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes in aqueous solutions with T i0 2 nanoparticles immobilized on foamed polyethylene sheet" Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, Vol. 113 pp. 257-264,1998. Chen D, Ray A.K. "Remoyal of toxic metal ions from wastewater by sem iconductor Photocatalysis" Chemical Engineering Science, Vol. 56 , pp. 1561-1570, 2001. Doan H.D., W u J, Boithi E, Storrar M. "Treatment o f wastewater using a combined biological and electrochemical technique" Journal o f Chemical Technology and Biotechnology, Vol. 78, pp. 632-641, 2003. Dionysiou D.D. ,Makram T, Baudin I, Laliné J.M. "Oxidation o f organic contaminants in a rotating disk photocatalytic reactor: reaction kinetics in the liquid phase and the role o f mass transfer based on the dimensionless Damkohler number"Applied Catalysis B: Enyironmental, Vol. 38, pp.1-16, 2002. Dionysiou D.D., Balasubramanian G, Suidan M.T., Khodadoust A.P., Baudin I and Laine J-M. "Rotating Disk Photocatalytic Reactor; deyelopment, characterization, and eyaluation for the destruction of organic pollutants in water" Wat. Res. Vol. 34, No. 11, pp. 2927-2940, 2000.

81

Drinan, J E. Water & wastewater treatment: A guide for the nonengineering professional. Technomic publishing company, Inc, Pennsylvania pp. 133-137;159-199, 2001. Dziewinski J, Marczak S, Nuttall E, Purdy G, Smith W, Taylor J and Zhou C, "Developing and testing electrochemical methods for treating metal salts, cyanides and organic com-pounds in waste streams." Waste Management, Vol. 18 pp. 257-263, 1998. F. Goodridge, K. Scott Electrochemical Process Engineering A Guide to the Design of Electrolytic Plant. Plenum Press, New York, 1995. Fujishima, A, Hashimoto, K, Watanabe, T. TiO? Photocatalvsis Fundamentals and Applications. Bkc Inc.. Tokyo. 1999. Gulyas H, "Processes for the removal o f recalcitrant organics from industrial wastewaters." Wat Sci Tech, Vol. 36(2-3) pp. 9-16, 1997. Guillard C, Lachheb H, Houas A, Ksibi M, Elaloui E, Herrmann J-M. "Influence of chemical structure o f dyes, o f pH and o f inorganic salts on their photocatalytic degradation by T i0 2 comparison of the efficiency o f powder and supported TiOz" Journal o f Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, Vol. 158, pp. 27-36, 2003. Hartmut Wendt, G. Kreysa. Electrochemical Engineering Science and Technology in Chemical and Other Industries. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, New York, 1999. Houas, A, Lachheb, H, Ksibi, M, Elaloui, E, Guillard, C, Herrmann, J-M. "Photocatalytic degradation pathway o f methylene blue in water." Applied Catalysis B: Environmental Volume 31 pp. 145-157, 2001. J.S. Newman. Electrochemical Systems. 2"`*Edition. Prentice-Hall Canada Inc., Toronto. 1991. Janssen, F.J.J.G., Van Santen, R.A. Environmental Catalysis Catalytic Science Series volum e.1 Imperial College Press, 1999. K. Vinodgopal, P.V. Kamat. "Electrochemically assisted photocatalysis using nanocrystalline semiconductor thin films" Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, Vol. 38 pp. 401-410,1995. Kaneko, M. Okura, I. Photocatalvsis Science and Technology. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, New York, 2002. Kuo, W; Ho P. "Solar photocatalytic decolorization o f methylene blue in water" Chemosphere 45 pp. 77-83, 2001.

82

Kwon C.H., Shin H, Kim J.H., Choi W.S., Yoon K.H. "Degradation o f methylene blue via photocatalysis o f titanium dioxide" Materials Chemistry and Physics, Vol. 86, pp7882,2004. Lakeshmi, S. Renganathan, R. Fujita, S. "Study on Ti02-m ediated photocatalytic degradation o f methylene blue" Journal o f Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry Volume 88 pp. 163-167, 1995. Lam C, "Optimum Aeration Interval for BOD Removal using a Packed Column Under a Cyclic Operation" Ryerson University, 2002. M row etz, M ; Selli, E. "Effects o f iron species in the photocatalytic degradation o f an azo dye in TiOz aqueous suspensions" Journal o f Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, Vol. 162 pp.89-95, 2004. Malato, S; Dibier R. "Solar photocatalysis: A clean process for water detoxification" The Science o f the Total Environment, Volume 291, pp.85-97, 2002. M etcalf & Eddy Wastewater Engineering Treatment and Reuse. 4 * * * Edition. McGrawElill Toronto, 2003. Pelegrini R, Peralta-Zamora P, Andrade AR, Reyes J, Duran N. "Electrochemically assisted photocatalytic degradation o f reactive dyes." Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, Vol. 22, pp. 83-90, 1999. Pelizzetti, E, Serpone, N. Photocatalvsis Fundamentals And Applications. John Wiley & Sons, Toronto, 1989. Pozzo R.L., Baltanas M.A., Cassano A.E. "Supported titanium dioxide as photocatalyst in water decontamination: State of the Art" Catalyst Today, Vol. 39, pp. 219-231, 1997. Rajeshwar K, Ibanez J. Environmental Electrochemistrv Fundamentals and Applications in Pollution Abatement. Academic Press, Toronto, 1997. Rajeshwar, K; Sopajaree, K; Qasim A; Basak S. "An integrated flow reactor-membrane filtration system for heterogeneous photoeatalysis. Part I: Experiments and modeling o f a batch-recirculated photoreactor" Journal o f Applied Electrochemistry 29: pp533-539, 1999. Rao K.V.S., Subrahmanyam M, Boule P. "Immobilized T i0 2 photocatalyst during long term use:decrease o f its activity" Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, Vol. 49, pp239249 ,2004. Raub E., Muller, K. Fundamentals o f Metal Deposition. Elsevier publishing company. New York, 1967.

83

Roventi G, Fratesi R, Della Guardia RA and Barucca G, "Normal and anomalous codeposition o f Zn-N i alloys from chloride bath." J Appl Electrochem, Vol. 30, pp. 173179, 2000. Schiavello, M. Photocatalvsis and Environment Trends and Applications. Kluwer Academic Publishers, London, 1987 Schiavello, M. Heterogenous Photocatalvsis. John Wiley & Sons, Toronto. 1997 Sheffield Hallam University http://www.shu.ac.uk/schools/sci/chem/tutorials/molspec/beersl.htm Storrar M. "Electrochemical and Biological Treatment o f wastewater from the automotive industry." Ryerson University, 2002 Skelton, R.L. Fabiyi, M.E. "Photocatalytic mineralisation o f methylene blue using buoyant Ti02-coated polystyrene beads" Journal o f Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, Vol. 132, pp. 121-128, 2000. Skoog, D; Holler, F; Nieman, T. Principles O f Instrumental Analvsis. 5* Edition Saunders College Publishers, Toronto. 1998. Vlyssides AG, Papaioannou D, Loizidoy M, Karlis PK and Zorpas AA. "Testing an electrochemical method for treatment o f textile dye wastewater." Waste Management , Vol. 20, pp. 569-574, 2000. Zumdahl, S. Chemical Principles 2"`^Edition. D. C. Heath and Company, Toronto. 1995. Arc-Flash http://www.arc-flash.co.ip/arc/e/02f.html

84

Appendix A - Error Analvsis
There are some experimental uncertainties associated with the results as listed below;

1. Absorbance measurement interference by suspended titanium dioxide: In experimental trials involving suspended photocatalytic treatment, the samples collected were allowed to settle for 24 hours before the clear liquid was taken for absorbance measurement. However, during transfer o f samples some titanium dioxide might have remixed with the water sample. This may cause some positive error in absorbance reading. Nevertheless, this was a systematic error and cancelled out in comparison among the runs. 2. Titanium dioxide holdup at the storage tank: In experimental trials involving suspended photocatalytic treatment, due to the simple structure o f the storage tank, significant amount o f titanium dioxide were left in the storage tank after 72 hours operation. The amount o f this holdup o f titanium dioxide seemed to be directly related to the flowrate used in the experiment. If this holdup o f titanium dioxide were not present, the efficiency o f the photocatalysis reported could have been higher. 3. Water evaporation during the experiment: For each experimental run, the final concentration was probably lower than the reported value, i.e. the percentage removal was higher, as some water evaporated during the experiment and the amount o f water that was electrolyzed was not known.

85

Appendix B - Sample Calculations
Sample Calculation for the determination of percentage removal of Methylene Blue:
From Appendix A - Experimental data of Trial 1:
M ethylene Blue c o n te n t by a b so rb a n c e T im e A b so rb % % Rem 0 0.681 100 0 24 0 .5 8 7 13.80 86.20 T h e p e r c e n ta g e a b s o r b a n c e a t 24 h o u r s is:

Absorbance @ time 0 x 100% = 0.587 x 100% = 86.20% Absorbance @ time t 0.681 The percentage removal of Methylene Blue at time t = Percentage absorbance @ 0 hour - Percentage absorbance @ time t 100-86.20=13.80

Sample Calculation for the determination of percentage removal of Zinc ion, Zn :

T im e 0 24

R ead in g 3.2 2.36

C oncentration (mg/L) 48 35.4

% 100 73.75

% R em 0 2 6 .2 5

Concentration (mg/L) @ Ohr = Spectrophotometer Reading x dilution factor =3.2 X 15 = 48mg/L The percentage o f zinc at 24 hours is: Zinc @. time 0 x 100% = 35A x 100% = 73.75% Zinc @ tim e t 48.0 The percentage removal o f Zi^"^ at time t = Percentage o f zinc @ 0 hour - Percentage o f zinc @ time t 100-73.75=26.25%

86

Sample Calculation for the determination of percentage removal of Nickel ion, Ni^^:

T im e 0 24

R ead in g 9.32 7.15

F acto r (=4) 27.96 21 .4 5

% 100 76 .72

% R em 0 23.28

concentration (mg/L) @ Ohr = Spectrophotometer Reading x dilution factor =9.32 X 4 = 27.96mg/L The percentage o f nickel at 24 hours is: Ni^+ @ time 0 x 100% = 21.45 x 100% = 76.72% Ni^"^ @ time t 2T96 The percentage removal o f Ni^^ at time t = Percentage o f nickel @ 0 hour - Percentage o f nickel @ time t 100-76.72=23.28%

Sample Calculation for the determination of velocity of liquid across the reactor, Vh (m/min) in Table 5.13:
For a flowrate, Qpipe, o f 8 liters per minute: 8L X 1m 0.008 m" 8LPM = min 1000 L min Mass balance
Qpipe Qpipe Qreactor

= velocity o f liquid across the reactor x Crosssection area o f the reactor Qpipe = Vh X As 0.008 m /min Vh = a .pipe  As (0.6m X 0.6m) = 0.0222 m/min

87

Uncertainty analysis calculation
By using the method o f uncertainty analysis, the uncertainty o f the percentage removal o f nickel ions can be calculated as follows;

%M =

Ci: îKîiaJ

XlOO%
j

(A L I) in yM +W (A L 2)

àyvyM d Cfi, xal

1
(A1.3)

d CiH ijifli

^final X

Cixiiioj]

(A L4)

From Table 5.4, Ci,,uiai = 36.5mg/L, Cf,,,a] ==12.0mg/L, applying equation (A1.3-A1.4):

YM

= 12.0x/«[36.5] =43.168
(A L 5)

d Cisiîiaï

dWyJ^
d Cjjxai

f

1

= -0 ,0274
(A1.6)

Based on information suggested by the supplier o f the photometer, Orbeco-Hellige colorimeter (model 975-MP), the uncertainty values, wj and W2 is:
w /=W2=0.02

(A 1.7)

Substituting equation A1.5-A1.7 to A1.2 gives:

88

=[0.02(43,168)2 + 0.02(-0.0274)2]i'^ = 6,l (AL8) Therefore, by using uncertainty analysis, the uncertainty o f the percentage removal of nickel is found to be 6.1%. In section 5.5, after 72 hours o f treatment, the percentage removal o f nickel is 67.0 ± 6.1 %. Similarly, by using uncertainty analysis, the uncertainty o f the percentage removal o f zinc is found to be 9.1%. In section 5.5, after 72 hours o f treatment, the percentage removal of zinc is 63.4 ± 9.1 %.

89

Appendix C - Determination of the absorption peak for Methylene Blue
Date: 4/21/4 Time: 12:21:25 PM

0.615^

0.55. . 0.50. 0.4 5 . 0 .4 0 . 0.3 5 .

A 0 .3 0 . 0 .2 5 .

0 .20 .
0 .1 5 .
0.1 0 .

0 .0 5 . 0.008 300.0

350

400

450

500

550

600

650

700.0

NM S A M 1 .S P -4/21/4- U V l

r
V!

:*/

 A .

= Absorbance = Wavelength in nanometers

90

Appendix D - Zinc and Nickel test method
NICKH- ( 'flOOEL) 975-KP Tes: No. 41 F ilter Wavelenf h; 528 Range; 0-12 m g/L anc higher Method: Dimethylgloxiire (He; oxime) NIOOEL "QaicK'n'Easy' TEST KTT No. 975-41 includes: 2 oz. No. R-3947 Annonium C itrate Solution., with 1 m L pipet (Code 3,5 1 oz. No. R-3956 Iodine Solution, with 0.5 m L pipet (Hazard Code 3,5) 4 oz. No. R-386 Ammonium Hydroxide 1:1, with 1 m L pipet (Code A,2)* 1 oz. No. R-2019 Diirethylglyoxime, 1% A lcholic, in metered dropper hot(Hazard Code B,5) BEFO R E STARTING: Read General Instructions, safety precautions and Not Do not intermix g la ss and p la stic Tubes. 1- PREPAR ATIO N OP 'BLANK TOBE' a. F ill a clean, dry tube to 10 m L mark with sample. use in Step 3. 2. PREPARATIO NO F 'SAMITE TnBE" a. F ill another clean, dry tube to 10 m L mark with sample. b. Add 2 m L R-3947 Ammonium C itrate Solution using pipet in b ottle t ;ce. Cap tube and invert several times to mix. c. Remove cap, add 1.0 m L R-3956 Iodine Solution using pipet. in hot; r twice. Cap tube and invert several times to mix. d. Remove cap, add 4 m L R-386 Ammonium Hydroxide 1:1 using the 1 . t .I, .'opper b ottle 4 tim es. Cap tube, mix as before. e. Add 18drops of R-2019 Dimethylglyoxlme Reagent. Replace cap an- -'hile holding cap securely, invert several times. Note time, allow 7 notes for color development. 3. Follow CPERATING INSTRDCnONS to Nickel (Ni).
Obtain test results

Cap and set a s ie f o r

in

terms o f mg.

(ppm)

N O T E 1: The Ammonium C itrate elim inates Iron and Aluminum interferencedoes not interfere up to 3 mg/'t.

Copper

N O TE 2: If screen reads "Dilute & R etest' or to confirm a reading at c near 12 ing,'L, d ilu te a fresh sample with d is tille d or deionized water, rete; . and multiply the resu lt by the d ilu tion factor as explained in Section 2. 4 For Reagent Hazard Code explanations, see Section 6.

yi

ziMC

(zrx

975-MP Test No. : F ilter Vavelength: 6 Range : 0-4.0 mg/L Zn and higî> Method: Z i n c ZIKC "Qulctc'n'Easy" TEST CTT Ho. 975-27 contains: ^ 1 Pkg of 50 RT-112 Zinc Tablets (Hazard Code: 0,5)
1 e a . 432-SRP T a b le t C r u s h e r /S t i r r i n g Rod

BEFO EE STABTIHGt Read General Instructions, safety precautions and N otes. Do not intermix glass and p la stic Tubes. SA M FLIH G ASD STO RACEt Collect samples in p la stic b o ttles that have been was: with 1:1 Hydrochloric Acid (R-405) and thoroughly rinsed with Deionized Water (R-3684). Samples can be stored at le a st six months at room temperaturi f adjusted to pH 2 (use about 2 m L n itr ic acid per l i t e r ) . Before test in. adjust sample to pH 4 - 5 with 1.0 N Sodium Hydroxide (R-538), but do not exceed pH 5, to avoid lo ss of zinc as a precipitate. 1. FK EFARATIO H of "BLAHt TDBE"« a. F ill a clean, dry tube to the 10 m L mark with sample. aside for Step 3.
2 . PEEPARATIOH OF "SAMPLE TOTE":

Cap and set it

a. F ill another clean, dry tube to the 10 m L mark with sample. ( I f sami: has high chlorine residual, add one No. RT-113 Zinc-Dechlorlnating tablet, crush, cap tube and mix to d issolve). b. Add one Zinc ta b le t, crush, cap, and mix to d isso lv e. Note the time.

c. Allow sample to stand for fiv e minutes, then mix again to assure cor.;, dissolution of tab let material. 3. Follow O PERATING INSTRUCTIONS to obtain test resu lt in teims o f mg/L (p; Zinc. N O T E It If screen reads "Dilute & Retest" dilute a fresh sample with d isti or deionized water, r e te s t, and multiply the result by the d ilu tion factor explained in Section 2 .4 . N O TE 2: Copper also produces color with th is reagent (RT-112). I f the of copper is suspected redo the t e s t (a fter reading Zinc resu lt in Step 3 using Blank Tube from Step la and Sample Tube from Step 2c. Add one EDTA Tablet No. RT-114 to Sample Tube, crush, cap and mix to d isso lv e. Follow Operating Instructions to obtain re su lts in terras of mg/L Copper (disregua screen name of "Zinc"). This copper reading must be subtracted from the I n itia l Zinc reading to give the corrected Zinc r e su lt. Continu..

92

degussa.
roduct Information

Titanium Dioxide P 25
Hydrophilic f u m e d Titanium D io x id e
I Titanium Dioxide P 2 5 is a highly dispersed titanium dioxide manufactured according
to the AEROSIL®-- process.
A p p lic a tio n s a n d P r o p e r tie s P hysico-chem ical Data
A pplications

Properties
· · Catalyst carrier Active com p o n en t for photocatalytic reactions H eat stabilizer for silicone rubber
Specific surface area (BET) Average primary particle size Tapped densitiy (approx. value) * acc. to D IN IS O 787/XI. Aug. 1983 Moisture * 2 hours at 105 "C Ignition loss 2 hours at 1000 "C based on material dried for 2hours at 105 °C pH-value
in 4% Dispersion

Unit
m'/g nm 3/1

Typical V alue
50 ± 1 5

21
130 g 1.5

·

P ro p e rtie s Process related high purity · H eat stabilizing properties for silicone elastom ers through its effect o n redox reactions
T h ereb y ;

%

S2.0

3 .5 - 4 .5

TIOa-content (1)
(1) based on ignited material

2; 99.50 g 0.300

AljOj- content (1)

· Im provem ent o f ageing properties at high tem perature (2: 200°C) · Positive im pact o n flam m ability protection

SiOj- content (1) FeaOa- content (1) HCL- (X )ntent (1) Sieve residue by Mocker, 45 pm
acc. to D IN IS O 787/XVIII, Apr. 1984
· ex planl

% %

S 0.200
S 0.010
S 0.300

%

S 0.050

The d a ta rep resen ts typfcal v alu es an d n o t production p aram eters.

Titanium Dioxide P25

August 01


