Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-1973

Hotel Design
Grant Aird
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Interior Architecture Commons Recommended Citation
Aird, Grant, "Hotel Design" (1973). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1599.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

HOTEL DESIGN
By Grant Aird

MATERIAL IN THIS VOLUME HAS ·BEEN REMOVED OR DAMAGED BY LIBRARY USERS. H~1N(i:, THE MATERIAL IS: Sdaa..., obtl..AA+'-1 0 AVAILABLE IN MICROFORM 0 AVAILABLE AT THE DESK
":f=ooTNO~

~NOT YET AVAILABLE
LrU~Ve- ~~

HOTEL DESIGN TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART "A" Introduction ··············.···········.···· 1 History of Hotels ..···········.···.·.··..·. 2
Design Approach .·.·····..·.·......·....·.·. 18
Design Theories .. , ..·....·................ 23

Rooms and Today's Clientele ··..·.········· 24
Furniture .......·...·. ~ ................... 33

Lobbies .......·.....................·..... 36

The Hotel Restaurant ·····.················ 42 APPENDIXES (a)
(b)

Appendix 1

-

The Design Approach

..........

49

Appendix 2 Appendix 3 Appendix 4 Appendix 5

Rooms · ························ 5'3

(c) (d) (e)

-

First Measure the Guest then Plan the Room How to Make Your Lobbl Look

................

62

Lively ........................ 64

Public Areas 2 Lobbies, Restaurants ·········. 70

LETTERS

2 -

PART

11

B"

Holiday Inn, Toronto Downtown Origination ··· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · 1 Lobby ······..·· · · · · ········ · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · 4 Commercial and Public Areas

................. 9

Rooms ······································· 12 Restaurants .································ 16 Bar ········································· 19 Chinese Influence Footnotes Bibliography

>----") f'?cHOvl:!O
'>
-f

W H ~N

-r-H~ I~
It;
I cq

INA"":.
.OS~ ·

..JA-ND~L..t'Z.EC> ~PI2.1 (\j

INTRODUCTION

HOTEL DESIGN

INTRODUCTION Briefly, this is a report that deals with today' s hotel industry with specific reference to Toronto. A city which has seen three

new hotels in the downtown area over the past few years, and now at least three more started for construction in the next five years.
't

The report contains sections that deal with historical events and aspects of the industry from its early existence to the present. Much of this will give the reader an insight to events that. have shaped the industry to what it is today.

Since the industry

~s

experiencing its own problems, dealing with

design, finance and a change of image, much of this report will b e concerned with looking at what is called a "Design Approach" to hotel design. In most cases, designers are finding this method Also the report will deal with three Here insight

to be of sound rationalism.

specific areas, rooms, lobbies and restaurant design.

shall be given to -problems associated with each and what changes are occurring with each to ensure their success among guests and . owners.

Final portions of the report will be allotted to specifically one hotel, the Holiday Inn, Toronto Downtown. A critical analysis of

the hotel and its design will be given with final submissions of the main floor and guest rooms, re-designed.

- 2 -

HISTORY OF HOTELS It should be noted here and now that the word "hotel" was not used in the beginning of the hotel industry, not until after the American Revolution were the names "hotel" or "house" in general use. (Here I use a

u.s.

source since there seems to be

little Canadian information on this). (l). In France the word Hotel came about during the French Revolution. By way of pass-

ing the first "hotels" were not hotels at all, but the luxurious residences of the nobility of 18th century Paris. Until this

time, I will refer to hotels under their proper titles associated with their times.

( Innkeeping probably had its origin when some caveman, as shrewd as he was hairy, _decided to change one arrowhead for a big bed of

~ boughs

I

complete with running brook.

The meat he served his "guest"

might have been bison, steak, rare, very rare.

Between Bagdad and Babylon, it is said, the first inns, mere overnight stopping places for camel an~ man, grew up.
( 2.)

An inn

about 2,500 years old still stands today just outside the rutned city of Pompii, Italy. By the time of Christ,innkeeping was an

established business and innkeepers already had some typical innkeeping problems. ( 3 .) We know that the "full house" was upon

them for Christ was born in a stable, because there was no space in the inn.

· ·· 3

- 3 Oddly enough these primitive "hotels" were kept not by men but by women. The personnel were probably other women. Syrian ladies danced

before the Roman Inn in ways more exciting, but probably no less
~mag~na

·

·

4 t· ~ve 1y th an d o neon li g ht s of modern hotels. ( )

As was true of most of the great civilizations of the ancient world, Egypt was built and maintained by slave labor. The earliest

pictures of cooking and dining were found on the walls of the Pharaoh's tombs dating back to about 1500 B.C. stone drawings were slaves. male slaves the men. Servants in these

Female slaves served the lady guests,

Evidently uniforms had not yet come into

vogue, for the most conspicious part of the servitors costu;te was its almost complete absence.

ANCIENT GREECE

In Greece's early development there w ·re few class divisions and worked was looked upon as a noble thing. Later with the develop-

ment of wealth, work was looked down upon as were workers. During wars the Greeks took sla-.res. as servants in public inns. their own servants. Many slaves found themselves

'some of the richer clientele brought

Many slaves were well known for their Some of the

arts and sold their services on the open market.

modern devices for stimulating production had their origin in this early period. The Greeks were aware of the effect of music on

( 4)

··· 4

- 4 -

production. of music.

Women slaves often prepared bread to the accompaniment

ROMAN INNS This was the era of banquets. open market .
( 5) ·

Here slaves were bought on the

The Romans trained these slaves for various jobs in The Romans had an extensive and well
tr~velling

kitchens, dining rooms, etc.

kept system of roads which included post houses for officials.

These Inns were operated for the sole purpose of making

money and were often located nearby a sacrifice temple. Surprisingly, the sacrificer·s wife was the innkeeper who used each day's sacrifice for· the inn's food . Inns were never beyond 30-40 beds, mainly be cause

of a lack of strong middle class, money, transportation, engineering skills and appropriate building materials, also their indifference. Because of decadence, disease, poor management and defeat by Northern barbaric tribes, the Roman Empire almost disappeared. dwindled and entire cities were ruined. practically ceased to exist. Population

Business and commerce also

}fiDDLE AGES During the early Middle Ages the innkeeping business came to a standstill. People lived in
iso~ated

communities, tilling the soil

governed by a lord.

Nobility travelled with an entourage and stopped There was little

in the open fields, or at the manor of a noble. need for innkeeping.

Hotels were the major means of innkeeping. by religious orders.

These hostels were run

Here a noble of great wealth sat before

··· 5

- 5 the Abbot's table, the poor were housed in separate quarters. There were no room rates. the monastery. The guest contributed what he could to

NEW INNS 1100 - 1200's
( 6). In communities Trade and travel gave the inn new importance · ...._the inn became the social center for the new working classes and

the riding middle class of towns. business.

Innkeeping became a flourishing

So good was the business that businessmen f6nned "guilds"

for mutual control and for their own ·..rell-being .

for business were set-up by which all members must abide.

--

Set standards Beside

lo?king after the business, many guilds looked after the needy, sick and children. Most guilds worked together, sharing the business.

Some places, a traveller would eat in one place, drink in a second and lodge in a third.

Minstrels were organized into guilds and could only be hired through a guild. Training was done through apprenticeship.

By 1672 some places stipulated that one be approved by the "Innkeeper's Guild 11 before he could be employed. Employee's of inns were forced

to take an oath of loyalty to the King and also report any stealing of persons' possessions by their employers - an early form of house detective?

As with fashion, the fashions of inns changed.

17th century coffee

houses were followed by chocolate houses, these in turn

··· 6

- 6 were followed by 18th century tea houses and gardens.

I

The first English inns were very crude .

Interior-wise they had

earthen floors or stone, a carpet of reeds and a place for bone and food remnants.
( 7).

Meals?

Guests brought their own.

Private rooms were only for the rich.

~is

changed in the 17th century.

Most old inns had a garden

and bowling green, some had "Brew Houses" for ma'king beer. Inside the inn was a "Long Room" or Assembly Room . A fireplace

usually graced each end and the place was the function room for }. banquets and dances. \ Hospitality in 1617 was inexcelled in that

every need was looked after.

Common law early declared the inn to be a public house and imposed social responsibilities for the well-being of travelers upon the innkeeper. The courts stated that it was not only the innkeeper's

right to receive travelers, but his duty to do so.

Signs became an interesting feature of inns, maybe more so than today.
( 8).

Signs displayed the inn was in the terri _ory of a Some

noble family, or in the original ownership of the land. carried the coat-of-arms of a former master.

In the early 18th century, roads were so bad that wheeled vehicles could scarcely travel. However, by 1800, roads were fully The coach industry

repaired through private trusts and tolls.

··· 7

- 7 flourished and so did the inns which served the post road traveller. Inns sprang up wherever a coach stopped. Nothing

could stop this boom now.

And all was well, until 1825 when By 1950, the railroads Only after

the first line of railroad was opened.

and Victorian snobbery closed most of the inns.

World War I and the arrival of automobiles in large numbers did inns take a new lease on life again.

As stated earlier, it was not until after the American Revolution
(9)

that the names "Hotel" or "House" were used.

Just prior to this

they were known as taverns. Taverns were the major areas for refreshment for pre-revolutionary soldiers throughout Europe and North America.

The bar was the main feature in taverns at that time.

Food came

from a bake shop and kitchen located in a separate building. Travelers even shared the same room, but this was neither nor there in that day.
her~

There was a revolution in travel in North America in the 1800's with the stage coach developing travel even further throughout the country. This was later replaced by the canal boat and with The highway

the canal, inns sprang up every ten or twelve miles. inn moved into towns to be near the depot.

With this movement,

old inns closed their doors and took on a new role as private dwellings. (lO) ·

··· 8

- 8 DGIN'IWN HOTEL
( 11). The City Hotel of New York presaged a new industry. Built in 1794

it was the biggest hostelry in the by a stock company.

u.s.

and the first t9 be built

But it was not until 1829 when Tremont House

with 170 rooms that America had its first really large hotel. Until that time engineering skills and the wide use of structural steel had not allowed construction of buildings this size. Hotels

were being built on expensive property in the heart of towns and cities.

With the increase in size of buildings came improvement in the
~

industry. ...,_.

The Tell Tavern in Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania burned

anthracite coal under natural draft in an open grate in 1808. The Astor House in New York introduced plumbing in 1834. ,.......____ The fifth

Avenue Hotel in New York had a stea~ operated elevato~ in 1853. And one night in 1883, electric lights came to the City Hotel in Pennsylvania. ( 12). was rea dy to build its "biggest and best" . The It cost $5-million In order

By 1875, the

u.s.

hotel was "The Palace" built in San Francisco. dollars and had 800 rooms.

Most rooms were 20' square.

to furnish this hotel, a furniture factory was bought to build the right furniture. floor. A ran&was also bought in order to provide an oak

Huge rugs specially woven in France graced the downstairs

chambers. Fixtures were most modern and so arranged that in the public rooms a master key controlled 100 jets. own tubular conductor for mail. Each room had its

. ·. 9

- 9 Pneumatic tubes provided internal communications. The use of

electric clocks and al·tomatic fire detectors were among the first in hoteldom . Rega_rding the rooms, there were fireplaces in each.

Each room had electric call buttons.

The hotel was hotels.

bui~t

around a central court, a copy from Viennese

Guests were driven inside the building in coaches and

deposited on a marble paved court admist potted trees and plants.

Around the court tiered balconies extended up the seven storeys of the building to a great domed roo( of opaque glass. sensation, the Waldorf-Astoria of its day. It was a

One should take note Here

of just how much impact this hotel has on today's design.

1 refer to John Portman's Hotel in Chicago at O'Hare Airport. 1t is almost like reliving the past in that these t\o.'O hotels are similar in many ways. The Palace with its seven storeys and ~00 Each has Both

rooms and O'Hare with its seventy storeys and 750 rooms. its tiered balcon'ies and great domed roof of opaque glass.

also used potted plants and trees in the great courts, though one court contained marble floors, the other (O'Hare) has patterned brick floors. The Palace influenced the lives of San Franciscans It. managed to survive thl.!

until the Great San Francisco Fire.

earthquake, but the next day could not withstand the fire that swept the city. A new 600 room Palace was built at 8-million dollars. It is still

a money maker and was sold in 1954 to the Sheraton chain for $6,500 . 00 .

· ·. 10

- 10 In 1894 a new novelty appeared, that of the telephone in guest rooms. Baths in guest rooms came before 1900, but not in every

guest room until 1907 with the Statler Hotel in Buffalo.

Now we come to one of the most famous of American hotels and of all hotels in the world as of 1956, the Waldorf-Astoria. start of the
~llt

( 13)

This was the

and glamour era.

Here was the Waldorf with its

hapd-painted ceilings, hand carved mahogany and expanses of marbleJ the scene of pea cock alley which was the most fashionable alley in the world. Here the Morgans, Astors, Vanderbilts and titled Those not impressed

Europeans were seen in their satorial best. by this magnificence were discreetly contents had cost $35,000.

informed that the rooms a nd its
0[

But again the grand era

the hotel

did not last long, only until 1912.

About 1912 the old Waldorf-Astoria began to decline. passed it by.
l~ith

Fashion had

the coming of prohibition and the shift of

business away from the area. the hotel became a losing business. In 1929 the old \.Jaldorf -Astoria was razed to mal<e way for the Empire State Building.

Lucius Boomer, a hotel magnet llbught new revolutionary ideas hotel industry in the 20's.
(14)

tt)

the

He abolished hand transcribing guest He was one of

charges [rom ledgers to a long itemized bill. the first to use women room clerks.

In 1920, Boomer shocked the

hotel world by granting his employees a six -day week .

· ·· 11

- 11 -

The 1920's were the boom years for hotels as for the

u.s.

as a

whole.(l~ost
hot~ls.

travel was done by train.

Salesmen were on the road

in hordes and group business began to be a big factor in the city Conventions were the cry of the day. The hotel industry

in the 1920's saw high occupancy , and investors seeing this rushed into hotel construction. It seems everyone was buying into

the business. Conmunities seeking advice for their hotel's needs such as size, kind of hotel and even financing, had only to call
~

the Hockenbury System.

Between 1927 and 1933 nearly a hundred

hotels went up in Manhattan, among them such giants as the WaldorfAstoria (Jr.) the Savoy-Plaza, the New Yorker, and the Govenor Clinton.

Toronto too was booming with its giants, the Royal York, the Park
Pla~a

and the King Edward Hotel.

Inevitably, it was not long before many towns and cities were overbuilt. In 1920 hotel rooms were filled to 85% occupancy. The next More

year occupancy slid off to 7o//. .

In 1923 it was down to 75%.

people stayed at hotels than before, but more rooms were built than the increase in guests. By 1927 hotel occupancy was 697., , nnci

it was reported that 112 hotels representing an $11-million dollar investment had failed.

With the big crash of 1929, hotels were among the hardest hit. Occupancy sank to 50'7. or less. Today a hotel must have at least

. (16) 60-65% occupancy to be successful and stay in bus1ness.

· ·. 12

- 12 Commercial hotel buildings came to an abrupt halt and from 1929 to 1954 only five first-class transient hotels were built in the
(17)

United States.

1n 1929, 275 hotels were opened.

In 1930, the

number dropped to 79, in 1931, 20 and only six hotels were opened in 1932. The 20's were the period of boom and finally the doom

for hotels.

In the early 30's, hotels sold for 10¢ on the dollartand many banks and insurance companies became the reluctant owners of hotels. Finally, after 1935, business began to rise again. came the business stood erect.
ov~rflowing.

When World War 11

With the war hotels were filled to The boom lasted

The occupancy rate jumped to 107%.

through 1946 when national occupancy hit 94io·

Tn the late 20's and 30's, something new hit the hotel business;
-

big hotel chains.

management and tax law changes. the Hilton, Sheraton chains.

---

.._

--(18)

Much of this

result~d

from large capital, expert

--

This is the beginning of the era of

Since then these chains have been

joined by many more such as Pick, Knott, Sonnesta, Howard Johnson, Holiday In and Hyatt just to mention a few. As of 1956 chain

--

operated hotels owned about 23% or 326,000 of the nation's 1,455,698 guest rooms and this has increased with every year. be said for the motel industry. the United States in 1926.
(19)

The same can

The word Mo-tel was first used in

The motel became a quick stopping over

place for the traveller and no attempt was made to provide food and beverages.

In 1935, the

u.s.

Bureau of Census listed 9848 motels which

- 13 -

increased to 13,521 by 1939.

World War II placeJ a definite brake

on ex:ansion, but after the war a travel explosion came about and with it more hotels to meet the traveller's needs. it was estimated there were 43,356 motels in operation. By 1951 About

this time a significant change took place in the character of the buildings and the operation. Investors with thousand of dollars Many motel operators

moved in replacing husband and wife owners.

kep up with the times by offering indoor plumbing, radio, T.v., enclosed showers , carpeted floors and tiled bathrooms. competition grew, it forced a new style and pace. As

Motels ran well

over $1,000,000. and contained a swimming pool, a luxurious lobby
an~

a restaurant of some size.

From 50,000 motels in 1954 the

number o( units grew to over 62,000 in 1961.

By 1962, the 100 unit motor hotel had become standard.

The typical

new mc·tel of today has over 100 rooms, a restaurant that scats mure than 100 people. It is also usual for the motel to be located The downtown motel

within 5 miles of the city's downtown area.

also is taking on the atmosphere of a resort with facilities such as putting greens, shuffle boards, swimming po<' ls and playgrounds.

Since the introduction of hotel chains, motels and motor hotels the early 40·s, the industry has been climbing upwards and many . changes have 1nfluenced its growth. (20)

In 1947, Intercontinental Hotels began operations in Latin America and became the first large international hotel chain. By 1949

··· 4

- 14 llilton had gone international with its Caribe-Hilto& in Puerto-Rico.

In the 1950's hotels were again turning to convention business and many were becoming convention oriented. ( 21.) To say this has ceased

today would be no small lie for one needs to only look at any hotel in Toronto to see this is the most important money producing area of the market that hotels are striving for . Many large hotels were

developing specialty restaurants as a means of bringing in more
~

sources of revenue.

Large motor hotels were being built by the The number of hotels

hundreds while older ones were being razed.

declined, but the number of rooms remained constant.

In 1954 another new tax incentive hit the industry - that of rapid depreciation, which encouraged hotel construction. By 1959,

u.s.

Airlines shifted "from prop to· jet engines and so began the jet age with larger planes and more people travelling. Occupancy was up to

70io in the hotel business.

(22.)

The 1960·s became known as the era of mergers and franchising. Again a new element to the industry. Transportation companies

. ( 23.) In 19 6 7 TWA purchas ed entered the hotel and motel f1eld.

Hilton International a~d offered travel club plans in competition with travel agents. Forty or more other airlines entered the

accommodation business.

Up until now not much has been said about hotel design and its architecture. Most hotels from 1920 to the late 40's were likely

··· 15

- 15 to be block structures of stone and brick. high vaulted ceiling and heavy furniture. Each with its huge Hotels on the exterior

were heavily ornamented and had very little relation to the ir surroundings except for a very domineering effect. Most hotels

were built around an open shaft, the court offering no better view than the window of a guest room on the other side of the or a view of a dirty roo£ within the court. Inside, the hotel was

one long corridor after another, usually unbroken by color, change of lighting or architectural features.
(24).
~

However, by the 1950's the hotel appearance did begin to change, new materials were on the market, glass was gaining more importance and popularity. Still,keeping block structures, the hotel was very

I
I

geometrical in shape and was taking on the office building look and one only needs to look at the Lord Simcoe Hotel and the Westbury Hotel to realize this. Lobbies were shrinking in si ze and

were less ornamental as was the exterior.

Balconies were disappearing in place of large expanses of window and many felt their was no need for balconies with the introduction of air-conditioning in rooms.

The 60·s again introduced a new hotel, a hotel more concerned

·t~ith

( 2 5). architecture advancements and its surroundings. Concrete was the

popular building material, much of it preformed.

Shapes ranged

from skyscrapes to circular shapes, each with its restaurants and
~pecial

lounges. at the very top.

Balconies were back in and so Pie shape rooms

were hotels with themes and specialty restaurants. were introduced and each room had a view.

Lobbies and decor were ··· 16

- 16 becoming more personalized and concerned .with people and arts. Most hotels contained stores for all basic needs. Hotels were

very convention minded and catered to any size of function. Hotels were becoming cities within cities. In 1969 there were

about 2.5 million guest rooms available in the

u.s.

Now we are in the 70·s and until now business has not been goo d (26) . for hotels or anyone else. In 1970, there was a serious drop 1n hotel and luxury food business. $100-million in losses.

u.s.

airlines reported over Most But dispite

Occupancy had dropped to 61%.

reasons are due to inflation and bad economic times.

this, hotels are being built, many for family business and the ever increasing convention business.

What future is there for the hotel industry?

The hotel and motel

business is certain to keep pace with the rise in population, the rise in family income and the rise in total

population~ 27 )the

National Planning Association places the average annual growth rate for the hotel business in the 1970's at 5.1%. The Association

estimates that the gross national product will be $1-trillion in 1970 and will rise to nearly $2-trillion by the end of 1970. Population is about 205 million. million. In 1980, it will be some 235

u.s.

per capita income in 1969 was $3,420.00 a year, in People are expected to have more time People with more time and money.

1980 it will be $6,340.00.

to spend away from their work.

They eat out more often, the effect on the hotel and restaurant business is fairly obvious.

. ·· 17

- 17 In design terms we will probably see much more use of the computer to solve design problems, a reality that seems to be entering most fields, but further one should see a more humanized approach to design because much of today's clientele is looking for it. No longer can designers and management

i

I

ignore the fact that today's clientele is demanding more and wanting more. Management is striving to change its approach Courses are being set-up to

and it has been long overdue.

educate management to understand the industry in all its aspects, management, design, clientele etc. Such courses are being

conducted by the Sheraton Corporation and the Hotel Corporation ·Of America.

Management has to be better educated on all hotel aspects if chains and firms are going to allow decisions and recommendations on room renovations, improvements, new air conditioning systems, and refurnishing of areas to be done by management. Through

interviews conducted at Hyatt and Holiday Inn one was able to gather that management had little knowledge of these aspects and at present had little to say in these areas when the hotel was constructed. A startling, but truthful fact since they are

essential for contributing knowledge on hotel functions to architects and designers.

Briefly then, this is what has happened in the hotel field since its early beginning to the present. written on the subject even today. Not a great deal has been

. .· 18

- 18 -

Hotel development is usually brought out through articles in hotel magazines, which unfortunately are biased and paint a pretty picture. inspection The best manner still is through on the spot

It is not hard to realize that the hotel today has come a long way from the small single dwelling with its pub and few rooms, as was associated with early pioneer days. To9ay, the hotel has

become in most ways a "city within a city", containing specialty rooms and rooms into the 1600's at a cost into the millions. Clientele has also changed from stuffy aristocrats to family and business type clien.tele. With them they have brought their Because

styles, tastes and demands for what they want in a hotel.

of this and other reasons such as economic ones, hotels must be planned more thoroughly in detail and aspect.

Today's hotel if not for anything else but economics, demands what is called a "Design

Approach~~ 8 \~·hat

is a Design Approach?

Does

it pertain to today's hotels? carried out to day's hotels?

And better still, is is being

The Design Approach consists of seven steps, the first being ANALYSIS, which incorporates a thorough study of both site and the intended use.

(2) ANALYSIS OF USE.

The decision of who will use the hotel.

(3) SYNTHESIS, which is to bring the results of the use study

··· 19

- 19 against the conclusions of the site analysis. (4) CONCEPTUALIZATION, this being the ideational phase - the creative design phase. (5) FEEDBACK - concerns itself with the up-dating of the design. (6) PLANS - these being the vital documents which spell out in complete detail every aspect of work to be done. (7) CONSTRUCTION - the decision phase. This process mentioned here is held out more as a recommendation than fact. It is founded well enough in fact, however, to lend Few hotels, if any, have been

its validity as a recommendation.

completely developed along this pattern, but today's trends favor greater popularity to this approach. Higher investments, narrower

profits and shorter run enterprise tend to force more careful and (Complete information refer to Appendix #1 precise planning. Page 49.) ·

To strengthen further consideration of such a process, it would be best to mention two recent cases of hotels in Toronto which failed to use such a process, and they are experiencing problems from the process used. Here I refer to Holiday Inn, Toronto Downtown

and the Four Seasons Sheraton.

Though some type of process was evident at times, both hotels point out that many troubles have stemmed from a deficiency of processes known as "feedback", conceptualization and especially by a lack of respect for a team effort. Both hotels definitely did

not have this team effort working for them, but rather demonstrated individual department efforts. As a result, numerous changed

(Appendix #1)

··· 20

- 2 0-

are taking place in each,

internally ~ and

on the exterior.

The

lack of team effort can be attributed in both cases to the presence of distrust and disrespect for one anothers skills and opinions. Secondly, all the essential members were not present in the beginning of the design phase, as was the case with Holiday Inn. In the case

of the Four Seasons, much trouble stems from the fact that management and the architect took the role of the designer, disregarding previous decisions made by the designer, which resulted in the architect and designer setting up a relationship in w~ich nei~her respected each other skills. But no team effort can be formed

if owners are themselves in dispute with one another.
(29.)

Seldom is the ideal design team achieved for other reasons. Probably the most common is the lack of stimulation on the part of owners. Few prospective owners of hotels realize the potential of this approach. Part of this stems from the fear of unnecessary or If more professional people are involved in But the increase may

overlapping fees.

design, the cost of the design may increase. be worth it.

What difference does it make if some additional

dollars are spent on the design process, if the results are more outstanding, more functional, and therefore, brings greater financial returns?

To be successful architecturally, any business venture involving architecture, or any other art or science must be successful commercially. If it is not, the business dies and possibly the

architecture along with it.

· ·· 21

- 2l -

Problems to an ideal team effort can further be attributed to the fact that many essential team members of the project are located in cities elsewhere, and that very seldom is the entire team around to hear the opening gun.

With team members being located elsewhere, as was the case with Holiday Inn and the Four Seasons, many decisions of the design were made too quickly, with very little depth or understanding of the problems. Some decisions had to wait until the parties

concerned could meet on the problem, which resulted in loss of time and adding considerable finance costs. Though this is

common in business today, it does pose considerable problems to the formation of an effective team, and at times has proven detrimental to many hotel designs. Members located within th e

site area, or on the job as full time consultants can prove only to be an asset to a successful and thorough design.

It is a further asset if all team members are present at the beginning.
(30 )

Aut again this is very seldom achieved.

The

engineer may have been able to offer vital cost saving sugge s tions if he had been called in earlier. The landscape architect, a

specialist in site selection and arrangements can do little more than "posey planting" if called too late. A £ood service

specialist can do little to improve the efficiency of kitchen layout if decisions on doors and utilities are already fixed.

All this is paid for with too many revisions to plans, added costs

··· · 22

- 22 of construction, ineffeciency in building use after construction. Many would stand firm on the premise that architectural and internal design failures are destined to be business failures.

In summing up, we can only ask now when it is too late - would Holiday Inn be experiencing problems with the layout and inefficiencies in building functions if the designer had been brought in at the beginning? Would parking and mechanical changes

had to happen if these had been approached on a team effort, rather than on an individual effort? Would Holiday Inn be experiencing

severe structural problems as they are now if a thorough analysis and conceptualization phase occurred?

Would the Four Seasons have had a more united functional interior if management and architect had not taken the role of designer? Would

not a team effort solidified if management had put aside petty disputes and encouraged stimulation of the project? Finally, would

not costs and decisions benefited by a team contained on the site in close understanding of Toronto's clientele?

''When there are mistakes in the design of a hotel, they usually result from inadequate conferences between the architect, the designer and the operating staff of the hotel. In building a new hotel, the owners As a result, no
(31.)

frequently wait too long before selecting a staff.

provisions were made for adequate space and storage".

The design approach may not solve all these questions, but we can honestly say now, that the method used did not prove its

.·· 23

- 23 justification for use.

With all the complexities and variations in hotel design, designers feel there are basically two theories of hotel designs. ( 32 ·) One

theory is that the hotel should provide a complete change from the home atmosphere and should be a place of the traveller.
~ lamour

and atmosphere for

The other theory is that it should be a home away
~

from home with a general elevation of taste in home decor. in many cases is no more than what a guest gets.

Which

Morris Lapidus, a design known for hotel extravaganzas disagrees with the latter theory and states "people want hotels to be places of excitement, they are not looking for a home away from home. Why do they go to movies or watch television? more glamorous way of life. four walls". They want to see a

They want to escape from their own

"True, comfort requires more than meeting the hotels guests physical needs. The hotel must also satisfy deep emotional needs as well .
~very

A hotel can have an uncomfortable atmosphere even when physical need is met.

Emotional comfort must be achieved and a

person away from home, for whatever reason, uncons cious}y expects a new
exper~ence,

.

an emotional uplift". (33.)

Morris Lapi d us.

Today, one can see which hotels cater to which theory.

Holiday

Inns, Howard Johnsons, favor the home away from home, the Park Plaza, Ritz, the latter theory. Here there is no theory more

successful than the other, both have proven their points

··· 24

- 2 4,-

financially.

clientele is the determing · factor as well as finance. Today's public is one

No matter which, hotels are in much demand.

which is generally on the move, and demand the finest service and facilities available, at a low cost. People are more independent 34 and between the ages of 30 - 50 with a salary of $20,000.00. < ·)

No longer is the tourist home or small motel the only answer. Today's guest want facilities close to an airport or major transportation system, so it is convenient to check in, make use of the desired facilities with privacy and be on the next day's plane, but it must offer the other alternative, that of excitement, relaxation and friendship for those staying for a week. It is· peculiar in a way that the hotel is now taking on another entirely new dimension, that of offering a vacation spot for the people in the city and surrounding areas where it is located, and therefore, to some degree arises the city within the city . Hotels

are now offering a new service to their surrounding community, that of being a few miles drive from home and providing a totally new atmosphere in which to relax and enjoy oneself without leaving the premises. Psychologically, the hotel is now designed

to provide its own community as well as others, a place to forget one's troubles by providing a need within. hotel for this purpose. Four Seasons is such a

In order to simplify matters pertaining to hotel design and dev~lopment, the hotel field has broken the hotel down into major 3 departments, i.e. rooms, food and beverage.< S.)

Rooms make up the largest percentage of the hotel and produce

25

- 25 -

7~/.

of the profit made by the hotel. (

36

·)

The guest room of today has had to undergo a change over the years just as today's hotel guest had had to keep pace with style. More

than ever, management is concerned about efficient space layout now that construction costs have steadily risen each year. Every chain has strived to develop the ideal room for mass production. Formulas have been worked out by both man and machine for the

..

best room design.

The Hotel Corporation of America have set up guide lines for room .layouts and the required furnishings. Unfortunately, many hotels Many

have taken what might be called the "be all to end all".

then deal no further regarding the human element (refer to Appendix #2, which is absurd since hotels are created specifically for people. (Appendix #2, Page 53).

Layout is an important part of guest rooms and can mean a saving in cost if carefully treated and planned through utilization of all available space.

Rooms are generally governed by size and shape of site, nature of surroundings and mainly by the positioning of the bathroom. (1) (2) (3) the internal bathroom the bathroom between two adjacent rooms the external bathroom (refer to Appendix #2, Page 55). Each

one has its drawbacks and good points. The one most commonly used and

Appendix #2

··· 26

- 26 found in downtown Toronto is the internal bathroom. The reason

for this is the amount of space that can be saved in corridor length. Though recently, the Sheraton people, after adopting a

systems approach in 1969, feel the external bathroom provides (37). the best possible design arrangement. According to their statistics, 2282 cu. ft. of space is created, compared to the average 1872 cu. ft. by being able to eliminate the entrance corridor. Another feature is the bath unit
~ccommodates
't

present This

construction systems and can adapt to future approaches.

is a very important element to consider in today's hotel design for we are in an age in which social standards, advancing techniques and tomorrow's guest may not be satisfied with today's amenities. Hotels need a running-in period of three to five

years, so it is a very good policy to design the hotel to the standards likely to prevail in five years time.< 38 )

But what about the pre-fab bathrooms?

Most of these new modular

buildings require 6·2 11 x6· for the complete unit, including walls, ceiling and floor. The price tag is $1,555.00. This particular

unit includes molded tub or shower, china water closet and porcelin enamelled iron lavatory, medicine cabinet, mirror, lighting, vinyl floors, all fittings with a total weight of 650 lbs. A unit very space conscious for today's space conscious owners. But why

have not more of these units been incorporated in today's hotels? According to hoteliers only one fits the requirements if not the price of hoteliers. When these requirements are filled then pre-

fab bathrooms will dominate the scene.

· ·· 2 7

- 27 But until then there is no reason why bathrooms presently used cannot be better designed to facilitate the guest by designing elements such as electrical services for lighting, fans within close and central locations of the guest. dealt with and at a reduced cost. Servicing is easily

Simple things such as more

towels racks, towel lines, variation in use of color could be inc orporated to make the guest feel more welcome and special. Poor design organization and bare basics seem to be the downfall
~

of many bathrooms.

In many hotels the computer is being used more and more widely for room layouts, again for economic

reasons~ 39~oliday

Inn Corp.

have used it to develop optimum sizes for dining rooms and lobbies. Rough sketches are made of a proposed new inn and a standard bedroom. The information is then coded and placed on tape, the

drafting machine is activated and in 25 minutes the computer has provided detailed plans and elevations for an inn, accurate to .22 inches. It's fast and saves money, which is of prime Travelodge Corp. has developed a

concern for any hotelier.

floor plan reducing cost, the "tri-arc" containing 200 rooms, is a building shaped of triangles and concave sides.

Because it has no front or back, the hotel can be placed on any site. This procedure takes 2/3 of the time needed to construct For financial reasons it is considered

a hotel the same size.

successful and today this has become the name of the game, but woe to originality and the personal touch that today's client

···· 2 8

- 28 -

is looking for.

Mass production seems to have dominated man's

mind more than reality.

Cost is the ruling factor of room design and for that fact hotel designs. It is distressing to see how much control this has on In many cases it destroyed promising designs. The Four Seasons

today's design.

Every hotel in Toronto shows signs of this.

Sheraton and its room design have suffered from the finance syndrome and this too can be said for most of its areas.
\

A design is

proposed after much consideration, only to be changed by management who plays the role of the designer in order to have the same effect in their minds at a cheaper cost, or by a firm like ITT who knows very little about hotel design. All rational thinking with regard

to durability, maintenance, and feasibility are tossed out for something that looks as good in management's mind and is SO¢ cheaper. The result to many, even their own staff, is failure and an assembly line appearance, an appearance that the management stressed at the beginning they did not want.

Generally, rooms have become standardized today, with usually a limit of three basic designs which are meant to be repeated hundreds and even thounsands of times. Holiday Inn is probably the best known

for this as all rooms are set up by guideline rules of which every Holiday Inn must follow. Holiday Inn even carries this standardization Why so much

into areas of furniture, style, decor, lobbies, etc. standardization? Again financial reasons.

· .· 29

- 29 -

With standardization being the forerunner of many designs, hotels once again are seeking, it seems, the ideal hotel and hotel room. It should be remembered that at one time hoteliers considered that a hotel of grandeur and ornamentation was the ideal hotel. But as is well known, tastes have changed from this ultimate in luxury to one of deluxe functional hotels. forgotten that changes are still continuing. And it should not be

Standardization of

room design and furniture may provide some financial gains now, but for how long. Hotels and designers should
~e

striving for

standardization with flexibility in design and materials to cope with ever rising changes and needs. Perhaps this calls for walls

that are moveable, inter-changeable and even drawers that fold into units rather than in some cases the ideal size wall and shape for today's clients and the latest radio gadget.

Possibly a further understanding for this can be seen by looking at today's clientele and what they are looking for. Mr. Whit

Hobbs, hotelier, speaking to the American Hotel and Motel Association, 1967, said that the hotel guest has changed

dramatically:

I

Whatever happened to Mom?

Remember, gray-haired
Always tir e d,

ample-bosomed, stoical somewhat stupid ole Mom?

always loyal, always satisfied with her down-trodden lot in life. She had a backache for 15 years and was old and looked it by the time she was 40. Mom wanted a better deal, a better world.

Mom went out and got a new girdle and a new rinse and a new point of view. Today she's better dressed, better groomed,

··· 30

- 30 -

better fed, better read. of her.

There is less of her, but a lot more Out of

Guests want more, and every more is a move up.

the economy and into luxury .·. always wanting more. more quality, more flair.

More style, Today

More originality and surprise.

it has to be a very personal, one-at-a-time customized approach. (40.)

A quick survey of Hobbs' friends revealed their appraisal of the hotel today as too cold, too impersonal and tasteless, personalityless and sterile. Their comments included thege remarks:Nobody

"Sears Roebuck decor, No atmosphere, No special favors. really cares.
~acky,

All hotels are plastic.

They all look the same,

tacky, tacky".

Their favorite hotels were the Plazas, the Bel-Air, Beverly Hills, the Royal Orleans, Brown Palace, hotels of originality and authenticity. When asked what they would do for a guest if they Comments ranged from

were running a hotel, the list was long.

a comfortable easy chair, disposable slipper~, a good clock, a radio in the bathroom, more mirrors, larger pieces of soap, larger towels, longer beds to better insulation between the rooms. 1tems

which indicated this clientele were looking for the home away from home approach with a personal touch ·
(41.)

This is fine, and some hotels could do well to listen.

But

hoteliers and designers should be conscious not to mistake this for an end or a means to become gadget crazed. often the professions

mentioned become too involved with new devices, and en~ up eliminating good functional designs.

· . . 31

-31- -

Some hotels within Toronto have answered this phase, such as the Regency Hyatt Hotel. Hyatt's through careful consideration and

relatively little cost have supplied guests with color in bathrooms by the additional of colored shower curtains and towels. Besides this personal touch, this addition of color has united the whole room as a finished well balanced design. Conveniences

for guests has been provided in another way by locating radio, television and air conditioning controls together in a close proximity to the guest's beside. As well as being a convenience
~

for the guest, this method of planning and layout of devices allows the hotel to repair and maintain at greatly lower costs and with greater ease.

Other hotels such as the Four Season Sheraton strived for the
person~l

touch, but seem to have been hampered by tight financ e

from levels that felt these needs were not justified and were too costly.

Holiday Inn, in making attempts to achieve many of these features mentioned earlier seem to have lost what had been achieved through over-treatment of standardization and the fact that everything must be engraved with the words "Holiday Inn". Guests

needs should be and can be catered to in hotel planning.

But again designers should be careful to ensure that design and reasoning are not overshadowed by these amenities ·

· · · · 32

- 32 -

Today's guest is wanting more because his needs are different to those of yesterday. Take the conventioner. This clientele is

travelling more due to reduced plane fares . and mainly to keep abreast of changes and to display his merchandise. is being done this way on a grand scale. Business

In 1968 in the United

States along 280,000 conventions were held for that year, from 70,000 in the 50's.
(42.)

No longer is it proving feasible to sell

merchandise over the phone, or the getting together every few years. The small hotel room for business is long past. Hotels

are now capitalizing on the boom for conventioners and are building hotels to accommodate these large numbers. The conventioner no

longer finds it unreasonable or impracticable to display their lines, small or large. Needs call for larger meeting rooms, large display

areas capable of holding many booths for displaying tractors, boats, etc. The Four Seasons is a good example of a hotel catering

to this business.

Others than conventioners expect more because they are being educated by hotels to expect more. Hotels spend thousands of dollars each

year to advertise their hotel has malls, free movies, a complete change of environrnent ' and excitement. Upon arrival they then look Secondly, much

for these after hearing and reading of the extras.

may be attributed to the fact that today's clientele is being better educated on taste, styles, etc. This clientele has worked

hard for his money and may partake in such a venture only once a year, so he wants the best he can afford.

· ·· 33

- 33 -

Furniture as one inevitably knows is as varied as there are names and styles. One comes across many versions of French, From what.is presently avail-

pseudo-Spanish and contemporary.

able on the market, there is no type of furniture which can be called the "ideal hotel furniture". strong points. Most styles have their

Traditional furnishings and styles such as

Spanish, Italian, French Provincial offer the hotel designs which are highly ornamental. Designs which many hoteliers find

beneficial in hiding burns and stains, though if not protected can suffer fates common to most furnishings. With such styles

being common to many of the clientele, it is not hard for them to relate this environment since it is found in many of their homes. However, today most of the furniture has become pure

decoration and disregards other design aspects, such as function and flexibility. Most of the furniture is far too cumbersome

for one person to move in an attempt to clean the areas it occupies. Secondly, furniture of these styles is not concerned with utilizing space to its fullest since much of it demands a great deal of room and is created for show.

Contemporary styles in hotels have been designed to be mainly aware of space utilization for economic reasons. A feature that is

becoming more prominent in contemporary furnishings is its flexibility for usage. Many styles can be quickly transformed from one use to Most of this

another with little problem to personnel or guests.

furniture is easily maintained, however, if not of high quality materials it will suffer from burns and severe scratches.

I

···· 34

- 34-

Contemporary furniture still suffers from the old trauma that it is impersonal, compared to wood and is hard to put with existing styles.
it.

Because of this many hoteliers are still hesitant to use

Many hotels such as Holiday Inn have tried to work on a perfect furniture formula, but have not achieved this, but only the standarization of lines. It must be said that one type of Contemporary One must

furniture such as contemporary does not fit every hotel. for example would look out of place in the Royal York.

remember this hotel was built in the 1920's at an age when building styles were on the extravaganza scale. Ornamentation was

considered representative of the times and suitmthe clientele's tastes. Through the years, the Royal York has built up an

individual tradition and a specific clientele who enjoy and look for this type of service, atmosphere and tradition it has always had. Furniture is of a period in which design was of an essence

as well as being authentic, not mass produced and quickly pieced together. For those who have reservations about this style, it

should be pointed out that hotels such as the Royal York, New Orleans, Park Plaza with their age still produce the highest occupancy rate of most hotels, mainly
be~ause

they are unique,

very personal, offer the best service possible and are keeping abreast of the times.

Most furnishings in hotels have been along traditional lines. When a hotel manager was questioned why traditional to contemporary -

··.. . 35

- 35 -

the answer was "it is far easier to camouflage stains and burns, easier than it is with today·s plastic furnishings. Plastic

furniture comes off as being cold, when on its own, it needs something to break the harsh lines. Management felt people were not

design conscious and do not talk about furniture; a point for serious questioning. Further, management felt that people's taste "The furniture they

lies in what is available in their own town.

see in the store window is what they have at home and is what they expect, a variation of the same thing, but only bigger and better".
( 43.)

This may be so, but most furniture in these stores is by no

means practical or well designed for hotel purposes, nor is it any more original than the Sears Roebuck approach.

Furniture has become a very touchy subject with many hoteliers, and has become just

a means

for asthetics.

Today, no matter the style,

furniture has to be easily maintained, cheap, easily moved for staff purposes, as well as for the clientele, space conscious, able to conceal marks to a high degree and if possible theft resistant. Unfortunately, most furniture today is picked basically for economic reasons. Other essential considerations that were mentioned are

quickly eliminated in order to meet a pre-determined budget.

One of the golden rules in hotel interior designing is to spend the money where, it will show and is matched by the one that the guest must first be provided with what he came for, a comfortable bed in a p 1 easant room.
( 44.)

. ·.· 36

- 3 () -

Hith this in mind, Hyatt Regency Corp . has developed a pr ocess for guest r oom treatment koown as "First measure the guest, then plan the room (refer t0 appendix 3 ) . page 62 .

Hilh the advent of nl.!w materials a rr iving on the market, this too

has nidc·d in cha11ging the hotel scene in rooms and other arl..!as. C:enet·ally speaking th·:-rc hilS been a move from painted walls
to

tltc

durnhlt' vinyl walls, wuol twist carpets to slrag; , \vhich in mauv
< .tscs is providing a means of concealing burns nnd :.La ins, fabdcs

froo silk cotton; Lo s·:ntitetics that are moH' easily <..:leaned,
1ongl!t" earing and sound rt'tardant . Heavy, cumbersome furniture
<;

gtving wa..,. in svz:,e ll1ltcls t.oda: to low slrearnlinl!d furnitur'. more
vcrsr.~cili~ anti Spd..C' C<·llscious .

The changl.!s

do

nvt stop

hC't" (· ,

~vtt

t<rke

pi<J

c r>very y ... ar.

Desi.gner<> must be awnre vf

these chan

·,

<~ztd .Jl!>u eusun; nuL L' l<:t
t"

these changes

bf'Cl'lll<'

in

turn <h:g .... ,...·r .:. -;

unct-ional ,lesign and Jomin<~tc reasou and prnc.ticability.

T
·lS

qu>t~
-If.:

Hr. Riclutrd rL Zf'Iglct· ot Pick !Intel Corp . "Mote
empt to b1 iug out ·tcw !"Ode 1 roons .
Wl' dr~

.1·\tlr

n

l ~

becoming ·rtd~('L

a~i

1 il ic!>".

( 4'>.)

'.
'1t.h· o

. · d t1e1r 1 . ne 1 lL · otes see8 Lo I1ave recc1vc prom1
iL
.l'>

~a b

)'" out l ~'· U·6).

started uuc to the ta,t_ that Americ..a }a~,;\ccl P.' ell

... ·J 7

- 37 -

Palaces as centers for society, Community hotels became what the National Intelligencer in 1827 called, "Palaces of the Public". The hotel lQbby like the outer rooms of a roy~l palace, became a gathering place, a vantage point for a glimpse of the great, the rich and the powerful.

Hotel lobbies have varied in size and grandeur over the years. In the early 1900's, lobbies were noted for their vastness in size, many containing full grown trees with carriages ~driving into the lobby to unload guests. High vaulted ceilings were characteristics, Most lobbies contained

each heavily ornamented or richly carved.

large amount of marble, a means for asthetics and to cover ugly structural columns. Today much of this has changed. Large lobbies

have become outdated socially because no longer is· there the socities of great nobility or the enthusiasm for seeing the powerfuls. Most of the change is due to economics with a trend for more living space in guest rooms and function areas. High construction costs

mentioned earlier have brought about demands that every inch of space that can be utilized, means money.

Air conditioning too has been another factor in the elimination of high ceilings and large lobbies. It seems both hotels and the

public have throughout the years outgrown their self-conscious attitude toward each other. Hotels often assumed the image of

patronizing luxury in the past and which clients were inclined to feel their status had risen by entering such premises. Today·s

··· 38

- 38 -

social changes have eradicated this phony attitude and hotels, quite rightly, concentrate on catering to their customers actual level. Any attempt, therefore, to over-design and any inclination

toward sumptuousness, rather than practicability within an acceptable level of comfort, should be resisted if for no other reason than economy.

But, not all lobbies are shrinking, and not all designers are treating lobby designs in the same manner. For example, the

Regency Hyatt House in Atlanta and in Chicago where the trend is toward "grand design"; their lobbies have become known as
11

Babalons 11 ·

Mr. Bob Bird, construction manager for the Hyatt Corp. states: "There is something very appealing about large enclosed open spaces and our design capitalized on it. The aim is to build a

hotel that is not stuffy and at the same time not too far out. The grand design is to promote people and activity within the hotel".(47.)

This grand design ?f Hyatt's has produced a solution in solving the long dark corridor. People upon leaving their room become

immediately part of the hotel scene, since no longer is there a walled or apartment effect. and interior. Rooms have exposure to the exterior

A believer in this grand design is Morris Lapidus.

Lapidus thinks of the hotel, especially its lobby, as a stage which should connote luxury, excitement and the unexpected. He

mixed classic design with contemporary, contrasted textures and made wise use of columns in his lobbies. Whereas in most cases

···39

- 39 -

the commercial lobby was getting smaller and smaller; Lapidus was producing huge lobbies at the Eden Roc and the Fountainbleu in Miami Beach.

According to Lapidus, nobody wants to go to a resort; the average vacationer is not tired, and he doesn't need a rest. want peace and quiet. What he does want is a change. He doesn't The lobby

is the gateway to this change and of better things to corne5 48

>·

Conrad Hilton became another believer in the grand lobby, but his reasons were strictly financial ones.
revenue-p~oducing

His ability was to carve

space out of a lobby, by adding restaurants and In some cases he even lowered the ceiling to The New York Hilton has

bars in lobby space.

produce another floor above the lobby.

immense lobby space, but very few chairs and seems t o be designed primarily to move people from floor to floor.

But lobbies need not be designed specifically for the clientele using it as Mr. Call of Western International Hotel states: "During a month test to determine where our guests carne from, we f ound that 46% of the reservations were generated locally. The only impression

that many local people have of a hotel is gathered from the lobby, where they meet friends who are guests and the restaurant". A true
(49.)

fact, and is why so many lobbies have become show places of the world.

Again one should keep in mind that these are not the only aspects of lobbies, like everything else, lobbies must be expertly planned

··· 40

-

40 -

and function (or all the needs that management pla nned , whether thev be for social reasons or promoting financia l
end~ .

llpun designing <my lobby , it should fror· the beginning, be decided what type of lobby and the function it has to perform. ''Heasur·e the guest, then plan the area" . Here agai 1,

The information gathered

hetc .c1n reveal the needs l>l the clientele and his tastes, which
ll.J V

b<!

an indication o(

ct

theme if one js desired and materir1ts that

nrc practical co usc.

h ,. important factor t.ha t must be considered and incorpot·atc d into
..111

l obbv is the use of

signa~

.

So ol ten this is ov<:rlookcd

·.o~ith

L1 · 1·csu l t that guests becumt.! contused and the lobby docs n·)L scrv·' its [unctiun. Frottt counters should be p0sitioned in such a manntr

<t, L' t.:no,ure caS) identiC icaLion upon arrival. and arranged so lhat.

thC'r<' is uu contusion or congt·st ion otl'

l.

rc~istered .

Tlh! Holiday lnn, DO'..rnl own foro·· o has found the true meaning 1f this .
tlel"~

L

a lobb) that

\htS lh>l

ns well planned as intended.
espc~..-iall)

&ucs

~

--

are having probl<'tn'·
d··.,k
uretl5

ol

jdC'nttfication,

1.-Jith tht:! froPI

through poor si,s ng(·.

Congestion is a problem and 1-.
acting~
L~·
1
t1

cr··ated by the ar"!:angcment of lubby furnitut·e which is

chan· Pl i11g dc\ icc Llnc;c to the desk , restricting mm cment to
<~rcas.
111

.lin

Elevators t( u
e.1s

l1.1V~

produced problems by being lo<.ate J ul due
Lo

in

area whit.h is

i ly

coug·~sted

a narrowing o1 spn\. t A

au!

· ht · .ILl thnt the) an: not rendily visible· upon an ivai.
·It

'~'Ature

r,,toJld be provided within c lose proxir:tity o! a l obby il> a

... 41

- 41 -

luggage room, to ensure there is no piling of luggage in major traffic areas and
30

!t will not give arriving guests the feeling The Regency Hyatt, Toronto did

that they are evicting people.

not plan for one and have expressed a severe problem with luggage over-crowding the lobby, especailly at convention times.

Since a lobby is a major traffic area, it should be planned to lead the guests from one area to another. Much of this is possible

through a number of methods, such as varying paint color values on walls or by the use of carpet, which contains a directional pattern. Precautions must be taken here also, with a carpet and

lobby design, Holiday Inn has found their lobby to be too directional, in that it leads people from major areas to major areas by-passing other areas, a serious problem for any hotel.

In all the planning must be well considered regarding function, layout, identification and maintenance if the lobby is to function as a whole.

The final thing that should be mentioned about lobbies is the use of themes. Themes as we know have become prominent in today's The use of a theme can

hotels and range from Roman to Oriental.

be advantageous by providing uniqueness and interest to a hotel. Themes can be a means of uniting the design of a hotel from rooms to restaurants to architecture. Many hotel themes are based

generally on points of interest or historical value in which the

0

0

0

42

- 42 -

hotel is located.

Holiday Irm, Toronto Downtown for
~oo

exa~~~ple

baa.

used a Chinese theme to some extent, though not

successfully, To

based on the Chinese community which lies outside its doors. add to this feeling, Chinese shops are contained in the lobby uniting .the inside atmosphere with the exterior atmosphere.

..

By no means have themes been the only approach to lobbies, one need only to look at the Four Seasons Sheraton in Toronto and their approach of landscaped gardens, or the dramatic effect done by Hyatt Corporation with the "grand design". Hospitality Magazine, Marchp

1970 (refer to appendix #4, page 64) published an article on lobbies, though somewhat of a decorators .ocabulary and treatment, just the same it is worth taking note of.

For information pertaining to . . lob&ies and their designs, articles by the Hotel Corporation of America, the Hotel and Restaurant Business by Donald Lundberg, and Principles of Hotel Design, the Architectural Press, 1970, can give an insight on past influences and today·s demands. (Also see pages on Public Areas, Appendix S, Page 70.

'mE HOTEL RESTAURANT

Eating out has a long history, one that started as early as Egyptian times and carried through Roman and colonial the coffee houses.
t~s

with

But the word ''restaurant" did not come to

America until 1794, via a French refugee from the guillotine, Jean Baptiste Gilbert Paypalt. (50) Paypalt set-up what must have been

·· · 43

- "'·the first Fren~ restaurant in tb6

u.s.

'

Julien· Restorator.

Since then the restaurant business baa changed drastically. Restaurants ranged from river boats, railroad dining cars, to the early Drive-In'· in the 1920'S· By the 1930's came the

coffee shop and in 1950 nearly every large hotel had installed one· The formal dining room was displaced in the 50's to be The 60's were known for

replaced by today's specialty restaurant.

the large chain operators many of which own hotels of their own.

,. Today the restaurant business, which includes hotels, is the third
largest business in the United

States~Sl)

However, it is generally believed that restaurants in hotels are (52.) not profitable, but are, nevertheless a necessity. The uniform system of accounts for hotels, going back to 1925,secommends· that the restaurant be operated as an integral part of the hotel. The reasons for most hotel food operations not being very profitable is due to the general manager of the hotel who bad little real understanding of food and berage operations. state of affair But, this

.

has changed now that more managers are being

trained to understand the food and beverage industry·

W~th the

increase of the Convention business over the past years, hotel

restaurant business is making profits due to the fact conventioners eat their meals at the hotel·· Much of this has been attributed The hotelman recognizes

to the addition of specialty restaurants. the fact that the guest is not a captive to go out of the hotel for some meals.

di~er,

that he will want

If the hotel has several

specialty restaurants, the guea't staying a few days is likely to try more than one of them·
··· 44-

- lii4' -

The specialty
attract~

reata~rant,

i f _.rchandised as a separate facility, ·

a large percentage of its clientele from outside the

hote~~J~is was one reason why Conrad Hilton, as maationed earlier
located many restaurants in the lobby for the purpose of attracting outside clientele.

But what about today's restaurant itself? regard to today's design?

What is happening with

As with the other areas already discussed,

this is an area in need of a design approach, a" area with no given solution and as varied as there are names for them. And, as with

the other areas .. "First measure the guest, then plan the room".

Past years have shown us that this was:anot the important factor considered, but rather impact. Room. were virtually eye-smashing, heavily ornamentea; it was an ' era that attempted to uplift its clientele and give them something they never had and probably never would have. With this trend of thougbt came the impractical. Since

guests were inspired, it was usually a time of depression and high society, but most elements served the function of only pure decoration. Molded motifs adorned everything and everywhere. Furniture fabrics

imported from France covered carved chairs, but only lasted until the first person spilled sherry on the upholstery. Things were A

beautiful, yes, but were by no means practical for their use.

fine example of this era isstill in existence at the King Edward Sheraton and the Royal York, although the latter is undergoing renovations.

Designers now are designing

ro~,.

specialty rooms

w~ich

are located

···45

- 4Jat the top of the hotel, rather than on the ground floor· and restaurants that 1111st appeal to a .... market for restaurat:eu:rs in Montreal as well as
T~ins,

Ontario

Restaurants are entering an era when a restaurant can no longer be just a British restaurant, or French. lt must be a meld that tries

to be all things to all people, yet retain its own

individuality.<'~.)
Fine

So why not use a far-out futuristic design to achieve this? as long as the design works.

lf it is too far out and people cannot

understand it, they become very uneasy and some take it as an insult to their intelligence.
A~so

Therefore, they usually never return.

it should be remembered that people are hesitant, especially

management, to try something not already proven.

Why have there n6t been more t:ontemporary and modern lines of furniture? Some reasons stem back to the same reasons that they are For the budget-minded restaurateur, good modern

not in guest rooms.

and contemporary furnishings aren't as readily available at low prices as traditional. Another thing, it's a lot easier to mix,

re-arrange and re-shuffle traditional furnishings, than it is modern. To move modern, or place it with the other pieces not completely compatible, it sticks out like the so-called "sore tm.b"· Another headache has been that ~rican manufacturers aren't tooled up to make good modern furniture, inexpensively. lf you want good, This equals ·

durable, modern furnishings you have got to import it.

dollar devaluation, shipping costs, dou~ling the price of furnishings. Then there may be strikes, if long, they force you to

select domestic furnishings which equal more than imports or you

··· 46

- 46

compromise the original design.

There are other design considerations of vital tmportance to be considered. These have been outlined by members of NSID.(SS.)

(1.) Mainteance, good design, degenerates to bad design if you cannot maintain it. (2) (3) (4) Must determine what the restauranteur wants within his budget. The kind of clientele he will be catering ~o. Whether his place is a fast food operation, a hamburger, beer place or an atmosphere restaurant. (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) How many seats he wants in hit dining area. How often he plans to turn his tables. What he plans to serve. The kind of motif he has ' in mind. What kind of kitchen he wants, large or small. Will it prepare continental fooda from scratch - convenience foods. (11) The kind of service will affect the number of people qual! ty foods ·

Designs developed must relate to the kitchens, allowing for traffic patterns to restrooms, bars, _ao if the owner decides to remodel these areas at a latter date, be does not have to gut and rearrange the dining area again. good design? This all leada to what are the basics of

Briefly, it is colors and the kinds of furnishings,

wall decor. and all the elements that go to make up a vibrant room. Lighting, because it affects food colors strongly. When

··· 47

- 47 -

one designs a room in a public place, he or she wants to create an environment that speaks to customers, so when they walk in they feel something happened to them.

Much of this is created through the use of the theme.

The

t.._
<56 ·>

sets the whole mood of the restaurant and thil sets the mood of the guest. It is a means of letting the guest know where he is.

A thorough design approach is one that does not stop with the theme, but is one which is carried right through from the menu design to the waitresses uniforms, cutlery and tableware. deaign united and becomes successful. Only then is the

Probably one of the best

examples of this approach can be found in the Sherway Inn in Toronto, a design successful to both owners and clientele.

The last thing designer should be aware of and strive for in restaurant design, is to create a design that is truthful to the clientele, not one that will shatter pretentions and exclude honesty.

·

...~

......

L'4

-48-

THE DESIGN APPROACH

Main steps consist of analysis, synthesis, conceptualization, planning and constructions, and at all times making use of feedback.

ANALYSIS A thorough study of both sire and the intended use~

,.

Is the area located near major highways, airports, may not always be advantageous and may make decision on type of establishment. Property surrounding the area, what is its intended use? Are these uses about to change? Zoning? Nature of topography

with regard t~ drainage? .would any adjacent use be considered a sound, odor, visual, or other nuisances. Contours of the land, land elevation. Amount and nature of vegatation. Whether a complete forest

or a single tree, the existing plant materials should be noted and well understood and may set the theme for development of the site. Soil studies needed for suitability of parking.

Important to site analysis is legal controls over the site, building codes, zoning ordinances and deed restrictions, limit or control

developm~nt.

Is there a city or regional planning body, if so

what is their belief of the future of this site?

Site analysis - main assets and liabilities as well as unusual characteristics about the site.

- 49-

ANALYSIS OF USE Decision of who will use the hotel, best hotel design is the one which really fits the program required by the client. We need to study the functional needs of the building and to create in three dimensions the kind of spaces that will logically meet that need. What kind of trade is intended? this number breaks down. Economic status of clientele. Degree of luxury. Need for conference space. Type of housekeeping and maintenance operation. Significance of staging capacity and type to build for now and what expansion is anticipated. A dominant local or business theme and how it might effect the design. Reasons for this? It forces the investigation of many possibilities Secondly, more definite conclusions Total number to be housed. How

which might be overlooked.

can be drawn regarding intended functional uses.

SYNTHESIS Next step is to bring the results of the use study against the conclusions of the site analysis. Information revealed may state

whether planning should continue, whether parking should be underground or more land is needed. Case studies of hotels on similar

hotels, built on similar areas is helpful.

· ·· 3

- 50 CONCEPTUALIZATION This is the ideational phase. This step requires the many-

faceted talents and experiences of all members of the design team. It is during this phase of the design that the designer Based upon

begins to mold a form - to create a new environment.

the factual, functional and practical, he attempts to form a while which fulfills the intended purpose.

It is here the designer concerns himself with scale, proportion, texture, color, rhythm, etc. His knowledge of the human habits,

desires and needs are interpreted in his shaping of a form. Concepts are formed from several approaches and several concepts. This is a thought process, not e~perimentation. It is the

interpreting of factual and logical in several different ways. Space should not compete in scale with the natural components of the area, it should provide a practical shelter, and protect man from man, but most of all it should give a form of delight.

FEEDBACK All new ideas and information should immediately be brought to bear up the design. New ideas among specialists in the design

team, new approaches - this also is feedback.

PLANS These are the vital documents which spell out in complete detail every aspect of work to be done. This is the phase which fixes

the theoretical and idealistic approaches of the designer ·

· · ·4

- 51 Here the choice is made between steel frame or reinforced concrete construction. Here is decided the amount of color,

style of brick, stone pre-cast concrete, tile inside and out, size, shape, style of windows and doors.

Every decision is made only with full integration of all aspects of design. The interior designers choice of color, texture and

arrangement within the building must be in harmony with the building architecture and present an harmonious foreground when one looks upon the landscape.

Here every shovel of earth is moved, every nail nailed, every drop of paint is painted.

This is not the time for the owner to change his mind about size, detail of construction or furnishing, type of operation.

CONSTRUCTION
This phase is for decisions during strikes and last minute decisions.

l

- 52 ·-.)

~

~

"

{

~

~
tI

~

\J
.... .....

~

v

,, ~

1..1

' /)

+
lo.j

~
I)

\,.)

~

·~
+
~ :> .,
~

~

'

\1

t--

.~

'"

:>

...
\)

~

~

~

~

~

...

~--~

+

:' '

'
'

·,

~

'

·' )

"' .. ''

....
~

·l(
;'\

~

., 0 "
0
\)

"' ·-

~

~

+
"')...
,)

~

-.1

tt -J <::

~

'-'

~

~

Appendix #2

-53 -

R<niS 1. Square footage of a guest room area can be determined only after establishing the total number of each type of room. NO. NEEDED In Ratio Ratio to total available Room

Single Double Twin Twin Double

10-30"1..
20-30"1..

30-60"1.. 10- 20"/.

It is customary and advisable to install at least a few adjoining rooms directly connected by double doors to be converted to suites when demand warrants.

2. Approximate square footage required for the desired number of units. ROOM TYPE Single Double Twin Twin Double Corridor widths are generally 5-6 ft. SQ. FT. AREAS, including bath and closet
180 190 240 250

to to to to

220 240 360 380

sq. sq. sq. sq.

ft. ft. ft. ft.

6 ft. being standard.

Each floor will have space for fire units, elevators, linen rooms, maids and janitor closets.

3. Space Needs in the Guest Room Function areas fall into the following categories. (a) Entry and storage of guests clothes and luggage. (b) Living and recreation. (c) Sleeping. (d) Bathing and dressing.
· ·· 2

- 54 -

Amount of space required for these function areas:
FUNCTION

RANGE
15-200/. 30-40% 20-40% 15-200/.

TRANSIENT GUEST
15% 30% 40% 15%

TERMINAL GUEST
20"1. 40"1. 20% 20"1.
1000!.

Entry & storage Living & recreation Sleeping Bathing & dressing TOTAl

100%

Deciding the length and width of guest rooms, one should keep in mind there are standard measurements for carpeting. conform to these standard widths. Room dimensions should

SLEEPING AND LIVING AREAS 1. 50"1. of floor areas is usually planned for sleeping and living space. This space includes aisle space between beds, night tables and bed lamps.

J

Living includes desk, straight chair, easy chair or chairs, floor lamps, dresser, or dressing table, racks for opening luggage, plus the amount of lounge and card table space deemed desirable. Sleeping and living functions may overlap, but not conflict. i.e. T.v. viewed from all areas.

2. Angle of entry should be so that sleeping and bath areas are not exposed. Requirements in living space are linked to the amount of time the guest will spend in his room and extent he will entertain visitors.

· ·3

-55 -

ENTRANCE AND STORAGE Storage area includes clothes closet, luggage rack, dresser and access space required by them. Closet should be convenient for guest to dispose of hand luggage and clothing on entering the room. Closet should contain a shelf or overhead rack for hats, handbags and small packages. The style of door and the quality of its hardware should be in keeping with the general decor of the establishment. Lock types (1) locks automatically when door is closed. (2) prevent ket from outside opening if door is locked from the inside. (3) draw bolt or chain.

BATH AND DRESSING AREA Baths, layout and types. 1. External Bathroom Important advantage of this is that of natural ventilation. Greatest failing of this is the fact that the service duct can be inspected only from the bathroom or bedroom in which workmen must pass through the room to inspect it. Where rooms are on both sides of the corridor there is two drainage systems. External envelope of bedroom is greater than the room with internal washrooms. This layout means higher building costs. Bedroom window is light and view.

I

r~c~~4,

therefore, there is a loss of

· ·· 4

- 56 -

2. MIDDLE BATIIROOM Bathroom located between two adjacent bedrooms. Worst feature of this is the elongation of the corridor. One bathroom internal, the other external. In one, one must

go through the bedroom to reach the bathrooms.

3. INTERNAL BATHROOM This layout necessitates a lobby. This can be used for furnishings,

part of area is regained by reducing bedroom area. Requires artificial lighting and ventilation.

No .

The common duct if planned well can be serviced from the corridor.
·.

Widths of bedrooms along outerwall are kept to a minimum. Lobby can be opened to the bedroom or separated by a door. Lobby can be used as a dressing area between room and bathroom.

Bathroom facilities are important and one should use high quality floor, wall and ceiling materials, saving on maintenance.

4. Major points to remember in planning the bath and dressing areas: 1. Adequate shelf and counter space for toilet articles. 2. Proper light and mirror for washing. and above. 3. Lavatory not in the corner or among mirror angles, making facilities difficult. 4. Outlets for electrical devices. 5. Adequate towel racks and hooks convenient to guests. 6. Basket or covered hamper for disposing paper and dirty linen. 7. Safety devices - non skid material for tub and shower. Handles Two on each side of mirror

placed at convenient heights and angles for entry and departure from bath.
· ·5

- 57 8. Fixtures should be located so that the amount of piping and labor required for installations within the bath from unit to unit can be kept to a minimum. 9. Plumbing connections should be readily accessible for each in maintenance - noise factor to be considered also. 10. Bath area with its own heating device, sometimes contained in lighting fixture. Additional features such as scales, two soap dishe s, two rolls of toilet paper, a telephone extension, s~ll refrigerator, ice chest, extention mirrors ·

. 5. GUEST ROOM INTERIORS
As much as 35% of floor area is taken up by furniture. Fifty-six square feet for single beds. Eighty-five to one hundred for two beds. Cleaning should be made as easy as possible, beds on rollers or beds built to the floor. Many pieces of furniture can be hung from walls. Upholstery, draperies and carpet can be selected on their ease to clean. Furnishings should be suitable, attractive and durable.

WALL COVERINGS
·
Paints are used most often for they are easily changed and repaired. Disadvantages - must be prepared with greater care than is necessary for other products. Choices for wall coverings are: paper, canvas, burlaps and cloths, plastic or plastic coated fabrics and panels fabricated fromnetal.
. ·· 6

-58 -

Wall coverings cont'd Selection of wall covering, keep in mind the type and style of furnishings so an intelligent and attractive blending of all elements is achieved.

DRAPERIES
Selected on durability and appearance. Type of window determines choice of either
...
11

drawdrapes 11 or those

that are bound back, and how draperies are hung and if a valence is needed.

·TERRACE AND BALCONIES
These amenities are pleasant but also costly. Lead to problems of security, wind and water proofing which entails special equipment and joinery, safety problems. But to restrict such features to rooms with a prominent view, and to those of a higher price ranged rooms.

CORRIDORS
To avoid the institutional appearance, corridors should be modulated by recessing bedroom lobbies, using false ceilings with variatio~ in lighting intensity in corridors.

DISABLED PEOPLE
Hotel mist have rooms assessable, without the disabled having to use steps.
5~/o of the guest rooms must be assessable to chairbound people.

Where there are no elevators, three rooms on the ground floor must be for disabled people.

-59-

There must be ehough room to allow a wheel chair in a bathroom and for the person to close the door.

Bathroom Layouts

- 60 -

/1/J)rl

---iI

.a l. ,o-<: r1 0 ,,.,

d ll rtt

1/
~~~-.,.., .

&711
j~

~

"'

,

-

U-'IT II

.&.:17 ,.,

-

L

~

Bathroom and Room Layouts

- 61 I

. ·- · --b

·""': .....

I-rs:
:

-

,_
.....

-~-

~

_

-- - ~

- -~- --- l

I

· /.. I

.. " '

L

..t:>. · .... ~

~

r

___ __

l~L

_. i

-I

I

I

- -1

.·--1

- - ··I

I
I

[ ,
0

l
r-

-0
p]I
0

~

0
ALl- C.i..CA1t!"N7:S
C·A~~:r.J= uu.. y

C CN'f"~:>L.~ ~().I?L.'t' LOC,tJ r.e-J:>

L-OCA;%:C> 7'or;..CTHC!e

Lrfo~
I

~

1
()

I

-1
0
0

~

L::d
A

D l[CJIDI
.. .
By

cr<l'

I' l 2 l 3 li4 l 5 1

I~ I

C~NY£.Nii.N74-Y ~OCATCL:>

CONT'~~'-S' L.ocAT.lii=>
8£-b~IC.l:

...

Appendix 2 Parts of this material have been removed from this thesis because of copyright restrictions.

Appendix 3: pages 62-63 This material has been removed from this thesis because of copyright restrictions: Dreyfus, G. (1972, January). First measure the guest, then plan the room. Hospitality, 22-23. Appendix 4: pages 64-69 This material has been removed from this thesis because of copyright restrictions: Raskin, B. (unknown). How to Make your Lobby look Lively. Publication unknown, 62-29.

PUBLIC AREAS Entrance and Reception The impression created by the main entrance is important since it tends to typify the type of hotel. It must always

ne clearly defined and provide direct access to the hotel r ··ception. If this is on an upper floor, stairs and lifts

mu st be e~clusive to the hotel.

Entranc e,doors and lobby

't

Doors ;hould have sufficient clear width to allow for porter, plugs, bags, minimum (900 mm clear opening). With rev)lving doors, side hung escape doors will be required. A draught lobby should normally be provided · · Disabled guests: All public entrances must be accessible to ambulant disabled people and at least one must be available for chairbound people. At least one entrance, served from the hotel garage must be accessible to chairbound disabled people.

FLOORING Area of transition is needed at entrance before using fine floor finishes. Allow for dirt and patches of wear from foot traffic.

BAC~GE

HANDLING

· Special .baggage area may be required for mass arrival · · Lifts and identification.

. ·· 2

- 71 -

RECEPTION · The reception desk should be located so that it is easily identified by guest immediately - and is ·also on his route to lifts and stairs · · Separate counter facilities are usually provided for enquiries and for checking in or out · · Desk top should be suitable for writing and there should be a bag shelf · · Other needs: !'rolleys · . Head porters position, telephone communications with garage, luggage room, cashier, reception · · Fire alarm and service bells should be located near head porters · · Room must be provided for cashier and accounting machines · · Manager's office should be near reception and file records. Porter station access to luggage and space for

RECEPTION LOBBY One must establish priority between publicity values of being able to see into the reception lobby or entrance from the street and the comfort and provacy of guest inside. This will effect positioning of the lobby and the glazing and type of curtaining. FURNITURE FITTINGS · Furniture should be of contract quality and be able to withstand hard wear. · Consider the following: easy chairs, settees, desk chairs and writing desks, low tables, ashtrays, tables and pedestal carpets.

· ·· 3

- 72 -

Curt ai ns - heavy (dress only or complete) and net, elec ·: r ically controlled curtains. An t 1- glare glazing to windows, staff seating behind counters and i n foyer for messenger boys. Cl , -k s should be installed 12 or 24 hour digital, easily
s e~n

by staff and guests.

·

- 73 -

DINING RO<M, RESTAURANT, COFFEE SHOPS These areas are usually open to non-residents. These areas should have convenient entrances from outside the hotel and in addition have direct access for resident guests. Range of dining accommodation may include general restaurants, specialty, buffet bars. In every case, the dining room requires that it be positioned adjacent to a kitchen or servery from which this is a direct and convenient access. Where several kitchens are included, these areas may be operated as a collective unit, with the bulk of food preparation being in a central point, usually before the guest.

CHECK LIST Number and type of seating. Dining rooms 18 to 20 sq. ft. per person. Banquet seating 10 sq. ft. per person. Popular priced table service 15 sq. ft. per person. Lunch room or coffee shop 20 sq. ft. per person. Bar and cocktail lounge 18 to 20 sq. ft. per person. Type of service. Theme and mot if. Division of room. · Dance floor · Orchestra facilities.
Dum

waiters.

Head waiter's desk.

· ··· 74

- 74-

Hard wearing floor entrance and exist. Tables - mat · .;, cloths, modular. Cash system and desks. Liquor serrice system. System of lighting, zoning, etc. Curtains. Telephorte, jack points. Acoustic treatment. Color 3nd lighting related to food. Speakftrs.

LETTERS

I

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada October 11, 1972

John Portman & Associates 225 Peachtree N.E. Atlanta, Georgia Dear Mr. Portman:
I am a fourth year Interior Design student at Ryerson, Toronto.

At present I am doing a thesis ort Hotel Design, a field which I plan to enter after receiving my degree.
I am very much aware of your work on this

subject with regards to Hyatt Regency chain and to say che least am extremely impressed with the freshness of your designs.
I would greatly appreciate your criterias and viewpoints on planning a hotel with reference to the interior.

Any material or information that you may feel beneficial to me on this subject, would be greatly appreciated. Thank you for your time and trouble. Sincerely,

Orant S. Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

September 27, 1972

Mr. t-1. Leven Sonesta Hotels 390 Commonwealth Avenue Bost o n, Mass. 022l i Genthmen: As a ~raduate student in Interior Design, presently in my ~ egree year, I have chosen for my thesis, Hotel Planning. Therefote, recognizing the fact that you are one of the Leaders in the hotel field, I would appre c iate any information you might care to offer, relative to current and future plans, when planning expansion or renov..J t ions. In other w'-1rd s , -what I am seeking is information on -what ma j or hotel chains set as criteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or cnginc~ring people. What are the main ingredients t d be built into hotel design to cater to the needs o f the people who may make use of your services and why? Any information which you feel might be of value to :ne in prnparing my thesis would be most sincerely ~PJhcc i a ted .

I

I

Yours very truly,

,
'.

,..

'

'

Grant

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada September 26, 1972

The Manager Hyatt Regency Hotels Hyatt Corporation 1338 Bayshore Highway Burlinganie, California 94010 Dear Sir: As a graduate student in Interior Design, presently in my degree year, I have chosen Eor my thesis, Hotel Planning. Therefore, recognizing the fact that you are one of the leaders in the hotel field, I would appreciate any information you might care to offer, relative to current and future plans, when planning expansion or renovations. 1 n other words, what I am seeking is . information on what major hotel chains set as c riteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or engineering people. What are the main ingredients to be built into hotel design to cater to the needs of the people who may make use )f your services and why? Any information which you feel might be of value to me in preparing my thesis would be most sincerely appreciated. Yours very truly,

._ ,r
Grant

/

'

.'

/

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto, Ontario Canada September 26, 1972

Mr. William Kithen The Olympic Hotel Seattle, Washington 98111 Dear Mr. Kithen:

,

As a graduate student in Interior Design, presently in my Degree year, I have chosen for my thesis, Hotel Planning. Therefore, recognizing the fact that you are one of the leaders in the hotel field, I would appreciate any information you might care to offer, relative to current and future plans, when planning expansion or renovations.
111 other words, what I am seeking is information on what major hotel chains set as Lriteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or en~ineering people. What are the main ingredients to be built into hotel design to cater to the needs of the people who may make use d your services and why?

Any intonmation which you feel might be of value to me in prep·ring my thesis would be most sincerely
appre~.:iated.

Yours very truly,

'

I
(

/

Grant

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

September 27, 1972

u.s.A.

Hotel Division Playboy Club International 919 N. Michigan Avenue Chicago, Illinois

Gentlemen: As a graduate student in Interior Design, presently in my degree year, I have chosen for my thesis, Hotel Planning. Therefore, recognizing the fact that you are one of the leaders in the hotel field, I would appreciate any information you might care to offer relative to current and future plans, when planning expansion or renovations. In other words,what I am seeking is information on what major hotel chains set as criteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or engineering people. What are the main ingredients to be built into hotel design to cater to the needs of the people who may make use of your services and why? Any information which you feel might be of value to me in preparing my thesis would be most sincerely appreciated. Yours very truly,

Grant S. Aird

.,..

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

September 27, 1972

The Manager Knott Hotels 575 Madison Avenue New York, N.Y. 10022 Gentlemen: As a graduate student in InteriorDesign, presently in my degree year, I have chosen for my thesis, Hotel Planning. Therefore, recognizing the fact that you are one of the leaders in the hotel field, I would appreciate any information you might care .to offer relative to current and future plans,when planning expansion or renovations. In other words, what I am seeking is information on what major hotel chains set as criteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or engineering people. Wh~t are the main ingredients to be built into hotel ~~esign to cater to the needs of thl· people who may ml'k~ use of your services and why? ~~
· ..'! .(

Any information which you feel might be of value to me in preparing my thesis would be most sincerely appre c iated. Yours very truly,

Grant

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario October 9, 1972

Mr. Peter Cameron c/o Tom Lee, Interior Design Sheraton Four Seasons Queen Street, West . Toronto, Ontario Dear Mr. Cameron: May I take this opportunity to thank you for the courtesy extended to me when we met last week at the Four Seasons Hotel. Your tour of the Hotel and discussion of paints and facts of interest were most informative and enlightening. I am sure they will make a valuable contribution to my studies as I progress through my course at Ryerson. For someone as busy as you must be, to take the time to explain and instruct a student such as I, is most sincerely appreciated. Apart from the educational value of our meeting, I enjoyed your company personally, and trust I may look forward to meeting with you again in the near future. Thank you again for your extreme kindness. Sincerely,

Grant

s.

Aird

..

\

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

September 27, 1972

Sales Department Loe·"' s 666 5th Avenue New York, N.Y.
10019

Gentlemen: As a graduate student in Interior Design, . presently in my degree year, I have chosen for my . thesis, Hotfi!l Planning. Therefore, recognizing the fact that you are one of the leaders in the hotel field, I would appretiate any information you might care to offer, relative to current and future plans, when planning expansion or renovations. In other words,what I am seeking is information on what major hotel chains set as criteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or engineering people. What are the main ingredients to be built into hotel design to cater to the needs of the people who may make use of your services and why? Any information which you feel might be of value to me in preparing my thesis would be most sincerely appreciated. Yours very truly,

- ~ "l·· . ./
Grant S. Aird

!'(

/

353 Bal1iol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada September 26, 1972 Mr. K. Willoughby Acting Director of Architecture & Interior Design Waldorf Astoria 301 Park Avenue New York, N.Y. 10022 Dear Mr. Willoughby: As a graduate student in Interior Design, presently in my degree year, I have chosen for my thesis, llote 1 Planning · . Therefore, recognizing the fact that you are one of the leaders in the hotel field, I would appreciate any information you might care to offer, relative to current and future plans, when planning expansion or renovations. In other words, what I am seeking is information on what major hotel chains set as criteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or engineering people. What are the main ingredients to be built into hotel design to cater to the needs of the people who may make usc of your services and why? Any information which you feel might be of value to me in preparing my thesis would be most sincerely appreciated. Yours very truly,

/

Grant

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada September 26, 1972

Design Department Holiday Inn Inc. )742 Lamar Avenue Memphis, Tenn. 38118 Gentlemen: As a graduate student in Interior Design, presently in my degree year, I have chosen for my thesis, Hotel Planning · . Therefore, recognizing the fact that you are one of the leaders in the hotel field, I would appreciate any information you might care to offer, relative to curr e nt and future plans, when planning expansion or renovations. In other words, what I am seeking is information on what major hotel chains set as criteria or guide lines when presenting their plans to consultants or engineering people. What are the main ingredients to be built into hotel design to cater to the needs o( the people who may make use of your services and why? Any information which you feel might be of value to me in preparing my thesis would be most sincerely appreciated. Yours very truly, ,
,. I"

/

I

Grant

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street

Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

October 17, 1972

Design Deparement Holiday Inns Incorporated 3742 Lamar Avenue Memphis, Tenn. 38118 . Dear Sirs: Further to my letter of September 26th, regarding my thesis on Hotel Design. As there is a great urgency in this connection, I would appreciate hearing from you at your early convenience. Anything you can send me would be sincerely appreciated. Thank you. Yours very truly,

Grant

s.

Aird

t ."
"'lU ' ·

~

353 Balliol Stre~t Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

October 17, 1972

nte Manager Hyatt Regency Hotel Hyatt Corporation 1338 Bayshore Highway Burlinganie, California 94010 Dear Sir: Further to my letter of September 26th, regarding my thesis on Hotel Design. As there is a great urgency in this connection, I would appreciate hearing from you at your early convenience. Anything you can send me would be sincerely appreciated. Thank you. Yours very truly,

Grant

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street l'ql'..Pf¥:D .29..8"- .On t ario Canada

October 17, 1972

Hotel Division Playboy Club International 919 North Michigan Avenue Chicago, Illinois
U.S .A.

Gentlemen: Further to my letter of September 26th, regarding my thesis on Hotel Design. As there is a great urgency in this connection, I would ~ppreciate hearing from you at your early convenience. Anything you can send me would be sincerely appreciated. Thank you. Yours very truly,

Grant S. Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

October 17, 1972

Mr. K. Willoughby Acting Director, Architecture and Interior Design Waldorf-Astoria 301 Park Avenue New York, N.Y. 10022. Dear Mr. Willoughby: Further to my letter of September 26th, regarding my thesis on Hotel Design. As there ·is a great urgency in thia connection, I would appreciate hearing from you at your early convenience. Anything you can send me would be sincerely appreciated. Thank you. Yours very truly,

Grant

s.

Aird

.."'

I I
Sales Department Loew· s 666 Fifth Avenue New York, N.Y. 10019 Dear Sirs:

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

October 17, 1972

Further to my letter of September 26th, regarding my thesis on Hotel Design. As there is a great urgency in this connection, I would appreciate hearing from you at your early convenience. Anything you can send me woul~ be sincerely appreciated. '11lank you. Yours very truly,

Grant S. Aird

3!l3i ~alliol Street Toronto 298, Ontario Canada

October 17, 1972

The Manager Knott Hotels 575 Madison Avenue New York, N.Y. 10022 Dear Sir: Further to my letter of September 2~th, regarding my thesis on Hotel Design. As there is a great urgency in this connection, I would appreciate hearing from you at your early convenience · . Anything you can send me would be sincerely appreciated. Thank- you. Yours very truly,

Grant

s.

Aird

353 Balliol Street Toronto 298, Onta%i o

October 17, 1972

Mr. John Haunts Planning & Renovations Department Executive Offices The Royal York Hotel 100 Front Street, West Toronto, Ontario
Dear Mr. Haunts: May I take this opportunity to thank you for the cou~tesy extended to me when we met last week at the Royal York Hotel. Your tour of the Hotel and discussiqn of points and facts of interest were most informative and enlightening. I am sure they will make a valuable contr r)ution to my studies as I ·progress through my course at Ryerson. For someone as busy as you must be, to take the time to explain and instruct a student such as myself, is most sincerely appreciated. Apart from the educational value of our meeting, I personally enjoyed your company and look forward to meeting with you again in the near future. Thank you again for your extreme kindness. Yours very truly,

Grant S. Aird

, -.

~

·'· .l(l.!.

353 Balliol Street

Toronto 298, Ontario

October 17, 1972

Mr. G. Scriver Sales Manager Hyatt Regency 21 Avenue Road Toronto, Ontario Dear Mr. Scriver: May I take this opportunity to thank you for the courtesy extended to me when we met recently at the Hyatt Regency. Your tour of the Hotel and discussion of points and facts of interest were most informative and enlightening. I am ·sure they wUl make a valuable contribution to my studies as I progress through my course at Ryerson. For someone as busy as you must be, to take the time to explain and instruct a student such as myself, is most sincerely appreciated. Apart from the educational value of our meeting, I personally enjoyed your company and look forward to meeting with you again in the near future. Thank you again for your extreme kindness. Yours very truly,

Crant

s.

Aird

This  material  has  been  removed  from  this  thesis  because  of  copyright   restrictions:      J.K.  Ottley,  JR,  personal  communication,  October  1972.        

This  material  has  been  removed  from  this  thesis  because  of  copyright   restrictions:      M.A.  Leven,  personal  communication,  October  2,  1972.     

This  material  has  been  removed  from  this  thesis  because  of  copyright   restrictions:      J.W.  Keithan,  personal  communication,  October  11,  1972.     

This  material  has  been  removed  from  this  thesis  because  of  copyright   restrictions:      D.L.  Leavitt,  personal  communication,  October  26,  1972.     

HILTON INTERNATIONAL CO 57 Hotels Operating O<Doxll»XX 15 Hotels Under Construction 4 Hotels Under Expansion

17 Signed Agreements

Hotels Operating (57) Acapt: I co, :·te:< ico - Acapt:lc o Hi 1 ton Addis Ababa, Ethiopia - Addis Ababa Hilton Al Ain, United Arab Emirates - Al Ain Hilton Amsterdam, Xetherlands - Amsterdam Hilton Amsterdam, Nethe rlands - Schiphol Airport Hilton Aswan, Egypt - m. s. Osiris Athens, Greece - Athens Hilton Barbados, W. I. - Barbados Hilton Berlin, Germany - Berlin Hilton Bogot6, Colombia - Bogot~ Hilton Brussels, Belgium - Brussels Hilton Cairo, Egypt - Nile Hilton Caracas, Venezuela - Caracas ~ilton Curacao, N. A. - Curacao Hilton Dusseldorf , Get~any - Dusseldorl Hilton Guadalajara, Mexico - Guadalajara Hilton Guam, U. S. - Guam Hilton Hong Kong, B. C. C. - Hongkong Hilton Honolulu, Hawaii - Kahala Hilton Istanbul, Turkey - Istanbul Hilton Jamaica (Ocho Rios), W. I. - Jamaica Hilton Kuwait - Kuwait Hilton London, England - London Hilton Luxor, Egvpt - ·,. s . Isis Madeira (Funchal) - Madeira Hilton Madrid, Spain - Castellana Hilton Mainz, Germany - Mainz Hilton Malta - Malta Hilton Manila, Philippines - Manila Hilton Marbclla (Costa del Sol), Spain- Marbella Hilton Martinique, F. W. I. - Martinique Hilton Mayaguez, Puerto Rico - Mayaguez Hilton Mexico City, Mexico - Continental Hilton Milan, Italy - Milano Hilton Montreal, Canada - Montreal Aeroport Hilton Montreal, Canada - Queen Elizabeth (a CN hotel) Munich, Germany - M~nchcn Hilton

*

Originn 1 Opening Date: Original Opening Date:

1957 Sept. 1969

··

Hilton International Co. - Statistics (Continued)

Hotel~

Under Construction (15)

Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates - Abu Dhabi Hilton Beirut, Lebanon - Beirut Hilton Jerusalem, Israel - Jerusalem Hilton Kathmandu, Nepal- Hotel de l'Annapurna Kenya - Salt Lick Lodge (64 rooms) - Taita Hills Lodge (62 rooms) Kuala Lumpur, Halaysia - Kuala Lumpur Hilton Lahore, Pakistan - Lahore Hilton London, England - Kensington Hilton Melbourne, Australia - Melbourne Hilton Okinawa (Naha) - Okinawa Hilton Quebec City, Canada - Quebec Hilton Stratford-Upon~Avon, England - Stratford Hilton Sydney, Australia - Sydney Hilton Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China - Taipei Hilton TOTAL NUMBER OF ROOMS

Hotel Expansions (4) Nairobi, Kenya - Nairobi Hilton Tehran, Iran - Royal Tehran Hilton Tel Aviv, I~rael - Tel Aviv Hilton Zur1ch, Switzerland - Zurich Airport Hilton
'NMU~~~R~~~x

Signed Agreements Bahia, Brazil Bahrain, Arabian Gulf Bali Barcelona,Spain Basel,&witzerland Budapest, Hungary Rio, Brazil Delhi,India Djakarta Florence,Italy Kano, Nigeria Karachi Kathmandu

( 17)

Lisbon ,,Portugal Buenos Aires, Argentina Vienna, Austria Dakar, Africa

Hilton International Co. - Statistics (Continued:

Hotels Operating (Continued) Nairobi, Kenya - Nairobi Hilton Nicosia, Cyprus - Cyprus Hilton Paris, France - Orly Hilton Paris, France - Paris Hilton Rabar, t-lo r occl' - Rabal Hilton Ro~e, Italy - Cavalieri Hilton Rotterdam, Netherlands - Rotterdam Hilton San Juan, Puerto Rico - Caribe Hilton Sao Paulo, Brazil - Sao Paulo Hilton St. Thomas, U. S. V. I. -Virgin Isle Hilton Singapore - Singapore Hilton Tananarive, Madagascar - Madagascar Hilton Tehran, Iran - Royal Tehran Hilton Tel Aviv, Israel - Tel Aviv Hilton Tokyo, Japan - Tokyo Hilton Toronto, Canada - Toronto Airport Hilton . Trinidad (Port-of-Spain), W. I. - Trinidad Hilton Tunis, Tunisia - Tunis Hilton Vancouver, Canada - Hotel Vancouver (a CN hotel) Zurich, Switzerland - Zurich Airport Hilton TOTAL NUMBER OF ROOMS

****

***Original Opening Date: Original Opening Date:

12/15/50 5/24/39

HOLIDAY INN
DOWNTOWN TORONTO

A further look into the subject should be taken .by studying a specific hotel which opened recently in downtown Toronto.

The hotel is the Holiday Inn, Toronto Downtown.

This hotel was

chosen because it shows some of the serious problems that hotels are experiencing in the Toronto area. Also it is an hotel in In my

which the design approach was never fully carried through.

opinion as a designer, this has had severe repercussions on the hotel.

The Holiday Inn, Toronto Downtown was opened in June, 1972.

The

hotel has now been operating for several months and is already experiencing numerous problems with its overall design.

Possibly, the best method of dealing with this hotel is to start with its origination, where many of its present problems began.

The building when first drafted was by no means the Holiday Inn it is now, nor was it even a hotel for that matter, but rather an office building in rough proposal. It was not until some time later,

with the advent of the Holiday Inn Corporation and the backing of a Swiss group that the building was considered for a hotel. It was

stated that only then, was the building quickly transformed into a hotel layout. question. It is this quick transformation that I severely

· ·· 2

- 2 -

I cannot help but wonder, whether it would not have been better to have disregarded the original plans and started a new building from scratch. Structurally, the building has posed many problems which

will be mentioned later in the report.

The new proposed hotel, before it could be passed, had to meet certain zoning requirements governed by City Hall. The first dealt with the

construction of underground passages for later expansion and development of the surrounding area. This alone virtually limited the Secondly, the height of

'

position in which the building would face.

the building was limited to the height of the smallest City Hall tower. Further no signage of any kind was to be visible on any side that faced City Hall, a dispute which seems to have created hard feelings between the people involved.

As the building progressed to its twenty-seven floors ( a size that was to be Holiday Inn's largest), the architect constructed a building that was sympathetic in design and materials to City Hall. Concrete

was used for this purpose and carried throughout the building with the intention of creating a feeling that the building came from outside and inward into the interior. The shape and position of the building

was planned to ensure that it did not block any view of the City Hall. In this respect the design has worked and it is aomewhat refreshing to see. Care was taken to provide a buildina that was
co.pl~tary

to

its surroundings and not designed to dominate them.

It is a building

which provides its own distinct characteristics on the exterior, while retaining a hotel impression, rather than an office complex, which may be considered what is happening with the new Four Seasons Sheraton.

- 3 -

When a hotel is designed for Holiday Inns, usually it is governed by certain building regulations, which have been formulated in Memphis, Tennessee. I call this the outside influence, and was informed that

in this case, this Holiday Inn belongs to the Commonwealth of Holiday Inns, one of separate identity from the parent organization in the

u.s.

However, it was not denied that the parent company had some say in the layout of this building. The architect became responsible for follow-

ing the regulations of the parent company and at the same time informing the Swiss group of its interest.

· is a common practice Though this

in today·s industry, I feel that because of the scattering of clients and the making of decisions elsewhere, decisions that should have been
n~e

at the site only end up being disasterous to the design of the One has to be there in order to take all aspects into view

building.

to ensure a careful and through decision.

Holiday Inn recently stated in an article, that the feasibility test conducted at the beginning indicated that this was the required size of building to meet their needs. However, it was also stated that

Holiday Inn requested more space internally, which turned out to be at a higher cost than they were prepared to pay. Holiday Inn found

it necessary to cram, in their words, as much space out of the building as was possible. From what I can see, the result was the shifting

of many areas, some projecting into other areas, as can be seer within the ballroom. Were all aspects really taken into account when the

feasibility study was conducted?

earlier, this was Holiday Inn's first venture into a this size. Some felt that Holiday Inn was looking at and

the hotel as a two-storey building, which in most cases

- 4 -

they have been dealing with since their existence.

This could have

had an effect on the design layout and produced problems of its own if this was the case.

Before dealing with the interior of the hotel, there is one prominent problem which has developed, dealing with the front diagonal parking at the main entrance. a congestion. The layout of diagonal parking as it is now, creates

If totally blocked, as it usually is, it makes it difficult Much of this
~terns

for cars present to move or leave.

from the fact that

there were no means provided for a through exist for cars using diagonal parking after disposing guests. It has been suggested that the removal

of the diagonal parking, or the removal of the end abutments of these parking areas would alleviate this problem, but apparently Holiday Inn has not commented on such a proposal. Expansion is not the answer since Parking other than

the hotel is bounded by Chestnut Street on the front.

the hotel garage is not permissible on the surrounding streets, however, a decision will have to be made soon as it is creating an inconvenience to guests and congesting surrounding through streets.

Upon entering the hotel, one is confronted with a lobby that is open to view and of medium size.
Conc~ete

has been carefully carried through-

out in a means to unite the exterior and the interior of the building. However, the lobby layout seems to be lacking from several points of view, such as identification of specific areas, front desk layout, security, theme and allocation of the elevator core. For those entering the hotel, means of identification is a problem. is to register, is hampered by the
··~ftice

of signage, which is located out of the guests immediate

··· 5

- 5 -

view.

Desk areas are not clearly identified, because the materials

used for lettering blend with the background it is situated on. Much of this signage is further hampered by the position of structural columns, which block many of the existing signs.

Identification of elevator areas is also a problem for guests upon arrival, since it is located out of view of central areas. Structurally, the problem cannot be corrected.

'
The front desk is posing problems of its own, as it is off to the side and out of view of the arriving guests.
position~d

This also

causes security problems because the front desk does not have total control to view the elevator cores to eliminate undesirables.
Gues~find
th~

the desk positioning somewhat of a handicap, because

sign in at one side of the room and then travel to the other

side of the lobby to reach the elevator core with their luggage. A layout not too convenient for guests.

Holiday Inn has expressed dissatisfaction of other areas with the front desk; not enough room has been provided for hotel equipment and personnel. Space has had to be found wherever possible. Most

definitely there has been a lack of communication between personnel and the designer for the needs of the latter. Structurally, the

front desk has been treated with materials fitting its function materials that are durable, wear - resistant and maintenance free, factors which should not be overlooked in any hotel.

Office management has been well positioned to ensure its close proximity

· ·· 6

- 7 -

out of view of the guests.

With this theme played down, the lobby

offers the guest very little in the way of interest and enjoyment.

Other aspects of the lobby have been treated in a decorative sense. Mirrors are used to cover structural columns and this psychologically the opens up areas more. Little means or thought have been given to make Fixtures are gaudy and

these integrate with other wall treatments. impractical for maintenance
purpose~,

and also have no r e lations to

the design or theme of the interior.

The furniture arrangement is hindering the design, since due to its arrangement it has become a channeling device for guests upon arrival at the front desk. Because of the lack of spacing, guests are forced

to travel to either end of the furniture line in order to reach their l'inal destination. Hotels have experienced this problem befor e and

have found it creates severe congestion and confusion during busy periods, besides inconveniencing guests. With this set-up, the

\
)

arrangement becomes very rigid with furniture being placed on the
perimeter~ of the room, rather than becoming an integral part.

The

)

arrangement as it is, creates very little opportunity for guests to mingle and meet other guests, if only for a moment.
/

Recently, the lobby carpet received coverage.

The carpet was to be

the world's largest handmade carpet at a cost of $17,000.00, but when laid down, it did not fit, and had to be re-cut - a costly mistake for the hotel, which can only be attributed to poor measurements and communication at the beginning. There is another tragedy with the

...

~

- 8 -

carpet in that it has not been properly protected at the main entrance, even though a zone of protection was set-up to help remove dirt from guests shoes. At an early stage, this carpet is showing visible signs A further margin of protection should have been The use

of wear and stain.

provided or else the carpet should have been set further back.

>
')

of marble in front of the front desk is a good example of what could have been used, since both areas are major traffic spots.

Before leaving the lobby, some reference should be given to the porter's station. The station, by some electrical and telephone blunders, has

been located in an area which is the furtherst point from the door. In order for the station to function as it should, it is essential that it be located by the main entrance in order to service the front door and front desk.

In summary, the lobby is one which has been treated quickly in the area of design and planning; it is a lobby which really does not generate feeling to its guests, or give an indication of what might lie beyond. The lobby has become more of a channeling area, a lobby which directs guests from one large area to another with little recognition of those areas in between. The lack of overall unity is virtually due to any

to the fact that the building structure was designed prior

indication from the designer of what the interior was to be like, thus leaving most preconceptions to the architect and others ·

··· 9

- 9 commercial areas located on the main and second floors have also been poorly dealt with. When treated, space allocations were set-up without What the hotel

knowledge of what, or who would occupy these spaces.

has now is dissatisfied tenants and a combination of stores that have little, or no relationship to the total design, because they were not considered until the last stage of construction. provided for mechanically, due to the architects original layout. Stores have been poorly and disregard for

economic reasons

Store personnel have no washroom

facilities in their stores, or for that matter even on the main f loor. Layout is such that stores are located in poorly lit corridors that psychologically deter guests from entering these areas. on
~he

Stores located

second floor are having problems of identification since none

was provided and the fact that they are out of public view, due to the existence of metal fire doors. Why no means of identification, or the

use of glass fire doors is still a mystery, even after questioning the management.

The second and third floors deal primarily with convention rooms, and the large ballroom. First impression of these areas is one of

confusion, especially when one is trying to locate the various conference rooms due
LO

the lack of, and use of signage, and secondly

the fact that the floor is broken up by the structural layout of the building.

Many traffic routes to these areas are obstructed by structural colums which divide major corridors and passages. This fault can

again be traced to the original proposed office concept.

· ·· 10

- 10 -

The ballroom is an area which shows very little concern for design treatment. It is distressing to see the designers'use of materials.

Wallpaper does not match, carpet is showing signs of wear, and uplifting. Use of color and lighting show no signs of sensitivity

for the size of the area, while fixtures used, dominate the room rather than compliment. The fixtures have been treated as an

afterthought and for impact, without consideration of their overall effect on the room design.

Storage that has been provided for this area is far too small and restricting to allow proper storage while at the same time permitting employees to' travel between the kitchen and the ballroom.

But design has been considered in a 7iUmber of areas.

A waiting room

adjoining the ballroom has been provided and can be opened into the ballroom. The design has allowed guests to mingle and get This also allows outside halls

acquainted prior to festivities.

and corridors to be free of congestion.

Besides this, the designer has provided a kitchen of considerable size to service the ballroom areas only. served hot and promptly. Therefore, meals can be

This feature is sometimes excluded in

hotel designs - meals therefore have to come from some distance from the area served, with the result that the food is cold upon arrival. The kitchen works well for the two adjacent areas, but

when the ballroom is divided into three sections, the section that

... l l

- 11 -

is the farthest away from the kitchen will suffer in service, due to the distance a waiter must travel to reach the room. Generally, It

the room gives the appearance of being quickly pieced together.

is no doubt a room of separate identity and design to the rest of the hotel; a feature that is not complimentary to the hotel.

The conference rooms generally suffer from the same faults as the ballroom. They are very small and very impersonal and somewhat
l

restrict their use to small functions.

Lighting

treatm~nt

is a cold

blue fluorescence, producing a harsh uncomfortable atmosphere; walls are very decorative and busy for the size of the room. No means has

been made to psychologically enlarge these areas by the use of materials such as mirrors, or a chosen was not care!ully
plai~

vinyl wallpaper.

Carpet when

consid~red

to ensure that it was in harmony

with other materials such as walls and now the carpets clash rather than harmonize. If I were a business man, I would find it hard to However, regardless of

remain in these areas for more than an hour.

these faults this is one area in which electrical conveniences were considered with the guest in mind. Electrical switches and heating

switches have been located centrally so that the guest may set the setting to his requirements at one time.

There is one conference area which is adapted for two functions, something most hotels might take note of. The terrace was designed

I

for the purpose of quick conversion from a conference room in winter or summer to an open cafe servicing the outdoor pool during the summer season.

··l2

- 12 The hotel has thus created a multi-purpose room to serve the needs of the guests, by simply choosing materials that are flexible to needs and change.

I I

Other facilities on this floor such as washrooms are sparse and poorly identified; one small washroom per sex is designed to service all meetings and ballrooms and these are far too small to meet convention needs, without inconveniencing guests to some degree. '

The 4th floor containing the indoor pool and small gymnasium is somewhat of a mystery. It does contain rooms for guests, however,

Holiday Inn is considering changing this area into offices; offices that are presently located on the level below the lobby. The reasoning is not clear, but possibly due to the fragmentation and smallness of various departments associated with Holiday Inn. Why this was not realized in the final stages of planning is again a mystery. The pool area on this floor is also questionable. The

carpet used, runs directly up to the pool doors, an area heavily traveled by pool users and while it is not as yet evident, I feel the chlorine used in the pool will eventually bleach the coloring out of the rug, unless immediately protected.

Corridors to rooms on the remaining floors are wide, spacious and bright. Coloring in the carpet has been used as a means to indicate each floor while the pattern acts as a direction force aiding the indication of elevator cores. The corridors are not long, but are broken up

··· 13

into short sections due to the building design, thus allowing rooms to be close to elevator cores. A positive design layout compared to

hnt.e l s such as the Four Seasons Sheraton with their monotonous non-ending corridors.

Directional signage has be en provided at elevators, indicating room numbers and direction in both English and French. Room numbers are

located on all doors by the key locks, making it virtually impossible for a person to mistake their room, besides giving the door a f ree uncluttered appearance.

Lighting has been provided near guest doors and at various int e1vals along the corridor plainness, while at degree. walls as a means of detering any impression of the same time illumunating the halls to a high

Wall treatment is different to most hotels with their usage of vinyl and wallpaper. Here a white stucco has been sprayed on. Ease of

maintenance and upkeep may be a problem, but it does add new dimension and texture to the walls.

v
In order to make the guests feel at home, Holiday Inn has provided at various points vending machines that are inset in .alcoves along the corridors with the addition in some areas of small rooms for preparing coffee or a light snack, a feature I'm sure most guests will appreciate, but the downfall of this is that these areas have

· ·· 14

not been treated in the same manner as the corridors - they are not even painted. Why would these areas not be treated in the

same manner when they serve a special function?

Maid work stations are located on each floor for specific reasons of maintenance of guest rooms. Upon inspection and besides being

pointed out, the building structure hinders the ease and manoeuvability within these stations. A maid must, each day, take some valuable

time to manoeuvre a cart out of these stations, a problem which unfortunately cannot be corrected now. As such maids and manage-

ment must contend with stations which will not function in the manner they should.

Rooms throughout the hotel are based on contemporary and traditional s ..yles. Layout is typical of most hotels with washrooms adjacent Most rooms have been provided with a balcony, ~ Guests have expressed enjoyment in having The architect By

to the entrance.

though extremely small.

a balcony, even it it is used only a short time.

felt balconies gave the building a hotel-apartment appearance.

in providing balconies, the hotel was able to fit two more rooms per floor. The balcony addition has also made it easy to service air-

conditioning equipment, since it is exposed to the outside balcony, rather than the exterior of the building. One noticeable disadvantage

of the balcony is that there is a loss of floor space in the gues :. rooms, due to its presence. So for this hotel anyway, balconies Whether they are used

have provided advantages and disadvantages.

or not, should be left up to the owners discretion.

Most room have been treated in neutral tones which allows for

.. 15

- 15 -

flexibility in change, but choice of color such as browns and golds and the materials used, gave the impression that these rooms were created mainly for men with little regard for the opposite sex. Walls are treated in vinyl and are easily cared for; an area hotels have found is worth careful consideration. However, this hotel falls into

the same pitfall as so many other hotels, with wall decorations. Pictures that are too small for the proportion of the walls and pictures that have no relation to the city in which they are found. In a recent study when guests where questioned, they stated that when they wake up they like to know what city they are in and the pictures are an indication of this.

Carpets are multi-colored shag and it has been proven in many cases that this type of carpet aids in hiding stains and burns so common to hotels.

Furniture is mainly of a contemporary style, clean unornamented and functional. Some pieces, such as end tables, contain control devices

for radio, television, all at the guests' fingertips, rather than being scattered throughout the room.

Somehow the designer seems to have overlooked the fact that wooden furniture, especially the top surfaces are susceptible to stains and burns. The rooms inspected confirmed this, which means that Holiday

Inn will have to replace furniture earlier than expected, or try to cover the top surfaces to prevent further damage. ,

··· 16

- 16 -

Holiday Inn has tried to care for their guests in their rooms by
providing the ladies with a separate vanity with the so-called

"Hollywood Mirror".

It is good to see that such thought was g iven.

However, why Holiday Inn, or the designer, did not carry this concern into the bathroom by adding some color is another mystery.

The bathrooms have been treated in a sterile white, giving the impression that it shouldn't be dirtied, and that Holiday Inn are running a hospital. The only concern for color seems to be in the On the other

towels with the colored name of Holiday Inn sewn in.

hand, Hyatt Regency is an example of a hotel which has used color throughout, and because of this the room as a whole is united. Why

bother to worry about color in one area, and not carry that concern
to 0ther areas!

One last thing that should be mentioned about the rooms, especially the lower rooms on the east side of the building, and that is they are confronted with a view of the roof containing mechanical equipment, vents and furniture structures, a poor arrangement for a

$24.00 room. C&moflague it.

Some attempt should have been made to correct this, or Virtually, this is no different than living in a

tenant house, in which one opens the window only to look into a brick

wall.

I question whether these rooms will prove very economical

compared to the other rooms, out of view of this area.

The other areas yet to discuss are the restaurants and the night

.. . 17

- 17 club. The restaurants are found on the lower levels and at the top The coffee shop appears to be the most successful It is a bright room, well planned and is functioning Care was taken to give the

of the building. at the moment.

as it should with a minimum of problems.

room some esteem by the choosing of materials of a more expensive quality than found in most coffee shops. created a warm atmosphere. Color and lighting have

A pseudo-Dutch theme has been used, which The success of this is
l

creates interest and character to the room.

evident in the business it is doing and the fact that Holiday Inn wishes they had made it larger.

is on the main floor and has a 1920's Toronto Much of this theme was created through the style of furnish-

lnas, fixtures and the design of the waitresses costumes.

Carved

is important to this room and the designer made sure all materials and in harmony. Fire cabinets were concealed in the walls

grain and design matched in all aspects with the rest of The room is flexible and allows for formal dinners and Generally, these rooms have been carefully

a aanner to ensure all elements and materials unite in
themes.

Inn's most expensive restaurant; a restaurant that also To ensure full advantage was taken of the Inn's view, restaurant was incorporated into the plan. the central core and serves this room only. It

is having problems with this room, resulting partly of materials used. The choice of the wallpaper

and has already started to deplete the rooms appearance, ?eing located by an area heavily used by waiters, the paper is showing signs of

~ear

and is becoming badly stained.

It is apparent that

the paper was not chosen with care, nor was it realized what treatment it would receive. This area of wall, due to its

location, calls for a special treatment such as vinyl wallpaper to ensure its longlivity. is the kitchen itself. Another poor aspect of the central core

As one rotates around the core, one becomes As it is now, this

exposed to the kitchen and its equipment.

kitchen was not meant to be for show, as a result its present . appearance has hampered a finished design besides exposing unpleasantries to the guests. This kitchen could have been better

treated if it had of been used as a show piece, as the room is apparently meant to be. The "show piece" kitchen is one thing Today·s

I

r

the Royal York is becoming more aware of and correcting. guests enjoy food being cooked before them.

Generally the room

adds character to the hotel and for the guests and should prove financially beneficial to the hotel, due to its location.

Holiday Inn has taken

fur~her

advantage of its view and location This room generates

by providing a night club above the restaurant.

more feeling and atmosphere during the evening than in the daylight hours. In this area the designer seems to have been insensitive to

color and materials and relied more on the view to create a successful room. In the daylight the wall color is vivid and

nauseous and makes one feel like turning away from the walled area -

... 19

is an example of one problem.

It has proven to be impractical

and has already started to deplete the rooms appearance,

~eing

located by an area heavily used by waiters, the paper is showing signs of wear and is becoming badly stained. It is apparent that

the paper was not chosen with care, nor was it realized what treatment it would receive. This area of wall, due to it s

location, calls for a special treatment such as vinyl wallpaper to ensure its longlivity. is the kitchen itself. Another poor aspect of the central core

As one rotates around the core, one becomes As it is now, this

exposed to the kitchen and its equipment.

kitchen was not meant to be for show, as a result its present . appearance has hampered a finished design besides exposing unpleasantries to the guests. This kitchen could have been better

treated if it had of been used as a show piece, as the room is apparently meant to be . The "show piece" kitchen is one thing Today·s

the Royal York is becoming more aware of and correcting. guests enjoy food being cooked before them.

Generally the room

adds character to the hotel and for the guests and should pro ve financially beneficial to the hotel, due to its location.

Holiday Inn has taken furr-her advantage of its view and location by providing a night club above the restaurant. This room generates

more feeling and atmosphere during the evening than in the daylight hours. In this area the designer seems to have been insensit ive to

color and materials and relied more on the view to create a successful room. In the daylight the wall color is vivid and

nauseous and makes one feel like turning away from the walled area -

··· 1c:;

is an example of one problem.

It has proven to be impractical

and has already started to deplete the rooms appearance, ?eing located by an area heavily used by waiters, the paper is showing signs of wear and is becoming badly stained. It is apparent that

the paper was not chosen with care, nor was it realized what treatment it would receive. This area of wall, due to its

location, calls for a special treatment such as vinyl wallpaper to ensure its longlivity. is the kitchen itself. Another poor aspect of the central core

As one rotates around the core, one becomes As it is now, this
t

exposed to the kitchen and its equipment.

kitchen was not meant to be for show, as a result its present . appearance has hampered a finished design besides exposing unpleasantries to the guests. This kitchen could have been better

treated if it had of been used as a show piece, as the room is apparently meant to be. The "show piece" kitchen is one thin~ Toda}'S

the Royal York is becoming more aware of and correcting. guests enjoy food being cooked before them.

Generally the room

adds character to the hotel and for the guests and should pro ve financially beneficial to the hotel, due to its location.

Holiday Inn has taken furt-her advantage of its view and location

by providing a night club above the restaurant.

This room generates

more feeling and atmosphere during the evening than in the daylight hours. In this area the designer seems to have been insensitive to

color and materials and relied more on the view to create a successful room. In the daylight the wall color is vivid and

nauseous and makes one feel like turning away from the walled area -

··· 19

- 19 -

management expressed dislike, but said it is much better at night. This is not the point - what does one do, lock people out during the day, which the hotel seems to be doing, and let them back in at night only? retre&ting It should be noted that Holiday Inn is considering Furniture

the walls in the not too distant future.

layout is sparse and does not appear to have been planned, and is contained on the perimeter of the room. Some seating areas are Definitely

located totally out of view of the band and dance area. poor design consideration . Furnishing
alon~

the walls appear as

coffee shop, booth-style furniture, done in a white vinyl which accentuates the blue walls all the more. Though this room was

created for its view, some of it is lost to roof exposures and drainage systems. uncluttered view. During the day it detracts from having a free As with most night clubs, there is a bar, but The

the bar is not used as a center of interest or attention.

bar rather is located in a private spot, out of sight of til e guests. Why it was not used to advantage being in a prominent Space was not a problem. Its presence could

area is unusual.

have been a further highlight to the room.

As well as being out of view, there is a problem of it being serviced, as such things as liquor supplies must be carried up flight of stairs. No elevator or dumb waiter can be supplied

this would bring the building higher than the Citv tower, a stipulation mentioned earlier. It appears to have

another aspect that was overlooked, or not provided for ·

··· 20

- 20 -

Since night clubs usually provide entertainment, and this one is no exception, the designer seems to have forgotten a change room is required for the entertainers . Since one is lacking, the entertainers Woe to the

must use a little storage area off the bar side entrance. entertainer!

Overall, the room is very insensitive to design,

nothing has been done to make it exciting, or of special character. Perhaps the designer became too enthralled with the view and forget the design. guest . The room is very impersonal and says nothing to the

The management and designer have relied too much on lighting

and the view to produle a successful room.

The· Holiday Inn has suffered many problems.

Problems that could have

been corrected and avoided with a more thorough and sensitive approach . Most areas show a rush of thought, without full consultation It has been stated that you can set

with other nembers involved.

your watch by the date a Holiday Inn is scheduled to open - this is one time it might have been more advantageous to have been late.

CHINESE INFLUENCE FOR PROPOSED DESIGN

This  material  has  been  removed  from  this  thesis  because  of  copyright   restrictions.        


