IMAGES ON THE STREET: FASHION, PERSONAL STYLE, AND THE SARTORIALIST  by  Meghan Lengyell  Bachelor of Arts Honours, Queens University, 2007 

A thesis presented to Ryerson University and York University 

In the partial fulfilment of the  requirements for the degree of  Master of Arts  in the Program of  Communication and Culture 

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2011  © Meghan Lengyell 2011

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend  this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. 

________________________________________ 

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other  means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of  scholarly research. 

________________________________________

ii 

IMAGES ON THE STREET: FASHION, PERSONAL STYLE, AND THE SARTORIALIST  Master of Arts 2011  Meghan Lengyell  Communication and Culture  Ryerson University and York University 

ABSTRACT  Drawing on urban modernity and subcultures, the street photography of the online site, The  Sartorialist, is interpreted within a history of everyday style on the streets (or "streetstyle") since  the midtwentieth century. The paper argues that, as a digital archive of streetstyle, The  Sartorialist creates a convincing portrait of the mythic notion of selfinvention through fashion  by tying style to a variety of elements of the real. Through a distant reading of the archive and  semiotic analysis of the images, the underlying structures of meaningmaking on the site are  revealed. Through a condensation of Nancy's theory of the image and Benjamin's conception of  the wish in the dream, I argue that The Sartorialist both validates and highlights the ultimate  limitations of the urban project of fashion and encourages a particular way of looking at the  world.

iii 

For everyone who worries that they won't get it done

iv 

Table of Contents 

Preface.........................................................................................1  Introduction ................................................................................5  Chapter One: Understanding the Streets...................................11  Part One: In the City, On the Streets  Part Two: Style on the Streets  Part Three: Documenting Streetstyle  Chapter Two: A Grammar of Style............................................29  Part One: Representations  Part Two: Methodology  Part Three: Elements  Chapter Three: On Looking and Feeling...................................55  Part One: On Looking  Part Two: On Feeling  Conclusion.................................................................................72  Works Cited...............................................................................78

v 

List of Figures 

1. "On the Street...Extreme Chic, Paris," The Sartorialist, 13 March 2008............................36  2. "On the Street...Somerset House, London." The Sartorialist, 30 September 2009.............37  3. "On the Street...Brooklyn Boho, Brooklyn," The Sartorialist, 30 July 2010......................38  4. "On the Street...Dior Homme for Femme, New York," The Sartorialist, 12 April 2007 ....40  5. "On the Street...Waiter at Caffe Florian, Venice," The Sartorialist, 13 July 2009...............43  6. "On the Street...Luca R., Milan," The Sartorialist, 17 May 2011.......................................44  7. "On the Street...Not Blue Jeans But Bright Blue Pants, Milan,"  The Sartorialist, 24 April 2007............................................................................................48  8. "On The Street...Lower East Side, New York," The Sartorialist, 5 June 2006...................51  9. "Truth is Stranger, No...More Fantastic, than Fiction,"  The Sartorialist, 22 November 2005...................................................................................52  10. "On the Street...Red, Green, and Grey, Paris," The Sartorialist, 1 October 2007.............58  11. "On The Street...Hudson St., New York," The Sartorialist, 7 April 2011.........................62  12. "On the Street...Whitaker St., Savannah," The Sartorialist, 6 May 2011.........................63  13. "On the Street...Being Cool, Staying Warm, NYC,"  The Sartorialist, 17 February 2010.....................................................................................64  14. "On the Street...Trench Tie, Milano," The Sartorialist, 25 June 2009..............................66

vi 

Preface 

In the world of fashion, we look to things to make up people. Our experience of other  people (especially strangers) is made up through the things they wear.  At the same time, people  invent who they are, making themselves up, through clothes. These material objects play a  significant role in our experience of others and of ourselves. Yet this fashioning of identity is  complicated by fashion's problematic relationship to the body, consumption, labour, and the  environment. Part of the reason fashion goes undertheorized in cultural studies is because of the  problems involved in extricating the power and potential of fashion from its exploitative and  oppressive elements. Though fashion persists in being more than its welldocumented limitations,  there is a tendency to see the movements of fashion as a weakness from which there is no  strength, where any instinct towards style or fashion is a product of a false conception of reality,  a focus on the imaginary to the detriment of the real. Especially given the association between  the fashionable and the feminine, this attitude condescends to the project of fashion,  oversimplifying in the process of brushing aside.  In this project, I strove to take fashion seriously. Reading the exciting new academic work  emerging around fashion, I was encouraged by the ways people were really taking on the  complications and contradictions of style and treating them as meaningful. This gave me faith  that it could be done. And so I thought about the opportunities and limitations of doing this  project and recognized that I needed a way to take this beautiful fluttering phenomenon of  fashion and fix it for study. I turned to the online site The Sartorialist as a way of seeing and  studying the work of fashion. The site provides beautiful images of beautiful people but, unlike  the beautiful pictures of beautiful people in magazines or at fashion shows, these images felt  different. I showed the site to different people in my life and kept hearing the same thing ­ there's 1 

something different here, something I appreciate, something I can't quite define. In my analysis  of the site, I wanted to pin down that difference because it echoed what felt to me to be the larger  tension of fashion ­ this hard to define yet unavoidable part that rescues a project that on its face  seems fraught with limitations.  The Sartorialist itself is a site at the forefront of the phenomenon of streetstyle blogs,  popular sites for fashionable inspiration that have sprung up as an inevitable development of our  insatiable interest in documenting our own lives, our own choices, our own tastes. Streetstyle  blogs value the work of everyday fashion and make it meaningful and important, to the point that  people actively search for streetstyle photographers, hoping that their sartorial choices make  them worthy of the photographer's lens. But as I surveyed the site, I saw that more than simply  validating particular tastes or styles, the site worked because it actively recreated a real life  experience of the urban environment within a digital space. Though at first the street recedes in  these photos, acting as a stage for the acting out of style, the space of the street is central to an  understanding of how The Sartorialist both plays into existing ideas of fashion and also  spotlights this supplemental, this fantastical, this imaginary extra that makes style more than  merely problematic decoration.  Each photograph on the site is a moment on the street and a way of seeing a stranger.  Though in our mind's eye, the picture might not be so beautifully or pristinely lit, these same  moments exist in our own experience. The city provides so many opportunities to recognize the  work of someone else's fashion. I don't think that this means that we always have the time or  energy to notice, but rather that we interact with so many people in these kinds of fleeting  moments, logging them in our minds so briefly we may not even recognize it happening. In my  paper, I use The Sartorialist as a way of fixing these moments in time. The site presents a

2 

collection of moments not unlike our own experience of the street ­ a series of unrelated  moments of fashion and, more importantly, people in fashion. The moments are fleeting but they  are also multiple, a constant condition of the urban environment. In this project, I zero in on a  particular moment of fashionable existence, that is, the moment of the street.  Even as I narrowed my project to this moment, to this one space of existence where the  dream of fashion could come true, I recognized and tried to make clear the way in which the site  uses the real to make the fashionable self a text that is completely readable, a particular kind of  fashionable real without the complications of effort, money or a fully realized human personality.  It is in this way that the site sells us fashion without selling us clothes. However, in the selling of  the dream of fashion, The Sartorialist also sells the reality of people. The people on the site are  defined in terms of a particular and fashionable real but the medium of the digital archive  provides the time to see the personal in the style, to see what Nancy calls the artistic image. In  my application of Nancy's theoretical framework (and eventually Benjamin's both limited and  hopeful conception of the kernel of life within the dead commodity), I wanted to show the  duality of this moment in the site. The site creates the real but it also fixes the real, fixes the  potential of fashion and lets us look at it, think about it, consider what it means. This validates  the project of personal style rather than simply the business of fashion.  However, whether or not you find that convincing depends on your receptiveness to Scott  Schuman's particular idea of style in the world, his fascinations and his assumptions. We see the  world on the site through his eyes, eyes and tastes which are culturally constructed just like our  own. Just like the fashion world in which he is immersed, his site privileges the young and the  beautiful.  Schuman does not examine his own preferences on his site and when he is asked to by  readers, he is often defensive about the politics behind his own taste. The emphasis on

3 

Schuman's own taste and style limited by his culturally situated preferences is a limitation of the  site, but also one way the site works. The Sartorialist presents one person's point of view out on  the street. The role of subjective experience in fashionable appreciation is something I wanted to  highlight in this work, to show that the personal in personal style is not just about the practice of  constructing ourselves through clothes but also a process of seeing others, connecting with others  based on what catches our eye, what sticks in our head half a block down the street. Choosing to  see is a powerful act and it is one that The Sartorialist privileges.  While I was working on this paper, I spent some time in Europe. Walking around the  streets of Berlin, I found myself confronted with the reality of my own ideas. As a tourist in a  strange city, we're more open to looking and seeing, more willing to wander and notice small  differences or interesting details. The limits of language and situation can preclude getting to  know people personally but wandering through the streets of a strange city, seeing people in  clothes, I felt like I got to know them a little as perhaps, even given the limitations of a traveller's  backpack, they got to know me. I believe that this is meaningful and that through The Sartorialist,  this gesture is valued and encouraged.

4 

Introduction  There will be time, there will be time  To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet   T.S. Eliot 

Walking around the city, the world of other people's worlds becomes available in each  split second glimpse of the shoes and the trench coat racing down the stairs to the subway or the  clattering of high heels against the sewer grate. In the large cities of the modern world, our  relationship with those who surround us on the streets and sidewalks is based largely on our  conceptions of their aesthetic not because we don't care to know more (although maybe we  don't), but because in the city, strangers coexist in this impersonal way, making up the  background of each other's lives without engaging with each other. We experience strangers  behind the veil of their public persona, personae which are largely made up of things we can  ascertain in an instant. On the street, "dress could act as display or mask  or both. The reverse  side to the world of display, whether bold or surreptitious, on the street, was the retreat into  privacy" (Wilson 1556). We put on a costume to venture out into the street, a costume which  both tells people some of who we are and hides its fullness.  A body constructed in clothes, like a building constructed along the skyline, is limited in  many ways. And though it is limited by use, necessity, likeness, tropes, history, and cultural  norms, still people continue to treat clothing as more than just a rote rearranging of existing ideas,  standards, and practices. Clothing remains "uncomfortably significant instead of reassuringly  natural or practical" (Hollander 105). Often times, however, the practice of selfconstruction  goes unnoticed by our friends and neighbours who might notice that we look nice or that we are  wearing something new, but who have too much other information to see the small changes in  our clothes as significant to the larger narrative of who we are. Fashion has never been able to 5 

change who we are, contrary to the claims made in magazines and Gap commercials. Yet often  times we shop and dress to go out in to the world as if it can.  On the street or in our bedrooms, fashion is one means by which the myth of self  invention takes hold. A welltailored suit or a high pair of heels has the power to transform the  individual into a different person, a stronger person, a pulled together visual image that suggests  the pulled together individual beneath. The aesthetic acts as a shield, as a performance, as a  costume, as a slick surface. When you put something on that feels good, you feel like a different  person, a better version of yourself. For a moment or two, clothing  that mess of signs,  complementary and conflicting, avoiding obvious translation  swallows your body whole.  Eventually, however, it spits you back out, because this mythic quality of fashion has never really  existed in the real world. In the worlds in which we live and work every day, where our mask has  endless opportunities to slip off or harden into a limiting boundary, this fantastical quality of  fashion fades into the background. What we wear becomes an interesting detail within the larger  tangible and culturally constructed realities of who we are to the people that see us every day and  know us well.  On the street, however, this mythic quality of fashion can exist. The fantasy is made real  through our limited interaction with it. Because our experience of other people is limited, the  clothes they wear and how they wear them makes up more of the total information available to  us. The ephemeral gets fixed in our imagination and often times, there is no further interaction to  confirm or deny, no "time and place immediately available for eating the pudding that the proof  can be found in" (Goffman 2).  On the streets of cities, surrounded by strangers, our agency over  our own identities increases and for a short period of time, the fantasy of fashion becomes real.  Through the camera and the internet, these fantasies and realities of fashion intersect and are

6 

made visible in streetstyle blogs which freeze this process in space and time. These blogs  recreate the moment of sartorial appreciation on the street, collecting the photographic evidence  in a digital archive. As one of the most popular streetstyle blogs, photographer Scott Schuman's  The Sartorialist (http://thesartorialist.blogspot.com) recreates and supports this myth of self  invention through fashion in two ways: through the creation of a fashionable "real" and the  privileging of successful imagemaking. On The Sartorialist, the hopeful potential that exists in  that single moment on the street is frozen within the frame. What Schuman captures is not a  window to a whole person it's just style (and good genes). Yet by documenting the fantasy of  fashion alongside elements of the real and by cataloguing mainstream Western style while also  recognizing creative personal style, The Sartorialist reinforces the mythical idea that we can  fully inhabit a fashionable image as a real identity.  This is a dream built on capitalism and embedded in our cultural narratives of  consumption. The idea that another lifestyle or reality is only a new car or new house or new pair  of shoes away keeps the malls full and the car dealerships busy. Yet this capitalist dream carries  within it a real human desire, a wish for selfactualization caught up in and mutated by  capitalism. The real wish within the fantastical dream, which Walter Benjamin felt as he walked  around the Paris Arcades, is just as real today. For Benjamin, this wish was for a classless society,  a utopia, he writes in his unfinished Arcades Project, which has "left its trace in a thousand  configurations of life, from enduring edifices to passing fashions" (Benjamin "Arcades" 45).  Susan BuckMorss, elucidating Benjamin's unfinished ideas, writes that these material objects  which held both a wish and a dream "were to reveal the truth of modernity, at once redemptively,  as the expression of utopian longing, and critically, as the failure to fulfil that longing" (Buck  Morss 316). The wish to be unbound from the existing structures that define and limit is still

7 

relevant today. Selfdefinition is the wish that helps propel us into malls and our overflowing  closets are a reminder that the wish becomes more of a dream in reality. Through the privileging  of cultural messages of selfcreation coupled with a focus on markers of the real, The Sartorialist  reconvinces tired consumers that the project of selfdefinition through fashion is worthwhile.  Further, however, The Sartorialist celebrates the space between the wish and the dream  through the image. Jean Luc Nancy defines the image as that which carries with it the distinct, a  presence which makes a visual more than just flat decoration. The image relies on this extra  separation, "the obviousness of the distinct...There is an image only when there is this  obviousness: otherwise, there is decoration or illustration, that is, the support of signification"  (Nancy 12). The image is not just something to look at, a pretty picture on the wall, but rather  something with which we can commune through a separate and distinct presence. This distinct  presence moves through the artist to the spectator through the art. The spectator relates to the  artist through the distinct image which "throws in [her] face an intimacy that reaches [her] in the  midst of intimacy  through sight, through hearing, or through the very meaning of words"  (Nancy 4). This intimacy is a product of the artistic creation and the image we create on our own  bodies is a creative product of our imagination, closer to us than any painting or photograph.  Though we can't transform ourselves through a new pair of jeans, we can use those jeans to  express something of who we are, to project our interior world out into the public space of the  street. Clothing can be more than simply ornament or decoration ­ it can reveal pieces of who we  are to the rest of world.  Nancy realized, however, that we can't share who we are with the world if there the world  is not there to notice. The spectator had to be open to the experience cultivating the eye to  appreciate art required active participation, an active will to see. The importance of actively

8 

seeing was also taken up by Charles Baudelaire who wrote about the urban figure of the flâneur,  who was, "the painter of the passing moment and of all suggestions of eternity that it contains"  (Baudelaire 5). The flâneur saw beauty on the dirty streets as other people walked by without  noticing. He captured that beauty, romanticized it through his art, and let other people see the  world as he did and perhaps eventually see the beauty in it themselves without having to use him  as an intercessor.  Following in this tradition, Scott Schuman encourages a way of seeing through his  activity as a modern day flâneur, seeing distinction in people and capturing his experience of  their creative construction on digital film. Schuman himself defines a sartorialist as "a  gentleman that has developed a style that helps express his personality" (Schuman "Focus").  Though his scope has widened out to include female sartorialistes (as he calls them in the early  days of his site), the focus on Schuman's own vision of stylish images remains. Through the site,  he invites the viewer to come along and experience the power of style. The photographs that  result from this modern day flânerie present a different kind of fashion image, a fashion image  which moves the focus off of the individual garments and onto both the individual embodying  the fashion and the appreciating eye behind the camera. This way of seeing people in clothes  foregrounds the work of fashion, foregrounds the dressed body as a constructed image   constructed, not from scratch, not without limits, not in a vacuum, but out of the materials of the  world taking into account the varied meanings and associations of bodies in the world.  Against the backdrop of the impersonal interpersonal environment of the fashionable city,  the people photographed on The Sartorialist act as standins for our own hopeful belief in the  mythical power of fashion  the power to be agents of our own creation. Benjamin's conception  of the wish/dream, the kernel of authentic wish within the ultimately futile dream of the

9 

commodity, inevitably plays out in the relationship between the individual and fashion. Yet on  the street, where Scott Schuman shoots his photographs, that wish can be made real, however  briefly. Our recognition of and appreciation for style on the street is a function of what Nancy  calls the distinction of the image  the supplemental, the intimate, the untouchable element that  exists in our communion with the successful artistic image. Schuman, following in the tradition  of Baudelaire's flâneur, spotlights the work, energy, and eventual product of personal style. By  tracing the mythic power of fashion on the site through Benjamin and Nancy's theoretical  concepts and linking it to a semiotic analysis of images from the website, I will argue that The  Sartorialist plays a unique role in supporting the project of fashion and recognizing its  significance within the anxiety and power of the urban experience of the street.  In her classic essay "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema", Laura Mulvey quotes a  famous aphorism which argues that trying to deconstruct beauty destroys it (implying that we  should not look too closely at pretty things, because if we do, we will not like what we see). This  is indicative of the way a lot of intellectual people have treated fashion, as something superficial  that will dissolve upon further investigation. Yet this examination of The Sartorialist will add to  the growing body of work in fashion theory which rescues fashion from the theoretical ghetto.  The project of style is a serious and meaningful feature of modern life. By deconstructing the  practices of The Sartorialist, I critique the fashionable image while still retaining the beauty and  importance of style as individual creation.

10 

Chapter One: Understanding the Streets 

Part One: In the City, On the Streets  Cities provide very particular places for the display of fashion and personal style.  Photography can take an individual and freeze them into a beautiful image, but the urban  environment can perform the same function in real time, on the street, in places where all the  disrupting information inherent in a human life is hidden away. The streets and buildings that  make up the city provide spaces for all varieties of people to exist in close proximity but be all  but completely unaware of the content of each other's lives. For De Certeau:  the identity furnished by [the city] is all the more symbolic (named) because, in spite of  the inequality of its citizens' positions and profits, there is only a pullation of passersby, a  network of residences temporarily appropriated by pedestrian traffic, a shuffling among  pretenses of the proper, a universe of rented space haunted by a nowhere or by dreamed  of places. (103)  The city itself exists, in part, as a mythic space, a romantic notion built on top of the giant  structures of iron and cement that border the streets and dot the skyline of the metropolis. The  city, like the country, is a space we imbue with meaning. Like the bright and idyllic field dotted  with shepherds in the pastoral poetry, the city too is romanticized as a place of excitement and  potential.  The number of people milling about is one exciting attraction of the city  Who will you  meet? What will you see?  and one of its most immediately noticeable features. Unlike life in  the country where faces are familiar, in the city, strangers surround us. The stranger is an organic  part of the metropolitan experience, according to Georg Simmel who defined a stranger as

11 

someone who is:  close to us insofar as we feel between him and ourselves similarities of nationality or  social position, of occupation or of general human nature. He is far from us insofar as  these similarities extend beyond him and us, and connect us only because they connect a  great many people. ("Stranger" 147)  Though we will never know each other's names, we spend hours before and behind each other in  line for coffee, in tooclose physical proximity on streetcars and subway trains, jostled on busy  street corners on Saturday afternoons. The exterior world of the city is filled with people we do  not know.  In Weber's seminal essay on "The City", he defined the city not solely by  geographical space or population but as "a settlement of closely spaced dwellings which form a  colony so extensive that the reciprocal personal acquaintance of the inhabitants, elsewhere  characteristic of the neighbourhood, is lacking" (Weber 65). The urban space, by this definition,  is predicated on this simultaneous closeness and strangeness. Our proximity to a large volume of  strangers makes these cohabitants both intimate to our lives and unknown entities.  The city  breeds anonymity because city dwellers lack the community and personal ties that knit together  smaller communities, they might walk past each other every day without learning any more  about their neighbour than the details of their Canada Goose winter jacket.  This strange closeness found in the city has several meaningful effects on the individual.  One benefit of this urban anonymity is the way it lets people create and exist independently  without fear of censure from the smaller community. Simmel believed that city dwellers  inevitably ended up with a blasé attitude, "an indifference toward the distinction between things"  in order to cope with the mental stress of the constant change and disruption happening outside  their doorstep ("Metropolis" 327). It is this attitude, he would argue, that allows a city dweller to

12 

walk past a homeless person on their daily walk to work without even registering their presence.  The city creates people who fail to notice each other, according to Simmel, and this lack of  personal connection is the source of that familiar urban feeling of "being alone even though we  are surrounded by people" (Hubbard 20). Walking through the city, we can become mere  background of other people's lives.  However, this is not the whole story of the city. What for Simmel was indifference can  also be understood as a mutual acceptance and tolerance. Though the city can be a lonely place,  it can also be a place of discovery. For Simmel, the city was a place of forced alienation, an  economic necessity which changed people from emotional beings to cold, rational observers  ("Metropolis" 325). He believed that constant change and difference mutated the human  condition, unaware of how much difference would become part of all of our worlds through the  definition of global, national and personal structures of identification. As it turns out, however,  difference does not have to be alienating. Cities provide opportunities for work but they also  provide opportunities for mutual coexistence and community. Urban anonymity "[promotes]  individualism, freethinking and civility, with the city creating the possibilities for meetings and  mismeetings that would spark creativity" (Hubbard 20). Together in the city, people are  interconnected through the very possibility and difference that Simmel saw as a destructive  disruption. Filled with mysterious strangers, the city understands mutual oddness and, to a degree,  embraces it. The closeness of strangers creates a crowd of (usually) respectful spectators to our  lives before whom we can safely experiment in our own creation.  The power and the insecurity that results from this urban anonymity feeds into the  development of fashion and personal style. Because we are often alone in the city, clothing  provides a way to feel like we are engaging with those around us. Clothes provide an immediate

13 

visual reference for who we are (or who we wish to be) by creating a text that can be read, even  in the crush of the urban crowd. Clothing provides a way to reach out and connect without a  personal acquaintance, without developing a friendship. At the same time, the city provides space  for experimentation and play. We can share space through style, claim space for our identity  through fashion and signal our membership in a tribe of our own choosing. Clothes provide  building blocks of a sartorial language used to speak among strangers in the city, the street  provides a key backdrop for this interaction.  In the city, a particular fashion of the streets developed at the intersection of street culture  and youth culture. These two intertwined cultures created a glamour and excitement around the  activities and costumes of the street. Though fashion as we know it (with trend cycles and  changing silhouettes) has existed since the fourteenth century, the idea of a youth culture with  separate clothing from the adult culture did not explode until the 1960s (Lipovetsky 18). In the  1960s, countercultural teenagers rejected the conventions to which their parents subscribed and  began experimenting. Teenagers had more time and energy to spend cultivating their own  particular style than their working parents and found role models for rebellion in the Beatniks,  Elvis, and eventually the hippies (Steele 41). The media focus on the styles and attitudes of the  teenagers during the late 1960s put a spotlight on their dress as meaningful to a movement. The  clothes were not just clothes but markers of a particular world view the style of the time was  heavily linked to politics and the way a person dressed told the world where their affiliations lie.  These links were not without tension, however. Within the culture, flower power and:  traditional workingclass garments, like blue jeans, also became associated with the aptly  named 'counterculture', yet there was also hostility between the orthodox Left and the  hippies, who seemed to leftists to be overly involved with cultural issues and bourgeois

14 

individualism. Traditional roles were questioned: male, as well as female, hippies wore  flowers in their long hair, as a way of redefining 'heman' masculinity in terms of peace  and love. Blue jeans and Tshirts were, at least superficially, unisex garments. Yet the  hippy movement was hardly feminist, and unisex clothing failed to obscure the sexually  dimorphic bodies of men and women. Long hair on men symbolized their rebellion  against social conformity and sexual restraint, but only outsiders professed to believe that  'You can't tell the men from the women'. (Steele 72)  Though the clothes were associated with a particular politics, they were also a way of looking  cool and being part of a larger movement. The romantic notion that clothes can both set a person  apart and join them with a community is an enduring and appealing one, especially for teenagers  searching for identity. As would later be repeated with the punks and the skaters (and perhaps  within most subcultural groups with both political and aesthetic markers), the clothing became a  way of subscribing to a particular ethos in the least politically committed way. The clothing was  associated with the mythology of the movement (rather than the gritty realities of the politics)  and for many people, that was enough.  Youth culture and street culture are inextricably linked because the streets, the sidewalks,  the storefronts provide the space for youth culture to display itself. Barred legally and monetarily  from entering bars and restaurants, these outside spaces become the primary spaces for display.  Seeking to see and be seen, kids migrate to these spaces and make a public display through their  loitering. And these furtively smoking teenagers are not the first to use the street as their runway.  The streets have acted as a display space for people of all ages since great cities emerged through 
th  the Industrial Revolution and subsequent urbanization of the 19  century (Rubinstein 216). 

Rather than being spread out on farms or in smaller tight knit villages, people were living boxed

15 

in with strangers in the big city. In a town where everyone knows everyone, socializing regularly  occurs in the privacy of people's homes. In these new cities, moving outside the home into public  places was crucial to getting to know other people. In a world full of first impressions, clothing  provided a way to express and impress yourself upon your neighbours, showing off both who  you were and what you had (Goffman 2). In an environment where community had to be formed  anew, clothes provided one avenue towards participation and engagement with fellow city  dwellers.  The streets of major cities like London and Paris, then as in now, provide ample  opportunities for the performance of fashion:  In the public spaces of nineteenthcentury Victorian society, men and women seized  centre stage in ritualistic performances as fashionable and respectable citizens.  Opportunities for public display flourished in the urban environment: the parks,  boulevards, transportation systems, shopping emporiums, and entertainment venues of  the world's industrialized cities. (Denny 34)  The streets of these bustling metropolitan centers provided a new way for those that could afford  it to show off their finery to a world of presumed admirers. At the same time, the streets were a  place to go to witness other people's displays. Importantly, however, Ted Polhemus makes a  distinction between the promenades of wealthy Parisian courtesans at the turn of the century and  the experiences of the streets as it exists today. He writes:  though the promenade might have marked a critical moment in the shift from inside to  outside, it shouldn't by any means be confused with hanging out. To promenade is to hob  nob with those on the up and up. Hanging out, on the other hand, is best done in the  company of those from the wrong side of the tracks. Some low life is essential. That, and

16 

youth: juvenile delinquents. In this sense, The Street is a dead end ­ the place to go when  you aren't old enough or rich enough to get in somewhere. (Polhemus 7)  Today the street has been democratized and, walking through the downtown of a major city, one  is as likely to find a homeless person sleeping as a fashionable person trying to get where they're  going. Certainly, some of this is mitigated by the kind of streets one traverses but no matter the  area of town, the street (unlike places found indoors, behind locked doors or gates) is always  open. Hanging out on an urban street at all hours of the night implies a certain fearlessness  regarding the kind of people and situations one might meet there. Though "practical necessity  may make The Street a last resort for some, it is precisely this quality which makes it so  seductive for many who could be elsewhere" (Polhemus 7). Out on the street, the protective  shield of the interior space is removed and anything could happen. Anyone could show up. This  dangerous quality of the real world that exists on the street acts as part of its fascination.  The streets then can be understood as a place where things happen  a place to adventure,  a place to see and be seen, a place to witness the scene. The cool kids hung out in the streets,  cool kids who were noticed by photographers and journalists, especially around music scenes (as  seen in Polhemus, Hebdige) and the term "streetstyle" was coined to describe fashion that  emerged from different populist movements on the street. Streetstyle has traditionally been  theorized as one element of larger subcultural movements having to do with local fashion or  politics (Steele 149).  The street was the background for these developing subcultures "in the  expressive forms and rituals of those subordinate groups  the teddy boys and mods and rockers,  the skinheads and the punks  who are alternately dismissed, denounced and canonized treated at  different times as threats to public order and as harmless buffoons" (Hebdige 2). The fashion was  thought to be part of the politics, whether it was attached to a general antiauthority message, a

17 

feminist politics, or a nationalist manifesto, because it was part of belonging to the group. The  fashions of these subcultural groups acted as "a form of stigmata, tokens of a selfimposed exile"  (Hebdige 2). The fashion was part of the rebel yell of the movement. 

Part Two: Style on the Streets  Rather than trickling down from large corporate fashion houses, streetstyle is fashion  which begins on the street and bubbles up (Polhemus 8). It reverses the direction of power and  creative energy  instead of buying into a corporation's idea of fashion, streetstyle was supposed  to be about creating style of your own. It started with urban kids in the clubs and on the streets  creating fashion out of whatever materials were available to them. Though streetstyle did not  start out with something to sell, the fashions of the street caught the attention of creative people  in the fashion world. As a result, street fashion has dictated many major fashion trends which go  from the street to the runway before eventually finding their way back to the masses. The grunge  movement of the early 1990s began on the streets before being recognized and produced for the  fashion elite by designers like Marc Jacobs at Perry Ellis. Editors of prominent fashion  magazines like Vogue and Harper's Bazaar encouraged readers to wear "street fashion that mixes  roughandtumble work clothes with waifish thriftshop finery" (Steele 145). Though grunge  failed to sell well at the top of the market, the high end remake of grunge was indicative of a  larger movement where streetstyle acted as inspiration for top designers, upending the traditional  top down system of fashion creation. Of course, once it made its way back to the streets,  streetstyle was devoid of most of its initial politics and often cost significantly more than it did  for the kids who created their "authentic" punk, grunge, or skater looks from the cheap materials  available to them at discount stores and thrift shops.  Though initially subcultural styles issue

18 

"symbolic challenges" to the existing norms and conventions of the day, they eventually and  "inevitably end by establishing new sets of conventions by creating new commodities, new  industries or rejuvenating old ones" (Hebdige 96). Subcultural styles go on after being  incorporated into mall culture, but they become incorporated in the trend cycle, much to the  disgust of the old guard.  The movement of subcultural style from the subversive to the mainstream echoes  Frederic Jameson's understanding of the movement of culture from modernist to postmodernist.  Modernist art was considered subversive to Victorian ideas of politeness and civility (Jameson  124). Yet as modernist ideas became accepted and integrated into mainstream academic teaching,  they lost their subversion. For people that grew up with Joyce and Picasso taught in university  classrooms, or with punks and skaters walking down high school hallways, the notion that these  things were really subversive and dangerously outside of the mainstream faded away. The notion  a shaved head or a Mohawk or a safety pinned jacket meant that a person was somehow different,  more authentic than the mainstream has lost its lustre as these original tokens of political  movements have become commodified as fashion for everyone, not just the politically minded.  As trustfund punks party next to homeless punks at shows for punk rock bands packaged by  corporate labels, the clothes have become emptied of much of their original meaning.  Yet the term streetstyle, at least in its original incarnation, was built on the assumption  that these styles born on the street were clearly separate, set apart from the practices of both  average people and those who were particularly fashionable. In this divided model, style that  plays within the bounds of normative structures is treated as if it were a fairly empty recitation of  the mainstream norms of the day. Dick Hebdige, in his seminal discussion of subcultural style,  sees "normal" dressing as containing "a whole range of messages which are transmitted through

19 

the finely graded distinctions of a number of interlocking sets ­ class and status, selfimage and  attractiveness, etc" (Hebdige 101). While both subcultural dressing and normal dressing are  fraught with transmissions of meaning, Hebdige distinguishes between what is definitively  streetstyle and what is not. He argues that legitimate subcultural streetstyle is "obviously  fabricated" and that those dressed in these subcultural styles "display their own codes" (Hebdige  101). In other words, for Hebdige, streetstyle denaturalizes fashion from both the individual and  location (where streetstyle would disrupt normal expectations for appropriateness in person and  in place) and consciously talks back to existing norms through fashion. All other style on the  streets can then be understood and defined in opposition to this definition or as what legitimate  streetstyle is not  as that which appears natural and appropriate within existing normative codes  of dress.  But these distinctions are actually fairly arbitrary, especially for the outside observer. As  trend cycles have sped up and subcultural and mainstream styles have overlapped, we have  become more accustomed to seeing different fashion styles mixed together on the individual, in  mall stores, and in magazine editorials. As a result, all fashion has become more transparent. A  person's fashion may be appropriate (and thus, square) but it is never natural. Elisabeth Wilson  notes:  Today, the way in which such fashions have been satirized has undermined the very  notion that there is any longer a dominant mode of dress. This is what journalists mean,  presumably, when they talk of fashion anarchy: that 'classic chic' no longer exists.  Something else, however, exists in its place: parodies of chic, the camping up of style...  we have all become so sophisticated about performance that we slyly recognize the  attempted sleight of hand that aimed to suggest the absence of effort or impression

20 

creation. No longer do any fashions seem normal or 'natural'. ("Adorned in Dreams" 173)  As we become more critical and knowledgeable about the fantasies and realities of display, we  see the space between different styles that people put on and the actual person beneath the styles.  We are less often tricked by the glamour of fashion because we know what it means to put on a  suit, what it costs to buy those shoes. We are aware of the work and so we see the clothes that  might once have been thought natural as a conscious display.  One way we might conceptualize the result of this heightened fashion awareness is  through Frederic Jameson's understanding of the move from modernism (where style is a  reflection of a real individual truth) to postmodernism (where style is empty decoration) as a  product of a cultural shift starting in the 1950s (Jameson 113).  For Jameson, the style of  postmodernism is based on two intertwined notions of pastiche and schizophrenia. Unlike parody  which mimicked other styles with laughter and a wink, knowing that the object of parody is real  while the parody itself is an act, pastiche rejects the notion of the real and instead merely recalls  objects of the past as empty images (Jameson 114). The death of the subject means rejecting the  notion of a stable individual beneath the clothing as a myth or a relic and seeing style in the  postmodern moment is just empty decoration, devoid of originality, "left to imitate dead styles,  to speak through the masks and with the voices of the styles in the imaginary museum" (Jameson  115). Jameson argues that part of the reason we have moved from modernism to postmodernism  is because we have run out of things to invent (115). Because we are no longer creating new  styles but instead just continually drawing on already existing styles, we are stuck saying what  has already been said, already been a part of the mainstream. Our style is emptied of political  content (and thus is pastiche) and untethered from space in time (and thus is schizophrenic).  Yet both of these either/or distinctions  either natural or actively and disruptively

21 

conscious, either empty decoration or a reflection of a complete and stable subject  neglect the  meaningful work done in the space in the middle between these two poles of activity. Subcultural  movements foregrounded the potential of clothes to express intense feelings about one's space in  time. These groups encouraged an understanding of clothing as the construction blocks of self  presentation by imbuing clothes with clear and definable meanings, understanding a garment as a  physical token, as Hebdige wrote, of a meaningful state of mind (Hebdige 2). Though the  streetstyle found on The Sartorialist is not connected to a particular political movement, it still  treats clothing as meaningful and expressive. Clothes can signal membership in many different  communities but at the same time spotlight the desire for (if not the achievement of) individuality.  In this way, fashion can still be understood as acting out the push towards and pull away from  group conformity that Georg Simmel wrote about at the turn of the century  the push and pull of  union and segregation which propels fashion and society forward in small steps ("Fashion" 544).  Through streetstyle blogs and the internet, this activity of everyday dress is recognized and  validated. 

Part Three: Documenting Streetstyle  Since the development of the instant camera in the late 1880s, the street has been a  popular place for photographers enraptured with "the idea of the city as a selfgenerating source  of images and the vision of being able to grasp every moment as an image became a reality"  (Eskildsen 11). The city, bustling with activity and all levels of life interacting in one space,  provided a whole world of images to these newly equipped photographers. Street photography  has historically stood "at the crossroads between the tourist snap, the documentary photograph,  [and] the photojournalism of the fait divers (news in brief)" (Scott 15).  Unlike the documentary

22 

photograph, however, which seeks to evoke the human condition, the street photographer seeks  out "the adventures that lie dormant in a street, at a crossroads, in a market, adventures generated  by the secret forces at work just below the surface of things" (Scott 59).  Paul Martin and Frank  Sutcliffe were among the first photographers to make their name taking pictures of the vibrant  world on the street (Westerbeck and Meyerowitz 103). For these photographers, Clive Scott  writes, "this real contact in real time means that the artist's hand does not so much describe what  is in front of it...but designates it as it happens" (Scott 38). The street photographer's camera was  supposed to seize the moment as it happened and hold it in place on film. These photographs  were supposed to be candid, capturing real life as it happened, but they benefited from the  expertise and artistry of the photographers. The beautiful pictures that resulted from street  photography soon appealed to the world of fashion photography, where it became popular to  move outside the studio to create "straight" or realistic fashion photographs in the 1930s and 40s  (HallDuncan 77). As realistic photography developed, mid century artists like Paul Strand and  Henri CartierBresson continued developing photographic techniques to capture "the spirit of the  imagery" and reflect the movement and energy of the real world out on the street (Westerbeck  and Meyerowitz 153). The spirit of these photographs also reflected back the fascinations and  interests of the photographer, the world according to their eye. These particular views of the  world can be seen in Diane Arbus's photos of real life oddities as well as the slice of life  photographs of Lee Friedlander, who often captured his own shadows in his photographs in order  to testify that he was there (Westerbeck and Meyerowitz 388). Street photography shows  something to the world that might otherwise be missed were it not for the street photographer's  eye.  Streetstyle photographers today continue in this tradition, drawing attention to the real

23 

style of individuals on the street. Beginning with Bill Cunningham's legendary New York Times  column and exploding over the last ten years with popular streetstyle sites like Facehunter,  Garance Doré, Jak and Jill, and Mr. Newton, the work of style on the streets has become the  subject matter of countless internet sites. The street provides a common thread through the  projects of these different photographers and provides the backdrop to much of their work. The  historical implications of the street as both "the stage upon which this drama unfolds and the  bottom line metaphor for all that is presumed to be real and happening in our world today" which  encouraged the original street photographers to go outside and document their world still remains  as part of what makes streetstyle so appealing (Polhemus 6). These sites reveal the everyday  experience of fashion in the world, providing photos as inspiration without explicitly trying to  sell the reader anything. They take seriously the project of style construction and treat  consumption as meaningful and valuable, but they are not selling the shirt in the picture. The  sites provide inspiration from real people about things that could be found at a variety of price  points and locations and images that speak to different ways of being and looking in the world.  One of the most famous of the new streetstyle sites is The Sartorialist, an archive of street  style fashion produced by fashion photographer Scott Schuman. Since September 2005, he has  been taking pictures of people on the street and posting them on his site. He captures streetstyle  in its new iteration, noting that:  The thing that is really different from street style that came before is that it always  seemed like they were trying to find the really different thing, find the crazy people and  take a picture...I'd take a picture of a guy in a suit, and people would say, `That's not  street style,' and I say, `But he was on the street!' There's much more subtlety on my blog  than on other blogs. (Larocca)

24 

Schuman is interested in fashionable people that exist within fairly conventional parameters of  style. At first, his focus was on the fashionable men that he noticed while working in the fashion  industry. As his site developed, his focus broadened to include women and people from  fashionable cities all over the world. Through the popularity of the site, Schuman has become a  fixture at fashion events in fashionable cities like Milan, New York, and Paris where he often  takes photographs, not of the shows themselves, but of the people on the street outside the shows  (sometimes models or editors, sometimes normal people). He usually presents these people  without captions or identifying job titles ­ the stories and backgrounds of the people pictured are  secondary to his own appreciation of their style.  The Sartorialist provides a site for the examination of this moment of real life. This does  not mean it provides a perfect window to the outside world. Rather, the site can be understood as  an approximation of the experience of the street, a recreation of a lived experience that works on  many levels to fool the eye into seeing the photographic image as reality. The realistic style of  the photography on The Sartorialist supports the mythic quality of the street available to the  viewer through the site. In his photographs, Schuman makes the camera (and the lighting choices,  and the inevitable posing and discarded shots) disappear. The verisimilitude of Schuman's image  hides the choice that is implied in every flash of the camera, the choice to privilege a particular  kind of fashionable person. The fashionable world he presents is very much the fashionable  world as Schuman sees it and that fact is obscured by the presentation of the photographs on the  site, displayed with no discussion of how they were made beyond an acknowledgement of the  cities where the shots were taken. Most of the photographs present the subjects in medium or  long shots looking right at the camera (looking at the lens as if they are looking at the viewer).  The pictures are intimate in so far as the subjects of each photograph present themselves to our

25 

look even though there is distance between the viewer and the subject. Rather than using close  ups to show all the details, Schuman's photographs maintain a comfortable distance from their  subject, a distance which feels appropriate for an interaction with a stranger. The camera  replicates the experience of the eye. Because the photographs appear so real, they help make real  the imaginary fashionable individuals within them.  Schuman's photographs are tied up in the same tension between the real and the  fabricated which exists in the fashion that is their focus. Photographs, as Susan Sontag writes,  "seem to have the status of found objects ­ unpremeditated slices of the world. Thus they trade  simultaneously on the prestige of art and the magic of the real. They are clouds of fantasy and  pellets of information" (Sontag 69).  Photographs freeze a moment in time and present it in a  frame like a window to another moment, hiding the work of lighting and framing and angle that  created that particular look in that particular moment:  Like a wood fire in a room, photographs ­ especially those of people, of distant  landscapes and faraway cities, of the vanished past ­ are incitements to reverie. The sense  of the unattainable that can be evoked by photographs feeds directly into the erotic  feelings of those for whom desirability is enhanced by distance. The lover's photograph  hidden in a married woman's wallet, the poster photograph of a rock star tacked up over  an adolescent's bed... all such talismanic uses of photographs express a feeling both  sentimental and implicitly magical: they are attempts to contact or lay claim to another  reality. (Sontag 16)  The wood fire in a room incites reverie because it reminds us of a warmer time, a safer time, a  port from the storm and a place where things seem easier and time seems to pass less quickly.  When we look at photographs, we come in contact with that time. They remind us of another

26 

time, another place, another moment and lay claim to it as real. On The Sartorialist, the  photographs work aspirationally  we want to be young and interesting and beautiful and  fashionable  but they also make that reality reachable because they look and feel real. The  documentary style of photography lends credibility and authenticity to the mythic experience of  fashion recreated through the site.  But more than it captures any documentarystyle truth about the people photographed,  The Sartorialist really captures Schuman's own eye on the street. The camera provides a  mechanism for Schuman to share his particular point of view with his readers and this point of  view is implicated in every picture he takes.  He acts in the tradition of Baudelaire's flâneur, "as  an 'I' with an insatiable appetite for the 'nonI', at every instant rendering and explaining it in  pictures more living than life itself, which is always unstable and fugitive" (Baudelaire 10). The  pictures that Schuman takes create a living portrait of fashion on the street, frozen in the moment  of appreciation. Rather than passing a stranger on the street and never seeing them again, or  seeing them again and finding out that they are much less interesting than they first appeared, the  streetstyle photographer creates an image that lets personal style project out and fill the frame.  On the digital card in the street photographer's camera:  the external world is reborn...natural and more than natural, beautiful and more than  beautiful, strange and endowed with an impulsive life like the soul of its creator. The  phantasmagoria has been distilled from nature. All the raw materials with which the  memory has loaded itself are put in order, ranged, and harmonized, and undergo that  forced idealization which is the result of a childlike perceptiveness ­ that is to say, a  perceptiveness acute and magical by reason of its innocence! (Baudelaire 11)  In capturing the scene of the street, the streetstyle photographer mixes the raw materials of the

27 

subject matter ­ the jeans, the blonde hair, the cement sidewalk ­ with the intangible, the  phantasmagoric power of the experience of seeing style come together on the individual on the  street.  When Schuman points his camera at someone and puts the picture on his website, he is  alerting his readers to something special, something worth noticing. As a spectator of the creative  work in the city, the streetstyle photographer "becomes the translator, so to speak, of a translation  which is always clear and thrilling" (Baudelaire 15). By pointing his camera at people on the  streets and uploading those images to his site, Schuman makes us pay attention to these  interesting ways that fashion works. In this way, he is able to get around the question that haunts  all fashion work ­ maybe people could dress to make political statements or create visual interest,  but most people don't. On his site, Schuman is able create a virtual world where most people do.  And because he offers little information on his subjects, he doesn't foreclose the notion that they  could be everything they appear to be. He lets this conflict go unresolved, encouraging the  mythic power of fashion. Writing about the relationship of the Surrealist movement to fashion,  Elisabeth Wilson notes that, "the relationship between organic and inorganic, natural and  artificial is a gap, or tear in the fabric of our experience, through which we may glimpse a  different version of the world" (Wilson "Magic Fashion" 383). When the streetstyle  photographer captures real fashion on the street, the realistic quality of photography makes it  seem like it really holds the moment, holds the feeling and the experience of looking at a person  made of and styled with raw materials. Through the website we return to the moment on the  street. The display is given power where the imagined is made real.

28 

Chapter Two: A Grammar of Style 

Part One: Representations  Like other constructed art objects (architecture, sculpture), successful personal style  presents itself as a whole but works as the coming together of many conscious and subconscious  parts. One way to undo these structures is through deconstruction. Jonathan Culler defines a  practitioner of deconstruction as one who "works within the terms of the system but in order to  break it" (Culler 86). The theoretical practice of deconstruction is slippery and hard to define, to  the point that Nicholas Royle, in search for a way to make its practices clear, reverts back to a  literal definition of deconstruction, defined in the Oxford English Dictionary as "the action of  undoing the construction of a thing" (Royle 24). But beginning with the clothed individual as a  constructed object is a useful way to understand the project of style. The act of construction is a  meaningful act. We construct buildings and those buildings become real ­ they are the product of  the imagination of the builder, they fulfil requirements of both aesthetic and function, speaking  to how the builder thinks the world should look and what the builder thinks fits in this particular  neighbourhood. Both a building and an outfit can be understood as a representation, which Kress  and Van Leeuwen define as:  a process in which the makers of signs, whether child or adult, seek to make a  representation of some object or entity, whether physical or semiotic, and in which their  interest in the object, at the point of making the representation, is a complex one, arising  out of the cultural, social and psychological history of the signmaking, and focused by  the specific context in which the sign is produced. Interest guides the selection of what is  seen as the criterial aspects of the object, and this criterial aspect is then regarded as

29 

adequately or sufficiently representative of the object in the given context. In other words,  it is never the 'the whole object' but only ever its criterial aspects which are represented.  (Kress and Van Leeuwen 6)  Representations of style work because of their contingent parts. Reading style, like reading other  images, is based on an understanding of representation as the result of active and constructive  creative work. Using the materials available to them, people put together outfits which can be  understood as a series of signs. In semiotic language, "signmakers thus have a meaning, the  signified, which they want to express, and then express it through the semiotic mode which  makes available the subjectively most plausible, most apt form, the signifier" (Kress and Van  Leeuwen 6). Each individual unit of clothing is the material representation of a signified and a  signifier. Together, these different signs work together to create sign system (the outfit) which  can be read in different ways. The meaning in the sign system is always polysemic.  In language, our expression is restricted by the vocabulary that already exists in style, we  are restricted by the clothing that already exists. This is not to say that we cannot invent new  words or cut and sew our own patterns, but ordinarily we work within the existing structures and  materials of our culture. We make our style choices out of the available materials even if they are,  as commodities, "'preconstrained'  like the constitutive units of myth, the possible combinations  of which are restricted by the fact that they are drawn from the language where they already  possess a sense which sense a limit on their freedom of manoeuvre" (LeviStrauss 19). Our  fashion is tied up in our practices of consumption, in looks and styles and materials that are  fraught with the assumptions and complications of their capitalist production. Yet, as Elisabeth  Wilson argues:  garments, like other objects, can take on imagined and/or subjectively experienced

30 

properties that go far beyond the flaunting of wealth or refined taste. It is because we live in  a society dominated by capital and consumption that we commandeer material goods for the  symbolic expression of values remote from materialism (Wilson, "Magic Fashion" 379).  Our materials come from the cultural and political time in which we exist but we reimagine  them all the time. The thoughtful rearranging of existing patterns and normative sign systems to  create new meanings is the practice of LeviStrauss's bricoleur, a creative agent who injects his  or her own energies to create or recreate meaning from existing forms. Using existing forms  creatively, we can build a coherent image that looks and feels just like who we think we are.  The slick outer shell of the fashionable individual projects a mythic notion of personhood,  one which is stable, fixed, and solid. Drawing on Barthes' Mythologies, Kaja Silverman defines  myth as "the deployment of signifiers for the purpose of expressing and surreptitiously justifying  the dominant values of a given historical period" (Silverman 27). The myth of the fashionable  individual supports two of the core values of modern day capitalism  individuality and wealth.  This dual function of the mythic that Silverman retains from Barthes  where it acts to express  and to justify, secretly, the values of the day  are intertwined within the world of fashion. The  need to project one's self out into the world, onto the street, in front of strangers necessitates the  time and money spent on the material goods which act out this silent communication. Where  expression and individuality is valued, so too is the consumption of goods which provide the raw  materials for that expression. The justification is in the desire for the thing itself.  Barthes theorized mythologies as a second level signification practice, where the sign of  the first level signification system became the signifier to the second level of signification  (Barthes 114). On the first level, the meaning of the sign is made up of the pictorial (image) and  understood meaning (concept) of the thing. A physical apple and the idea of an apple come

31 

together to create the sign "apple". Yet on the second level of signification, that apple becomes  the signifier for other mythic associations. Apple's denotative meaning is "apple" but its  connotative meaning, depending on the context, could be a reward for favourite school teacher or  a sign of good nutrition. Myth sees the apple itself as "raw material" (Barthes 114). These other  meanings are also part of our understanding of the sign of the apple  it exists within a web of  signification. In the same way, the images on The Sartorialist have a mythic value beyond their  literal meaning.  Barthes' semiotic analysis of mythologies was based on a multilayered understanding of  signs and signifiers which looked at both the denotative sign and the connotative sign. Barthes  famously applied this strategy to an analysis of a black soldier on the cover of a Paris Match  magazine whereby the denotative signs (black soldier saluting the flag) which becomes a  signifier to another connotative sign (nationalism, militarism) (Silverman 28). By drawing out  the way in which meaning was formed in the image not only through each individual object but  by the meaning of the objects together, Barthes was able to show how ideology was formed and  upheld. Barthes' tools of semiotic analysis are useful because they provide a way to understand  each garment of clothing as part of a larger mythic whole of selfpresentation. Barthes also  improved on Saussure's original semiotic analysis by allowing for "motivated as well as  unmotivated signifying relationships" (Silverman 28). Rather than being completely arbitrary,  the links between sign and signifier could be understood in relationship, where a Ferrari indicates  wealth not only because it is a symbol of wealth but because it really costs a lot of money. In the  same way, a cheap looking suit indicates lower income not only because cheap suits are  associated with sleazy salesmen but also because cheap suits are inexpensive. Meaning is made  through an understanding of the sign in context.

32 

Part Two: Methodology  In my analysis of the images on The Sartorialist, I wanted to discover how meaning was  made on the site over the entire archive of images. In order to deal with this volume of material, I  drew upon Franco Moretti's theory of distant reading. Rather than close reading, which takes a  few texts very seriously, distant reading shifts the focus to "units that are much smaller or much  larger than the text: devices, themes, tropes ­ or genres and systems" (Moretti 57). This way of  examining the archive exposes the structures across the different objects (in this case,  photographs) displayed on the site. Rather than focusing on a few images and drawing  generalized ideas from the specifics, I looked at the entire site and created general concepts  which could then be applied within specific images. Given the size of the digital archive, this  method allowed me trace ideas through many different images and make verifiable claims about  the content of the site. Instead of using the few to speak for the many, I looked to the many to  speak for the few.  The digital archive of The Sartorialist provided a wealth of information. Thousands of  Schuman's photographs are available on his website where he has been posting multiple images  four or five days a week since September 2005. Wanting to speak authoritatively on the content  of the archive as a whole, I began by reviewing every photograph on the site from the very  beginning of the archive. Instead of looking at each picture closely, I scanned the archive looking  for recurring concepts or elements. As I noticed objects like cigarettes and cellphones recurring  across many different photographs, I was able to situate them within the larger narrative of The  Sartorialist and see them as more than the minor details they might appear to be in analysis of  one individual picture. The elements which emerged from the site were crucial to understanding  the underlying messages inherent in the photographs. Letting the images lead my analysis, I built

33 

my theory of the site from the elements themselves. I was then able to apply these concepts to  any image from the site and show how each photograph was built around the same basic  principles, principles which created the overall meaning and effect of the images on the site.  I sought to create an overarching framework for the display of fashion on the site through  the open coding of key concepts as a form of grounded theory, building my theory from the data  present on the site. Through the process of viewing the thousands of images that have amassed in  the archive, I was able to recognize meaningful structures at work in the photographs. Using  Weber's conception of the ideal type as a guiding principle (echoing Moretti's focus on the  general unit rather than the specific circumstance), I considered these elements or ideal types as  "constructed utopias" or "yardsticks" against which real scenarios can be measured (Kalberg  218219). Like Plato's heavenly forms, ideal types help make sense of what we see in reality,  providing "a clear 'standard' against which given patterns of action can be 'measured'" (Kalberg  219). The ideal types discovered through my own distant reading of the images on The  Sartorialist work together to create the mythical experience of style on the site. In each image on  the site, many of these elements appear, creating coherence over all the images (even if all the  elements do not appear in every image). 

Part Three: The Elements  The reoccurring tropes within the images can be understood as micro mythologies,  coming together to create the larger macro myth of The Sartorialist. The images are made up of  elements which serve different functions within the larger narrative of the site. The kinds of  props found in the pictures, the location of the shots, and the style of photography all locate the  activity on the site within the realm of the real (rather than an imaginary fashion space). The

34 

repetition of the real in each photograph grounds the mythic power of fashion in an everyday  (and thus, attainable) context. The focus on the classic situates Schuman's fashionable people  within the mainstream of style, speaking in a language that we can all understand while the  supplemental power of detail and the visual ruptures of reverse stereotyping foreground the  creative work of the individual (as well as Schuman's own taste). Through these different  elements, The Sartorialist both encourages and recreates the appreciation of style on the street.  By freezing this moment in time, the site creates a mythic space where the imaginative potential  of style on the street is always real and meaningful. 

1. Props  The people captured in the photographs on The Sartorialist are often holding real objects  which link them to real worlds and real lives. These tokens are unrelated to the ensemble in the  photograph and act as anchors, linking the imagined world of fashion with the lived experience  of being in the world. Keys, cell phones, cigarettes, coffee cups, magazines ­ all of these props  act as signifiers of real lived experience. These real life accessories separate the people in  Schuman's photos from models in magazine editorials. These are people with somewhere to go  or somewhere to be (keys, flyers), people with friends and loved ones (cell phone, pet). These are  people who are bored or tired or addicted (coffee, cigarettes). These anchoring props create a  narrative for the individual. They are all of these things while still being fashionable, looking  interesting, valuing aesthetics. These props add depth to the imagined profile of these people ­  they are still fantasy but they are fantasy made real (the word becomes flesh). Usually, the  performance of fashion presents only the end product and, like in social situations, mistakes and  complications to this slick finished production are concealed to create "an impression of

35 

infallibility" (Goffman 43). In these photographs, the props present indicate that this is not the  big performance, when all unsightly and mundane details are swept out of sight this is the  backstage pass.  Further, the props help situate the individuals in the photographs within time giving them  both a history and a future. Unlike models in editorials, these individuals are implicitly placed  within a time line. The props encourage us to read the people as having a before and after ­ a trip  to the coffee shop, an appointment, a date, a chore ­ which places them within a space ordered  by time. Though the photograph freezes time and represents one single moment of beauty, this is  simply one captured moment within a lifetime of  moments. The burning cigarette represents a single  moment captured but also implicitly references the  existence of the rest of the pack. There will be more  cigarettes, there will be more outfits, and there will  be more days. The prop acts as a kernel encasing  the relationship between before, after, and now.  They create narratives surrounding the people in the  photographs and they authenticate the fashion as  personal rather than editorially styled. Props then  are tied to the mythic potential of The Sartorialist.  In "Extreme Chic, Paris", the woman  pictured carries a piece of paper in her hand.  Schuman could have asked her to set the paper  ("On the Street...Extreme Chic, Paris,"  The Sartorialist, 13 March 2008).  A piece of paper as a prop.

36 

1  down to create a more coherent visual for the photograph, but he did not  . As a result, the paper 

in her hand complicates the visual of the photograph. The paper might be a flyer or a note, an  email or a bulletin. People don't usually carry around blank pieces of paper, so we can assume,  given that she is outside on the sidewalk, that the paper holds information that is useful to her life.  In this way the potential connotative meaning of the paper (flyer, information) explodes out to  create more meaning in signification on the second level. The paper means that she has  somewhere to go, something to do. The fact that she has a paper in her hand but no purse or  carrying case of any kind indicates that she was handed this paper on the street or is delivering it  somewhere on the street. She seems informed,  purposeful. These associations tie her to a lived  experience in the real world.  This association with a greater life and purpose  can also be seen in "Somerset House, London." In this  image, the girl is holding a phone in her hand,  potentially in conversation or about to make a call. The  cell phone links the girl in the picture to a real life with  things to do. Having someone to talk to on the phone  means she has somewhere to be, somewhere to go. She  ("On the Street...Somerset House,  London." The Sartorialist, 30  September 2009)  A cell phone as a prop.
1 

is integrated in a network of people who might want to  call her or who she might want to call. Merely owning a 

The question of exactly how much Schuman stage manages his photographs remains unclear. On September 5,  2006, he took a picture of a woman whose jacket was slightly undone and wrote, "After I took the photo, I felt  like I should have asked her to straighten her jacket but then again, the nonchalance in which she wears the  vintage coat is part of her charm" (The Sartorialist). The site encourages us to see these moments as untouched  and unedited but it is likely given the beauty of the photographs that there is at least some manipulation of light  and positioning. For more interrogation of the realities and fictions of street photography, see Scott, Westerbeck  and Meyerowitz. 

37 

cell phone indicates that communication with other people is a regular experience in one's life.  Further, the basic functions of the cell phone suggest that the girl in the picture is someone who  talks and someone who listens. She is not merely a pretty face made object in the photograph ­  she is a living person.  Finally, in "Brooklyn Boho, Brooklyn," there is a picture of a girl on a sunny day posed  like a stork holding a set of keys in her hand. These keys denote access/entrance to a home or car.  The connotation of this sign prompts us to read more into this girl and what she represents. Like  the flyer before, the keys represent somewhere to go, something to do. They place her in a time  line where she will at some point return to this specific home/car place. Keys imply ownership  and value a key is predicated on the idea that you have something worth locking.  The other key  chains on her key ring, only somewhat visible behind and beside the key, point to a personality,  to choices about how to decorate one's life. In some  ways, the key works as the perfect mythic object  because it is a utilitarian object which always carries  with it this mythical potential. Keys often make  appearances in jewellery precisely for this reason. Keys  provide an entrance to places that are otherwise out of  reach. In this photograph, the key represents access to a  world. 

2. 

Location  As previously noted, meaning making is  ("On the Street...Brooklyn Boho,  Brooklyn," The Sartorialist, 30  July 2010)  A ring of keys as a prop.

impacted by all the details that put a sign in context. In 

38 

the same way that the apple can represent nutrition or educational excellence based on whether it  is on a teacher's desk or on a poster in a doctor's office, the space of signification impacts how  we read the sign.  On The Sartorialist, the photographs are primarily taken on the sidewalk or the  side of the street. They are not taken inside fashion shows, or at restaurants, or at parties. They  are not taken against white backgrounds or in the desert or another fantastic location like  magazine editorials. The sidewalk provides the canvas for these photographs it is the blank slate  onto which these figures are drawn. The sidewalk, too, encourages a reading of these  photographs as existing in the behind the scenes spaces of life.  One way of thinking through the space of the street is through a comparison to the world  of theatre. The theatre is clearly demarcated into different areas of activity. Erving Goffman  compared the spaces of interaction to the spaces of theatre and theorized that people operate  within three different interactional spaces: front stage, backstage and places where our  appearance isn't tied to role maintaining (Rubinstein 53). The front stage might be our office or  date while the backstage would be our homes or dressing rooms. Goffman characterizes the  street as falling into the third category as a space where no one is looking to see what we are  wearing or judging us on what we wear. Writing about these spaces in terms of fashion, Ruth  Rubenstein argues that we can understand the street as an example of this third kind of space,  reporting that on the street one finds:  models hurrying to their assignments carrying the clothes and accessories needed to  complete their appearance for the photo shoot. Individuals often do not bother to dress  well to run a neighbourhood errand. In cities, women commonly rush to work wearing  sneakers, with their business suits and work shoes in their briefcases (Rubinstein 55).  The sidewalks of city streets are spaces we often traverse without thinking in order to get where

39 

we are going in a hurry. And women do, often begrudgingly, sacrifice elements of fashion in  order to get to the office on time. Yet the notion that this space is separate from the space of  display negates the realities of living in an urban environment.  Especially for the urban dweller, the sidewalk is one of the primary spaces of existence   lookalike liminal spaces we traverse on our way from work to home or play  but even given the  time we spend there, it is a space that goes unnoticed on our way to other places. Beyond  childhood, the sidewalk is not a destination, a place to sit and stop and play with friends, but a  place of movement, a space to go through to get to a more important destination. Unlike the path  or the road, the sidewalk is largely devoid of romantic clichés. In his famous essay on the city,  De Certeau theorizes that "to walk is to lack a place. It is the indefinite process of being absent  and in search of a proper" (103). The sidewalk is a place  for walking. The sidewalk is only interesting in so far as  it exists in relationship to its surrounding buildings  we  might look up but we rarely look down. The sidewalk  itself is not a mythic space or a space that people dress  for. It is not an obvious place of display and thus it adds  to the realness of the image.  The sidewalk allows for movement between  spaces and so it too is implicated in the spectrum of time  ­ the time it takes to get from point A to point B. We are  ("On the Street...Dior Homme for  Femme, New York," The  Sartorialist, 12 April 2007)  The sidewalk as a location. less interested in the sidewalk than the place where the  sidewalk ends. As a liminal space between two more  important locations, the sidewalk is neither here nor 

40 

there and the individual on the sidewalk is out of place, fixed in the middle of a flowing narrative.  Though they really exist somewhere else, this moment on the sidewalk creates an imaginary  existence in this space. They are not choosing where to be, they're trying to get where they're  going. In this way, the sidewalk is a backstage space of life, a space that always exists in relation  to other spaces.  This understanding of the sidewalk impacts how we read the location in context. In "Dior  Homme for Femme, New York", the woman pictured is wearing a dark suit is standing on the  sidewalk holding a cigarette. Returning to the semiotic reading of the props featured above, the  cigarette denotes the habit of smoking but it connotes many deeper associations. The cigarette  can be understood as an indicator of stress or addiction. On one hand, it can be a social gesture  (smoking together) yet on the other, it can indicate a human weakness at play (even if the  weakness is just a desire to look cool). Yet the cigarette existing on the street connotes more than  the cigarette achieves alone. On the street, the cigarettes become the signifier for the smoke  break, for time off from a day at work or a social engagement. The cigarette is an excuse to be  away, to have a moment to one's self. On the street, the cigarette takes on different meanings than  it might in a cafe in Paris or in a crowded newsroom. Here the cigarette is not an accessory, it is  an activity ­ something to do that is significantly different from what came before. The cigarette  break situates the girl in the picture in a social situation, whether it is work or fun. She is only on  the street for the length of time it takes that cigarette to burn out soon she will be off doing  something else because she is not just a model, she is a person with places to be. 

3. 

Costume  Because Schuman's photography focuses on mainstream style (rather than style that exists

41 

on the fringes), elements of the classic recur on the site. Schuman seems fascinated with clothes  that have a clear, historically grounded meaning, particularly in his appreciation of "old man  style" (a term he uses to describe the welltailored suits worn by older men on the street) and his  interest in uniforms. These two fascinations overlap in the way they envelope the individual in  the garments of the group the uniform, after all, can be understood as a blue collar version of the  classic grey suit, both in their own way charged with "subordinating the individual to the group  effort. Visible uniformity reminds the individual performer that individual excellence should be  subsumed in the group endeavour" (Rubenstein 99). Though this sublimation of the individual  can certainly be understood negatively in the age of giant faceless corporations, sharing similar  signs of clothing can also, as seen in subcultural studies, mean joining in a community with  common goals and values. The positive or negative connotation of the community determines the  value of the uniform in the eyes of the beholder.  The uniform clearly signals membership in a larger community. Rather than indicating  the character or status of the individual, the uniform indicates occupation (for example, the  waiter or the barber). As a concept, the uniform provides the standardized basis from which  alterations are made, the way to participate and the standard from which one can, if given the  option, thoughtfully diverge. When the barber wears his white jacket, he signals membership in a  community but the way he wears that white jacket, the way the material is pressed and the shine  of the buttons, indicates his ownership of the uniform. This relationship between the individual  and their uniform is a reflection of the push and pull between the individual and the collective.  The way a uniform is worn signifies something about its wearer because the meaning of the  uniform itself is so clear. In a similar way, individual details of the man beneath the grey wool  can be understood through the attention to detail, through the subtle ways that the shape and style

42 

of the suit is edited and changed by the wearer.  Both  the uniform and the suit are clear and reliable signs  which associate the wearer with a collective. In this  way, these classic styles exist between the collective  and the individual.  In "Waiter at Caffe Florian, Venice", we see a  young man standing in front of a restaurant. He is  dressed in a white dinner jacket with a black vest and  a white shirt. Even without the information given in  the title, the combination of black and white has the  cultural connotation of a waiter or waitress in a  restaurant. Ordinary people would not often wear  ("On the Street...Waiter at Caffe  Florian, Venice," The Sartorialist,  13 July 2009)  A waiter's uniform as a costume.

these clothes unless they were attending a very fashionable and fancy party. Further, the man is  standing up straight with his hands behind his back, giving the appearance of a person who is  ready to serve. The location and body language here impacts our reading of this gentleman as  actually in uniform rather than just playing with the fashion look of the uniform. Taken on their  own or on a hanger, we could not know for sure if the clothes were for real or just a playful  imitation. The person is implicated in the clothes and has the capacity to define the clothes just as  the clothes define the person. Thus we see these clothes, the classic uniform of the restaurant  server, and we see them worn with pride, buttons done up, shoulders fitting elegantly.  Especially  for the American photographer in a European setting, a service industry professional dressed in  such a pristine manner evokes a certain pride in their work, proud membership in a group of  people with specific and important roles in society. While this might not be the reality of the 

43 

individual, it is the connotation of the clothes in the photograph.  The suit is a different kind of uniform which has traditionally carried a positive  connotation. In the 1950s, the grey flannel suit was the uniform of the Organization Man and  signalled that a man was part of the team, fulfilling the role of the breadwinner in the household  (Steele 41). The suit was tied to the family home and the role of father and provider. The suit was  closely linked with masculinity, symbolizing "mastery over one's feelings and ...rationality, the  state of making decisions on the basis of calculation, organization, abstract rules, and procedure"  (Rubinstein 45). Though the suit today has lost some of its symbolic value  as Elisabeth Wilson  writes, "Even the city stockbroker dressed in his bespoke Jermyn Street uniform can no longer be  self conscious about it...It is no longer possible to be the perfectly dressed gentlemen whose  dress never calls attention to itself"  it still holds onto associations of classic masculinity  ("Adorned in Dreams" 173). The suit represents the  pinnacle of lived nostalgia and imaginative fashion  because it speaks to deeply entrenched cultural values.  Before we deconstructed gender and looked behind the  curtain of suburban family life in the 1960s, these signs  provided comfort (even as they encouraged conformity).  While these ideas may have tarnished some, the material  objects still retain glimmers of these associations,  glimmers which grow stronger when they are worn by  the same men that have been wearing them since the  ("On the Street...Luca R., Milan,"  The Sartorialist, 17 May 2011)  The suit as a costume. 1950s.  The continuing power of the suit can be seen in 

44 

"Luca R., Milan" where a man in a grey suit is photographed on his yellow vintagelooking  bicycle. Though this prop injects a sense of whimsy in the photograph, the suit itself is 
2  classically cut and styled. He projects an air of professionalism and seriousness.  The jacket, 

pants, shirt, and tie come together almost as non fashion. Everything fits ­ across the shoulder,  down to the shoes ­ and the way the suit is worn reflects a pride in appearance and a  commitment to a certain masculine standard. Here, the clothes are not trying to express a  particular individual style but rather make group affiliations clear. This is not to say that the  clothes are not actively chosen by the individual, but the aesthetic quirks of his own personality  are not pushing through his clothes.  On The Sartorialist, Schuman does not highlight subcultural style ­ he highlights cultural  style, the style at the centre of fashionable development in the West. It is not about the avant  garde on the fringe, not about the without but rather the within. The clothes featured are  recognizable and the style is largely defined by nuance ­ tailoring, detail, accessories ­ rather  than wholesale reinvention of clothing from the ground up. The language of the fashion  presented is largely a vocabulary that people understand, even if they're a little fuzzy on the  dialect. Schuman's affection for the classic through these uniforms of Western culture engages  the audience as members of the imagined community, rather than just viewers of it. Schuman  highlights classic shapes and styles, playing within the lexicon. The communal sharing of  meanings suggested by the clothing texts embraces shared space and shared cultural history  through clothes. 

2 

This picture, taken in Milan, Italy, highlights one of the complications to fashion analysis across borders. The  experience of seeing well dressed men on bikes is common in Italy, much more common than it is here. When I  read and analyze these images, I am inserting my own culturally specific experience into the analysis. Though  the site focused on Western fashion, there are some meaningful differences between the different cities and  countries that Schuman photographs. Further study of these cultural differences on the site would be interesting  and valuable. See Christopher Breward and David Gilbert Fashion's World Cities for more on this topic.

45 

4. The Supplement  Though the outfits in the photographs are generally constructed out of the building blocks  of common Western fashion (suits, dresses, jeans, trench coats, blazers), Schuman's subjects  often embody more than just a rote performance of already hollowed out fashionable ideas. As  much as his work celebrates the community built through fashion, it also highlights the power in  the personal style on the fashionable individual. In each photograph, there is an element of  specialness that draws attention to the choices made by the individual. This eyecatching moment  is often created through bright colour, accessories, and contrast, play within existing and classic  elements of fashion rather than wholesale creation of new ones. Each of these elements of  distinction adds to the imagined narrative of the individual and opens up space for closer  readings of the outfit as a whole.  These elements are not necessary to be adequately stylish   many people look very nice and preserve their warmth and modesty on a daily basis without  moving beyond the basic and functional  but through an understanding of this extra addition, we  can see how fashion expresses something about the individual.  Personal style involves taking that which is whole and making it personal, making  something more intimate with the materials of the masses. How can we make sense of this extra  work, this addition to that which is already complete? One way this extra element can be  understood is through Derrida's concept of the supplement. In Derrida's poststructuralist thought,  the supplement is defined as that which "forms a part without being part, it belongs without  belonging" (Royle 49). The supplement is separate from the thing but has a relationship to it.  Derrida writes:  The supplement adds itself, it is a surplus,  a plenitude enriching another plenitude, the

46 

fullest measure of presence. It cumulates and accumulates presence. It is thus that art,  techne, image representation, convention, etc., come as supplements to nature and are  rich with this entire cumulating function. (144145)  He distinguishes between manmade art and nature here, where manmade craft or techne is  supplementary to the natural world ­ though the natural world is complete without it, art adds  something to it (perhaps to our ability to appreciate it). Derrida explains his concept through the  distinction between writing and speech that he finds in Rousseau's Confessions where writing is  supplemental to speech. Derrida writes that writing "must be added to the word urgently...as an  image or representation" (144). The spoken word disappears upon speaking so the written word  must step in as a secondary or unnatural addition to the spoken word, "a sort of artificial and  artful ruse to make speech present when it is actually absent" (Derrida 144). In this way, we  understand the second function of the supplement "it intervenes or insinuates itself intheplace  of if it fills, it is as if one fills a void" (Derrida 145). The supplement at once adds plenitude to  plenitude and fills a space that was not filled by this plenitude. While writing appears in this  construction as secondary to speech, Royle argues that "there is a kind of primacy, presence and  'worth' that writing can embody, that is not possible in 'society'" (52). Though the supplement is  not the natural world or the immediate speech, it offers something that neither "whole" concepts  can attain by fixing them in time, by commenting on them and providing secondary analysis and  understanding. In this way, the "whole" and the supplement are unstuck from these clear  distinctions of primary and secondary.  Personal style can be understood as a supplement to our real selves, the selves we  experience in our own minds. In the same way that writing is supplementary to speech in that it  takes that which disappears in a moment and fixes it on the page or computer screen, clothing

47 

provides a means through which we can take who we are and how we feel in a particular moment  and export that feeling out into the world for an evening or an afternoon. When we create a self  through clothing, we are caught up in the project of identifying ourselves in the world and  identification, for Derrida, is "inextricably linked and interminably bound up with the  supplementarity, the phantasmatic, or imaginary. Identifying always entails a logic of adding on,  making up, being in place of" (Royle 59). Fashion is supplemental ­ it adds something  meaningful to that which was already formed, it fills a space that could not be filled.  The concept of the supplement is especially useful for looking at personal style and the  way it creates the presence of the individual through the photographs on The Sartorialist.  Personal style (style that expresses something about the individual) is indicated in the  photographs through the addition of elements which  draw the reader's attention. Immediately, bright colours  draw attention to the individual. In a crowd of people,  the eye is naturally drawn to the woman with the bright  blue hair or the man in the magenta pants. But it is not  just that the colour happens to be eyecatching ­ it is  that the bright colours indicate a willingness to be  noticed. The bright colours act as an attention beacon, as  a material call to attract the gaze. The stranger on the  street is not only creating an imaginary persona through  ("On the Street...Not Blue Jeans  But Bright Blue Pants, Milan," The  Sartorialist, 24 April 2007)  Bright blue pants as a supplement. their clothes, but they are also indicating a willingness  to be read, an active participation in a translation of self  from one form to another. It is an element of active 

48 

styling, something that indicates that what we see on the street is a work of effort and thought.  Accessories provide a similar function. Hats, scarves, purses, belts and jewellery, while often  functional, also provide avenues for creative expression. Taking their functionality and adding an  aesthetic element creates more depth in the image of the individual. The text has more layers and  there is more to be read.  The addition of these supplementary elements work in an ensemble according to the same  rules that provide the basis for all art  line, colour, symmetry, proportion.  A visual can be made  pleasing or interesting to the eye by breaking the traditional rules or norms of fashion in  thoughtful or unusual ways. One way vibrant visuals of personal style are often seen in the  photography on the site is in the development of contrast. Contrast exists when some element of  the individual is in tension with some element of their style. There is beauty and power in the  visual of the well tailored grey suit or the combination of long blonde hair and a slinky dress, but  these looks often appear flat or lifeless beside an image which tweaks this classic look to present  a more personal style. Conscious contradiction in clothing reflects a self that is always a mess of  contradictions, always more than an easy definition or label. The individual, already made real  by the props and the location, is given life through the personal style displayed in these moments.  In "Not Blue Jeans But Bright Blue Pants, Milan", the man pictured is standing on the  street wearing a navy jacket, white dress shirt, and black tie. Instead of the expected  black/grey/navy dress pants, he is wearing bright blue pants. On the surface, this seems like an  arbitrary distinction. After all, what's the difference between bright blue pants and navy pants?  Yet by deconstructing this image, one can see the meaning in this sartorial choice. On the surface,  these are just blue pants but they connote more. These blue pants connote a lack of fear of being  noticed, of stepping outside of the boundaries of classic menswear. Further, they suggest

49 

knowledge of the classic silhouette and a play upon it. This reading of the pants as playful (rather  than accidental) is encouraged by the other accessories in the ensemble (the belt, the pocket  square). These elements indicate a concern for detail and an engagement with a full head to toe  presentation. This play within the existing rules of menswear creates an ensemble which appears  consciously constructed. Rather than simply joining in the crowd of men in neutral suits, this  man clearly wants to stand apart.  Part of the reason these moments of contrast provide interest for the viewer is because  they require the viewer to engage with different levels of cultural knowledge at once ­  assumptions about class/race/age/gender ­ as well as their varied assumptions about and  associations with particular clothing items, colours, skirt lengths, etc. In these paradoxical  moments, fashion has the capacity to become a political act, however briefly, by calling into  question how natural the natural order of things really is. Rather than always validating our  assumptions, fashion can reveal the arbitrariness of the ideas about appropriateness that are  upheld in culture beyond the norms of fashion. 

5. Reversed Expectations  One of the ways visual interest is continually created on the site is through the reversal of  sartorial expectation. A subset of the supplemental elements of fashion described above, the  reversal of stereotypes creates tension between the expected wearer and the actual wearer,  between one garment and another garment. This visual rupture creates interest by referencing  deeply rooted cultural knowledge and expectations.  For example, when masculine suits are worn  by women (or young male hipsters), they take on a different, inevitably more ironic connotation  than they do on older men. Reclaiming objects from the past in a new context has always been

50 

part of fashion's history. In the 1960s, hippies rejected the current moment and searched for more  authentic (and less corrupted by "the man") clothing "of long ago and far away" (Steele 74). Of  course, the past never returns in quite the same way it was experienced originally the fringed  headbands borrowed from the American Indians still evoked earthiness and mysticism, perhaps,  but the connotations were much different on the bodies of American hippies. Fashion writer  Valerie Steele is critical of this nostalgic reimagining of objects of the past. She argues that  fashion's propensity to borrow from the past is not indicative of:  a mass flight into nostalgia. Indeed, the evidence indicates that most fashion trendsetters  have very little sense of history. The actual past is essentially irrelevant it exists only to  be cannibalized. Designers, stylists, photographers, and club kids all ransack the past for  usable images, which are then ripped out of  context and ruthlessly stripped of most of their  original meaning. (Steele 152)  This understanding of the fashionable turn towards  objects of the past is limited in its understanding of  how relevant the past is within objects reworked for  the present. Rather than thinking of these objects as  empty relics, we can conceptualize them as carrying  with them the associations and meanings of the past,  reunderstood through the way they are worn and  carried in the present. Clothing is always "pre  constrained", always caught up in what it meant before  it was recontextualized by twenty first century  ("On The Street...Lower East Side,  New York," The Sartorialist, 5  June 2006)  Menswear on a female body as a  reversed expectation.

51 

hipsters (LeviStrauss 19).  Rather than existing as empty shells hollowed out by the artifice chasing fashion crowd,  these objects are reimagined by being placed in a new context. For instance, a recurring theme  in the photographs is women in menswear. A woman in menswear subtly questions what it means  to dress like a woman, what it means to be a woman in a man's suit, what it means to be a man in  a suit that a woman can wear and reappropriate. Especially because Schuman demonstrates such  a fidelity to and affection for the old traditions of men in suits, his interest in gender bending  (however slight) seems particularly significant. These questions create a moment around the  fashion that is about more than just pleasing aesthetics. In "Lower East Side, New York", we see  a woman on the street wearing a tailored shirt and pants with large black suspenders. This is not  a woman in drag ­ there is no sense that this is a  costume, but rather a play on the different meanings  inherent in her sartorial choices. The unbuttoned blouse  creates a femininity that contrasts the masculine lines of  the suspenders. She may not be actively performing an  act of cultural questioning, but she is making a  thoughtful choice. By capturing these moments,  Schuman puts a spotlight on certain kinds of dressing  and creates a moment surrounding fashion that is  fleeting, capturing and privileging this supplemental  ("Truth is Stranger, No...More  Fantastic, than Fiction," The  Sartorialist, 22 November 2005)  Dreadlocks and a suit as a reversed  expectation. project of personal style.  But this tendency to capture contrast through the  reversal of stereotypes can waver awkwardly between 

52 

the celebration of difference and an almost condescending appreciation for the implications of a  man with dreadlocks wearing a nicely tailored suit. As much as clothes provide materials to play  and create different meanings, people's bodies hold all kinds of culturally constructed meanings  that they cannot control and the reason that we are drawn to particular styles, whether it be for  ourselves or on strangers on the street, does not exist outside of a cultural history and  subconscious ideas about what is beautiful, what is professional, what is feminine, what is strong.  In "Truth is Stranger, No...More Fantastic, than Fiction", a black man is pictured wearing a well  tailored grey suit and a wide brimmed straw hat. The contrast of the hat with the suit creates  visual interest through the reversal of expectation ­ the formality of the suit is in tension with the  casualness of the hat where the hat undercuts the formality of the suit. The suit looks more casual,  more like an everyday uniform when it is worn with the straw hat. At the same time, however,  the man has long black dreadlocks. The visual power of the image also derives from the contrast  of the dreadlocks against the suit. One of the reasons why this image is powerful is because we  do not expect to see a man in dreadlocks in a suit. Kobena Mercer writes about wearing  dreadlocks as a move towards more natural black hair, a "liberating rupture or 'epistemological  break,' with the dominance of whitebias" (104). Unlike straightened or permed hair, dreadlocks  represented a natural black stylization and thus were a powerful statement of acceptance of  blackness over an attempt to fit into whiteness. The suit, on the other hand, is traditionally  associated with white, male power. The tension in the image reveals elements of the initial  separate signs that might not initially come to mind. In this way, the power to reverse expectation  through fashion can be as limiting as it is liberating.  These five elements of The Sartorialist provide a language through which we can  understand the structures of the site. The props and locations act to anchor the photographs to the

53 

real world. The costume acts to situate the fashion within a classic, translatable context. The  supplement and reversed expectations interject the personal into the project of style, highlighting  the individual along with the clothes. These structures provide a way of understanding the site  and lend a vocabulary to a discussion of the phenomenon of streetstyle. The repetition of these  elements subtly reinforces the key concerns of the site, creating a cohesive representation of style  on the street.

54 

Chapter Three: On Looking and Feeling 

Part One: On Looking  The images on The Sartorialist affect us, not only because they are beautiful images  offering a window to the real world but also because we identify as both the bearer and object of  the gaze. What Schuman captures simultaneously in his photographs is both the experience of  looking and the imagined experience of being looked at. Susanne Holschbach writes that,  this process of becomingapicture...is not limited to the specific situation of being  photographed or filmed it takes place in the street as much as in public places, even in  one's own four walls, because it is a fundamental mechanism of intersubjectivity: in order  to be perceived and recognized as a person at all, I need to allow myself to be identified  within the framework of a series of possible pictures. (Holschbach 172)  Implicated in the fashion project catalogued on the site, we identify with these people  photographed on streets and sidewalks just like ours. We are at once the spectator and the object  of the spectatorship we are the ones watching and the ones waiting to be seen. The Sartorialist  recreates the experience of our eyes and bodies, watching and being watched on the street.  In busy urban centres, where we are surrounded by visual and auditory stimuli all the  time, our interaction with strangers often occurs in glances "so rapid [that they are] subliminal  (and seldom something we are conscious of): a quick flick of the eyes as people glance at each  other, scan their appearance and then look away" (Hubbard 17). This glance can be enough to  secure us in the knowledge that people are not dangerous or are not going to bother us. This  glance also sees people in limited terms  in a short amount of time, we are able to judge if  someone is stylish or not, while simultaneously being judged ourselves. Jacques Lacan

55 

considered the gaze to be a simultaneous seeing and being seen, writing that:  what determines me, at the most profound level, in the visible, is the gaze that is outside.  It is through the gaze that I enter light and it is from the gaze that I receive its effects.  Hence it comes about that the gaze is the instrument through which light is embodied and  through which ­ if you will allow me to use a world, as I often do, in a fragmented form ­  I am photographed. (106)  It is in the gaze that we come into being. The experience of being seen is equal to the experience  of seeing. For Lacan, this importance of looking begins with the mirror stage in development where  the child, still unable to run around, recognizes the face of another. In this moment, "curiosity  and the wish to look intermingle with a fascination with likeness and recognition: the human face,  the human body, the relationship between the human form and its surroundings, the visible  presence of the person in the world" (Mulvey 836). It is in this moment that the child is thought  to recognize the difference between image (the other) and selfimage (themselves). Because in  this early stage in development, they are still lacking mobility, they see the other as superior:  The child's fragmented body becomes, thanks to the way that the mirror is read, a whole.  The ideal of the body as a unity over which the child has mastery emerges as the illusion  produced through the mirroring experience. Though the mirror simply returns an image  of what the child actually does, the mirroring experience deceives insofar as it presents  the body through a coherent image. The wholeness of the body is seen in a way that is not  experienced. (McGowan 1)  Fashion has the ability to recreate this experience of looking and seeing wholeness where we are  fragmented. On the pages of magazines where fashion models wear outfits styled by someone

56 

else (perhaps less beautiful and certainly outside of the frame of the photograph), whose makeup  and hair are done professionally and whose minute imperfections at the end of all of that  constructive labour are washed away by a cursor in Photoshop, we look in the editorial mirror  and sees a person that we could never be  perhaps not so unlike ourselves, but better, more  fashionable, luckier.  When the glamour of fashion works, it creates a whole where there are only separate parts.  We see the whole person, the vision in tights and tweed, and sometimes we are captivated by it.  Style can create something unfragmented in a world where everything is fragmented. Sometimes,  when this package is built without the required nuance and thoughtfulness (and perhaps artistic  talent), the work is visible behind the image. You might think of those times when you can't help  but notice the middle aged man in his leather biker jacket or a young girl in high heels and a  miniskirt. We understand that these people are trying to project something through their clothes  we sense their unease in the outfits they have chosen. We can see the work. But successful  fashion hides the work, especially in the short interactions that happen on the street. We just see a  glimpse, a ghostly image, and then it is gone. The performance of successful fashion gives us the  impression that someone's "present poise and proficiency are something they have always had  and that they have never had to fumble their way through a learning period" (Goffman 47). "Red,  Green, and Grey, Paris" is an example of a successful image of style, frozen in time through  Schuman's photography.  His visual design choices  to center the woman within the frame, to  position her in front of a dark building to create a monochromatic image (apart from her already  striking hair)  encourage a reading of this outfit as successful style by subtly supporting the  sartorial choices with his own stylistic choices. This woman would be striking even in a poorly  shot and lit photograph, but she benefits from Schuman's expertise as a visual designer.

57 

The combination of the slightly longer  menswear grey jacket with the denim creates a  masculine silhouette, even as the nip in at the waist  suggests a feminine body underneath.  Though the  jacket has a traditional line and cut, it is made out of a  soft, almost velvety fabric. The hard lines of the suit  are in contrast to its soft materials as well as the subtle  paisley print over the grey background. The grey scarf  tucked into the neck opening creates a feeling of  being enveloped by fabric while the narrow cut of  both the jacket and the jeans suggests the body  beneath. Upon further investigation, the jacket is a  ("On the Street...Red, Green, and  Grey, Paris," The Sartorialist, 1  October 2007)

site for repeated reversed expectations, between masculine and feminine, hard and soft, revealing  and covered up. The longer one looks at this jacket (depending on the detail visible in the image),  the more details become available as elements working together to create this visual rupture. The  layers of the outfit become visible and definable.  Her bright red hair acts as a call to be noticed, a shining beacon in a sea of blonds and  brunettes. It is the supplemental element of the ensemble that encourages a closer reading by  suggesting an interest in the project of personal style. Especially given that she appears slightly  older, the red reads like a challenge against fading away. The striking shade of red along with the  youthful bangs creates a freshness that brightens the grey of her ensemble and the ombre effect at  the ends (where the red appears to fade into a bright orange) indicates an attention to detail and  to depth. Where bright coloured hair could evoke punk rock, this sophisticated dye job mitigates 

58 

associations with Manic Panic. The visual interest created through the hair inserts personal style  into a sophisticated image.  But this could just be a picture in a salon window. Because the clothes and hair work  together so successfully, the image could be read as an editorial image, styled by an entire team  of professionals. The location of the photograph (outside, against a wall) immediately makes it  seem more candid than most editorially produced images. The natural light against the dark wall  suggests an outdoor space rather than the inside of a studio. Further, she's holding a piece of  paper in her hand, a prop that links her to a world and an itinerary. This prop acts as a visual  distraction, consistently situating the image within the real world made up of real people.  Through these elements in the photograph, the stylish image which so successfully rendered  personal style is made theoretically attainable.  On The Sartorialist, the display of this work of style in archived photographs creates time  for reflection. Instead of being momentarily mesmerized by the wholeness of the image, we are  given time to see its parts. We see the image and think about the person. We see the outfit as art  and think about the choices made to pair those shoes with that dress, why it works or why it does  not. We think about the origins of that menswear suit on that woman and wonder what she is  trying to say about masculinity femininity (or both or neither). Given the time to reflect, we can  see the person and their constructed image as interrelated things. In essence, we see the work of  successful artistic construction as more than just decoration. 

Part Two: On Feeling  Subjectivity is an important component to the appreciation of fashion. Through The  Sartorialist, this is made clear through the repeated elements and looks which make up Scott

59 

Schuman's particular, subjective view of what is (and implicitly, what is not) stylish. While  Schuman's images create a fashionable real, they also often exemplify a beautiful, unique  fashionable image. These beautiful images cause us to stop and look they are not merely pretty  but also interesting, evocative, compelling. The arresting image of personal style on display is  important because it grabs our attention and creates a moment of appreciation or what Nancy  would call a shared experience of presence. These moments are worth investigating. Through a  synthesis of Nancy's conception of the presence of the image and Benjamin's hopeful wish  within the inevitable dream of capitalism, the power and potential of the successful fashion  image will be unearthed.  Yet what specifically makes up the content of moments is tightly tied  to our own subjectivity. Being receptive to particular fashion images depends on the kind of  stores you shop at, the kind of clothes you wore growing up, the practical necessities of your life,  and many more particular and personal style modifiers. If your tastes align with Scott Schuman's,  The Sartorialist  might provide you with many moments to reflect upon compelling images. If  they don't, then the images might appear technically proficient, but flat.  It is difficult to convince another person that something is beautiful if they do not see it  themselves  perhaps it is all in your head, anyway, in your own projections and associations  which read more into a pair of jeans and a grey jacket than might be present in the image itself.  In the following theoretical discussion, I support my discussion of Nancy and Benjamin with  images which I find personally evocative, recognizing that is a personal choice based on feelings  which are difficult to translate into words. In my analysis of the images, I employ the elements to  show how the image works, focusing on the way combinations of garments create a compelling  image, attempting in words to describe how the feeling is built. Through the separation of theory  and my own favourites, I strive to reflect the very project of thoughtful looking that exists as one

60 

function of Scott Schuman's project on The Sartorialist. Though you may not agree about what  you see, he encourages us to take the time to really look.  Jean Luc Nancy discusses the importance of looking in his discussion of the image. For  Nancy, the image is different from the ornament. Where the ornament provides mere decoration,  the image provides access to another's world. The image is defined by its relationship to its  source material. Though it resembles the thing itself, the image "is a thing that is not the thing: it  distinguishes itself from it, essentially" (Nancy 2). In terms of fashion, we can understand this as  the separation between the self and the fashionably constructed self.  Though the painting of the  sunset may look exactly like the sunset or our outfit may be a perfect reflection of who we are,  the space between the reality and the resemblance is the domain of the distinct. The image's  "distinction is the dissimilarity that inhabits resemblance, that agitates it and troubles it with a  pressure of spacing and passion" (Nancy 9). The image's power resides in the reality that  whatever resemblance exists between the image and the thing, there is always dissimilarity  within it, a knowledge that there is a fundamental difference between being something and  looking like something. The image presents a window to the world while simultaneously  presenting distance from it.  The distinct is separate from the world of things (described as those things which have  use). In the image, however, the distinct "establishes simultaneously a withdrawal and a passage  that, however, does not pass" (3). The image can only offer a passage towards something because  the image is never the thing itself, never the actual person beneath the style. The spectator is  caught in the passage that does not pass "an intimacy is thus exposed to me, but for what it is,  with its force that is dense and tight, not relaxed, reserved, not readily given" (Nancy 3). The  spectator is intimate with the image ­ it affects them and they are shown something private/secret

61 

through it, a glimpse at the space between ourselves  and the other. This intimacy at a distance is described  by Nancy as "barely touching the skin, à fleur de  peau" (Nancy 4). This French phrase is evocative of  this closenessatadistance that Nancy is talking  about here. Like a flower touching skin, the presence  of the image is a delicate sensation, one that would be  lost in an attempt to grasp it, to crush it within one's  fingers.  Nancy uses the portrait as an example of how  In this image, both the phone and  her placement on the street make  her seem real. However, it is the  combination of supplemental  elements which is more powerful  in creating the visual of a  thoughtful person who has made so  many personal choices about her  outfit. This image is built out of  many disparate pieces ­ the striped  skirt, the knee highs, the granny  cardigan, the boxy red purse, the  bowler hat ­ that don't match but  still complement each other. There  is an effortlessness in the rumple of  the tucked in shirt and the softness  of the cardigan. The combination  of thoughtfulness and  effortlessness creates a tension in  the image, creating visual interest  and drawing our attention to each  individual piece.  ("On The Street...Hudson St., New  York," The Sartorialist, 7 April  2011) this presence works and this example is useful to an  understanding of what gives clothing presence.  Nancy writes that portraits touch us à fleur de peau or  else they are not portraits of all ­ their portraitness (as  it were) is caught up in their ability to touch, to reveal  a presence of the individual, and only in so far as they  do that are they separate, as Nancy notes, from a  license or passport photograph. The distinction  between the portrait and the identification photo is  that the portrait "pulls and draws (this is the semantic  and etymological sense of the word), in that it  extracts something, an intimacy, a force" (Nancy 4).  Through the image, the very drawing of the image, 

62 

something of the essence of the person is brought out. The  focus on drawing both literally and figuratively here  foregrounds the creative work of imagemaking. The  presence appears in the image but is also is created through  the image. When the artist draws a portrait, they create this  space of presence. The individual in front of their closet,  staring at their clothing, making choices about how they  would like to appear, is also pulling and drawing in order to  create an image of themselves.  When people dress, they make choices about how  they want to be presented in the world. Though some  people are more eager participants in their own image  making than others, everyone is created and exists first as a  visual billboard when they walk into the room or into a  conversation. The question that remains for us is if that  image can be understood as Nancy's image or merely as a  driver's license photo ­ something that merely recreates the  individual without drawing attention to the space between  the representation and the self that exists beneath it. It is  only through the process of styling that this distance is  highlighted. When an ensemble catches the attention of a  passerby, when they ask, "What's he wearing?" or think,  "Cool shirt", they are noticing both the thing and the  This image works through its  reversed expectations. The  combination of the backpack, long  dress, and white sneakers suggest a  flurry of different motivations. An  everyday glamour exists in the  combination of these practical  items, like the sneakers (which  reference the real) alongside the  formality of the floor length gown.  The unnaturally red hair  encourages the reading of this  combination as a thoughtful  display (rather than a wardrobe  malfunction). Schuman's  photograph also encourages us to  read this as a successful fashion  image through her positioning on a  wooded street  she seems almost  like a fairy, a little out of space and  time. The unexpected combination  of elements works with the setting  to create this other worldliness.  ("On the Street...Whitaker St.,  Savannah," The Sartorialist, 6 May  2011)

63 

individual ­ the closenessatadistance. For Nancy:  The distinct distinguishes itself: it sets itself apart  and at a distance, it therefore marks this  separation and thus causes it to be remarked ­ it  becomes remarkable, noticeable and marked as  such. It also, therefore, attracts attention: in its  withdrawal and from out of this withdrawal, it is  an attraction and a drawing toward itself. The  image is desirable or it is not an image (but  rather a chromo, an ornament, a vision or  representation ­ although differentiating between  the attraction of desire and the solicitation of the  spectacle is not as easy as some would like to  think...). (Nancy 6).  Here Nancy points out one of the cruxes of these  aesthetic arguments. Subjectivity is always involved in  deciding what is merely ornament and what is image,  what is flatly decorative and what opens up the  closenessatadistance that defines the image. Given  that images work to place the spectator in this window  to another's world, in a liminal space between one world  and another, one way to understand this complication is  to consider the relationship working both ways where  This image is built out of the  different textures  the knit of the  grey sweater in contrast to both the  furriness of the scarf and especially  the sparkly sequins of the skirt.  The knit above and legs in black  tights below further encourages us  to note the competing interests at  play in this outfit.  This feels like  the coming together of two  costumes, a fashionable walk of  shame where the desires of the  night compete with the realities of  the day. It is the individual beneath  the clothes that foregrounds an  individual's choice in these  combinations. The smile beneath  the knit cap encourages us to read  this combination as playful. The  combination of the oversized furry  cowl and  the short, sassy sequined  skirt, combined with her age,  creates a whimsical playfulness  which hints at the woman beneath  the clothes.  ("On the Street...Being Cool,  Staying Warm, NYC," The  Sartorialist, 17 February 2010)

64 

the spectator depends on the image to reveal its presence and the image depends on the spectator  being open to the presence. Who the spectator is affects how open they are to appreciating the  presence of the image. Later, Nancy seems to recognize this, writing that "the image touches me,  and, thus touched and drawn by it and into it, I get involved, not to say mixed up in it. There is  no image without my too being in its image, but also without passing into it, as long as I show it  consideration, maintain my regard for it" (Nancy 7). The content of this consideration is vague.  How does one maintain regard for the image? The history of distinguishing mass art from high  art reveals how Western culture has historically treated art images as either those which critics  might show regard for and those which were not worthy of their consideration in this same way.  It is only by choosing to give things consideration that we are able to pass into the presence of  the image. Importantly, then, it is not the presence that would seemingly come first but rather the  choice to maintain regard for it. In this way, the importance of the viewer who chooses to see is  clear. When Schuman walks the streets looking for style, he "maintains his regard" for the  project of fashion, for the power and possibility of the styled individual to express something  worth understanding or documenting out into the world.  In the close of his chapter on the image, Nancy gestures towards an understanding of the  presence of art as a means through which community could be built through art appreciation.  When we look at art, "resemblance gathers together in force and gathers itself as a force of the  same ­ the same differing in itself from itself: hence the enjoyment [jouissance] we take in it"  (Nancy 9). We recognize the distance between the artistic image and the thing that it represents.  Through our reflection on the art, "we touch on the same and on this power that affirms this: I  am indeed what I am, and I am this well beyond or well on this side of what I am for you, for  your aims and your manipulations" (Ibid). This distinct presence of the image is not something to

65 

be used, traded or owned by someone else. Creating the  distinct through art is a declaration of independence and  through art, "we touch on the intensity of this withdrawal or  this excess. Thus mimesis encompasses methexis, a  participation or a contagion through which the image seizes  us" (Ibid). The image is more than what we get from it, more  than what we want from it. In this way, the mimesis of the  image also carries this distinctiveness and we participate in it.  We are seized, not simply by the resemblance to the thing, but  by the fact that there is more there than simply resemblance  This image is successful because of  its details. The shopping bag and  (that is, the presence of the translation of the thing into the  the little dog give this woman a  history, a life beyond her clothing,  image).  However, by recognizing the presence of the distinct  within the realm of the real. The  in the image "he enters into the image, he no longer looks at it  smartly (and tightly) tied trench  and carefully rolled up sleeves  ­ though he does not cease to be in front of it. He penetrates it,  indicate a pride in appearance  through the attention to line and  silhouette. The bright blue dress  is penetrated by it: by it, its distance and its distinction, at the  beneath is bold, especially against  same time" (Nancy 10). The spectator's one sided relationship  the shock of white hair, and it  attracts the eye. This image plays  turns into a reciprocal relationship, whereby the image opened  as a reversal of expectations in so  far as it speaks back to culturally  constructed ideas about women  up to him and he to it. This openness is crucial to the way the  fading away as they age. The pride  image works to reveal presence. The presence is contingent on  in appearance and bold colour  choices creates an image of a feisty  woman. Her existence out on the  the openness and vice versa.  street, still active, still taking care  The image reveals a presence of a real thing, it reveals,  of a little dog, combines with her  fashion choices to create a vibrant  in Heideggerian terms, a world worlding beyond its borders. A  image of an older woman who  seems lively, not faded.  ("On the Street...Trench Tie,  world, for Heidegger, is more than the things that we could  Milano," The Sartorialist, 25 June  2009) 66 

describe filling a space. A world is an experience of human existence. It is "that always  nonobjectual to which we are subject as long as the paths of birth and death, blessing and curse,  keep us transported into being. Wherever the essential decisions of our history are made,  wherever we take them over or abandon them, wherever they go unrecognized or are brought  once more into question, there the world worlds" (Heidegger 2223). It is within worlds that  things gain their meaning, within worlds that the material is made art.  Through style, we can gain entry into other people's worlds and let them into our own.  Style is personal and there is a certain intimacy of relationship between our interior existence and  the material things that fill our closets and empty our wallets. There are some items of clothing,  some combination of items that you can put on and feel like yourself, or maybe more accurately  the self that you want to be. Even those who do not work to cultivate a cohesive personal style  often experience clothing as personal ­ whether it is because the clothing carries with it the  memories of the experiences during which it was purchased or worn (a great band tshirt or a  wedding dress) or just because it looks good in front of the mirror. These are the moments when  style becomes an image, not an ornament.  Yet the privileging of the personal in personal style is always in tension with the way that  style exists in the world. For all the idealistic talk of individualized fashion, most people wear  pretty similar things. That leather jacket that seems to manifest your interior world out to the  exterior one is a piece that is also worn and embraced by many other people, people who also  grew up watching James Dean or watching their cool older brother ride his motorcycle after their  curfew or people who did neither but understand the leather jacket as a signifier of cool based on  their experiences of other people who wore them. Clothing feels personal but exists in the world  as mythologized objects, things with certain associations and cultural contexts. They act as texts

67 

that people can read because that leather jacket means a lot of the same things to me as it means  to you. As previously mentioned, subcultural groups based on music scenes or political  viewpoints have often used clothing as a site of liberation yet, as Elisabeth Wilson wryly puts it  "if liberated dress meant doing your own thing, no one ever commented on how strange it was  that everyone wanted to do the same thing" (Wilson 240). Part of the experience of clothes is  beinginclothes together. We are speaking in a language that we (more or less) all understand.  As society becomes more permissive and the icons of past rebellions like dyed hair and piercing  become commonplace on the streets of most cities, we see each other and we understand this  coming together of signs and symbols and associations.  One of the criticisms of streetstyle and its exploding popularity in the last decade is that it  starts with the notion of individuality and inevitably descends into a phenomenon that Freud  called, "the narcissism of small differences" (Prickett). Each streetstyle blog becomes a  collection of people dressed in similar ways, cultivating their individuality through a slightly  different haircut or skirt length. What starts as a project that appreciates difference descends into  a project which celebrates a particular kind of sameness. Though this criticism is lobbied against  streetstyle blogs specifically, at least in part because they have been heralded as a completely  democratized space for freedom in fashion, it is a criticism that applies to fashion in general. If  the experience of independent self definition through fashion is really just a myth, then what is  the point of putting so much energy into a personal style that just ends up looking more or less  like a lot of other people? What is the value in that display?  One way of considering this question is through Walter Benjamin's idea of the wish  image and the dream image and how they work in a capitalist society enthralled by the potential  for display. In his unfinished final work The Arcades Project, Walter Benjamin uses the World's

68 

Fair to consider the value and spectacle of display. At the Fair, "the crowd was conditioned to the  principle of advertisements: `Look, but don't touch,' and taught to derive pleasure from the  spectacle alone" (BuckMorss 310). Rather than creating a market where things could be bought  and sold, the World's Fair trafficked in the spectacle itself. The sights and sounds on display  created a space of "utopian fairyland" where the "physical transformation of urban space gave  material form to the utopian dreams of the bourgeois Enlightenment the century before...It called  on human beings to use their own, Godgiven reason to create the `heavenly' city here and now"  (Ibid). People travelled from all over the country to witness the potential of human imagination.  At the World's Fair, it seemed as though human potential really could create utopian  environments even though the real world as yet lagged far behind. Benjamin compared this  spectacle to Marx's conception of the phantasmagoria. For Benjamin, in the World's Fair, the  phantasmagoria developed to the point that "exchange value no less than use value lost practical  meaning, and purely representational value came to the fore" (BuckMorss 311). People were  enthralled with these massive displays of human energy and creativity. The images were not just  pretty, they promised more than their display alone.  In The Arcades Project, Benjamin writes about the potential of the dialectic image to  awaken the individual to a collective consciousness. Objects, in his theoretical framework, are  "prototypes" for political awakening, holding within them both the promise of what could be (its  forehistory) and the failed reality of what it is in the present (its afterhistory) (BuckMorss 312).  Through subjective reflection, the individual could recognize these mass cultural objects as  "politically charged monads, `blasted' out of history's continuum and made `actual' in the  present" (BuckMorss 314). In other words, through a reflective mode of interaction with objects  of mass culture, Benjamin believed that the individual could be awakened from false

69 

consciousness to recognize the real potential of life beyond the limited options presented by  capitalism. Unlike other attempts to deconstruct mass culture, this theory "takes mass culture  seriously not merely as the source of the phantasmagoria of false consciousness, but as the  source of collective energy to overcome it" (BuckMorss 31617). Instead of only being a vehicle  for continued oppression, the phantasmagoria here holds within it the potential for collective  political engagement.  Benjamin's conception of the emancipatory experience of the object relies on the  distinction between the wish and the dream to deconstruct the potential from the fetish. Susan  BuckMorss writes that:  ...this fetishized phantasmagoria is also the form in which the human, socialist potential  of industrial nature lies frozen, awaiting the collective political action that could awaken  it. The wishimage is the transitory dreamform of that potential. In it, archaic meanings  return in anticipation of the `dialectic' of awakening. (BuckMorss 316)  The wish is the seed of what could be in the dream state of what is. It holds within it "the utopia  that has left its trace on a thousand configurations of life, from enduring edifices to passing  fashions" (Benjamin 45). The relationship between the individual and their clothing (or between  clothed individuals) reveals the dynamic between the wish and the dream very effectively. The  play between the individual and the object is not an empty one. The contemplative process  through which people engage with their clothing can be understood as the manifestation of the  wish to be an agent of one's own creation. Yet the wish manifests as a consumerist dream, "a  (disguised) fulfilment of a (suppressed or repressed) wish" (BuckMorss 332). It is a dream that a  person can be whoever they want to be through a pair of jeans or a shirt, but the relationship  between self, identity, and presentation and consumption illustrates the dialectic image that

70 

Benjamin saw as existing in mass cultural objects. The wish was played out through the dialectic  of the object as a kind of continuing fantasy.  The photographs on The Sartorialist, like fashion itself, are a physical manifestation of  the wish within the dream. The mythic idea of fashion presented on the site is the ephemeral  pinned down and frozen in time in the photograph, existing only in a moment in the world. The  site recreates a fleeting moment on the street and validates the meaning in that moment, even if it  can never after achieve the same glory. Recognizing the opposing forces working within the  object is useful because it validates, rather than ignoring, the wish that is left upon recognition of  "the dream as a dream" (BuckMorss 319). The existentialist idea that individuals can fully  construct their lives, ignoring all the ways people are born into culturally constructed bodies,  races, sexualities, and classes, is enticing partly because sometimes it feels like it is possible.  Sometimes, for a moment when you enter a room, the work of display has been meaningful and  the dream has come true.

71 

Conclusion  On The Sartorialist, the mythic idea of fashion as a means by which we can create  ourselves as a beautiful image is supported and encouraged. Drawing on the tradition of flânerie,  Schuman created a catalogue of his own taste in style, focusing on the details that inject the  individual's creative energy in their clothing. Rather than celebrating the subculture or the  fringes of the avantgarde, Schuman focuses on fashionable people that play within the existing  confines of Western fashion. He is drawn to specific looks  old man style, reversals of  expectation, girls on bikes  and his website catalogues his own eye as it moves through the  streets of fashionable cities capturing what catches his fancy. Schuman documents a particular  view of style, posting for a particular fashionable community who appreciates his focus on the  mainstream, the detail, the play within the existing tropes of Western style. He is not posting  pictures for everyone. But he is presenting one way of seeing and appreciating the world.  Of course, magazines also provide fashionable images and a particular view of fashion.  But while on the pages of magazines, the construction of style comes together seamlessly, on the  digital pages of The Sartorialist, the real world inches in and complicates the perfect image. The  visual grammar of the site (the props, the location) creates a recognition that these images really  do exist in time and space. These elements represent the real and distinguish Schuman's work  from the professionally styled images of mainstream fashion photography. As Todd McGowan  writes, "to affirm the real is to affirm that the work of ideology never comes off without a hitch.  Every ideology includes a point within its structures that it can't account for or represent. This is  the point, the real, at which ideology opens up to the outside" (McGowan 3) Even while they  present an aspirational image of finely tuned personal style, each photograph is linked to the real  world and the fragmentary reality of human existence.

72 

Although these elements of the real separate the photographs from the kind of pictures  found in magazine editorials, it is important to recognize that the site does not present a wholly  real, candid, or grassroots  experience of fashion. Though the style of photography and the real  life moments captured create the feeling that we are glancing through a window at the actual  experience of fashion on the street, the site is constructed to sell particular ideas, even if it is not  selling actual garments. In fact, streetstyle websites can be understood as filling a necessary  place in the fashion cycle. After a season of fall fashion shows where Celine and other big name  fashion houses showed camel coats on the runway:  [another blogger] Doré shoots three gorgeous women attending fashion shows in their  camel coats (the real runway version), and Schuman shoots Doré shooting those gorgeous  women, which means four thin and gorgeous ladies are captured working a trend as they  go about their days. And the fashion loop is complete. (Larocca)  In this way, the very real people that Schuman photographs are sometimes just another stop for a  trend as it makes its way around fashionable publications. He is not trying to sell jackets, but  through his site, he sells the idea of fashion. The site itself features banner ads from clothing  companies like American Apparel, selling clothes to the fashionable audience Schuman has  cultivated through his photography, an audience which respects his eye and his recommendations.  Drawing on this authority, Schuman asks many of the fashionable men who reoccur on  the site about their favourite tailors, drycleaners, and cobblers in the city and provides this  information on a page called The SartoriaList. Though Schuman is not selling anything explicitly,  he is selling a way of life that costs money and takes time. His beautiful images of men in jackets  are tied to the dream of selfcreation, of being just as fancy and well groomed and important as  the men pictured on the site through the acquisition of the kinds of pieces featured on the site.

73 

Further, as a fashionable insider, Schuman can likely tell when someone is wearing the real  version rather than the downmarket knock off. The vision of a good looking person really living  in and wearing a good looking piece of clothing in a well lit and perfectly shot photograph is an  excellent advertisement for the company, and one they likely did not have to pay for.  As  Benjamin said about Baudelaire's flâneur "the department store is the last promenade for the  flâneur" where the department store "makes use of the flâneur to sell its goods" (Benjamin  "Paris" 40). Schuman shoots people in luxury goods, outside fashion shows.  He is very much  within the mainstream world of fashion and that implicates him in its concerns and fascinations.  At the same time, however, The Sartorialist provides a useful space for the analysis of the  realities of fashion on the street. Because these moments of fashionable appreciation in the urban  environment happen in the blink of an eye, the photographer's camera acts as a helpful  intermediary. Schuman's photographs provide a way to study the way that fashion works on the  streets. Although his pictures are not the real moment of recognition and appreciation on the  street, they reflect Schuman's own moments of appreciation (even if they are reframed or better  lit through posing and positioning after the initial moment of appreciation). Through the site, we  see how one person sees style. Though these images are imperfect representations of a real  moment, they are useful for capturing and sharing the experience of fashion on the street.  Schuman's images are downloaded onto his site and shared with fashion lovers all over the world,  democratizing fashion through internet browsers.  Further, Schuman's photographs, while still largely white, young, and thin, capture a  broader range of fashionable images than fashion magazines, capturing people in the boroughs of  New York City wearing clothes that have never seen a runway. His photographs of editors and  other important fashion people have created mini fashion celebrities, but his pictures are just as

74 

often nobody as they are somebody. Whether the subject of the photograph is nobody or  somebody, the allure of individual tied to the real, authentic, lived reality of the world adds  legitimacy to the fashion image and help sell the dream that The Sartorialist represents. The  variety in styles, genders, ages, and races side by side on one site further encourages a reading of  the site as a catalogue of personal style across borders. Mainstream fashion magazines very  rarely have old women beside young men beside professional women beside guys on  skateboards. Though The Sartorialist does present a particular view of what (and who) is  fashionable ­ that is, Scott Schuman's own perspective ­ it provides more variety than more  specialized publications aimed at selling a particular kind of clothes to a very particular kind of  person.  The images on the site validate the work of fashion by giving the necessary task of daily  dressing an international platform and spotlight. The site privileges the construction of style as a  valuable project. It takes the normal, day to day reality of seeing other strangers on the street and  freezes it in time, prompting us to question what it means to see and be seen by so many  strangers every day. The website recreates the imaginative experience of city living where a  stranger on the street catches the eye for just a fleeting moment through an attraction to the  fashionable image they've created our imaginative experience of the city is made real on the site.  The photographs fill a gap in our minds where "we come back to the city time and time again in  pursuit of that true experience that constantly eludes us, and so, unable to embrace the metropolis  in its profound totality, we take refuge in the landscape of memory" (Parker 18). Photographs, as  Susan Sontag has noted, "give people an imaginary possession of a past that is unreal" (Sontag  9).  They make real a time that never really was. The photographs fill the distance that the city  creates through its disconnected communities through the photos, we know the other strangers

75 

on the street. They become people to us, people offering up some of who they are to be read.  Part of the reason the photographs on The Sartorialist work is because we want this  transformative dream of fashion to be real. If we really could be whoever we wanted to be  through clothing, then all the money and hours spent would be worthwhile and we would have  more agency over our lives. If what Schuman is capturing is real ­ if our reading of these  pictures is an authentic understanding of these people ­ then the site works as an affirmation that  we can create ourselves. But because we recognize the space between fashion in that one  moment (even if it's captured on a digital card) and the actual realities of living as a being in  clothes in the world, we recognize this hopeful notion as a myth, a wish encased in a doomed  dream which undoes the very mythic quality of the site.  Yet there is more to the site than just the failure to deliver on a promise of wholesale  fashionable potential. In his conception of myths, Roland Barthes believed that mythologies only  worked in the support of oppressive ideologies, transforming "meaning into form" (Barthes 131).  Myth then is a means by which we are kept in our place. As Kaja Silverman notes, Barthes falls  back on the Marxist notion that "ideology is a condition of false consciousness promoted through  fictions sponsored by the dominant class, fictions which it is presumably possible to penetrate by  means of a deconstructive analysis" (Silverman 30). This understanding sees ideology as a  blanket which hides us from a separate but somehow (someday) accessible real. This ideology or  myth is a singular notion which keeps us from being who we would like to be or doing what we  would like to do. Yet Silverman argues "there is always a heterogeneity of conflicting ideologies  concealed behind the dominant one. While it may not be possible to step outside of ideology  altogether, it is possible to effect a rupture with one, and a raprochement with another"  (Silverman 31). In other words, as Hebdige writes, "forms cannot be permanently normalized.

76 

They can always be deconstructed, demystified" (Hebdige 16). As much as The Sartorialist  presents an impossible view of fashion, it also provides an opportunity for selfreflection and  fashionable options beyond the decorative existence that stores and magazines sell us by  subscription. The Sartorialist provides another way of thinking through the question of style and  its potential importance. If our clothes cannot change who we are, they can at least show who we  are. In a world of faceless nameless strangers, making yourself into an image can be the first step  to revealing your own personal subculture in the middle of the mainstream.

77 

Works Cited  Barthes, Roland. Mythologies. Trans. Annette Lavers. St. Albans: Paladin, 1973. Print.  Baudelaire, Charles. The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays. Ed. Jonathan Mayne. Trans.  Jonathan Mayne. London: Phaidon Press, 2006. Print.  Benjamin, Walter. The Arcades Project. Trans. Howard Eiland and Kevin McLaughlin.  Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1999. Print.  . "Paris, the Capital of the Nineteenth Century." The Writer of Modern Life. Ed. Michael W.  Jennings. Trans. Howard Eiland et al. Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University  Press, 2006. 3045. Print.  BuckMorss, Susan. "Dream World of Mass Culture: Walter Benjamin's Theory of Modernity  and the Dialectics of Seeing." Modernity and the Hegemony of Vision. Ed. David  Michael Levin. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993. 30938. Print.  Culler, Jonathan. On Deconstruction. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2007. Print.  De Certeau, Michel. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California Press,  1984. Print.  Denny, Margaret. "Framing the Victorians: Photography, Fashion and Identity." Places and  Spaces of Fashion, 18002007. Ed. John Potvin. New York: Routledge, 2009. 3451. Print.  Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology. Trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Baltimore: The Johns  Hopkins University Press, 1997. Print.  Eliot, T.S. "The Lovesong of J. Alfred Prufrock." Collected Poems 19091962. London: Faber  and Faber Ltd., 1963. 1317. Print.  Eskildsen, Ute. "Introduction." Street and Studio: An Urban History of Photography. Ed. Ute  Eskildsen. London: Tate Publishing, 2008. 913. Print.  Goffman, Erving. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Anchor Books: New York, 1959.  Print. 78 

Hebdige, Dick. Subculture: The Meaning of Style. London: Metheun and Co. Ltd., 1979. Print.  Heidegger, Martin. "The Origin of the Work of Art." Off the Beaten Track. Eds. Julian Young and  Kenneth Haynes. Trans. Julian Young and Kenneth Haynes. Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press, 2002. 156. Print.  HallDuncan, Nancy. The History of Fashion Photography. New York: Alpine Book Company,  Inc., 1979. Print.  Holschbach, Susan. "The Pose: Its Troubles and Pleasures." Street and Studio: An Urban History  of Photography. Ed. Ute Eskildsen. London: Tate Publishing, 2008. 17177. Print.  Hollander, Anne. Seeing Through Clothes. New York: Viking Press, 1978. Print.  Hubbard, Phil. City. London: Routledge, 2006. Print.  Jameson, Frederic. "Post Modernism and Consumer Society." The AntiAesthetic. Ed. Hal Foster.  Port Townsend: Bay Press, 1983. 11125. Print.  Kalberg, Stephen. "Max Weber's Sociology: Research Strategies and Modes of Analysis."  Reclaiming the Socioloical Classics: The State of Scholarship. Ed. Charles Camic.  Malden: Blackwell Publishers, 1997. 20841. Print.  Kress, Gunther and Theo Van Leeuwen. Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual Design.  London: Routledge, 1996. Print.  Lacan, Jacques. The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis. Ed. JacquesAlain Miller.  Trans. Alan Sheridan. New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 1998. Print.  Larocca, Amy. "The Street is Their Oyster." New York Magazine. New York Media, 13 February  2011. Web. 1 April 2011.  LeviStrauss, Claude. The Savage Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966. Print.  Lipovetsky, Gilles. The Empire of Style. Trans. Catherine Porter. Princeton: Princeton University  Press, 1994. Print.  McGowan, Todd. The Real Gaze. New York: State University of New York Press, 2007. Print. 79 

Mercer, Kobena. Welcome to the Jungle. New York: Routledge, 1994. Print.  Moretti, Franco. "Conjectures on World Literature." New Left Review. 1 (JanuaryFebruary 2000):  5468. Web. 7 June 2011.  Mulvey, Laura. "Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema." Film Theory and Criticism:  Introductory Readings. Eds. Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen. New York: Oxford  University Press, 1999. 83344. Print.  Nancy, Jean Luc. The Ground of the Image. Trans. Jeff  Fort. New York: Fordham University  Press, 2005. Print.  Parker, Simon. Urban Theory and the Urban Experience: Encountering the City. London, New  York: Routledge, 2004. Print.  Polhemus, Ted. Streetstyle. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1994. Print.  Prickett, Sarah Nicole. "Dead end of the street style." Eye Weekly. 30 April 2010. Web. 2 June  2011.  Royle, Nicolas. Jacques Derrida. London: Routledge, 2003. Print. 
nd  Rubenstein, Ruth. Dress Codes. 2  ed. Boulder: Westview Press, 2001. Print. 

Schuman, Scott. The Sartorialist. Web. 2 April 2011.  . "The Sartorialist Profiled In Focus Magazine." The Sartorialist. 30 March 2006. Web. 2 June  2011.  Scott, Clive. Street Photography. London: I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd, 2007. Print.  Silverman, Kaja. The Subject of Semiotics. New York: Oxford University Press, 1983. Print.  Simmel, Georg. "Fashion". The American Journal of Sociology 62.4 (1957): 54158. Web. 27  April 2011.  . "The Metropolis and Mental Life." On Individuality and Social Forms. Ed. Donald Levine.  Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1971. 32439. Print.  . "The Stranger." On Individuality and Social Forms. Ed. Donald Levine. Chicago: The 80 

University of Chicago Press, 1971. 14349. Print.  Sontag, Susan. On Photography. New York: Anchor Books, 1977. Print.  Steele, Valerie. Fifty Years of Fashion: New Look to Now. New Haven: Yale University Press,  2000. Print.  Weber, Max. The City. Glencoe: Illinois Free Press, 1958. Print.  Westerbeck, Colin, and Joel Meyerowitz. Bystander: A History of Street Photography. Boston:  Little, Brown and Company, 1994. Print.  Wilson, Elizabeth. Adorned in Dreams. London: Virago Press, 1985. Print.  . "Magic Fashion." Fashion Theory 8.4 (2004): 37586. Web. 20 March 2011.

81 


