Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2010

Development Of Framework For In-Vehicle RearEnd Collision Warning System Considering Driver Characteristics
Atif Mehmood
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Civil Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Mehmood, Atif, "Development Of Framework For In-Vehicle Rear-End Collision Warning System Considering Driver Characteristics" (2010). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1604.

This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

DEVELOPMENT OF FRAMEWORK FOR IN-VEHICLE REAR-END COLLISION WARNING SYSTEM CONSIDERING DRIVER CHARACTERISTICS

by

Atif Mehmood, M.A.Sc., P.Eng. Master of Applied Science, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (2003) Bachelor of Civil Engineering, Quaid-e-Awam University of Engineering Science and Technology, Pakistan (2000)

A dissertation presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of

Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) In the Program of Civil Engineering

Department of Civil Engineering Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2010

© Copyright 2010 Atif Mehmood

ii

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this dissertation. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this dissertation by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Signature

iii

Borrowers

Borrowers undertake to give proper credit for any use made of the dissertation. Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this dissertation.

Please sign below and give address and date.

Name

Signature of Borrower

Address

Date

iv

DEVELOPMENT OF FRAMEWORK FOR IN-VEHICLE REAR-END COLLISION WARNING SYSTEM CONSIDERING DRIVER CHARACTERISTICS

A Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) dissertation ­ 2010

by Atif Mehmood, M.A.Sc., P.Eng.

This dissertation is presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) In the program of Civil Engineering Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

ABSTRACT

Rear-end collisions are one of the serious traffic safety problems. These collisions occur when the following vehicle driver is inattentive or could not judge a potential rear-end collision situation. The use of rear-end collision warning systems (RECWS) may help drivers to avoid rear-end collisions. The existing systems assumed constant driver reaction time for all driver population in their design and evaluation. They also ignore variations in driver characteristics, such as age and gender.

v

The objectives of this thesis research are: (1) to develop reaction-time models that incorporate driver characteristics, (2) to develop a car-following simulation model that represents driver behaviour, and (3) to develop a rear-end collision warning system that accounts for driver characteristics and produces reliable collision warnings. In the human-factors study, four driver reaction-time models are developed for four different car-following scenarios: lead vehicle decelerating with normal deceleration rate, lead vehicle decelerating with emergency deceleration rate, lead vehicle stationary, and car-following acceleration regime. These models describe how the driver and situational factors affect reaction-time. The driver factors include age and gender, and the situational factors include speed and spacing between the following and lead vehicles. The developed car-following model assumes that drivers adjust their speeds based on information of both the lead and the back vehicles. The model also assumes that the driver reaction-time varies based on driver characteristics and kinematics. The proposed model represents driver behaviour in acceleration, deceleration, and steady state regimes of the car-following scenarios. Another unique feature of the model is that it explicitly considers information on the back vehicle. The model is calibrated and validated using vehicle tracking database. The driver reaction-time models and other kinematics constraints were integrated to develop a driver-sensitive rear-end collision warning algorithm (RECWA). The developed car-following model is used to evaluate and validate the performance of the proposed RECWA. The results show that the proposed

vi

RECWA is functioning properly and producing reliable results. With further research and development, the proposed algorithm can be integrated into driving simulators or real vehicles to further evaluate and examine its benefits.

vii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I am extremely grateful to my supervisor, Dr. Said M. Easa, for his valuable advice, guidance, suggestions, and professional support throughout my studies and the entire research work. I have learned a lot from him about civil engineering, research methodology, and professionalism during my MASc. and Ph.D. studies at Ryerson University. I am very thankful for his financial support and providing research ideas during my studies. I am also thankful for his moral support during my right arm fracture and two critical surgeries during my Ph.D. study. I am also thankful to all the members of my oral examination committee for their valuable and helpful comments. These include Dr. Shinya Kikuchi from the Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Dr. Kamran Raahemifar, Dr. Persaud, and Dr. Ali Mekky from Ryerson University. I am gratefully indebted to my parents for their priceless love, affection, prayers, and encouragement to undertake so many years of school and yet another degree. I would like to thank my friend `Anwar' for his caring and support. Above all, I give special thanks to my beloved wife, Irum H. Afzal, for her constant support, patience, encouragement, and prayers. Irum and our children (Hamza Atif and Faryal H. Atif) have sacrificed many of their needs to permit me to pursue my study goals in very tough financial conditions. Thanks to my family. I shall forever remain thankful to my in-laws for taking care of my wife and children for several months, which allowed me to devote the time for my thesis research and write-up.

viii

TABLE OF CONTENTS Abstract Acknowledgements CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 1.1 Research Background 1.1.1 Research Summary 1.2 Methodology and Scope of the Thesis 1.3 Thesis Structure CHAPTER 2 LITERATURE REVIEW 2.1 Introduction 2.2 Existing Driver Reaction-time Studies 2.2.1 Driver Factors 2.2.2 Situational Factors 2.2.3 Limitation of Existing Reaction-time Studies 2.3 Existing Car-following Models 2.3.1 Limitation of Existing Car-following Models 2.4 Existing Rear-end Collision Warning Systems 2.4.1 Perceptual-based Systems 2.4.2 Kinematics-based Systems 2.4.3 Limitation of Existing Rear-end Collision Warning Systems 2.5 Summary CHAPTER 3 3.1 HUMAN FACTORS AND DESIGN OF COLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEMS Collision Avoidance Systems 3.1.1 Driver Advisory Systems 3.1.2 Driver Warning Systems 3.1.3 Control Intervention Systems Human Factors and Design of Collision Warning Systems 3.2.1 Baseline Driver Behaviour 3.2.2 System Standardization and Guidelines 3.2.3 Warning Message Modality and Design 3.2.4 Warning Message Timing 3.2.5 False Alarms 3.2.6 Driver Reaction Time 3.2.7 Driver Control Requirements 3.2.8 Older Drivers 3.2.9 Driver Performance v viii 1 1 3 5 7 11 11 11 12 13 15 16 20 21 22 24 25 26

3.2

27 27 29 30 30 31 32 32 33 34 35 35 36 37 38 39 39 41 42

CHAPTER 4 DESCRIPTION OF SOFTWARE 4.1 STISIM Driving Simulator 4.1.1 Event File 4.1.2 Configuration File

ix

4.2

4.1.3 Output Data File System Dynamics 4.2.1 Cause-effect Relationships 4.2.2 Feedback Loops 4.2.3 Delay 4.2.4 System Dynamics Modelling Variables 4.2.5 Vensim Functions 4.2.6 Rationale for Using System Dynamics

42 44 45 45 46 46 47 49

CHAPTER 5 5.1 5.2 5.3

5.4 5.5 5.6

MODELLING DRIVER REACTION TIME IN CAR-FOLLOWING BEHAVIOUR BASED ON HUMAN FACTORS 51 Introduction 51 Mathematical Car-following Model 54 Experimental Program 57 5.3.1 Participants and Apparatus 57 5.3.2 Brake Reaction-time Data 58 5.3.3 Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction-time Data 60 Data Analysis 62 5.4.1 Brake Reaction Time 62 5.4.2 Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction Time 65 Modelling of Driver Reaction Time 68 Summary 72

CHAPTER 6 6.1 6.2

6.3 6.4 6.5

DEVELOPMENT OF DRIVER-SENSITIVE CAR-FOLLOWING MODEL 73 Introduction 73 Model Development 75 6.2.1 Logic of Proposed Model 75 6.2.2 Data Collection 79 6.2.3 Mathematical Relationships 81 Model Calibration 89 Model Validation 98 Summary 103

CHAPTER 7 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.4

DEVELOPMENT OF IN-VEHICLE REAR-END COLLISION WARNING ALGORITHM CONSIDERING DRIVER CHARACTERISTICS 104 Introduction 104 Algorithm Development 105 7.2.1 Logic of the Proposed Algorithm 105 7.2.2 Algorithm Formulation 108 Validation of the Proposed Algorithm 115 7.3.1 Application Example 117 7.3.2 Sensitivity Analysis 120 Summary 121

x

CHAPTER 8 8.1

8.2 8.3

CONTRIBUTIONS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE RESEARCH Thesis Contributions 8.1.1 Contributions in Modelling Driver Reaction Time 8.1.2 Contributions in Car-following Modelling 8.1.3 Contributions in Developing Rear-end Collision Warning Algorithm Conclusions Future Research

123 123 123 126 128 130 131 134

REFERENCES Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C Appendix D Appendix E Appendix F Appendix G Appendix H Appendix I Appendix J

Copies of Consent Agreement and Driver Information Sheet 147 Independent T-test for Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction Time 151 Repeated Measure ANOVA Analysis for Normal Scenario 153 Repeated Measure ANOVA Analysis for Surprised Scenario 188 Repeated Measure ANOVA Analysis for Stationary Scenario 223 Regression Analysis for Normal Scenario 258 Regression Analysis for Surprised Scenario 269 Regression Analysis for Stationary Scenario 276 Regression Analysis for Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction Time 282 Qualitative Validation of Spacing and Speed Profiles (5 Samples) 284

xi

LIST OF FIGURES Figure 1.1: Flow chart for thesis methodology 6 Figure 3.1: Crash Avoidance System Categories (Burgett 1994) 28 Figure 3.2: Driving Task Errors (Wassim et al. 1995) 28 Figure 4.1: Driving simulator at Ryerson University 40 Figure 4.2: Cause-effect relationships 45 Figure 4.3 Simulation time setting 47 Figure 4.4 Vensim simulation functions 48 Figure 4.5 Vensim lookup function 48 Figure 5.1: Logic of car-following manoeuvers and reaction times 53 Figure 5.2: Car-following vehicle dynamics 59 Figure 5.3: Brake reaction time for different speed/distance levels for each scenario 63 Figure 5.4: Comparison of brake reaction time based on gender 64 Figure 5.5a: Effect of gender on acceleration/deceleration reaction time 66 Figure 5.5b: Effect of age on acceleration/deceleration reaction time 66 Figure 5.5c: Effect of driving intensity on acceleration/deceleration reaction time 67 Figure 5.5d: Effect of driving experience on acceleration/deceleration reaction 67 Figure 6.1: Car-following vehicle dynamics 76 Figure 6.2: Logic of the proposed car-following model 78 Figure 6.3: Stock flow diagram of the model (a) Vehicle dynamics, (b) Reaction time 82 Figure 6.4: Calibrated desired speed relationship 86 Figure 6.5: Assumed potential curves for calibration parameters of b1 92 93 Figure 6.6: Assumed potential curves for calibration parameter b2 Figure 6.7: Assumed potential curves for calibration parameter b3 93 Figure 6.8: Calibrated non-braking parameter relationship 94 Figure 6.9: Calibrated braking parameter relationship 95 Figure 6.10: Calibrated non-braking back vehicle parameter relationship 95 Figure 6.11: Statistical distribution of age 97 Figure 6.12: Statistical distribution of gender 97 Figure 6.13: Observed and predicted speed (a) and spacing (b) profiles 99 Figure 6.14: Effect of age and gender on speed profile 102 Figure 6.15: Effect of age and gender on spacing profile 102 Figure 7.1: Car-following scenario for a rear-end collision 105 Figure 7.2: Logic of the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm 107

xii

LIST OF TABLES Table 3.1: General guidelines for the selection of auditory vs. visual forms of information presentation (Deatherage 1972) 34 Table 5.1: Sample breakdown of participants 57 Table 5.2: Driver and scenario variables and their levels for repeated measures ANOVA 68 Table 5.3: Speed and distance headway variables and their levels for repeated measures ANOVA 69 Table 6.1a: Sample variables extracted from the NGSIM database (for veh. ID = 116) 80 Table 6.1b: Sample variables extracted from the NGSIM database (for veh. ID = 116) 81 Table 6.2: Average RMSE associated with estimated following vehicle speed based on 45 observed samples for all combination of curves (km/h) 94 Table 6.3: RMSE associated with speed and spacing of the following vehicle 101 Table 7.1: Description of collision warning systems 116 Table 7.2: Application example input & output data 117 Table 7.3: Evaluation and validation of the system performance for application example 118 Table 7.4: Evaluation and validation of the system performance for different scenarios 121 Table A1: Driver information check list 150

xiii

xiv

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION

1.1

Research Background

A rear-end collision occurs when a following vehicle collides with a leading vehicle travelling in the same lane. In 2007, rear-end collisions accounted for approximately 30% of all reported collisions in the US (NHTSA 2007). Safe driving requires a careful scanning of the environment and responding properly to the actions of the lead vehicle. Driving errors contribute to the collisions that result in the loss of precious human lives and costly property damage to society. Several driver performance factors may contribute to rear-end collisions, such as inappropriate driver reaction time, following too closely, and driver inattention (Brown et al. 2001). Roadway safety can be enhanced by overcoming drivers' errors with the aid of rear-end collision warning systems (RECWSs). Based on the nature of their design, these systems can be classified as kinematics-based and perceptual-based RECWSs. The kinematics-based RECWSs use the basic laws of motion and assumed driver reaction time to trigger the warnings. These systems trigger the warnings when the following vehicle is within the specified minimum stopping distance. The perceptual-based RECWSs trigger the warnings using an assumed driver reaction time and a time-to-collision (TTC) threshold. The warning algorithm is an important component of these systems. A poorly designed algorithm initiates the warning either too early or too late, which undermines the reliability of these algorithms. Brown et al. (2001) have identified 1

that the driver reaction time has important impact on algorithm performance. Driver reaction time can vary with individual driver characteristics such as age and gender and driving situations such as driving speed and spacing between the following and lead vehicles. Based on the assumption of an assumed driver reaction time, the warning initiated by a rear-end collision warning algorithm could be an early or a late warning for different drivers under different driving situations. The warnings should also not be issued if it is determined that the driver is aware of the situation and responding properly to the actions of the lead vehicle. If the warnings are issued regardless of the awareness of the driver then these warnings are called nuisance warnings and undermine the reliability of a collision warning system. Traffic engineers and transport professionals use microscopic traffic simulation tools to evaluate traffic operational problems and intelligent transportation system (ITS) applications. The ITS systems include collision warning systems, adaptive traffic management, traveler information, and incident management systems. These systems are difficult to evaluate using analytical tools due to the complex system dynamics involved in these applications. In a traffic simulation tool, different scenarios can be generated with varied roadway geometric and different traffic data and traffic problems can be evaluated without disrupting traffic conditions on the road. Traffic simulation tools are composed of several driver behaviour models including car-following, lane changing, and travel route choice. In particular, car-following models have significant impact on the accuracy of the traffic simulation tools in replicating traffic behaviour on the

2

road (Sakda and Hussein 2005). A car-following model simulates the driver behaviour in a car-following scenario. A rear-end collision also occurs in a carfollowing situation. Therefore a car-following simulation model is very useful to evaluate a rear-end collision warning algorithm. Design of a rear-end collision warning algorithm involves several factors that include driver and situational factors such as driver reaction time, speed of the following and lead vehicles, spacing between the following and lead vehicles, and acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle. The warning criterion determines the moment when it is unsafe for a following vehicle driver to continue travelling at the same driving speed. The existing rear-end collision warning algorithms do not consider driver characteristics and also produce early or late warnings which affect their usefulness. The existing car-following simulation models which are used to evaluate the performance of the rear-end collision warning algorithms also do not consider driver characteristics in the modelling of driver behaviour. 1.1.1 Research Summary A human factors study is conducted to determine the effect of driver and situation factors on driver reaction time in car-following scenarios. The driver factors include age, gender, driving experience, and driving intensity (average driving hours per week). The situational factors include driving speed and spacing between the following and lead vehicles. The car-following scenarios were characterized based on the actions of the lead vehicle such as normal, surprised, and stationary. In these scenarios the following driver follows a lead vehicle

3

which either decelerates with a normal deceleration rate, or an emergency deceleration rate, or is stationary at some spacing, respectively. These scenarios were tested at different driving speeds (60, 80, and 100 km/h) and spacing (10, 20, 30, and 40 m). Statistical analysis was done to model the driver reaction time in all of the tested car-following scenarios such as normal, surprised, and stationary. These driver reaction-time models include both the driver and situational factors (such age, gender, speed) and the spacing between the following and lead vehicles. The driving experience and driving intensity were not found to be the significant variables. Driver reaction time in an acceleration manoeuvre was also modelled based driver characteristics such as age and gender. A visual signal such as speed limit sign was used to determine the driver reaction time in an acceleration regime. The developed reaction-time models are used in developing the carfollowing simulation model and rear-end collision warning algorithm. The driver reaction time used in developing the proposed car-following model and rear-end collision warning algorithm explicitly considers the driver characteristics such as age and gender. The proposed car-following model also addresses some other limitations of the existing car-following models such as consideration of back vehicle and use of different driver reaction times in acceleration and deceleration regimes. The proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm also introduced a risk factor that continuously monitors the actions of the following vehicle driver in response to the actions of the lead vehicle. The risk factor helps to avoid the false alarms which will improve the reliability of the proposed rear-end collision

4

warning algorithm. The developed car-following simulation model is used to evaluate the performance of the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm. The results of the application example and sensitivity analysis show that the proposed algorithm is functioning properly.

1.2

Methodology and Scope of the Thesis

The objective of this thesis is to develop a framework for the design of a rear-end collision warning algorithm that incorporates driver characteristics. The framework components include a human factors study to model the driver reaction time in car-following scenarios based on human factors, develop a carfollowing model and calibrate and validate it with NGSIM individual vehicle tracking data, and develop a rear-end collision warning algorithm and evaluate it with the developed car-following model. A flow chart is developed that describes the overall study methodology and outlines the details of the tasks that were required to conduct this thesis. The flow chart is shown in Fig. 1.1 and the tasks are explained below.

·

Development of the methodological framework and identification of the essential framework components: human factors study, car-following model, and rear-end collision warning algorithm.

·

Literature review, covering the framework components including human factors study for driver reaction time, car-following logic development, and rear-end collision warning algorithm development. Identifying limitations of

5

Human Factors Study

Developing Car-following Simulation Model

Framework for In-vehicle Rear-end Collision Warning (RECW) System

Figure 1.1: Flow chart for thesis methodology existing driver reaction-time studies, existing car-following models, and existing rear-end collision warning algorithms. · · Design of experiments to study driver reaction time in car-following scenarios. Data extraction from the simulator output files, statistical analysis, and modelling of driver reaction time in car-following scenarios. · Developing a car-following logic for modelling car-following driver behaviour.

6

·

Determination of appropriate variables and data extraction from the NGSIM individual vehicle tracking database to calibrate and validate the proposed car-following model.

·

System Dynamics simulation modelling using VENSIM to calibrate the proposed car-following model.

·

Calibrate and validate the proposed car-following model with NGSIM individual vehicle tracking data.

· ·

Developing a rear-end collision warning algorithm (logic). Integrate the developed car-following model with the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm to evaluate and validate its performance and present an application example and sensitivity analysis.

·

Compilation of the thesis contribution, conclusions, and recommendations.

1.3

Thesis Structure

The thesis structure is organized in the following 8 chapters:

Chapter 1: Introduction This chapter describes the research background, research summary, research methodology, and scope of the thesis research work.

Chapter 2: Literature Review This chapter presents the literature review related to framework components: driver reaction time, car-following models, and rear-end collision warning

7

systems. The limitations identified in the literature review are also discussed for each component of the framework.

Chapter 3: Human Factors and Design of Collision Avoidance Systems This chapter discusses the fundamental concepts of collision avoidance systems, their types, and the human factors considered in the design of collision warning systems.

Chapter 4:

Description of Software

This chapter provides the fundamental concepts and details of the software used in this thesis. This thesis involves the study of human factors and simulation modelling. STISIM, a driving simulator, is used for human factors study. A system analysis method called System Dynamics (SD) is used to develop the carfollowing model that simulates the individual driver behaviour in a car-following scenario. VENSIM, a System Dynamics computer language, is used to calibrate and validate the proposed car-following model.

Chapter 5:

Modelling Driver Reaction Time in Car-following Behaviour Based on Human Factors

This chapter describes the development of driver reaction-time models based on human factors that will be used later for car-following analysis. The reaction time was classified as brake reaction time (BRT) and acceleration/deceleration reaction time (ADRT). The BRT occurs when the lead vehicle is braking and its

8

brake light is ON, while the ADRT occurs when the driver reacts to adjust his/her speed using the gas pedal only. This chapter evaluates the effect of driver characteristics and traffic kinematic conditions on the driver reaction time in a car-following environment.

Chapter 6:

Development of Driver-sensitive Car-following Model

This chapter describes the development of a driver-sensitive car-following model that addresses some limitations of the existing car-following models. The proposed car-following model explicitly considers driver characteristics such as age and gender, and information on the lead and back vehicles in modelling the driver behaviour in a car-following situation. Actual vehicle tracking data obtained from the U.S. Federal Highway Administration were used to calibrate and validate the proposed model.

Chapter 7:

Development of In-vehicle Rear-end Collision Warning Algorithm Considering Driver Characteristics

This chapter describes the development of an in-vehicle rear-end collision warning algorithm that considers the driver characteristics and risk factor in the decision rule to initiate the warning to a potential rear-end collision situation. The driver characteristics include age and gender that affect the driver reaction time. The risk factor continuously monitors the driver actions in response to the actions of the lead vehicle. The risk factor is designed to minimize the nuisance

9

warnings and enhance the reliability of the rear-end collision warning systems (RECWS). The performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated and validated with the car-following model developed in the previous chapter.

Chapter 8:

Conclusions, Contributions, and Future Research

This chapter describes a summary of the thesis contributions, and presents conclusions and suggestions for future research.

10

CHAPTER 2 LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Introduction

This chapter presents the literature review related to framework components: driver reaction time, car-following models, and rear-end collision warning systems. The following sections describe the literature review on each framework component, followed by the description of the limitations identified in the literature review.

2.2

Existing Driver Reaction-time Studies

Before reviewing the literature of driver reaction time it is important to understand the fundamental concepts of driver reaction time. Driver reaction time in response to a sensory signal comprised of two main response components called mental processing time and movement time. Mental processing time is the time it takes for the responder to perceive that a signal has occurred and to decide on a response. For example, it is the time required by the driver of the following vehicle to detect that the leading vehicle is decelerating and he/she should apply the brakes at a certain moment. Movement time is the time required by the driver of the following vehicle to lift his/her foot from the accelerator and then touch the brake pedal.

11

The review of existing reaction-time studies were classified based on the factors they have considered while analyzing the driver reaction time. Researchers have identified many factors that influence driver reaction time and divided them into driver and situational factors. The driver factors include driver age, gender, and experience. The situational factors depend on the driving tasks which include expectation, urgency, and cognitive load. Details on driver-specific and situational factors are presented in the following sections. 2.2.1 Driver Factors Generally, it appears that age slows the driver brake reaction time. Surprisingly, several studies have produced mixed results. Broen and Chiang (1996) found that older drivers react slowly in some cases. But Lerner (1994) found no effect of age on reaction time. Green (2000) identified several reasons for the mixed results: biased sample, old people with better health drive like young people, and experience and more practice which compensate for the slowing of perception or movement time. The perception of urgency may also compensate for the age factor. Young drivers may warrant a low urgency compared to old drivers while facing the same dangerous situation. Aging produces vision loss that results in a slower braking response, particularly at night and in poor weather conditions. Summala and Koivisto (1990) found that older drivers compensate for their poorer braking by driving slower. The research findings on the effect of gender are also mixed. Some researchers have found faster reaction time for men (Lings 1990) and others found no difference (Hankey 1996). Driving experience has not been explicitly

12

addressed as a variable in the literature. Summala et al. (1998) measured driving experience by the lifetime mileage driven. The study found no effect of driving experience on the perception of the lead vehicle's braking onset while performing the in-vehicle tasks. 2.2.2 Situational Factors Expectancy The terms `expected' and `unexpected' are used in the literature to refer, respectively, to drivers alerted and expecting a signal to brake and those that use unexpected signal. Some researchers have used the term `expected' when drivers are explicitly told that a brake response must be made at a particular stimulus. In a car-following scenario, drivers always expect the normal deceleration rate except when a lead vehicle behaves unexpectedly, such as suddenly braking with a maximum deceleration rate to avoid an unexpected situation ahead. This is also referred to as the expectancy of the car-following driver. The results of the expected reaction time vary significantly in the literature. Some studies reported an expected reaction time in the range of 1.3 to 1.4 s (van Winsum and Brouwer1997). Other studies reported a range from 1.14 to 1.21 s (Triggs 1987). The third cluster of studies agrees with a value of 0.9 s (Alm and Nilsson 1994). The wide variation in these results is due to the use of different signals and situations for determining the driver reaction time. Urgency Urgency is usually defined by the time-to-collision (TTC), where shorter TTC is more urgent and vice versa. The TTC depends on vehicle speed and spacing 13

(distance headway) and can be manipulated by varying the distance, speed, or both. Chang et al. (1985) found a half-second reduction in the reaction time to a yellow light as speed increased from 25 to 40 mph, but found no further reduction for speeds up to 55 mph. Schweitzer et al. (1995) studied the effect of the speed and following distance on the reaction time and found no effect of speed on the reaction time. However, the authors did not account for the behaviour of the lead vehicle (i.e., expectancy). Other studies used surprised intrusion paradigms (e.g., intrusion of a policeman) to determine the effect of the TTC on the reaction time. Both studies found totally different results. Summala and Koivisto (1990) concluded that reaction time decreased by almost 1 s as the TTC decreased from 6 s to zero, while Hankey (1996) found that the reaction time increased by 0.4 s as the TTC grew shorter from 4.35 to 2.85 s. Green (2000) stated that these opposing conclusions are likely due to methodological differences. Some studies also found that at very short TTC, drivers prefer the steering manoeuver rather than braking (Malaterre et al. 1988). Urgency in a car-following scenario cannot be defined by the TTC alone. The behaviour of the lead vehicle is very important, such as braking then accelerating, continuously decelerating, or even becoming stationary. Cognitive Load Several researchers found that high cognitive load slows the driver reaction time (Green 2000). Two primary sources of cognitive load are the use of in-vehicle devices and complicated drivers' path such as successive turns in a winding

14

road. Korteling (1990) and Summala et al. (1998) found slower reaction time when the road has more turns and the drivers viewed in-car displays, respectively. The use of cellular phones also increases the cognitive load. Several studies attempted to determine the effect of cellular phone use on the reaction time. The results showed that cellular phones increased the reaction time by about 0.5 s (Lamble et al. 1999). It is very difficult to calibrate the effect of cognitive load on reaction time since precise tracking of drivers' in-vehicle activities is not possible. For these reasons, the cognitive load is not considered in this study. 2.2.3 Limitation of Existing Reaction-time Studies 1. The existing reaction-time studies were exclusively designed to study the effect of some specific factors alone, such as driver factors (age and gender, etc.) or situation factors (expectancy, urgency, etc.). Some studies ignored the effect of situational factors and some ignored the effect of driver factors. 2. The existing car-following models use the driver reaction time that was based on some previous physiological studies where actual car-following behaviour in different driving situations (lead vehicle stationary or decelerating with normal or emergency deceleration rate) was ignored. 3. The existing reaction-time studies failed to provide reaction-time models that can readily be used in car-following analysis for different driving situations. The studies also failed to identify how various factors affect differently driver reaction time in different driving situations.

15

4. The existing reaction-time studies assume the same reaction time for both the acceleration and deceleration regimes in a car-following situation.

2.3

Existing Car-following Models

Car-following models describe how two vehicles interact with each other in a traffic stream. Model performance is evaluated based on considering key factors that affect driver behaviour. Researchers have found a number of key factors that influence car-following behaviour. These factors are classified into two categories: individual and situational. The individual factors include age, gender, risk-taking behaviour, vehicle characteristics, and driving skill. The situational factors include time of day, day of week, weather and road conditions, and information of the lead and back vehicles such as speed and spacing. A number of car-following models have been developed during the past several decades. These models have been grouped into five categories (Brackstone and McDonald 1999): (a) Gazis-Herman-Rothery (GHR) model, (b) collision avoidance (CA) models, (c) linear models, (d) psychophysical models, and (e) fuzzy-logic­based models. Brief descriptions of these categories including the most recent developments are presented here. The first car-following model was developed at the General Motors Corporation by Gazis et al. (1961) also known as the GM car-following model or the GHR model. This model assumes that the acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle depends on the relative speed and spacing between the

16

following and leading vehicles, and the speed of the following vehicle at time t, as follows:

 [VF (t )]m [V (t ) - V (t )] a F (t + t ) =   F l  L  [X L (t ) - X F (t )] 
where,

(2.1)

aF (t + t) = acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle at time (t + t), , m, and l = calibration parameters, VF = velocity of the following vehicle at time t, XF = position of the following vehicle at time t, VL = velocity of the lead vehicle at time t, and XL = position of the lead vehicle at time t. Many studies were conducted for the calibration of the GHR model. Chandler et al. (1958) calibrated the parameters using a data sample of 8 drivers who drove a test track for 20-30 minutes. Their initial work was followed by other researchers (Heyes and Ashworth 1972, Aron 1988, Ozaki 1993, Wolshon et al. 2000). The first collision avoidance (CA) model was developed by Kometani and Sasaki (1959). This model calculates the safe following distance required to avoid the collision with the lead vehicle based on the speeds of the following and leading vehicles and the reaction time of the driver of the following vehicle. The model is expressed as
X (t - t ) = VL (t - t ) +  VF (t ) +  1VF (t ) + b0
2 2

(2.2)

In Equation 2.2,

17

X(t - t) = safe following distance for the following vehicle at time (t - t) (m), bo, , , 1 = calibration parameters, VL(t - t) = velocity of the lead vehicle at time (t - t) (km/h), and VF(t) = velocity of the following vehicle at time t (km/h). The model of Eq. 2.2 was improved by Gipps (1981) who introduced the performance limits of the vehicles and drivers for the calculation of the maximum and the minimum acceleration/deceleration rates. These performance limits end up with two constraints: acceleration constraint (assumed to depend on vehicle characteristics and driver comfort) and safety constraint (assumed to depend on the speed of the lead vehicle). Other CA models include the NETSIM and FRESIM models developed by the U.S. Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and the CARSIM model developed by Benekohal and Treiterer (1988). The linear model (Helly 1959), which has originated from the GHR model, assumes that the acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle depends on the relative spacing and speed between the following and leading vehicles, desired following distance, speed of the following vehicle, and driver's reaction time. The model is given by an(t) = C1  v (t ­ T) + C2{  x(t ­ T) ­ Dn(t)} (2.3)

Dn(t) =  +  v(t ­ T) +  an (t ­ T) where, an(t) = the acceleration of vehicle n at time t, Dn(t) = desired following distance at time t,

(2.4)

18

v = speed of vehicle n,

 x = relative distance between the vehicles n and (n-1),  v = relative speed between the vehicles n and (n-1),
T = driver's reaction time,

 ,  ,  ,C1, and C2 = calibration parameters.
The main difficulty with the linear model is its calibration (Hanken and Rockwell 1967, Roackwell et al. 1968, Aycin and Benekohal 1998). The psychophysical or action-point (AP) models were developed based on the assumption that a driver will perform an action when a threshold of his/her perception-reaction is reached. Michaels (1963) proposed certain thresholds of the relative speed and spacing between the following and the leading vehicles. For example, based on the threshold of the relative speeds, a driver will decelerate until the relative speed between the following and the lead vehicles becomes zero. In a situation when the spacing between the following and leading vehicles is greater than a certain threshold, then the driver of the following vehicle will not react to the actions of the leading vehicle. The first AP model (Wiedemann 1974), incorporated a traffic simulation program, VISSIM, and described the acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle in four different situations: un-influenced driving, closing process, following process, and braking situation. There are certain thresholds and acceleration/deceleration models for each driving situation. Other examples of action-point models include those developed by Mehmood et al. (2003) and Zhang et al. (1998). Mehmood et al. (2003)

19

developed the AP model using the System Dynamics approach. The model incorporates the information of the second leading vehicle and has some alertness levels based on the onset of the brake light of the lead vehicle. The thresholds used in AP models vary widely among drivers and hence there is a need to incorporate individual driver characteristics when including driver behaviour in a car-following model. The first fuzzy-logic model was presented by Kikuchi and Chakroborty (1992). Other models include those by Yikai et al. (1993) and Rekersbrink (1995). The fuzzy-logic­based models were developed based on fuzzy-set theory that describes how adequately a variable fits the description of a term. In these models, driver decisions are determined based on a set of common sense driving rules developed through experience. The driving rules were presented in IF-THEN format and govern the driver's decision for a given driving condition. For example, IF the vehicle separation is `Close' AND `Closing' THEN brake.

2.3.1 Limitation of Existing Car-following Models 1. The existing car-following models do not explain the variation of the model parameters in different car-following situations. The model parameters are assumed to represent the driver behaviour of the car-following vehicle in all driving scenarios such as acceleration and deceleration regimes. 2. The existing car-following models assume a driver reaction time that does not consider the driver's individual characteristics such as age and gender.

20

3. Some existing car-following models assumed shorter reaction time for deceleration regime and others assumed shorter reaction time for acceleration regime. The reaction-time values were just assumed values and had no empirical basis. 4. The fuzzy-logic­based car-following models are difficult to calibrate, which contributes to the lack of their credibility and reliability in practical applications. 5. The existing car-following models assume that the driver of the following vehicle responds only to the actions of the lead vehicle and ignores the actions of the back vehicle. 6. The safety-distance car-following models assume that drivers travel at an assumed safe following distance. For example, the CARSIM car-following model assumes that drivers follow the lead vehicle at a safe distance which is equal to a car length (L) and a buffer space of 10 ft (i.e. L + 10). The assumed safe following distance does not represent the following distance that drivers actually maintain in real traffic.

2.4

Existing Rear-end Collision Warning Systems

Earlier rear-end collision warning systems are divided into two types: perceptualbased and kinematics-based systems. A review of these systems is presented next.

21

2.4.1 Perceptual-based Systems The success of the perceptual-based systems depends on the right choice of perceptual thresholds used to trigger the warnings. The time-to-collision and time headway are the driver performance measures for which perceptual thresholds are used. The TTC is the time a following vehicle would take to collide with the lead vehicle and it is calculated using the relative speed (VL-VF) and the space headway (Range) between the following and lead vehicles, expressed as a positive value.

TTC =

Range VL - VF

(2.5)

When the following and lead vehicles are travelling at similar speeds, time-to-collision approaches infinity, and when the following vehicle is travelling at a slower speed the time-to-collision does not logically exist. Several researchers suggested different TTC thresholds for safe and unsafe driving situations. Van der Horst (1991) suggested a time of 4 s to distinguish between the safe and unsafe driving situations. It was also supported by Farber (1991). But Nilsson et al. (1991) suggested that the threshold limit of 4 s is short and not safe. Hogema and Janssen (1996) conducted experiments for vehicles approaching a queue of vehicles and found out the minimum TTC of 3.5 s. Hirst and Graham (1997) found that a TTC of 3 s could miss the critical situations but this limit reduced the number of false alarms. The deceleration time for the following vehicle might vary at different driving speeds. Therefore, use of a

22

constant time-to-collision threshold would be inappropriate for unsafe situations at different driving speeds. Time headway is another perceptual threshold used to trigger the warning. It is defined as the time in seconds and calculated by dividing the space headway, the spacing between the rear bumper of the lead vehicle and the front bumper of the following vehicle, to the velocity of the following vehicle. Wheatley and Hurwitz (2001) used the time headway criterion to trigger the warning in a potential rear-end collision situation. Time headway (TH), expressed in seconds, is defined as the spacing between the front bumper of the following vehicle and the rear bumper of the lead vehicle (Range), divided by the velocity of the following vehicle (VH).

TH = Range

VH

(2.6)

Time headway is considered to be the available time for the driver of the following vehicle to match the braking profile of the lead vehicle. This algorithm assumes that drivers drive within the constraints of their reaction time. It is also assumed that both the lead and following vehicles are initially travelling at the same speed and, in a braking situation, the following vehicle will perfectly match the braking profile of the lead vehicle. These assumptions pose limitations for the use of the time headway criterion. It was estimated that in 75% of rear-end collisions, the lead and following vehicles were not travelling in a continuous car-following state before the collision occurred (Horowitz and Dingus 1992). Furthermore, the following

23

vehicle driver cannot perceive and match perfectly with the braking profile of the lead vehicle. Therefore, the algorithms based on the time headway criterion may not capture all rear-end pre-collision scenarios. 2.4.2 Kinematics-based Systems The kinematics-based systems trigger the warnings based on kinematic information of the lead and following vehicles, and assumed driver reaction time and maximum deceleration rate for the following vehicle in a potential collision situation. The trigger criterion is the required minimum stopping distance plus a safety margin of 1 or 2 meters.

V Rw = F +R.TFVF + 2 2d f

2

(2.7)

where, Rw = range for the warning, VF = speed of the following vehicle, df = deceleration rate of the following vehicle, and R.TF = reaction time of the following vehicle driver, and 2 is the safety margin. These algorithms assume that the deceleration rate of the lead vehicle remains constant until it stops. The most popular kinematics-based RECWS is developed by Burgett et al. (1998). The important parameters associated with the following vehicle are the driver reaction time and the maximum deceleration rate. Richard and Daniel (2001) tested this system and suggested the maximum deceleration rate of 0.75g and the driver reaction time of 1.5 s.

24

Other kinematics-based systems were developed by Kiefer et al. (1999) and Krishnan et al. (2001). Kiefer et al. (1999) conducted the experiments and developed an algorithm based on the required deceleration rate. In experiments, the drivers were instructed to brake at the last moment in lead vehicle braking or stationary scenarios. It was observed that all drivers responded at relatively same levels of the required deceleration rate. The observed average required deceleration rate was 0.55g. Krishnan et al. (2001) developed a system for the lead vehicle stationary scenario. In case of the warning, it was assumed that the drivers will use the mean deceleration rate of 5.5 m/s2. However, vehicle characteristics such as mass of heavy and light vehicles, and driver comfortable deceleration rates were also used to maximize its capability of preventing the collision. The comfortable deceleration rate was modelled based on the current speed of the following vehicle. The mean reaction time was considered as 1.1 s with a standard deviation of 0.305 s, as reported by Olson and Sivak (1986). Kinematics-based algorithms appear to present a comprehensive approach to trigger the warning by taking into account the dynamics of the lead and following vehicles and an assumed reaction time of the driver of the following vehicle. However, it would be inappropriate to use the same assumed reaction time for different driving situations and drivers of different ages and genders. This may result in an early or late warning that will maximize the number of nuisance alerts and will also undermine the reliability of existing collision warning systems. 2.4.3 Limitation of Existing Rear-end Collision Warning Systems The limitation of existing rear-end collision warning systems are summarized as:

25

1. The existing rear-end collision warning systems assume the same driver reaction time for all population of drivers and ignores the individual driver characteristics such as age and gender. 2. The existing rear-end collision warning systems provide early or late warnings that undermine their reliability and credibility. 3. The deceleration for the following vehicle may vary at different speeds. Use of a constant TTC threshold for a collision warning criterion would be inappropriate for unsafe situations at different driving speeds. 4. For the time-headway warning criterion, it is inappropriate to assume that initially both the following and lead vehicles are travelling at the same speed and the following vehicle will perfectly match the braking profile of the lead vehicle.

2.5

Summary

This chapter has presented the literature review related to framework components: driver reaction time, car-following models, and rear-end collision warning systems. Based on the literature review, the limitations related to each framework component are also summarized. The identified limitations will be addressed in the subsequent chapter.

26

CHAPTER 3 HUMAN FACTORS AND DESIGN OF COLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEMS

This chapter discusses the fundamental concepts of collision avoidance systems and human factors consideration in the design of collision warning systems. The first section describes the type of collision avoidance systems and driving errors involved in roadway collisions. The last section describes the human factors and their fundamental requirements in the design of collision warning systems.

3.1

Collision Avoidance Systems

Recent advances in sensor, computer, and digital processing technologies have led to the development of low-cost collision avoidance systems (CAS) that can be used on vehicles to aid the drivers in potential unsafe driving situations. Based on their mechanisms of intervention, CASs can be categorized into three categories. These categories are illustrated in Fig. 2.1. The first category represents the advisory systems that apply to potential collision situations, where urgent collision avoidance action is not necessary. The second category represents the warning systems that apply to imminent collision situations, where immediate driver action is needed. The third category represents the automatic control intervention systems that apply to imminent collision situations, where driver intervention alone is not sufficient (e.g., automatic soft braking, emergency braking, and automatic steering).

27

Figure 3.1: Crash Avoidance System Categories (Burgett 1994)

Figure 3.2: Driving Task Errors (Wassim et al. 1995)

28

It is being identified that driver errors contribute to 93% of all accidents (Treat et al. 1977). The above mentioned different categories of systems are designed to tackle different types of driver errors (Fig. 2.2). It is assumed that driver recognition errors might be remedied by in-vehicle advisory systems which simply indicate the presence of potential hazards via proximal-traffic situation or traffic control advisory displays. Driver warning concepts would incorporate a decision-making capability to compensate for driver decision errors and warn drivers of immediate hazardous situations. Erratic actions might be addressed by control intervention systems that would augment the capabilities of driver warning systems. For instance, crashes caused by unlawful drivers or attributed to unsafe driving acts or vehicle control failure might be mitigated by fully automatic control systems. These three categories of collision avoidance systems, in relation to a rear-end collision avoidance system, are discussed in the following sections. 3.1.1 Driver Advisory Systems In-vehicle driver advisory systems face design challenges in terms of their effectiveness. These systems must inform the driver of crucial information at critical times without creating a nuisance that result in an in-vehicle distraction. Presence indicators and situation displays are two kinds of advisory systems used in the car-following scenario. Presence indicators would inform drivers of the presence of proximal vehicles in the same lane within a specified range by means of a simple visual or auditory display. Situation displays are more sophisticated than presence indicators, which would render the driver's own vehicle as well as surrounding vehicles within a range. Such displays would

29

provide drivers with situation awareness information to guide judgments about when to and how to engage in various manoeuvers. Situation displays must not impose undue workload on the driver, must be readily available to the driver and be easily checked prior to initiating new vehicle manoeuvers. 3.1.2 Driver Warning Systems The design of driver warning systems accounts for decision-making algorithms that imply some threshold conditions for a warning. Fixing warning thresholds are problematic and may require driver behaviour studies and driver models to tailor warnings to individual types of drivers (Tijerina et al. 1994). The warning systems will be ineffective if the warnings are delivered too late or too early to the driver. For car-following manoeuver, the warning systems warn the subject vehicle (SV) drivers via overt/intrusive display warning when it is unsafe to drive at the same kinematics. They also warn the SV drivers to reduce speed if it is excessive. Drivers might react in several ways in response to a warning. Driver warning systems might issue directive warnings so as to tell drivers how to react. Warnings should not induce drivers to make manoeuvers that prompt another crash with a third vehicle. The collision avoidance system might first offer nondirective alarms, followed by directive warnings if time is too short. 3.1.3 Control Intervention Systems Control intervention systems, either partial or fully automatic, are an alternative or possibly a supplement to collision warning systems and would be activated beyond the point where driver warning alone is likely to be ineffective. Partial

30

control intervention systems provide some vehicle deceleration or variable resistance to a heading change in the face of a crash hazard, provide additional cues to the driver for crash avoidance, and allow the driver to play a part in the crash avoidance manoeuver. Examples of such systems might be soft braking or variable resistance steering. Fully automatic control systems are applicable if the time available to avoid a crash dictates that driver time delay is near zero. Concepts of these would involve full automatic braking, automatic steering, and perhaps automatic throttle control. For rear-end crashes, an augment warning is triggered with soft, moderate, or hard braking to stop without driver intervention.

3.2

Human Factors and Design of Collision Warning Systems

During the design process of advanced technologies ranging from advanced collision warning systems (CWS) to comprehensive driver information systems, a careful thought must be given as to how these systems interact with the human driver. Some research work is done in this area but still a lot of work remains to be accomplished. Campbell et al. (1998) identified the human factors research that might be needed to ensure the safe and useful development of collision warning systems. These human factors research needs were developed through a process involving analysis of existing human factors research and system design data sources for ITS devices, and reviews of the research statements developed during the 2-day IVI Human Factors Workshop (ITS America 1997). These human factors research needs are summarized in the following sections.

31

3.2.1 Baseline Driver Behaviour During the 2-day IVI Human Factors Workshop (ITS America 1997), a number of research statements focused on the need to characterize baseline driver behaviour and develop driver models for intelligent vehicle initiative (IVI). Currently-available driver models are generally limited to simplistic

representations of driver steering and speed control. They do not take into account the probabilistic or variable nature of driving performance and do not include perception and decision-making. Thus, a key need is to develop computational theories and models of driver behaviour and to use these tools to support collision warning system development. 3.2.2 System Standardization and Guidelines The Human Factors Workshop (ITS America 1997) stated that a successful IVI prototype would require the development of system standards and design guidelines. IVI system designers need assistance and direction in creating complex in-vehicle displays to ensure that the systems are intuitive, useful, and acceptable to drivers. The standards should also ensure that in-vehicle systems are universal across vehicles. Without system uniformity, problems with driver confusion and negative transfer may occur, causing higher accident and fatality rates. The development of standards in other disciplines caused great concern, with some researchers arguing that standards may be developed prematurely, resulting in a poor design. Parkes (1997) argued that standards do not mean mandatory compliance and need to remain specific enough to be useful, but general enough to apply across many systems without restricting design.

32

3.2.3 Warning Message Modality and Design Driver messages for a collision warning device may be auditory, visual, tactile, or some combination of these three modalities. Within the driving environment, each of these three modalities is associated with some advantages and disadvantages. The auditory channel can have an advantage over the visual channel due to its attention-getting qualities (McCormick and Sanders 1982). In particular, auditory alerts reduce the visual load on the driver (Wolf 1987) and are well-suited to a collision warning situation in which immediate action is required. However, their attention-getting abilities can become annoying to a driver if the alerts occur frequently or are associated with a high false alarm rate. The auditory displays are frequently disabled by users, apparently because of increase in subjective workload (King and Corso 1993). Visual alerts are generally less intrusive than auditory alerts and the location of the display in a vehicle can be used as a cue to the direction of the impending collision (e.g., co-located with a side-view mirror). Nonetheless, the visual channel is the more traditional mode for presentation of driving information, and is associated with relatively higher information rates than the auditory channel (Sorkin 1987). Using a visual display to present collision avoidance alerts introduces yet another visual task at precisely the same time that drivers' attention should be external to the vehicle.

33

Table 3.1: General guidelines for the selection of auditory vs. visual forms of information presentation (Deatherage 1972) Use auditory presentation if: Use visual presentation if:
1. The message is simple. 2. The message is short. 3. The message will not be referred to later. 4. The message deals with events in time. 5. The message calls for immediate action. 6. The visual system of the person is overburdened. 7. The receiving location is too bright or dark. Adaptation integrity is necessary. 8. The person's job requires him to move about continually. 1. The message is complex. 2. The message is long. 3. The message will be referred to later. 4. The message deals with location in space. 5. The message does not call for immediate action. 6. The auditory system of the person is overburdened. 7. The receiving location is too noisy. 8. The person's job allows him to remain in one position.

The selection of auditory vs. visual forms of information display should depend on a number of situation-specific variables. Deatherage (1972) developed general guidelines for selecting auditory vs. visual display modalities. These guidelines are presented in Table 3.1. Tactile displays typically provide stimuli in the form of mechanical vibration or electrical impulses (McCormick and Sanders 1982). Tactile alerts might be transmitted through the seat back, the steering wheel, or even the accelerator pedal. For example, Janssen and Nilsson (1990) conducted a simulator study using an "intelligent gas pedal" that applied a counterforce to the driver's foot as a collision alert. They found that the alert was associated with a reduction in headway on the part of their subject. 3.2.4 Warning Message Timing Another common issue is the timing of messages, including alerts and warnings. Aside from nuisance alarms, timing of system messages can significantly

34

contribute to the efficacy of a system. For example, in the case of a rear-end CWS, the driver must confirm with their own eyes that there is a hazard ahead before reacting, so alerts presented very early may go unheeded or cause a distraction at the last moment. All CWSs alerting may share this same trend. Drivers, for the most part, avoid most crashes and do so daily not necessarily in an extreme manner, but in the normal context of traffic interaction. 3.2.5 False Alarms In collision warning systems two types of false alarms are present. First, a "real" false alarm occurs when a collision alert is presented to the driver in the absence of any crash-relevant obstacle or event. Second, a "nuisance" false alarm occurs under circumstances in which the driver feels that the alert itself, or the urgency associated with the alert, is incorrect or inappropriate. False alarms will reduce the trust and confidence that the driver places in the system, thus reducing system effectiveness. Lee and Moray (1992) identified that users are most reluctant to rely on equipment they do not trust. When trust in the device is too low and an alarm is presented, drivers may spend additional time verifying the problem, thus slowing appropriate collision avoidance actions. Alternatively, they may choose to ignore the alarm, thus completely defeating the purpose of the system. 3.2.6 Driver Reaction Time A key issue in the development and design of collision warning devices is the perception-reaction times of drivers to warnings and alerts. In the past, several

35

research studies have been conducted to study this key issue and have reported a wide range of findings. Wortman and Matthias (1983) measured the nighttime braking response times of the drivers to the onset of an amber signal at an intersection and reported mean values ranging from 1.09 to 1.55 s. Chang et al. (1985) conducted a similar study, but in daytime as well and on both dry and wet roadways, and reported mean response times of 1.3 s. Lerner (1993) measured the perception-response times of both younger and older drivers to a simulated on-the-road emergency and reported a mean reaction time of 1.5 s. AASHTO (2004) uses a design reaction time of 2.5 s to determine stopping distance when designing roadway elements such as signs, road curvatures, and traffic signal visibility and timing. Fundamentally, warnings and alerts must be presented early enough in the total time frame of the potential collision event for the driver to perceive and understand the message and to take appropriate action. Therefore, assumptions made about driver capabilities to perceive and to respond to collision alerts affect virtually every design parameter of a collision warning system. 3.2.7 Driver Control Requirements It is not clear which alert and warning parameters should be adjustable by the driver. Options for driver control include turning the system on and off, switching between alert modalities (e.g., auditory vs. visual presentation of alerts), modifying the intensity of the alert (e.g., loudness or brightness), and adjusting the sensitivity of the system and timing of alerts. For example, in order to better reflect their own driving styles and prevailing driving conditions, drivers may want

36

to adjust the distance setting or time-to-collision parameter of a collision warning system. Such an adjustment would have the practical consequence of allowing drivers to select either a more or less conservative timing logic for the system, thus changing the timing of alert presentation in response to a potentially unsafe driving condition. Such a control function might increase user acceptance of the system and reduce "nuisance" alarms. However, it also increases the likelihood that the alerts will be presented too late for the driver to make an appropriate response within a given collision scenario unless other measures are built into the system. 3.2.8 Older Drivers Older drivers present a unique problem to the overall development and deployment of a collision warning system. Dingus et al. (1998) cited several sources of literature outlining empirical evidence that older drivers have longer glance times at in-vehicle displays, drive more slowly with more lateral error, have longer reaction times, veer into different lanes when making turns, and were more likely to make navigation errors than younger drivers. Warnes et al. (1993) reported that cognitive and motor impairments characteristic of the older driver population increased during cognitively complex situations. The collision warning systems must be designed to accommodate older driver limitations and needs.

37

3.2.9 Driver Performance A successful design of a collision warning system should enhance the drivers' strengths and support their weaknesses in performing the tasks of safe driving. Drivers' situational awareness, workload, attention, and decision-making have all been defined as important to understanding driver performance. Situational awareness has been defined as an awareness of environmental information relevant to successful task performance, the meaning and context of that information, and the predictive future state of these conditions (Ward 1996). Driver workload is defined as the extent of the resources required for the driving task (Dingus et al. 1998). Measuring driver workload will assist designers in determining what tasks will require excessive attentional resources, resulting in unsafe driving behaviour. The ability to assess driver workload and safe driving vs. driver overload (i.e., too much information) and unsafe driving will be critical to the overall success of collision warning systems. As situational awareness and attention decreases and workload increases, a speed/accuracy trade-off occurs where bad decisions will be made quickly and good decisions will be acted on too late (Campbell et al. 1998). Much more research is needed on these issues in order to create an efficient collision warning system.

38

CHAPTER 4 DESCRIPTION OF SOFTWARE
This chapter provides the fundamental concepts and details of the software used in this thesis. This thesis involves the study of human factors and simulation modelling. STISIM, a driving simulator, is used for human factors study. A system analysis method called System Dynamics (SD) is used to develop the carfollowing model that simulates the individual driver behaviour in a car-following scenario. VENSIM, a System Dynamics computer language, is used to calibrate and validate the proposed car-following model.

4.1

STISIM Driving Simulator

STISIM Drive is an interactive driving simulator developed by Systems Technology Inc. It allows the drivers to control all aspects of driving including the steering and vehicle speed. A real car has been integrated to the simulator that includes a steering wheel and brake and gas pedals. The roadway scene is projected on to the wall in front of the driver using a projector. The arrangement of the real car integration with the simulator and the roadway scene projection provides a real-world driving feeling. The arrangement of driving simulator is shown in Fig. 4.1.

39

Figure 4.1: Driving simulator at Ryerson University There are four basic components of the STISIM Drive: the graphics environment, the driver controls, the scenario definition language (SDL), and the SITSIM Drive software. The graphics environment is comprised of graphics card that generates the images, the display system that displays the images, and the graphic models that are used so that the images can be displayed. The driver controls such as lateral vehicle position, maximum speed, sound effects, etc. can be set using the configuration file of the STISIM Drive software which is installed on a desktop computer. The SDL is used to program the event file which is used to display the roadway features and various events for the driver's view. The event files also define the required output variables that can be collected in an

40

output file. The details of the event, configuration, and data output files are described in the next sections. 4.1.1 Event File The event file is used to program the events that need to be displayed in the simulation scenarios. The events are displayed based on the elapsed longitudinal distance travelled along the road. The general format of the event description in the event file is as follows:

ON DISTANCE, EVENT SPACIFIER, PARAMETER 1, PARAMETER 2,..., PARAMETER N The ON DISTANCE parameter specifies the location of the start of the event based on the elapsed longitudinal distance travelled since the start of the simulation. The EVENT SPACIFIER parameter specifies the type of event that need to be displayed such as a tree, building, vertical curve, horizontal curve, same lane or opposing lane vehicles, pedestrian, etc. The PARAMETER 1 ...PARAMETER N parameters are associated with each types of events. For example, the event V will display a vehicle travelling in the same direction of the subject vehicle with PARAMETER 1 =speed of the appearing vehicle, PARAMETER 2 =longitudinal position of the appearing vehicle with respect to the subject vehicle, and PARAMETER 3 =later position of the appearing vehicle with respect to the centre line of the displayed roadway. The total number of individual events that can be displayed in any simulation scenario is limited to 10,000.

41

4.1.2 Configuration File The configuration file allows the users to modify and set the simulation properties such as the vehicle properties, maximum speed limit, sound effects, brake control, driving side of the road, and daytime and nighttime driving environment. STISIM Drive has a default configuration file named STISIM.CFG that can be modified based on the user requirements to run the specific simulation scenarios such as the daytime or nighttime simulation scenarios. The configuration file has numerous tabs that can be modified to adjust the simulator characteristics based on the desired driving conditions. For this research experiments, the brake and steering wheel setups were changed by consulting the subject drivers to have a better real-world normal driving feeling. STISIM Drive also has an option of autopilot mode that can be used to drive the simulation scenario without a driver. This option was used to check the program events and adjust their parameters before the commencement of the actual experiments. 4.1.3 Output Data File The simulation run creates an output file that contains the output data associated with the required output variables. The output data file is stored in the subdirectory specified in the STISIM drive configuration. The output data can be saved in various options depending upon the required output variable. These options include BSAV/ESAV Data Block, Time to Collision, RMSB/RMSE Data Block, Divided Attention Data, Tailgating, Driver Mistakes, etc. Most of the output variables are saved with the BSAV command option. The same command was used to collect the output data in this research study. The ESAV command is

42

used to tell the program to stop collecting the data. Following is an example of BSAV/ESAV commands. 1200,BSAV,1,0.049,REACTION TIME DATA,PARAMETER 1,...,PARAMETER N 1350, ESAV The above commands tell the program to start collecting the output data at a travel distance of 1200 meters since the start of the simulation, stop collecting the data at the travel distance of 1350 meters and store the data in the output file under the output data block of REACTION TIME DATA. The numbers 1 and 0.049 tell the program that the data should be collected with respect to the elapsed simulation time (seconds) and at an interval of 0.049 s. The PARAMETER 1 is the type of variable for which the output data will be collected. STISIM Drive has a list of variables with a specific number assigned to each variable. The variable number is used for the PARAMETER 1 in the event file of the simulation program. STISIM Drive automatically formats the output data file into evenly collimated. This helps to import the variables data into other programs such as MS Excel spreadsheets. Once the output data is formatted into spreadsheets it is ready for the analysis. The driver characteristics data of each participant such as age, gender, driving experience, and driving intensity were collected in a questionnaire before the start of the experiments. The same approach was adopted in this research study.

43

4.2

System Dynamics

System Dynamics (SD) is a computer-based simulation methodology that was invented in the early 1960s at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). It was invented by combining the ideas from three fields:

· · ·

Control engineering, the concepts of feedback and system self-regulation Cybernetics, the nature of information and its role in control systems Organizational theory, the structure of human organizations and the forms of human decision-making Based on the above-mentioned ideas, a guiding philosophy and a set of

representational techniques were developed that can be used to simulate the complex, nonlinear, multi-loop feedback systems (Meadows 1980). Initially, SD was applied to analyze industrial and management problems, but gradually its application has been broadened to assess the behavioural characteristics of a number of complex systems including social, economic, engineering, physical, biological, and ecological (Drew 1995). In SD there are three fundamental principles which are used to organize the available information into computer simulation models. These principles are:

· · ·

Cause-effect relationships Feedback loops Delay

44

4.2.1 Cause-effect Relationships Cause-effect relationships represent the interaction of variables that drive the behaviour of a system. For example, a cause-effect relationship between the two variables (A and B) represents how a change in variable A will affect the variable B. A change in variable A may cause a positive or negative impact on variable B such as increase in price will reduce the sale of a product or increase in age of a driver will increase his/her reaction time. The description of many underlying factors and their interrelationships forms a System Dynamics model. A few examples of cause-effect relationships are shown in Fig. 4.2.

BIRTH TRAFFIC

+ + -

POPULATION CONGESTION

CONGESTION

VEHICLE SPEED

Figure 4.2: Cause-effect relationships 4.2.2 Feedback Loops Many of the cause-effect relationships feed back upon themselves and form a closed feedback loop. Feedback refers to a situation of a variable A affecting a variable B and variable B in turn affecting A either directly or through a chain of causes and effects. A feedback can be a positive or negative feedback. Feedback is positive if an increase in a variable leads to a further increase in the same variable. Feedback is negative if an increase in a variable leads to a decrease in the same variable.

45

4.2.3 Delay System Dynamics modelling also incorporates the time delay for the action of some variables. Sometimes the consequences of an action or decision-making time delay the action of an event. For example, construction of a new road or increasing the capacity of a road will take some to attract more traffic. On the other hand, the capacity cannot be increased instantaneously since it requires a planning and construction time. 4.2.4 System Dynamics Modelling Variables The variables in the simulation model are expressed by stocks or levels, flows or rates, and converters or auxiliaries. All variables in the model are connected by the connectors, an arrow that carries information from one variable to another. Levels or stocks are used to represent anything that accumulates over time and flows or rates are used to represent any activity or action. For example, one can consider the level as a bathtub and the rate as the pipe that fills or drains the bathtub. The bathtub holds the water but the pipe either fills or drains the bathtub at a specific rate or volume of water per unit of time. In a car-following model, spacing between the following and lead vehicles is a level that depends on the change in spacing (rate) due to the following and lead vehicle speeds. The input variables can be expressed by auxiliaries that remain constant during the simulation time.

46

4.2.5 Vensim Functions Vensim provides an interactive graphical environment that enables modelling, simulating, and analyzing dynamic problems. It allows continuous interactions among many variables and numerous cause-and-effect relationships involved in the simulation model. The simulation blocks consist of a set of equations and functions that define a relationship between the input and output variables that vary over simulation time. The simulation model output is obtained over the simulation time and at each simulation time step. The time step and simulation start and end times are defined by the users at the start of the simulation run (Fig. 4.3).

Figure 4.3 Simulation time setting

47

There are several functions available in the simulation environment that facilitate the development of the simulation logic (Fig. 4.4). A few functions such as "IF THEN ELSE" and "Lookup" are described as follows: IF THEN ELSE (cond, tval, fval), returns first value (tval) if condition (cond) is true or second value (fval) if condition is false.

Figure 4.4 Vensim simulation functions

Figure 4.5 Vensim lookup function

48

In addition to the predefined functions, one can specify an arbitrary linear or nonlinear relationship with a "Lookup" function. A "Lookup" function can be defined with a list of numbers representing an x axis and a y axis (Fig. 4.5). The inputs to the "Lookup" are positioned relative to the x axis, and the output is read from the y axis. The specialized functions created by the "Lookups" are very useful to test the behaviour of a model via simulation runs. 4.2.6 Rationale for Using System Dynamics There are numerous reasons that provide the rationale why System Dynamics (SD) was chosen to model the driver behaviour in this thesis. 1. Modelling driver behaviour is a complex problem which involves numerous cause-effect relationships that change over time. Analyzing such a complex problem requires a modelling approach that can understand the cause-effect relationships involving many variables that change over time. 2. SD simulation is a computational platform which is flexible, robust, and transparent and has been successfully used in the past to describe and analyze complex interrelated systems or processes, including those involving human behaviour (Sterman 2000). 3. SD simulation describes the structure of a model that helps to identify the key factors and improves the understanding of how a system changes over time (Saeed 1994). 4. SD has a broad database containing both qualitative and quantitative information that can easily be used in determining the structure and parameter values of a model (Graham 1980). The qualitative information

49

refers to the descriptive information (graphical), while the quantitative information refers to the numerical observed field data. 5. The computer languages used to implement System Dynamic models are STELLA/ITHINK, DYNAMO, POWERSIM, and VENSIM. These computer languages provide a graphical modelling environment and have userfriendly tools that allow detailed examination of complex models and their outputs. These computer languages simulate the equations and variables of a model and produce the output tables and plots (Roberts 1996). In this thesis, VENSIM was used in the modelling of the driver behaviour in a carfollowing scenario.

50

CHAPTER 5 MODELLING DRIVER REACTION TIME IN CAR-FOLLOWING BEHAVIOUR BASED ON HUMAN FACTORS
This chapter describes the development of driver reaction-time models based on human factors that will be used later for car-following analysis. The reaction time was classified as brake reaction time (BRT) and acceleration/deceleration reaction time (ADRT). The BRT occurs when the lead vehicle is braking and its brake light is ON, while the ADRT occurs when the driver reacts to adjust his/her speed using the gas pedal only. This chapter evaluates the effect of driver characteristics and traffic kinematic conditions on the driver reaction time in a car-following environment.

5.1

Introduction

Car-following behaviour is an essential component of rear-end collision avoidance algorithms and microscopic traffic simulation models. The most important parameter used in the calibration of car-following models is driver brake reaction time (BRT) which has been examined in a number of studies. The brake reaction time in response to braking of the lead vehicle definitively differs from the reaction to an obstacle on the road or from the reaction to a crossing vehicle at an intersection (Summala 2000, Ma and Andréasson 2006). In psychological studies, the driver's reaction process is further represented in three states: mental processing, movement, and device response. Driver reaction time is defined in earlier car-following research as the sum of the perception time and

51

the foot movement time (Ma and Andréasson 2006). The reaction time depends on the driving task and individual driver characteristics. The driving tasks include car-following, lane-change, left-turn, and right-turn tasks. The reaction time during the car-following task is the time lag that the follower uses to react to the change in the leader's driving behaviour. The driver reaction time in a car-following scenario can also be defined as the reaction time during the acceleration and deceleration manoeuvres. In the case of acceleration/deceleration manoeuvres, the car-following driver will accelerate or decelerate to sustain the desired speed for the given kinematic conditions. The desired speed is defined as the maximum speed at which the following vehicle driver would travel based on the given kinematic conditions. This speed can also be influenced by the speed limit and other factors such as weather conditions and visibility. The car-following driver reacts to adjust his/her speed by using the gas pedal only or by using the brake pedal in the case when the lead vehicle is braking and its brake light is on. The term acceleration/deceleration reaction time (ADRT) is used when the driver reacts to adjust his/her speed by only using the gas pedal, In this study, the ADRT is defined as the time difference between the moment the driver receives the visual signal to adjust his/her speed and the moment he/she starts to adjust the gas input. The term brake reaction time (BRT) is used when the driver reacts to brake in response to the lead vehicle's braking. The BRT is defined as the time difference between the moment the driver receives the lead vehicle brake light signal and the moment he/she touches the brake pedal.

52

Acceleration Reaction Time (ADRT)

Brake Reaction Time (BRT)

Deceleration Reaction Time (ADRT)

Figure 5.1: Logic of car-following manoeuvres and reaction times The following vehicle driver can also face a forward collision situation because of a surprised behaviour of the lead vehicle such as when it applies emergency braking or stops at short distance headway. Fig. 5.1 illustrates the car-following logic that includes the different manoeuvers and the respective reaction times. As noted, the BRT and ADRT are essential components of this logic. Various organizations have established some standards for BRT such as 2.5 s in the United States and 2 s in Europe, but these values have been criticized by many researchers (Green 2000). The author also stated that several studies have recommended BRT values that differ by a factor of almost 4. The variation of the results is due to the use of different signals, responses, and testing situations. Therefore, the use of these values for modelling car-following

53

behaviour is questionable. Previous studies have focused only on specific factors, but a reaction time study should examine all the factors including driverspecific and situational factors. However, placing drivers in surprised (emergency) or even urgent situations and measuring the perception and movement times is not easy in real road experiments. It is also very challenging to design a scenario that can account for all the factors at the same time. This chapter overcomes these challenges by modelling such car-following scenarios based on data obtained from a driving simulator. The objective of the study is to determine typical reaction times under car-following environment for different driving conditions and driver characteristics. The main tasks of this chapter are: (1) to design car-following scenarios for different driving conditions at different speeds and spacing, (2) to conduct driving simulator experiments, and (3) to analyze the variables to obtain some insight into their effects on the driver reaction time, and (4) to develop analytical models for the BRT and ADRT. Before describing these tasks, it is useful to present first the mathematical carfollowing model that will be used later for calibration and validation using realworld vehicle tracking data.

5.2

Mathematical Car-following Model

Various theories have been developed to express the traffic flow process. These theories model the driver behaviour in different traffic flow situations. One class of such theories that attempt to describe the car-following behaviour is called carfollowing theories. The car-following theories are based on the follow-the-leader

54

concept and the rules of how a driver follows his/her immediate leading vehicle are established based on both experimental observations and theoretical concepts such as psychological considerations. Background of such theories can be found in detail in Brackstone and McDonald (1999) and elsewhere in the literature. Based on these theories, researchers developed many car-following models that represent the driver's car-following behaviour. These models predict the speed or acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle at each time step during a continuous traffic flow. The simplified formulation of the carfollowing model (Mehmood et al. 2003) is as follows:
VD F (t ) - V F (t )  aF (t) =   × 0.278 T F (t )  

(5.1)

where, aF (t) = acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle at time t (m/s2), VDF (t) = desired speed of the following vehicle at time t in both steady and nonsteady state conditions (km/h), VF (t) = current speed of the following vehicle at time t (km/h), TF (t) = reaction time of the following vehicle driver at time t (s), and 0.278 = unit conversion factor, for converting speed in km/h to m/s. The following vehicle drivers drive in three regimes: coasting, accelerating, and decelerating. The following driver responds to the lead vehicle's deceleration

55

and acceleration manoeuvers. It is assumed that the decelerating regime is divided into two scenarios: when the brake light of the lead vehicle is ON, the following vehicle driver will apply brakes, otherwise he/she will adjust the speed using only the gas pedal by decreasing the gas or throttle input. It is also assumed that while coasting, if the following vehicle driver wishes to accelerate (the accelerating regime), he/she will increase the speed by increasing the gas or throttle input. In this experimental study, the following vehicle driver's reaction time is modelled during the accelerating and accelerating regimes. As mentioned previously, the reaction times in accelerating and decelerating regimes were further classified as the reaction time (ADRT) in accelerating or decelerating regimes using only the gas pedal and the reaction time (BRT) in decelerating regime using the brake pedal. Using these reaction times in Eq. (5.1) modifies the equation as follows:
VD F (t ) - V F (t )  a (t) =   × 0.278  ADRT (t ) 
F

(5.2)

a

Fd

VD F (t ) - V F (t )  (t) =   × 0.278 BRT (t )  

(5.3)

where, aFd (t) = deceleration rate of the following vehicle at time t in decelerating regime using only the brake pedal (m/s2), ADRT(t) = reaction time of the following vehicle driver at time t in accelerating or decelerating regimes using only the gas pedal (s),

56

BRT(t) = reaction time of the following vehicle driver at time t in decelerating regime using only the brake pedal (s) and 0.278 = unit conversion factor, for converting speed in km/h to m/s.

5.3

Experimental Program

5.3.1 Participants and Apparatus Sixty subjects participated in the experiment (31 males and 29 females), aged 18-70 years. To account for the variability among the driver population, the distribution of age and gender in the selected sample of the tested drivers was selected to be the same distribution of the driver population in Canada (Transport Canada 2006). The drivers were distributed in three age groups, 18-24, 25-54, and 55+ years, where the number of drivers was 8, 35, and 17, respectively. The sample breakdown is given in Table 5.1.

Table 5.1: Sample breakdown of participants Age Group and Number of Drivers Gender 18-24 years Number Female Male 4 4 % 12.8 13.0 25-54 years Number 17 18 % 59.9 57.9 55+ years Number 8 9 % 27.3 29.1

57

The participants were tested using STISIM: a high fidelity, interactive driving simulator that offered a 45 degree horizontal field of view and integrated in a real car equipped with steering, brake, accelerator, and automatic transmission control. The display system used Epson EMP-S3 LCD projector that focused the moving images on a projection screen. The participants sat in the car which was located in front of the projection screen. The vehicle speed (km/h) was displayed on the front screen. Before the start of the experiment, each participant was given instructions regarding the experiment. The participants also signed the consent agreement and provided the information regarding their age, gender, driving experience, and driving intensity. The copies of consent agreement and driver information sheet are given in Appendix A. 5.3.2 Brake Reaction-time Data To replicate the driver behaviour in the car-following scenario, three driving conditions were tested at different spacing and driving speeds. These conditions are categorized as normal, surprised, and stationary based on the driving behaviour of the lead vehicle, also called principle other vehicle (POV). The following vehicle is also referred to as the subject vehicle (SV). The maximum comfortable deceleration rate an individual driver is willing to use in nonemergency situations (normal driving) ranges from 2 to 3.45 m/s2 (Xin et al. 2008). However, in an emergency situation, drivers are expected to brake at a deceleration rate ranging from 5 to 8.5 m/s2 (Krishnan et al. 2001). The higher deceleration rate of 8.5 m/s2 was reported for the new light vehicles.

58

Age Gender Speed (V)

Normal Surprised Stationary

Spacing (d)

Following vehicle (SV)

Lead vehicle (POV)

Figure 5.2: Car-following vehicle dynamics The braking capability of the vehicle decreases with wear and tear. In this study, two deceleration rates of the lead vehicle were selected for normal and surprised situations, as described later. Before the actual experiments, all participants drove a few practice experiments to familiarize themselves with the driving simulator. The simulation runs for normal, surprised, and stationary conditions were chosen at random for each participant. Fig. 5.2 shows the geometry and variables used in the car-following logic. In all three scenarios, the SV begins to accelerate from the stopped position to the target speed of 60, 80, or 100 km/h. For each run, the drivers are directed to accelerate at the test speed and maintain their speeds until they react in response to the action of the lead vehicle. The SV driver is directed to maintain his/her speed throughout the experiment. At a distance of 1.1 km down the road, the POV appears in the same lane at a certain spacing and speed depending on the type of scenario. In the normal scenario, the POV appears at a spacing of 20, 30, or 40 m and travels at the same speed as the SV. At a distance of 1.2 km the POV decelerates and its brake lights are turned on. The SV driver reacts in response to the braking of the POV. The POV decelerates for a moment and

59

then starts to travel at the same speed. The average deceleration rate of the POV ranged from 2.5 to 3.5 m/s2. This scenario is designed to mimic a normal car-following behaviour at different driving speeds and spacing. The normal carfollowing behaviour is less likely to contribute to a rear-end collision. In the surprised scenario, the POV appears at a spacing of 10, 20, or 30 m and travels at the same speed as that of SV. These spacing combinations for the surprised scenario were used since the drivers have difficulty in judging the surprised braking rate at larger spacing. At a distance of 1.2 km the POV decelerates at a very high rate and then stops. This is a surprised driving condition compared to a normal driving behaviour. The average deceleration rate of the POV ranged from 4 to 7.5 m/s2. The SV driver reacts by stopping the vehicle to avoid a rear-end collision. In the stationary scenario, the POV is in the stationary condition at different distances from the SV. The POV appears (as stationary vehicle) at a distance of 20, 30, or 40 m. The SV driver brakes to avoid colliding with the stationary vehicle. This scenario also creates a rear-end collision situation at different speeds and spacing. The independent variables included urgency, expectancy, age, gender, and driving experience. Urgency is addressed by varying the speeds of the lead and following vehicles and the spacing between them. The expectancy is addressed by varying the lead vehicle braking behaviour at different traffic kinematic conditions. 5.3.3 Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction-time Data The urgency and expectancy cannot be used to model the ADRT when the driver wishes to accelerate or decelerate to sustain his/her desired speed. Therefore,

60

the reaction time was initially collected during the start of the experiment when the driver would accelerate, and represented the acceleration reaction time. The participants were instructed to start the vehicle as soon as they see the start screen. The reaction-time data were collected from the onset of the start of the experiment to the time when the driver presses the gas pedal to start the vehicle. When the driver wants to accelerate while driving at a specific speed he/she will only use the gas pedal. There were 27 runs for each participant for the collection of the BRT data at different speeds, spacing, and situations. In this initial experiment, although the drivers were instructed to start the vehicle immediately when they see the start screen, some drivers had reacted too slowly and some were very fast during the start of the experiment, producing some bias into the data. In addition, the experiment did not provide data related to the deceleration reaction time which the experiment indicated might be different from the acceleration reaction time. Therefore, another experiment was designed to omit the outliers and check the difference between the reaction times during the acceleration and deceleration tasks, where in the deceleration task the drivers use only the gas pedal. A visual signal was used to instruct the participants that they need to accelerate or decelerate while driving at a specific speed. The speed limit signs were used as a visual signal. These signs appeared at a distance of 40 m from the subject vehicle. Several experiments were run and it was observed that the drivers of each age group can easily read the speed limit signs at a distance of 40 m. The participants were instructed to start the vehicle as soon as they see

61

the start screen and to accelerate or decelerate at each speed limit sign to follow the displayed speed. The reaction-time data were collected from the onset of visual signal to when the driver uses his/her gas pedal to adjust his/her speed. Three readings were collected, one at the start and two at the speed limit signs. The ADRT data collected in this case were used to omit the outliers of the acceleration reaction-time data collected during the start of the experiments. Twenty-five subjects participated in the additional experiments (16 males and 9 females), aged 18-70 years.

5.4

Data Analysis

5.4.1 Brake Reaction Time As described previously, the type of scenario (normal, surprised, and stationary) and the speed-distance combinations within each scenario introduce expectancy and urgency. The mean BRT for each scenario for different speed-distance combination is shown in Fig. 5.3. As noted, there is a clear effect of the expectancy and urgency on the brake reaction time. As expected, the BRT decreased with the increase in the level of urgency behaviour of the lead vehicle (normal vs. surprised). The drivers react slowly for normal deceleration compared to the stationary and surprised conditions of the lead vehicle. The drivers also react slowly at larger spacing during the course of each scenario. In other words, the BRT is directly proportional to the available time to collision at the braking onset of the lead vehicle.

62

2.500 Normal Surprised Stationary 2.000

Brake Reaction Time (s)

1.500

1.000

0.500

0.000 60.10 60.20 60.30 60.40 80.10 80.20 80.30 80.40 100.10 100.20 100.30 100.40 Speed/Distance Level

Figure 5.3: Brake reaction time for different speed/distance levels for each scenario But the BRT also varies for different types of scenarios (normal, surprised, and stationary) at the same spacing and speed. Therefore, the results indicate that the level of expectancy and urgency has a significant effect on the brake reaction time in a car-following scenario. The brake reaction time as a function of gender, age, driving experience, and driving intensity (driving hours per week) for each type of car-following scenario was analyzed. As an example, the variation of the BRT with gender is shown in Fig. 5.4. The BRT of females was larger than that of males in all scenarios. The BRT also increased for all age groups at normal, surprised, and stationary scenarios. However, there is a slight difference in the BRT for all age groups in all types of scenarios, except the normal scenario in which the middle and old age groups were found to be 0.12 s slower than the young age group.

63

1.6

1.4
1.32

1.39

Normal Surprised Brake Reaction Time (s) 1.2 Stationary

1
0.85

0.8

0.78 0.74 0.70

0.6

0.4 Male Gender Female

Figure 5.4: Comparison of brake reaction time based on gender The driving experience and driving intensity have mixed effects on the brake reaction time. The brake reaction time of the fairly experienced drivers is higher than that of the beginners and well-experienced drivers in the normal and stationary scenarios, but smaller in the surprised scenario. The driving experience and driving intensity vary for drivers of different age groups and gender. The difference between the BRT of stationary and surprised scenarios is smaller compared to that between the normal and the other two type of scenarios (surprised and stationary). The stationary scenario also acts like a surprised scenario since the stopping distance ranged from 20 to 40 m which is a surprised situation especially at higher speeds. However, the stationary scenario introduces more urgency since the lead vehicle is not moving. As expected, the BRT decreased markedly with the unexpected deceleration rates of the lead

64

vehicle for all variables. In other words, for the normal scenario in which the average deceleration rate of the lead vehicle is of a normal driving situation, drivers react slowly compared to the stationary and surprised scenarios, as expected. 5.4.2 Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction Time

As previously mentioned, the acceleration reaction time data were collected at the start of each simulation run of the BRT experiment and there were 27 simulation runs for each participant. The average of these runs was considered as the acceleration reaction time. The outliers in the first experiment were omitted and the resulting acceleration reaction-time data were analyzed. Based on the data of the second improved experiment, the ranges of the acceleration reaction time for the young, middle, and old age groups were 0.4-1.1 s, 0.6-1.3 s, and 0.6-1.5 s, respectively. For the deceleration reaction time, an independent tsample test was conducted to identify whether the difference in the means of the acceleration and deceleration reaction times is significant. The null hypothesis that the means are equal was not rejected (Appendix B). The ADRT as a function of gender, age group, driving experience, and driving intensity was also analyzed, as shown in Figs. 5.5. These driver characteristic are shown in Table 5.2. The ADRT of females was larger than that of males. The ADRT also increased for all age groups of young, middle, and old drivers. The ADRT of the fairly-experienced drivers is higher than that of the beginners and well-experienced drivers.

65

0.95
0.92

0.9

0.85
0.82

ADRT (s)

0.8

0.75

0.7

0.65

0.6 Male Gender Female

Figure 5.5a: Effect of gender on acceleration/deceleration reaction time

0.9

0.85

0.84

0.8 ADRT (s)

0.75

0.75

0.7

0.65

0.65

0.6 Young Middle Age Old

Figure 5.5b: Effect of age on acceleration/deceleration reaction time

66

0.85

0.81

0.8 ADRT (s)
0.78

0.75

0.7 Excessive Driving Intensity Normal

Figure 5.5c: Effect of driving intensity on acceleration/deceleration reaction time

0.85

0.84

0.8 ADRT (s)

0.80

0.75
0.74

0.7 Beginner Fairly Exp. Driving Experience Well Exp.

Figure 5.5d: Effect of driving experience on acceleration/deceleration reaction time

67

5.5

Modelling of Driver Reaction Time

As previously mentioned, the BRT data were collected for three driving conditions: normal, surprised, and stationary. Besides the BRT, the ADRT data were also collected during each simulation run of the experiments. The BRT data were analyzed using a 3 x 2 x 3 x 2 x 9 x 3 repeated measures ANOVA: (a) with age (three levels), gender (two levels), driving experience (three levels), and driving intensity (two levels) as between-subject factors, and (b) with the speeddistance headway combinations (nine levels) and scenario type (three levels) as within-subject factors. The variables and their levels are shown in Tables 5.2 and 5.3.

Table 5.2: Driver and scenario variables and their levels for repeated measures ANOVA Variable 1 Age (years) Gender Driving Experience (years) Driving Intensity (hrs/week) Scenario Type Young 18-24 Male Beginner 0-5 Normal 0-20 Normal Level and Range 2 Middle 25-54 Female Fairly experienced 6-20 Excessive 21+ Surprised 3 Old 55+ n.a. Well experienced 21+ n.a. Stationary

68

Table 5.3: Speed and distance headway variables and their levels for repeated measures ANOVA Level Variable V (km/h) - d (m) a V (km/h) - d (m) b
a b

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

60-20 60-30 60-40 80-20 80-30 80-40 100-20 100-30 100-40 60-10 60-20 60-30 80-10 80-20 80-30 100-10 100-20 100-30

Normal and Stationary scenarios. Surprised scenario. There was a significant difference in the means of the BRT at each level of

normal, surprised, and stationary scenarios. Therefore, an independent repeated measures ANOVA was conducted for each scenario. This analysis helps to identify the independent variables that have significant effects on the BRT for each driving condition. The analysis revealed that speed, distance headway, age, and gender were significant factors that affect brake reaction time in all scenarios. The results of repeated measure ANOVA analysis for the normal, surprised, and stationary scenarios are given in Appendices C, D, and E, respectively. These analyses also provide the descriptive statistics and graphically representation of driver reaction time for each level of normal, surprised, and stationary scenarios. Regression analysis was conducted to model the BRT for each driving condition. The independent variables were speed, distance headway, driver's age, gender, driving experience, and driving intensity. The repeated measures ANOVA revealed several significant variables that affect the BRT at different driving conditions. Several combinations of variables were tested to develop

69

models for the BRT for the three kinematic conditions. The models were developed using SPSS software. For the normal driving condition, three models were developed as follows (Appendix F), BRTn = 0.025 Age + 0.401 Gender, (R2 = 0.78) (Normal: Model 1) BRTn = 15.16 -0.09 exp (-3.63 Gender) ­ 15.87 exp (0.00003 V) + exp (0.025 d), (R2 = 0.66) (Normal: Model 2) BRTn = 0.078 Gender - 0.002 V + 0.049 d, (R2 = 0.97) (Normal: Model 3) where, BRTn = brake reaction time at normal driving condition (s), Age = age of the driver of the following vehicle (years), Gender = gender of the driver of the following vehicle (0 for males and 1 for females), V = speed of the following vehicle (km/h), and d = distance headway between the following and lead vehicles (m). The Age variable was significant only in Model 1, while V and d were significant only in Models 2 and 3. Model 3 is recommended here since it has better goodness of fit (R2 = 0.97) and it also accounts for the speed and distance headway which are important variables in the calibration and validation of the car-following and rear-end collision warning algorithms. As expected, the BRT increases with the increase in distance headway and decreases as the speed increases. The positive sign of the Gender variable indicates that females are slower than males. For the surprised and stationary scenarios, the developed BRT models are as follows (Appendices G and H), (5.5) (5.6) (5.4)

70

BRTsr = 0.001 Age + 0.109 Gender + 0.003 V + 0.023 d, (R2 = 0.95) (Surprised: Model 1) BRTsr = -5.21 + 4.8 exp (0.02 Gender) -0.16 exp (-0.00003V) + exp (0.015 d) +0.000002 exp (0.136 Age), (R2 = 0.47) (Surprised: Model 2) BRTst = -5.64 + 4.01 exp (0.005 Gender) + exp (0.001 V) + exp (0.01d) + 0.001 exp (0.056 Age), (R2 = 0.42) (Stationary: Model 1)

(5.7)

(5.8)

(5.9)

BRTst = 0.002 Age + 0.035 Gender + 0.001 V + 0.017 d, (R2 = 0.96) (Stationary: Model 2) (5.10)

where, BRTsr and BRTst = brake reaction time for surprised and stationary scenarios (s), respectively. As noted, the BRT increases with the age, speed, and distance headway in both scenarios. The results of regression models (Eqs. 5.7-5.10) suggest that drivers may have difficulty in decision-making in these scenarios (stationary and surprised) that results a slower reaction time with the increase of the driving speed. Please note that the likelihood of a collision was high when these scenarios (stationary and surprised) were tested for higher driving speeds (80, 100 km/h vs. 60 km/h). This also suggests that drivers demand an early collision warning if they are driving at a higher speed compared to a slower driving speed. The females are also slower in both of these scenarios. Model 1 (Eq. 5.7) and Model 2 (Eq. 5.10) are recommended for surprised and stationary scenarios since these models are simpler and have better goodness of fit. Regression analysis was also conducted to model the

acceleration/deceleration reaction time. Only Age and Gender were found to be significant variables. The developed model for the ADRT is as follows (Appendix I),

71

ADRT = 0.017 Age + 0.159 Gender, where,

(R2 = 0.79)

(5.11)

ADRT = acceleration/deceleration reaction time (s). As noted, the ADRT increases with the age and the positive sign of the Gender variable indicates that the females are slower than the males. In estimating the models of Eqs. 5.4-5.11, the driving experience and driving intensity and were not found to be the significant variables.

5.6

Summary

This chapter described the development of driver reaction-time models based on human factors in car-following scenarios. The kinematic conditions introduced urgency and expectancy based on the braking behaviour of the lead vehicle at different speeds and spacing. The kinematic conditions were used for evaluating the BRT and are classified as normal, surprised, and stationary. Data were collected on a driving simulator integrated into a real car and included the BRT and ADRT (as dependent variables) and driver's age, gender, driving experience, driving intensity (driving hours per week), vehicle speed, and spacing (as independent variables). The results showed that there was a significant difference in the BRT at normal, surprised, and stationary scenarios and supported the hypothesis that both urgency and expectancy had significant effects on BRT. Driver's age, gender, speed, and spacing were found to be significant variables for the BRT in all scenarios. The results also showed that driver's age and gender were significant variables for the ADRT.

72

CHAPTER 6 DEVELOPMENT OF DRIVER-SENSITIVE CAR-FOLLOWING MODEL
This chapter describes the development of a driver-sensitive car-following model that addresses some limitations of the existing car-following models. The proposed car-following model explicitly considers driver characteristics such as age and gender and information on the lead and back vehicles in modelling the driver behaviour in a car-following situation. Actual vehicle tracking data obtained from the U.S. Federal Highway Administration were used to calibrate and validate the proposed model. Car-following modeling was only limited to the cars since enough data associated with the trucks were not available.

6.1

Introduction

Car-following models describe how a pair of vehicles interacts with each other in a traffic stream. Model performance is evaluated based on key factors that affect driver behaviour. Researchers have found a number of such factors that influence car-following behaviour. These factors are classified into two categories: individual and situational. The individual factors include age, gender, risk-taking behaviour, vehicle characteristics, and driving skill. The situational factors include time of day, day of week, weather and road conditions, and information on the lead and back vehicles such as speed and spacing. Over the past 50 years, various car-following models were proposed that attempt to describe the driver car-following behaviour based on the follow-the-

73

leader concept. The existing car-following models assume that the dominant effect on driver behaviour comes from the next vehicle ahead (also called the lead vehicle). However, when driving in a traffic stream, the vehicle behind the following vehicle (called the back vehicle) somehow also influences driver behaviour in a car-following situation. These car-following models were developed based on various theoretical considerations and experimental observations. These observations include driver reaction time, speed, and spacing. Existing car-following models also assume that all drivers of different age and gender have the same reaction time. Siuhi and Kaseko (2010) proposed that the driver's response times are lower for the deceleration response than for the acceleration response. The average reaction times for the acceleration and deceleration response were assumed to be 0.8 and 0.7 s, respectively. But in an earlier research, Subramanian (1996) suggested that drivers react faster under acceleration response than deceleration response. Both of these findings were quite different and were not based on some human factors study. The authors conducted a comprehensive driving simulator study (Mehmood and Easa 2009) to identify the effect of human factors and traffic kinematics on driver reaction time in a car-following situation. It was observed that the driver reaction time varies, in both acceleration and deceleration regimes, based on not only kinematic conditions such as speed and spacing but also on individual driver characteristics such as age and gender. There is a need to further develop

74

existing car-following models to incorporate the effect of the back vehicle and driver characteristics on the car-following behaviour. In this chapter, the System Dynamics (SD) principles were applied to address the limitations of the existing car-following models. The simulation environment in SD provides a computational platform to simulate and examine complex problems. This platform is characterized by many nonlinear

relationships including heuristic and empirical with numerous feedback loops. The primary objective of this chapter is to develop a new car-following model, that is driver-sensitive and accounts for the effects of the back vehicle, and calibrate and validate the model using actual vehicle tracking data. The chapter is organized into four sections: Model development that describes the logic of the proposed car-following model, data collection, and mathematical relationships, Calibration, Validation of the proposed model and followed by the Summary of this chapter.

6.2

Model Development

This section describes the development of a driver-sensitive car-following model. The assumptions and logical framework of the proposed model are first presented, followed by the mathematical equations of the proposed model and the data collection. 6.2.1 Logic of Proposed Model The car-following situation considered in the proposed model assumes a string of three vehicles: lead vehicle, following vehicle, and back vehicle, all travelling

75

Speed (SB) Spacing (DB)

Age Gender Speed (SF)

Spacing (DF)

Speed (SL)

Back vehicle (BV)

Follower vehicle (FV)

Lead vehicle (LV)

Figure 6.1: Car-following vehicle dynamics along a single lane (Fig. 6.1). It is assumed that the driver of the following vehicle perceives information either from both the lead and back vehicles or only from the lead vehicle depending on their kinematic conditions such as speed and spacing. The spacing is defined as the longitudinal distance measured from the back bumper of the lead vehicle to the front bumper of the following vehicle. The three vehicles are assumed to be passenger cars (since data related to other vehicle classes were not available). The driver of the following vehicle is assumed to drive in three regimes: coasting, accelerating, and decelerating. Based on a previous study by the authors (Mehmood and Easa 2009), the driver reaction time in these regimes is considered to be different and depends on the vehicle spacing, speed, and driver characteristics such as age and gender. The reaction time is also different for the cases of deceleration using the gas pedal or using the brake (as a result of the braking of the lead vehicle). The proposed model predicts the acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle based on the information of the lead and back vehicles and the desired speed and reaction time of the driver of the following vehicle. The desired speed is affected by the acceleration and deceleration parameters and the current spacing between the following and lead vehicles. It is assumed that the

76

back vehicle only contributes to the acceleration regime when it is approaching a following vehicle with higher speed. The following vehicle can also accelerate based on the desired speed, if it is more than the current speed. The desired speed is defined as the maximum speed at which the driver of the following vehicle would travel based on the given kinematic conditions. The logic of the proposed car-following model is shown in Fig. 6.2 and is highlighted in the following steps (the step number is indicated in the figure): 1. Initially at time t0, the current speed of the following vehicle and spacing between the following and the lead vehicles are inputted to the proposed model. 2. The desired speed of the following vehicle is calculated at any time t (Eq. 6.2, shown later). 3. The following vehicle can accelerate or decelerate based on the desired speed at any time t. For the deceleration regime, brake reaction time (Eq. 6.7) is used when the brake of the lead vehicle is ON; otherwise deceleration reaction time (Eq. 6.6) with throttle input is used. For the acceleration regime, the acceleration reaction time (Eq. 6.6) with throttle input is used. 4. The acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle is calculated based on the desired speed, the current speed, and the reaction time values at time t (Eq. 6.1). 5. The acceleration/deceleration rate calculated at time t0 is used to calculate the current speed of the following vehicle at time (t0 + t ).

77

6. The acceleration/deceleration rate at time (t0 + t ) is calculated based on the desired speed, the current speed, and the reaction-time values at time (t0 + t ). 7. The speeds of the lead and back vehicles are input into the model which is used to calculate the calibration parameters and the spacings between the following vehicle and both the lead and back vehicles. 8. The age and gender values were the calibration parameters in the calibration process, but for an application these values would be an input based on the statistical distribution of the driver's population.

4

6 5

Driver Characteristics (Age, Gender)

3

8

3

7 2 9 9 9 9 1 7

Figure 6.2: Logic of the proposed car-following model

78

9. Desired speed of the following vehicle is affected by the calibration parameters (b1, b2, and b3) based on the car-following acceleration or deceleration regimes. The calibration parameters are defined in Eqs. 6.11, 6.12, and 6.13 that depend on the speed difference between the following and lead or back vehicles and the spacing between them. It should be noted that the lead vehicle is dominant in the deceleration regime and the back vehicle only contributes to the acceleration regime.

More details on the model logic are presented later in the mathematical relationships. The desired speed was calibrated based on the spacing between the following and lead vehicles. The acceleration and deceleration parameters were calibrated based on the inverse-time-to-collision (INVT) associated with the lead and back vehicles. The INVT associated with the lead vehicle depends on the relative speed and spacing between the following and lead vehicles. Similarly, the INVT associated with the back vehicle depends on the relative speed and spacing between the following and back vehicle. 6.2.2 Data Collection The vehicle trajectory data used for calibration and validation of the proposed car-following model were collected by the US Federal Highway Administration as part of the Next Generation Simulation (NGSIM) program (Hranac et al. 2005). The data were collected between 7:15 a.m and 8:05 a.m on June 15, 2005, using video cameras mounted on a 36-storey building which is located adjacent to the

79

U.S. Highway 101 and Lankershim Boulevard interchange in the Universal City neighbourhood. Vehicle trajectory data for a sample of 80 following vehicles were extracted from the NGSIM database. As mentioned earlier, each sample consists of a string of three vehicles, the following, lead, and back vehicles. The Highway Capacity Manual (HCM 2000) suggests a time headway of 3 s as the critical headway to identify whether a vehicle is in a car-following situation or not. Therefore, the time headway for the pair of vehicles constrained was 3 s or less. Motorcycles and trucks were excluded from the data in order to work with more homogeneous vehicle characteristics. These vehicle types represented less than 2% of the total vehicle population. Vehicles that appeared in more than one lane were not considered for car-following analysis. The right-most lanes near the on and off-ramps were also excluded from the data analysis since the vehicles entering and existing the freeway continually disturb the car-following behaviour of other vehicles in this lane. The variables collected for each subject vehicle include observation time, following vehicle ID, lane number, vehicle speed, vehicle class, vehicle acceleration/deceleration rate, longitudinal position, the lead and back vehicle IDs, and vehicle length, etc. (Tables 6.1a and 6.1b). Table 6.1a: Sample variables extracted from the NGSIM database (for veh. ID = 116)
Veh ID 116 116 116 116 116 Frame ID 279 280 281 282 283 Global Time 1.11885E+12 1.11885E+12 1.11885E+12 1.11885E+12 1.11885E+12 Local X 5.2635912 5.2763928 5.2891944 5.3026056 5.3190648 Local Y 34.15894 35.22696 36.29802 37.36513 38.41730 Global X 1966322.332 1966323.049 1966323.766 1966324.489 1966325.196 Global Y 570977.9962 570977.2064 570976.4167 570975.6199 570974.8366 Veh Length 6.5532 6.5532 6.5532 6.5532 6.5532

80

Table 6.1b: Sample variables extracted from the NGSIM database (for veh. ID = 116)
Veh Width 1.64592 1.64592 1.64592 1.64592 1.64592 1.64592 1.64592 1.64592 Veh Class 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 Velocity 10.671048 10.677144 10.646664 10.555224 10.415016 10.271760 10.180320 10.152888 Acceleration 0.073152 0.039624 -0.496824 -1.304544 -1.694688 -1.316736 -0.490728 0.033528 Lane 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 Lead Veh ID 105 105 105 105 105 105 105 105 Back Veh ID 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 Space Headway 18.254472 18.251424 18.251424 18.248376 18.263616 18.297144 18.345912 18.403824

The data were further processed to filter the speed of the lead and back vehicles. In addition to the speeds, the spacings between the following and the lead vehicles and between the following and the back vehicles were determined for each representative sample. The spacing was calculated from the front to the rear bumpers of the respective vehicles using vehicle lengths. 6.2.3 Mathematical Relationships Following the underlying assumptions and logic of the proposed car-following model, as described in section 6.2.1, a stock flow diagram was developed using the VENSIM DSS program (Fig. 6.3a and 6.3b). This program provides a user-friendly and flexible environment to define/code, calibrate, and validate the mathematical relationships (Ventana Systems 2007). Additionally, the program has a wide range of built-in mathematical functions and optimization procedures that could facilitate calibration and validation.

81

L D a t l e D

L D a t l e D

F D t a l e D F D L S B T V N I B D B D t a l e D B S

F D

L S F D a t l e D

F S

F D a t l e D F D A F S D g n i k a r B n o N r e t e m a r a P r e gt ne i m k ar a r Ba P r ht e ee vm . k a c r aa BP

F S

F D A F S D

Figure 6.3: Stock flow diagram of the model (a) Vehicle dynamics, (b) Reaction time

L T V N I

F T R P L D
F T R P

L L B T R B e g A T R D A r e d n e G

L D

L L B

(a)

(b)

82

In Figure 6.3: BLL SL SB SF DSF ADF DL INVTL = status of the brake light of the lead vehicle at time t (o or 1). = input speed of the lead vehicle at time t (m/s). = input speed of the back vehicle at time t (m/s). = current speed of the following vehicle at time t (m/s). = desired speed of the following vehicle driver at time t (m/s). = acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle at time t (m/s2). = input deceleration rate of the lead vehicle at time t (m/s2). = inverse-time-to-collision at time t associated with the lead vehicle which is calculated using the speed of the lead and following vehicles and spacing in between them (1/s). INVTB = inverse-time-to-collision at time t associated with the back vehicle which is calculated using the speeds of the following and back vehicles and spacing in between them (1/s). DeltaDF = change in spacing between the following and lead vehicles at time t calculated based on the current speed of the following vehicle (m). DeltaDL = change in spacing between the following and lead vehicles at time t calculated based on the current speed of the lead vehicle (m). DF = current spacing between the following and lead vehicles at time t calculated based on the DeltaDL and DeltaDF (m). DeltaDB = change in spacing between the following and back vehicles at time t calculated based on the current speed of the back vehicle (m).

83

DB

= current spacing between the following and back vehicles at time t calculated based on the DeltaDB and DeltaDF (m).

Braking parameter = defined by a lookup function and depends on the inversetime-to-collision associated with the lead vehicle. Non-braking parameter = defined by a lookup function and depends on the inverse-time-to-collision associated with the lead vehicle. Back veh. parameter = defined by a lookup function and depends on the inversetime-to-collision associated with the back vehicle. Age = age of the following vehicle driver (calibration parameter), initially defined by an input value. Gender = gender of the following vehicle driver (calibration parameter), initially defined by an input value (0 or 1). ADRT = acceleration/deceleration reaction time of the following vehicle driver at time t. BRT PRTF = brake reaction time of the following vehicle driver at time t (s). = perception reaction time of the following vehicle driver at time t, it is either ADRT or BRT depending upon the situation (s). Like many existing car-following models, the proposed model also predicts the acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle at each simulation time step during a continuous traffic flow. This rate is defined as follows,

 DSF (t ) - SF (t )  ADF(t) =    PRTF (t ) 

(6.1)

84

As previously mentioned, the following vehicle driver travels in three regimes: coasting, accelerating, and decelerating. At each simulation time interval (say dt = 0.1 s) the following vehicle driver adjusts the speed difference, if any, between his/her current speed and the desired speed. The desired speed (DSF) is the maximum speed that a driver would like to travel for the given kinematic conditions. The steady state condition emulates the situation when the relative speed between the following and the lead vehicles is zero, and in non-steady condition this relative speed is not zero. The desired speed in a steady-state condition at simulation time t is assumed to depend on the spacing between the following and lead vehicles (DF). The relationship between the desired speed and the spacing between the following and lead vehicles was calibrated using the NGSIM individual vehicle tracking data. For each pair of vehicles, the speed of the following vehicle and its corresponding distance headway were extracted. For each observed speed, the mean distance headway from all the vehicles observed to travel at this speed was computed. The developed relationship between the desired speed in the steady-state conditions and the observed mean spacing is illustrated in Fig. 6.4. Based on field data observations obtained from the NGSIM database, it is assumed that for the DF of 50 m the DSF is 80 km/h and for DF of 6 m the DSF is 0 (Fig. 6.4). These constraint values imply that a jam density of 110 vehicles/km and the pairs of vehicles do not interact in a car-following situation at a spacing of 50 m or more.

85

80 Observed Desired Speed (km/h) 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 0 10 20 30 40 50 Observed Mean Spacing (m) Observed mean spacing Regression line DSF = -0.0181DF2 + 2.6148DF - 6.5262 R2 = 0.8137

Figure 6.4: Calibrated desired speed relationship Thus, the desired speed of the following vehicle is defined as follows:
80 km/hr, DSF(t) = (-0.0181DF2(t) + 2.6148DF(t) ­ 6.5262) x 0.278, 0, DF(t)  50 m 6m < DF(t) < 50 m (6.2) DF(t)  6 m

The variable DF(t) is determined as follows: DF(t) = DF(t ­ dt) + [SL(t) ­ SF(t)] dt where, DF(t - dt) = current spacing between the following and the lead vehicles at time (t ­ dt), initially, it is externally defined at time t = 0 (m), and dt = assumed simulation interval = say 0.1 s. (6.3)

The current speed of the following vehicle, SF(t), is determined as follows:

SF(t) = SF(t ­ dt) + ADF(t - dt) dt In Equation 6.4:

(6.4)

86

SF(t ­ dt) = speed of the following vehicle at time (t ­ dt), which is externally defined at t = 0 (m/s), and ADF(t - dt) = acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle at time (t ­ dt), calculated using Eqs. 6.8-6.10 at time (t ­ dt) (m/s2). The desired speed relationship as illustrated in Fig. 6.4, and defined in Eq. 6.2, is consistent with the relationship derived based on the SAVE database (Ervin et al. 2001). As mentioned earlier, the proposed model assumed that the following vehicle driver travels in three regimes: coasting, accelerating, and decelerating. The following vehicle drivers accelerate or decelerate in response to the actions of the lead and back vehicles. The lead vehicle actions are dominant during the deceleration regime of the following vehicle. However, while driving in a traffic stream, the back vehicle is also pushing the lead vehicle if the back vehicle approaches the lead vehicle with an increasing rate of change of spacing. Therefore, it is assumed that the back vehicle dynamics will only affect the acceleration regime of the following vehicle. The proposed model also assumes that the reaction times during the acceleration and deceleration regimes are different. In the previous chapter, the authors (Mehmood and Easa 2009) conducted a simulator experiment to evaluate the effect of human factors on driver reaction time in car-following scenarios. The car-following driver reacts to adjust his/her speed by using the gas pedal only or by using the brake pedal in the case the lead vehicle is braking and its brake light is ON. The term acceleration/deceleration reaction time (ADRT) is used when the driver reacts to adjust his/her speed by only using the

87

gas pedal. The term brake reaction time (BRT) is used when the driver reacts to brake in response to the lead vehicle's braking. Reaction time models were developed for both ADRT and BRT. The deceleration regime is classified into two states: when the lead vehicle is braking or not braking. The brake light status of the lead vehicle (BLL) is determined using the relationship suggested by Ozaki (1993), which is given by

ON BLL = OFF

DL(t) < -0.013 SL(t) (6.5) Otherwise

The reaction-time models for ADRT and BRT have been developed in the previous chapter as follows,

ADRT(t) = 0.017 Age + 0.159 Gender

(6.6)

BRT(t) where, BRT(t)

= 0.078 Gender ­ 0.002 SF(t) + 0.049 DF(t)

(6.7)

= brake reaction time at time t (s),

ADRT(t) = acceleration/deceleration reaction time at time t (s), Age Gender = age of the driver of the following vehicle (years), and = gender of the driver of the following vehicle (0 for males and 1 for females)

88

These reaction-time models depend on both vehicle dynamics and driver characteristics. It is evident that driver reaction time increases with age (Eq. 6.6) and females are slower than males (Eqs. 6.6 and 6.7). The acceleration and deceleration regimes will introduce non-steady­sate conditions: one for acceleration and the other for deceleration. Therefore, for non-steady state conditions three calibration parameters are introduced, and for each non-steady ­sate condition, Eq. 6.1 is modified as follows,

ADF(t) = 

 DSF (t )b1 - SF ( t )   ADRT (t )  

(non-braking scenario, deceleration regime) (6.8)

ADF(t) = 

 DSF (t )b 2 - SF (t )   BRT (t )  

(braking scenario, deceleration regime)

(6.9)

ADF(t) =

 DSF (t )b3 - SF (t )    (non-braking back-lead vehicle scenario, acceleration regime) (6.10) ADRT (t )  

where, b1 = parameter for the lead vehicle non-braking scenario (deceleration regime), b2 = parameter for the lead vehicle braking scenario (deceleration regime), and b3 = parameter for the non-braking back vehicle scenario (acceleration regime).

6.3

Model Calibration

This section describes the calibration of the model parameters. The calibration parameters include b1, b2, b3, Age, and Gender of the driver of the following

89

vehicle. The calibration involves finding the values of the parameters to best fit the outcomes of the proposed model with the observed actual data. The model outcomes used in the calibration include speed and spacing profiles of the following vehicle. When a model is structurally complete and properly simulates the process, the calibration of the model can proceed. In VENSIM there are two ways to calibrate the model: (1) changing the values manually and performing simulation to achieve a better fit between simulated and actual data, and (2) using optimization. In optimization, the program automatically changes the parameters of the choice and look for the best fit between the simulation output and actual data. The optimization starts with different starting input values of the parameters. The model parameters along with their lower and upper bounds can be defined in the optimizer before a simulation run. The procedure adopted for calibration is as follows: 1. The 45 samples extracted earlier from the NGSIM database were used for the calibration of the car-following model. These samples represent varied scenarios including braking (deceleration regime), non-braking

(deceleration regime), and non-braking (acceleration regime). 2. The unknown parameters for each of the car-following scenario (b1, b2, and b3) were considered as a function of the INVT (inverse-time-tocollision). The INVT is defined as the ratio of the speed difference between the following and the lead or back vehicles and the spacing between them.

90

3. Initially, three potential curves were defined for each parameter. For example for parameter b1 the defined curves as a function of INVT are (Curve A, B, and C shown in Fig. 6.5), for parameter b2 the defined curves as a function of INVT are (Curve D, E, and F shown in Fig. 6.6), and similarly, for parameter b3 the defined curves as a function of INVT are (Curve G, H, and I shown in Fig. 6.7). Theses defined curves provide the trend and ranges for the given parameters b1, b2, and b3. It was assumed that the drivers behave differently in response to a crash potential for the given driving situation such as braking (deceleration regime), non-braking (deceleration regime), and non-braking (acceleration regime). The curves were defined based on the hypothesis that the drivers are less or more sensitive to a rear-end crash potential in each of the car-following scenarios. For example, Curve C is relatively less sensitive to a small increase in rear-end crash potential (i.e., small negative values of inversetime-to-collision) compared to Curve A which is more sensitive to small increase in crash potential. 4. Initially, Age and Gender values for each sample were defined as the input assumed values. The optimizer was turned on from the simulation control and the ranges for Age and Gender values were also defined. The minimum and maximum bounds for the Age were input as 18 and 80, respectively. The Gender had only two possible values of 1 (female) or 0 (male).

91

5. The simulation runs result in the calibration parameters b1, b2, b3, Age, and Gender for the best fit between the simulation output and actual data. 6. To identify the best curves for b1, b2, and b3, all possible combinations of curves were tested through simulation runs. The estimated number of simulation runs was 27x45 = 1215. For each simulation run, the RMSE associated with the estimating speed of the following vehicle was calculated. The average RMSEs for the simulation runs of all curve combinations for 45 samples are given in Table 6.2.

1

0.8

Curve C 0.6 b1 Curve B Curve A 0.4 0.2 0 -1 -0.8 -0.6 INVT -0.4 -0.2 0

Figure 6.5: Assumed potential curves for calibration parameters of b1

92

1

0.8

Curve F 0.6 b2 Curve E Curve D 0.4 0.2 0 -1 -0.8 -0.6 INVT -0.4 -0.2 0

Figure 6.6: Assumed potential curves for calibration parameter b2

1.1

1.08

1.06 b3 Curve G 1.04 Curve I 1.02 1 -1 -0.8 -0.6 INVT -0.4 -0.2 0 Curve H

Figure 6.7: Assumed potential curves for calibration parameter b3

93

Table 6.2: Average RMSE associated with estimated following vehicle speed based on 45 observed samples for all combination of curves (km/h) Curve RMSE Curve RMSE Curve RMSE Combination Combination Combination A,D,G 3.9 A,E,G 8.2 C,D,G 2.2 A,D,H 5.1 A,E,H 9.4 C,D,H 3.4 A,D,I 6.7 A,E,I 11.3 C,D,I 4.8 B,E,G B,E,H B,E,I C,F,G C,F,H C,F,I 4.1 5.3 6.1 4.5 6.3 7.5 B,D,G B,D,H B,D,I A,F,G A,F,H A,F,I 3.5 4.9 5.5 6.7 8.4 12.6 B,F,G B,F,H B,F,I C,E,G C,E,H C,E,I 8.6 9.7 11.4 3.7 4.6 5.8

7. The combination of curves that resulted in the lowest average RMSE was chosen and the points associated with the chosen combination of curves were extracted. The results show that the combination of curves C, D, and G represents the lowest average RMSE of 2.2 km/h. The calibrated values of b1, b2, and b3 for 45 samples and their respective inverse-time-tocollision values for curves C, D, and G were accumulated to calibrate the relationships for b1, b2, and b3 as shown in Figs. 6.8, 6.9, and 6.10, respectively.
1.2 1 0.8
b1 = 26.214 INVT4 + 11.227 INVT3 - 0.9691 INVT2 - 0.0114 INVT + 0.9737 R2 = 0.865

0.6 0.4

Non-braking Parameter Regression Line 0.2 0 -0.35 -0.3 -0.25 -0.2 INVT -0.15 -0.1 -0.05 0

Figure 6.8: Calibrated non-braking parameter relationship

94

b1

1 b2 = 1.0441e
1.5983 INVT

R2 = 0.919

0.8 0.6 0.4 Braking Parameter Regression Line 0.2 0

-1.2

-1

-0.8

-0.6 INVT

-0.4

-0.2

0

Figure 6.9: Calibrated braking parameter relationship
1.1

b3 = -0.0259 INVT2 - 0.0946 INVT + 1 R = 0.8441
2

1.08

1.06 1.04 Non-braking Back. Veh. Parameter Regression Line 1.02 b3 1 -1.2 -1 -0.8 -0.6 INVT -0.4 -0.2 0

Figure 6.10: Calibrated non-braking back vehicle parameter relationship The calibrated relationships for b1, b2, and b3 are described in the following Eqs.:

1, b1 (t) =

INVT (t)  0

26.214 INVT (t) 4 + 11.227 INVT (t) 3 ­ 0.9691 INVT (t) 2 ­ 0.0114 INVT (t) + 0.9737, 0.8, -0.33 <INVT (t) <0 (6.11)

INVT (t)  -0.33

where, b1 (t) = non-braking parameter (deceleration regime) at time t,

95

b2

INVT (t) = inverse-time-to collision associated with the lead vehicle at time t = SL(t ) - SF (t ) . DF (t ) 1, b2 (t) = 1.044 exp [1.5983 INVT (t)], 0, where, b2 (t) = braking parameter (deceleration regime) at time t, INVT (t) = inverse-time-to collision associated with the lead vehicle at time t = SL(t ) - SF (t ) . DF (t ) 1, b3 (t) = INVTB (t)  0 INVT (t)  0 -1< INVT (t) < 0 (6.12) INVT (t)  -1

-0.0259 INVTB (t) 2 ­ 0.0946 INVTB (t) + 1, -1< INVTB (t) < 0 (6.13) 1.1, INVTB (t)  -1

where, b3 (t) = non-braking parameter (acceleration regime) at time t, INVT (t) = inverse-time-to collision associated with the back vehicle at time t = SF (t ) - SB(t ) . DB(t ) The calibration also resulted in a sample of age and gender values for 45 samples used for the calibration process. This sample was used to develop the statistical distributions of age and gender that were assumed to represent the given NGSIM database. The developed statistical distributions for Age and Gender are shown in Figs. 6.11 and 6.12, respectively.

96

The samples used for the calibration represent the vehicle dynamics on freeways. The calibration parameters suggest that in the case of deceleration regimes, the rate of change of speed is higher when the following vehicle is braking compared to when it is not braking and decelerating with only the throttle input.

Figure 6.11: Statistical distribution of age

Figure 6.12: Statistical distribution of gender

97

The parameters also suggest that drivers use the throttle input for the deceleration regime when they tend to reduce their desired speeds by 20% (Fig. 6.8). It is also observed that the lead vehicle has a dominant influence on the actions of the driver of the following vehicle. But the back vehicle can also contribute to the acceleration regime when it is approaching the following vehicle with higher speeds. In a usual practice, drivers either change their lane to avoid a conflict with the back vehicle or increase their speeds to remain in a continuous traffic flow. This study is limited to the car-following modelling and the contribution of the back vehicle in a lane-change manoeuvre can further be studied in the lane-change modelling.

6.4

Model Validation

For validation, 15 random samples of three-vehicle platoons were extracted from the NGSIM database. The samples used for the validation were different from the samples used for calibration of the proposed car-following model. The trajectory of the lead and back vehicles, and the initial position and speed of the following vehicle were provided as input to the calibrated car-following model. The age and gender of the following vehicle driver were generated based on their statistical distributions developed in the previous section as:

Random [Bernoulli Distribution [p (female) =0.57, 15] Out [gender] = [1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1]

98

Random [Poisson Distribution [  = 40.02 , 15] Out [age] = [42, 31, 38, 33, 44, 38, 35, 42, 42, 39, 30, 45, 47, 43, 49]

70

60

(a)

Speed (km/h)

50 Observed Speed Predicted Speed 40

30 0 2 4 Time (s)
40

6

8

10

35 Spacing (m)

(b)

30

25

Observed Spacing Predicted Spacing

20 0 2 4 Time (s) 6 8 10

Figure 6.13: Observed and predicted speed (a) and spacing (b) profiles

99

These values were inputted to the proposed model. Validation of the proposed car-following model was conducted by comparing the model estimates of the speed and spacing of the following vehicle with those observed in the NGSIM database. Fig. 6.13 shows the observed and predicted results associated with the following vehicle. Qualitative validation of some other samples is shown in Appendix J. It is evident that the speed and spacing profiles predicted by the proposed model closely follow those of the observed field data. For each of 15 samples, the root-mean-square (RMS) error associated with the prediction of speed and spacing of the following vehicle was estimated by using Eqs. 6.14 and 6.15, respectively.

RMS Error (SF) =

1 n 2  (SFi (t ) Model - SFi (t ) Observed ) n t =1

(6.14)

where, RMS Error (SF) = root-mean-square error associated with the speed of the following vehicle (km/h), n = number of observations (i = 1, 2, 3...n), SFi (t)
Model

= speed of the following vehicle estimated from the proposed model

at time t (km/h) for sample i, and SFi (t)
Observed

= speed of the following vehicle observed in the NGSIM database

at time t (km/h) for sample i.

100

RMS Error (DF) =

1 n (DFi (t ) Model - DFi (t ) Observed )2  n t =1

(6.15)

where, RMS Error (DF) = root-mean-square error associated with the spacing of the following vehicle (m), DF i (t) Model = spacing between the following and lead vehicles estimated from the proposed model at time t (m) for sample i, and DF i (t) Observed = spacing between the following and lead vehicles observed in the NGSIM database at time t (m) for sample i. The estimated root-mean-square (RMS) errors associated with the prediction of the speed and spacing profiles (speed and spacing vs. simulation time) of the following vehicle are given in Table 6.3. The average RMS error values for the speed and spacing for the 15 samples were 1.72 and 0.67, respectively. Table 6.3: RMSE associated with speed and spacing of the following vehicle Ave. RMSE RMSE Ave. (Spacing) Number of Observed Observed (Speed) Observations Spacing Speed Sample 1 44.5 1.34 18.51 0.19 151 2 47.0 2.17 15.18 0.32 145 3 58.9 1.11 30.32 0.24 123 4 51.4 5.01 8.330 0.45 60 5 48.5 1.27 13.44 0.29 64 6 45.3 1.65 16.45 0.56 159 7 44.2 1.86 16.98 0.50 162 8 53.4 0.76 16.02 0.28 205 9 55.0 1.29 23.67 0.38 207 10 46.3 1.26 15.45 0.32 185 11 55.1 1.63 22.3 1.12 168 12 38.7 1.20 13.4 0.64 121 13 56.2 0.96 12.6 0.78 91 14 43.5 1.85 26.8 1.86 105 15 35.3 2.35 28.6 1.86 118 Average 48.2 1.72 18.53 0.67 138

101

60 58 Speed (km/h) 56 54 52 50 48 0

Age 20M Age 20F

Age 60F Age 60M

1

2 Time (s)

3

4

5

Figure 6.14: Effect of age and gender on speed profile

30.5 30 29.5 Spacing (m) 29 Age 20F 28.5 28 27.5 27 0 1 2 Time (s) 3 4 5 Age 20M Age 60F Age 60M

Figure 6.15: Effect of age and gender on spacing profile Figs. 6.14 and 6.15 show the simulation results of a representative sample in which different driver characteristics were tested to check how the age and gender of the driver affect the speed and spacing profile of the following vehicle. It is observed that the average speeds of the females are less than those of the males. The results also show that older drivers tend to drive at lower speeds and higher spacings than young drivers under the same traffic conditions. The

102

sample length of the representative sample used for testing the driver chacracteristics was only 4 seconds.

6.5

Summary

One of the important components of traffic simulation models is a car-following model that describes the driver behaviour in a car-following situation. The existing car-following models have some limitations that may adversely affect their performance when used for the evaluation of an in-vehicle rear-end collision warning systems. This chapter presents a car-following model that addresses some limitations of the existing models. The proposed model considers variations in the driver reaction time and the impact of the front and back vehicles in the car-following situation. The proposed model explicitly considers the driver's age and gender in car-following modelling. Actual vehicle tracking data obtained from the U.S. Federal Highway Administration were used to calibrate and validate the proposed model. The results of the proposed model in terms of replicating actual speed and spacing profiles of the following vehicle are promising. In the next chapter, the developed model will be implemented for the evaluation of a proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm.

103

CHAPTER 7 DEVELOPMENT OF IN-VEHICLE REAR-END COLLISION WARNING ALGORITHM CONSIDERING DRIVER CHARACTERISTICS
This chapter describes the development of an in-vehicle rear-end collision warning algorithm that considers the driver characteristics and risk factor in the decision rule to initiate the warning to a potential rear-end collision situation. The driver characteristics include age and gender that affect the driver reaction time. The risk factor continuously monitors the driver actions in response to the actions of the lead vehicle. The risk factor is designed to minimize the nuisance

warnings and enhance the reliability of the rear-end collision warning systems (RECWS). The performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated and validated with the car-following model developed in the previous chapter.

7.1

Introduction

In this chapter, a driver-sensitive rear-end collision warning algorithm is proposed which was simulated with a previously developed car-following model to present an application example. The proposed algorithm overcomes the limitations of the existing systems. This chapter is organized into three sections: Algorithm Development that describes the logic of the proposed algorithm and its formulation and System Validation which is followed by Summary of the chapter.

104

7.2

Algorithm Development

7.2.1 Logic of the Proposed Algorithm A potential rear-end collision threat exists when it is expected that a following vehicle will collide or will nearly miss a leading vehicle travelling in its forward pathway. Three cases have been defined that may result in a rear-end collision (Lee 1976): when a lead vehicle is stationary, when a lead vehicle is moving at a constant slower speed, or when a lead vehicle is decelerating. In these cases the lead vehicle is either moving or stationary. The collision situation of the proposed algorithm considers two vehicles: a following vehicle and a lead vehicle either moving or stationary at a certain distance (Fig. 7.1). The proposed algorithm presented in this chapter is a kind of kinematicsbased algorithm. There are three main differences between the proposed algorithm and the existing kinematics-based algorithms: the assumption of a constant driver reaction time is removed, it continuously monitors the risk factor that helps to identify a potential collision threat, and the required deceleration rate that depends on the likelihood of the warning (Lw) which also represents the level of a collision threat.

Age Gender Speed (SF)

Spacing (DF)

Speed (SL)

Follower vehicle

Lead vehicle

Figure 7.1: Car-following scenario for a rear-end collision

105

Rear-end collision warning criterion is developed based on the available and required deceleration times (Ta and Tr) for the following vehicle to avoid a potential collision with the lead vehicle. However, these deceleration times are proposed to be calculated for the two stages: one at the risk factor (RF) and the other at the likelihood for the warning (Lw). The risk factor is introduced to avoid the false alarms. If the RF is less than one, the algorithm will stop and will start recalculating the values based on the updated input data. If the RF is more than or equal 1, then the algorithm will calculate the likelihood of the warning (Lw) which is calculated based on the revised available and required deceleration times (Tar and Trr). The logic of the algorithm is presented in Fig. 7.2. The text in italic designates the input. The steps of the algorithm are as follows (the step number is indicated in the figure): 1. The spacing between the following and lead vehicles at time t depends on the speed of the following and lead vehicles (Eq. 7.3). 2. Reaction time of the following vehicle driver to a driving situation at time t depends on driver characteristics, speed of the following vehicle, and spacing between the following and lead vehicles (Eqs. 7.4 and 7.5). 3. The available deceleration time (Ta) at time t depends on the driver reaction time, safe buffer distance, current spacing between the following and lead vehicles, and current speed of the following vehicle (Eq. 7.2). 4. Driver characteristics such as age and gender are user input values.

5. Comfortable deceleration rate at time t depends on the current speed of
the following vehicle (Eq. 7.10).

106

1

1 4

9

3

2 3
2

2
Driver Characteristics Age, Gender

3
9 3

3
7

5
6

7
11
Driver Characteristics Age, Gender

6
11

11 4 9 8

5
6 6

10
9

10
9 11

11

11

11

12 12

12

5

Figure 7.2: Logic of the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm

107

6. The required deceleration time (Tr) at time t depends on the current speed
and deceleration rate of the following vehicle (Eq. 7.6). 7. The risk factor at time t depends on the available and required deceleration times (Eq. 7.1). 8. The driver reaction time to the warning (RTw) depends on driver characteristics such as age and gender (Eq. 7.14). 9. The revised available deceleration time (Tar) at time t depends on the reaction time to the warning, sensor delay, current speed of the following vehicle, and the spacing between the following and lead vehicles (Eq. 7.13). 10. The likelihood of the warning (Lw) at time t depends on the revised available and required deceleration times (Eq. 7.12). 11. The warning will only be initiated when both the risk factor and the likelihood of the warning will be equal to or more than 1. 12. In case of a warning initiation, the required deceleration rate depends on the comfortable deceleration rate, the likelihood of the warning, and the risk factor. 7.2.2 Algorithm Formulation The variables considered in the algorithm include age, gender and reaction time of the driver of the following vehicle, speed of the lead and following vehicles, grade of the terrain, comfortable deceleration rate of the following vehicle, and spacing between the lead and following vehicles. Depending on the vehicle user's information, driver age and gender would be as the input variables into the

108

proposed algorithm. The grade of the terrain can be measured using a Global Positioning System (GPS). Various systems are available to collect the data associated with the lead and following vehicles such as their speeds and spacing between them. These systems use different technologies such as optical, electromagnetic radar, and ultrasonic. The Ta of the risk factor is calculated based on the reaction time (RT) of the driver of the following vehicle for the given driving situation, while Tar for the Lw is calculated based on the reaction time to the warning (RTw). The reaction time to the warning only depends on the age and gender of the driver of the following vehicle. However, in addition to the age and gender, the reaction time to a driving situation also depends on the speed of the following vehicle and the spacing between the following and lead vehicles. It is observed that at a lower TTC, the driver will have a reaction time lower than the reaction time to the warning (RTw). Under such circumstances, the RF will be dominant for the calculation of the required deceleration rate (Ar). The RF at time t is calculated as follows:

RF(t) = where,

Tr (t ) Ta (t )

(7.1)

Tr(t) and Ta(t) = the required and available deceleration times at time t, respectively (s).

109

The Tr is the time during which drivers apply deceleration rate and stop the vehicle safely. In an ideal safe driving situation the Tr will be equal to Ta. The Ta is calculated as follows: DF (t ) - min (2, RT (t ) )SF (t ) - S b SF (t )

Ta(t) = where, SF(t) Sb

(7.2)

= current speed of the following vehicle at time t (m/s), = safe buffer distance between the following and the lead vehicles, say 1 m,

RT

= reaction time to the driving situation at time t (s). The maximum reaction time of 2 s is proposed since at a very high TTC the RT will also be very high and it will reduce the reliability of the system, and

DF(t)

= current distance headway between the following and lead vehicles at time t (m) which is calculated as follows:

DF(t) where, DF(t ­ dt) SL dt

= DF(t ­ dt) + [SL(t) ­ SF(t)] dt

(7.3)

= spacing between the following and lead vehicles at time (t ­ dt) (m), = current speed of the lead vehicle at time t (m/s), and = time interval, say 0.1.

In an earlier study, Mehmood and Easa (2009) conducted a driving simulator study to identify the effect of human factors such as the age and gender and kinematics (speed and spacing) on driver reaction time in a carfollowing situation. Three car-following situations were studied: the lead vehicle

110

decelerating with a normal deceleration rate, the lead vehicle decelerating with an emergency deceleration rate (surprised), and the lead vehicle is not moving (stationary). The reaction-time models for each driving situation were developed based on the data collected in the simulator study. The surprised and the lead vehicle stationary scenarios were more probable to the rear-end collisions. Therefore, it is assumed that the reaction-time models developed for the surprised and stationary conditions can be used for a rear-end collision analysis. The developed reaction-time models are as follows:

RTsr(t) = 0.001 Age + 0.109 Gender + 0.003 SF(t) + 0.023 DF(t)

(7.4)

RTst(t) = 0.002 Age + 0.035 Gender + 0.001 SF(t) + 0.017 DF(t)

(7.5)

where, RTsr(t) and RTst(t) = brake reaction times for the surprised and stopped driving situations at time t (s), respectively, Age Gender = age of the driver of the following vehicle (years), and = gender of the driver of the following vehicle (0 for males and 1 for females).

The Tr at time t can be calculated as follows:

Tr (t) =

SF (t ) 2 ADF (t )

(7.6)

111

where, ADF (t) = deceleration rate of the following vehicle at time t (m/s2) and can be defined by a car-following model (Mehmood and Easa 2010a),

ADF (t) =  where, DSF(t) BRT(t)

 DSF(t )b2 (t ) - SF(t )   BRT(t )  

(7.7)

= desired speed of the following vehicle at time t (m/s), = brake reaction time of the driver of the following vehicle at time t (s) and is defined in Eqs. 7.4 and 7.5, and

b2

= calibration braking parameter at time t.

The relationships for the desired speed (DSF) and the calibration braking parameter (b2) were calibrated using the NGSIM vehicle tracking data. The calibration is already discussed in the previous chapter. These relationships are as follows: DSF(t) = (-0.0181DF2(t) + 2.6148DF(t) ­ 6.5262) x 0.278 0 DF(t) > 6 m (7.8) DF(t)  6 m

1 b2 (t) = 1.044 exp [1.5983 INVT (t)] 0 where, b2 (t) = braking parameter (deceleration regime) at time t,

INVT (t)  0 -1< INVT (t) < 0 (7.9) INVT (t)  -1

112

INVT (t) = inverse-time-to-collision associated with the lead vehicle at time t = SL(t ) - SF (t ) . DF (t ) Krishnan et al. (2001) developed an equation to determine the comfortable deceleration rate (Af) that was dependent on the current speed of the following vehicle. The ADF was constraint to be less than or equal to the comfortable deceleration rate,

ADF (t)  Af (t) = -0.735 ­ 0.0859 SF(t)

(7.10)

Eq. 7.6 corresponds to a level terrain. However, the braking manoeuver can also occur on a downgrade or an upgrade terrain. Therefore, the analysis should include the gradient of the roadway. As defined by AASHTO (2004), Eq. 7.6 can be modified as follows:

Tr (t) =

SF (t )  ADF (t )  2g ± G   g  

(7.11)

where, g = acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m/s2), and G = grade in slope (%)

The likelihood for the warning at time t is calculated as follows: Lw (t) =
Trr (t ) Tar (t )

(7.12)

113

The Trr (t) will be the same as of in Eq. 7.11 but Tar will be calculated based on the reaction time to the warning (RTw).

Tar (t) =

(DF (t ) - R.Tw SF (t ) - S b )
SF (t )

(7.13)

Dabbour and Easa (2009) developed an equation to determine the reaction time (RTw) of the driver in response to the warning of a collision warning system. It was found that the reaction time to the warning depends on the age and gender of the driver of the vehicle and is given by

RTw = 0.2466 + 0.0241 Age + 0.1353 Gender

(7.14)

The system will only trigger the warning if both RF and Lw are more than or equal to one. As mentioned previously, the minimum of RF and Lw will be used to calculate the required deceleration rate. The required deceleration rate at time t, Ar (m/s2) will be calculated as follows:

Ar (t) = Min [RF (t), Lw (t)] Af (t)

(7.15)

It is assumed that drivers will follow the warning otherwise the required deceleration will be increased with the delay in response to the warning. It is also anticipated that drivers will apply an emergency deceleration rate which ranged from 5-8 m/s2. In case of a warning, the required deceleration rate will always be more than the normal or comfortable deceleration rate which is usually 3.4 m/s2

114

or less (AASHTO 2004). The percentage increase in the required deceleration rate compared to the comfortable deceleration rate will show a potential critical situation for a driver of the following vehicle.

7.3

Validation of the Proposed Algorithm

When a rear-end collision warning system initiates a warning its performance can be evaluated by answering some questions: (a) Was the warning early, late, or appropriate? (b) Has the collision occurred or not? (c) If a collision has occurred, what was the impact velocity? The system performance can be validated with performance measures such as deceleration rate and driver reaction time. An application example is presented to evaluate and validate the performance of the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm. In application example, the following vehicle is posed to a potential rear-end collision situation. The proposed warning algorithm will initiate the warning if it is determined that the following vehicle is in an uncomfortable driving situation and a rear-end collision may occur. When the warning is issued, the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm also determines the required deceleration rate to avoid the collision. The same rear-end collision situation was then simulated with the car-following model developed in Chapter 6. Car-following model assumes that the driver is attentive, in the same way when a warning is issued and the driver becomes attentive. To validate the system performance, the deceleration rate produced by the car-following model is compared to the required deceleration rate determined by the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm. The proposed system

115

performance is also compared to an existing kinematics-based rear-end collision warning algorithm developed by Burgett et al. (1998) as explained earlier in Chapter 2. Before presenting an application example, it is necessary to describe the system input and output variables, warning criterion, warning threshold, and assumed assumptions. Table 7.1 summarizes the input and output variables, warning criteria, and warning threshold used in the proposed and Burgett et al. (1998) algorithms. Weather was not considered in testing of these systems since unfavourable roadway conditions can influence the occurence of a rear-end collision rather than a driver distraction. It is identified that 74% of the rear-end collisions occured when the drivers were inattentive and 86% of those collisions occurred during the daytime (Baldock et al. 2005). Therefore, it is assumed that the day is sunny, weather is fine, and the driver is inattentive when he/she is posed to a potential rear-end collision situation.

Table 7.1: Description of collision warning systems Algorithm Warning Warning Input Criteria Threshold Variables Proposed RF, Lw RF & Lw > 1 SF, SL, DF, Algorithm Age, Gender Burgett et al. (1998) Rw Rw SF, SL, DF, RT=1.5 sec, Ar=7.35 m/s2

Output Variables RF, Lw, RTw,RTst, Warning, Ar Rw ,Warning

116

In Table 7.1: Rw = range for the warning and explained earlier in Chapter 2 (Eq. 2.7). 7.3.1 Application Example It is assumed that a following vehicle is travelling on a level terrain (g = 0) at a speed of 100 km/h and approaching a lead vehicle which is stationary at distance of 130 meters. As explained earlier, it is assumed that the driver is distracted and did not observe the stationary lead vehicle. It is also assumed that the driver of the following vehicle is 20 years old and is female. Performance of the proposed and Burgett et al. (1998) algorithms are evaluated for this potential rear-end collision situation. The input and output data based on these two algorithms are described in Table 7.2. For the given driving situation, the proposed algorithm initiated the warning at a distance of 130 meters while Burgett et al. (1998) algorithm initiated the warning at a warning range of 96 meters. The proposed algorithm calculated the expected reaction time of the driver of the following vehicle as 0.87 sec. The Burgett et al. (1998) algorithm assumes the driver reaction time as 1.5 sec. If the driver of the following vehicle will follow the warning initiated by the proposed algorithm then he/she will start braking at a distance of 106 meters. Table 7.2: Application example input & output data Algorithm Input Data Proposed SF=100 km/h, SL=0, DF=130 m, Algorithm Ag=20, Gender=Female Burgett et al. (1998) SF =100 km/h, SL= 0, DF=130 m, RT=1.5 sec, Ar=7.35 m/s2 Output Data RF=1.66, Lw=1.16, RTst=2.39 sec RTw =0.87 sec, Ar=3.63 m/s2 Warning=Yes, Rw=96 m, Warning=Yes

117

The driver of the following vehicle equipped with Burgett et al. (1998) algorithm will start braking at a distance of 54 meters. The proposed algorithm determines the required deceleration rate as 3.63 m/s2. The Burgett et al. (1998) algorithm assumes the required deceleration rate of 7.35 m/s2. After the initiation of a warning, it is assumed that the driver will become aware of the situation and will follow the required deceleration rate to avoid the potential rear-end collision. The proposed algorithm initiates the warning only when the required deceleration rate is more than the normal or comfortable deceleration rate. The performance of the proposed and Burgett et al. (1998) algorithms were evaluated by answering the same questions as defined earlier in section 7.3 (Table 7.3). To validate the system performance, the same driving situation was simulated with the car-following simulation model described in Eqs. 7.8 and 7.9 but the condition of comfortable deceleration rate defined in Eq. 7.10 was released. The required deceleration rates of the both algorithms are compared with the average deceleration rate calculated by the car-following simulation model.

Table 7.3: Evaluation and validation of the system performance for application example % Match Algorithm Warning/ELA Collision Impact Ar ADF Velocity (m/s2) (m/s2) (km/h) Proposed Yes/A No 0 3.67 4.45 82% Algorithm Burgett et al. (1998) Yes/L Yes 6 km/h 7.35 6.90 94%

118

In Table 7.3: ELA = E stands for "early warning", L stands for "late warning", and A stands for "appropriate warning". Table 7.3 shows that the proposed algorithm initiates an appropriate warning that avoids the collision and the required deceleration rate also closely matched with the average deceleration rate produced by the car-following simulation model. The required deceleration rate assumed by the Burgett et al. (1998) algorithm also matched with the average deceleration rate produced by the car-following model but it overestimates the required deceleration rate that results in a collision and the warning turns out to be a late warning. Humans are not perfect and one cannot expect that all drivers will follow exactly the same assumed deceleration rate (7.35 m/s2) for all potential rear-end collision situations, as suggested by the Burgget et al. (1998). Wear and tear of the old cars also reduces the braking capability of the vehicles that may also hamper in achieving the maximum required deceleration rate of 7.35 m/s2. The proposed algorithm calculates the driver reaction time and deceleration rate of the following vehicle based on the driving situation such as speeds of the following and back vehicles, distance headway as well as driver characteristics such as age and gender of the driver of the following vehicle. Since these parameters vary for different drivers, the warning initiated by the proposed algorithm also varies for different types of drivers. If it is supposed that the driver would have been 55 years old female then the proposed algorithm calculates the driver reaction time and the required deceleration rate as 1.7 sec

119

and 4.72 m/s2, respectively. Results also suggest that the warning is only triggered when the required deceleration rate is more than the normal or comfortable deceleration rate. When the lead vehicle is moving, the available deceleration time will be more compared to when the lead vehicle is not moving. The warning is only issued when the RF and Lw will be equal to or more than 1. 7.3.2 Sensitivity Analysis To further evaluate and validate the proposed system performance, a sensitivity analysis was done in which the driver reaction time and required deceleration rates were tested for potential rear-end collision situations at different speeds and spacing for drivers of different age and gender. Sensitivity analysis depicts that how a given system output depends upon the input parameters for a given driving situation. This is an important method to check the quality, robustness, and reliability of the system output parameters. The warning algorithm depends on the current speeds of the lead and following vehicles, current following distance, and age and gender of the driver of the following vehicle. The output parameters include driver reaction time and deceleration rate of the following vehicles. Each scenario was also simulated with the car-following simulation model (Eqs. 7.7 and 7.8) and deceleration rates (ADF) were compared with the required deceleration rate (Ar) determined by the proposed algorithm. It is evident that the ADF and Ar were closely matched (Table 7.4) that supports the hypothesis that the results produced by the proposed algorithm are reliable.

120

Table 7.4: Evaluation and validation of the system performance for different scenarios Impact % Match RTw RTst Ar ADF Velocity (sec) (sec) (m/s2) (m/s2) System Input Data (km/h) SF=100 km/h, SL=0, 0 1.70 2.45 4.72 5.86 80% DF=130 m, Age=55, Gender=Female SF=50 km/h, SL=0, DF=30 m, Age=30, Gender=Male SF=40 km/h, SL=0, DF=20 m, Age=45, Gender=Male SF=60 km/h, SL=0, DF=40 m, Age=35, Gender=Male 0 0.96 0.62 4.97 5.55 90%

0

1.33

0.47

4.83

5.27

92%

0

1.10

0.81

5.66

6.43

88%

7.4

Summary

The proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm presented in this chapter is a kind of kinematics-based algorithm. The main differences between the proposed algorithm and the existing kinematics-based algorithms are related to the driver reaction time, risk factor, and required deceleration rate. Specifically, the driver reaction time used in the proposed new collision warning algorithm is based on both kinematics and individual driver characteristics. The risk factor which depends on the available and required deceleration times continuously tracks the actions of the following vehicle driver in response to the actions of the lead vehicle. If the driver is attentive and responding properly in response to the actions of the leading vehicle then the risk factor will not allow the algorithm to trigger the warning. This reduces the number of false warnings and will improve

121

the reliability of the proposed collision warning algorithm. The performance of the proposed rear-end collision warning system was evaluated and validated by presenting an application example and sensitivity analysis for different scenarios. The results of the application example were also compared to an existing Burgett et al. (1998) rear-end collision warning system. It is observed that the proposed system is functioning properly and triggering acceptable and reliable warnings.

122

CHAPTER 8 CONTRIBUTIONS, CONCLUSIONS, AND FUTURE RESEARCH
This chapter describes a summary of the thesis contributions and presents conclusions and suggestions for future research.

8.1

Thesis Contributions

This thesis presents a driver-sensitive framework for the design of a rear-end collision warning algorithm. The framework comprised of three main components: modelling driver reaction time in car-following situations based on human factors, developing an improved driver-sensitive car-following simulation model, and testing of the proposed new rear-end collision warning system using the developed car-following model. The summary of the contributions and concluding remarks on the framework are described in the following sections. 8.1.1 Contributions in Modelling Driver Reaction Time A comprehensive driving simulator study was conducted in which car-following simulation scenarios were designed to study the effect of kinematics (speed and spacing) and individual driver characteristics (e.g., age, gender) on driver reaction time. The car-following scenarios tested for modelling the driver reaction time include normal, surprised, stationary, and acceleration regime. These scenarios were designed based on the deceleration behaviour of the lead vehicle. In normal, surprised, and stationary scenarios, the lead vehicle is decelerating with a normal deceleration rate, surprised deceleration rate (more

123

than normal), and stationary, respectively. It was found that both kinematics (such as the speed and the spacing between the following and lead vehicles) and individual driver characteristics (such age and gender) have significant effects on driver brake reaction time (BRT) in a car-following situation. For a car-following acceleration regime, a visual signal such as speed limit sign was used to determine the driver acceleration reaction time (ADRT). The reaction-time models were developed for all of the tested car-following situations (normal, surprised, stationary, and acceleration regime). The developed reaction-time models were used in developing the car-following model and a rear-end collision warning algorithm. Overall, this human factors study has explored the effect of driver and situational factors on driver reaction time and presented analytical models for BRT and ADRT which are necessary inputs for car-following and rear-end collision warning algorithms. The driver factors include age, gender, driving experience, and driving intensity and the situational factors include speed, spacing, urgency, and expectancy. Based on this study the following comments are offered: 1) The results of this study have important theoretical and practical implications. The theoretical issues concern the different driver behaviours in the normal, surprised, and stationary conditions and the variables that influence driver reaction time. The reaction time addressed in this study includes brake reaction time and acceleration-deceleration reaction time. The practical issues concern the modelling of the driver reaction time in different driving

124

situations and its application in car-following and rear-end collision warning algorithms. At higher speeds, for example 90 km/h, every hundredth of a second can reduce the stopping distance by 0.25 m. Therefore, every fraction of a second is important in modelling driver reaction time in a car-following situation. 2) The results support the hypothesis that both urgency and expectancy have significant effects on brake reaction time. The age, gender, speed, and distance headway were found to be significant variables that affect BRT in the normal, surprised, and stationary conditions. However, age was not found to be a significant variable in predicting the BRT for the normal scenario when it was combined with gender, speed, and distance headway. The age and gender variables were found to be significant in predicting the

acceleration/deceleration reaction time. The study also supports the hypothesis that BRT increases with age and that females are slower than males. The trend of both age and gender is the same in the analysis of BRT and ADRT. 3) For the situational factors, the BRT decreases with the increase in speed in the normal scenario, and increases with the increase in speed in the surprised and stationary scenarios. This variation of the speed behaviour is most likely due to the braking behaviour of the lead vehicle. The stationary scenario also acts like a surprised scenario when a lead stationary vehicle appears, for a following vehicle diver, in a surprised way. Therefore, the effect of speed (BRT increases with the speed) in both of these scenarios is the

125

same. It was also found that the BRT increases with the increase in distance headway in all scenarios. The repeated measures ANOVA and regression analysis do not support the hypothesis that driving experience and driving intensity are significant variables that affect the brake reaction time in a normal, surprised, or stationary scenario. 4) The results for the effect of age and gender on BRT agree with those of Broen and Chiang (1996) and Lings (1990), respectively. The results for the effect of speed and distance headway agree with those of Schweitzer et al. (1995). Besides exploring these effects, the thesis research has presented analytical models that are necessary for car-following analysis. Specifically, the BRT model (for the normal scenario) and the ADRT model were useful in modelling the car-following simulation algorithm. The surprised and stationary car-following situations will more likely contribute to a rear-end collision situation compared to normal situations in which the lead vehicle's braking behaviour is within the normal deceleration rates. Therefore, the BRT models for the surprised and stopped conditions are useful in modelling rear-end collision warning systems. 8.1.2 Contributions in Car-following Modelling This research has presented a new and improved car-following model, based on the system dynamics principles, that has addressed some limitations of existing car-following models. The existing models do not consider driver characteristics in modelling driver behaviour in a car-following situation. Besides, they only use the information associated with the lead vehicle such as its speed and the

126

spacing between the following and lead vehicles. The proposed car-following model explicitly considers driver characteristics (age and gender) and accounts for the information about the back vehicle in modelling driver behaviour. These improvements represent the key contributions of the present study to carfollowing modelling. Based on this research, the following comments are offered: 1) The proposed car-following model is driver-sensitive and accounts for the information about the back vehicle of the following vehicle. The model assumes that the drivers travel in three regimes: coasting, accelerating, and decelerating. The deceleration regime is further classified into two regimes based on the lead vehicle's braking and non-braking scenarios. The reaction time used in the acceleration and deceleration regimes is assumed to depend on vehicle dynamics and driver characteristics. Unique parameters are developed for the acceleration and deceleration regimes. The results show that the rate of change of speed is higher for the braking deceleration regime than that for the non-braking deceleration regime. The back vehicle can only contribute to the acceleration regime if it is approaching the following vehicle with a speed higher than the speed of the following vehicle. 2) The calibration of the parameters was performed using the NGSIM vehicle trajectory data collected on freeways. Therefore, the observations for the calibration parameters may vary for other roadway classes. The calibration process resulted in a sample of driver population that represents the NGSIM data. For validation purposes, the statistical distributions of that sample were used to generate the age and gender values. This was a fair assumption as it

127

is similar to other calibration parameters that were assumed to represent the NGSIM data. 3) This research is the first attempt of car-following modelling in which driver characteristics were considered explicitly in determining the

acceleration/deceleration rate of the following vehicle. It was found that males and young drivers drive at higher speeds and lower spacing than females and older drivers, respectively. The model estimates of the spacing and speed profiles of the following vehicle were compared with actual field data and the model showed excellent correspondence. 8.1.3 Contributions in Developing Rear-end Collision Warning Algorithm This research also proposed a new rear-end collision warning algorithm (RECWA). The proposed RECWA addressed some limitations of the existing systems. The existing systems assume specific values of driver reaction time in their design and evaluation. It is also known that existing algorithms initiate early or late warnings that may undermine their performance and reliability. Based on this research, the following comments are offered: 1) Unlike existing rear-end collision warning algorithms, the driver reaction time in the proposed algorithm depends on the driving situation and individual driver characteristics such as age and gender. A risk factor is also introduced which continuously tracks the driver actions in response to the lead vehicle actions. If the driver is attentive and responding properly to the actions of the lead vehicle, the risk factor is less than 1; then the proposed algorithm will not

128

initiate the warning (Mehmood and Easa 2010b). This will minimize the nuisance warnings and will enhance the reliability of the proposed RECWA. 2) The risk factor and the likelihood of warning depend on the available and required deceleration times. The available deceleration time was calculated based on driver reaction time, speed of the following and lead vehicles, and the spacing between them. The required deceleration time depends on the current speed and the comfortable deceleration rate. 3) The performance of the proposed RECWA is evaluated by using a carfollowing simulation model which was developed earlier in this research study. The proposed algorithm initiates the warning when a driver is inattentive and poses a driving condition where the required deceleration rate is higher than the normal or comfortable deceleration rate. The proposed algorithm also calculates the required deceleration rate at the onset of the warning. A sensitivity analysis was done in which a few potential rear-end collision scenarios were simulated, for drivers of different ages and genders, with the car-following simulation model. The required deceleration rates calculated by the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm closely matched the average deceleration rates predicted by the car-following simulation model. These results proved that the proposed RECWA is functioning properly and producing reliable results.

129

8.2

Conclusions

The thesis research presented a framework for the development of an in-vehicle rear-end collision warning algorithm (RECWA). The proposed RECWA is a kind of kinematics-based algorithm that considers driver characteristics in its design and evaluation and initiates reliable warnings. As part of the framework development, a human factors study was conducted to model the driver reaction time in car-following scenarios. It is concluded that the driver reaction time in carfollowing scenarios depends on individual driver characteristics such as age and gender, and kinematics such as the speed of the following vehicle and the spacing between the following and lead vehicles. The driver reaction-time models were used to develop a car-following model that considered driver characteristics and addressed some limitations of the existing models. The improved carfollowing model considers different driver reaction times in acceleration and deceleration regimes and considers the information of the back vehicle in modelling the car-following driver behaviour. It is concluded that older drivers and females drive at lower speeds and higher spacing compared to young drivers and males, respectively. The car-following model is calibrated and validated with NGSIM individual vehicle tracking data. The car-following model is validated qualitatively as well as quantitatively. Since driver characteristics are considered in the design of the proposed RECWA, the algorithm will produce timely warnings for the drivers of different ages and genders. The reliability of the proposed algorithm is improved by introducing a risk factor that determines the risk of a potential rear-end collision.

130

The performance of the proposed algorithm is validated with the developed driver-sensitive car-following simulation model. The results are encouraging and it is concluded that the algorithm is functioning properly. It helps to reduce the likelihood of a collision when issued to a distracted driver. The human factors that need to be considered in the design of a rear-end collision warning system include driver performance, driver control requirements, driver reaction time, false alarms, warning message timing, baseline driver behaviour, system standardization and guidelines, and warning message modality and design. The factors considered in the design of the proposed rearend collision warning algorithm include: (a) Baseline driver behaviour: a driver behaviour car-following model is developed to evaluate the performance of the proposed RECWA ; Older drivers: driver age is considered; (b) Driver reaction time, driver reaction-time models are developed based on human factors; (c) False alarms, a risk factor is introduced that continuously tracks the driver actions and avoids the possibility of false alarms; and (d) Warning message timings: the proposed algorithm only triggers the warning when the crash potential is imminent and driver can observe the potential collision situation.

8.3

Future Research

Further development and refinement of the proposed framework can be carried out with the following future directions. 1) The reaction-time models used in this study were calibrated based on the data collected in a "human factors study". These calibration parameters would

131

be useful at the early stage of using such a warning system. As the system is used for some time, the system can accumulate such data for the specific user(s) of the vehicle and use them to calibrate driver-specific parameters. The calibration of driver-specific parameters should be further explored in future research. 2) It is recommended that other human factors such as system standardization and guidelines, warning message modality and design, driver performance (driver workload), and driver control requirements (controlled parameters for system users) should be studied in the future research or when the proposed algorithm is used to design a prototype rear-end collision warning system. 3) Microscopic traffic simulation programs are composed of several models including car-following, lane-change, origin-destination information, and vehicle routing, etc. Like a driver-sensitive car-following model, developed in this thesis, a lane-change model should also be developed that should also incorporate the effect of driver characteristics in the lane-change driver behaviour. 4) Once a traffic simulation program containing driver-sensitive car-following and lane-change models is developed, it can be applied for a macroscopic traffic analysis to identify the impact of individual driver characteristics on traffic operations. A survey of age and gender of the drivers expected to use the proposed network or corridor can be conducted to develop the statistical distributions that can be used to generate driver characteristics for a macroscopic traffic analysis.

132

5) Although it is being verified that the proposed rear-end collision warning algorithm is functioning properly, before presenting a commercial product, it should be integrated with a driving simulator or into a real car, and experiments should be conducted to further evaluate its benefits.

133

REFERENCES AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials) (2004). A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. Washington, DC. Alm, H., and Nilsson, L. (1994). Changes in driver behaviour as a function of handsfree mobile phones-A simulator study. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 26, 441­451. Aron, M. (1988). Car-following in an urban network: Simulation and experiments. In Proceedings of Seminar D, 16th PTRC Meeting, 29-39. Aycin, M.F., and Benekohal, R.F. (1998). Linear acceleration car-following model development and validation. Transportation Research Record 1644, Transportation Research Board, Washington, National Research Council, D.C., 10-19. Baldock, M. R. J., Long A.D., Lindsay V.L, and McLean, A J (2005). Rear-End Crashes. Report No: CASR018. Center for Automotive Safety Research, University of Adelaide, Australia. Benekohal, R. and Treiterer, J. (1988). CARSIM: Car-following model for simulation of traffic in normal and stop-and-go conditions. Transportation Research Record 1194, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, Washington, D.C., 99-111. Brackstone M. and McDonald M. (1999). Car-following: A historical review. Transp. Res., Part F: Traffic Psychol. Behav., 2(4), 181­196.

134

Broen, N., and Chiang, D. (1996). Braking response times for 100 drivers in the avoidance of an unexpected obstacle as measured in a driving simulator. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 40, 900­904. Brown, T. L., Lee, J. D., and McGehee, D. V. (2001). Human performance models and rear-end collision avoidance algorithms. Human Factors, 43(3), 462-482. Burgett, A.L. (1994) Methodologies for Evaluating the Impact on Safety of Intelligent VehicleHighway Systems. 14th Int. Tech. Conf. on Enhanced Safety of Vehicles, No. 94 S3 0 12, Munich, May 1994. Burgett, A., Carter, A., Miller, R., Najim, W., and Smith, D. (1998). A Collision Warning Algorithm for Rear-End Collisions, 16th International Technical Conference on the Enhanced Safety of Vehicles (ESV), Windsor, Canada, June 1-4, 1998, Paper No. 98-S2-P-31. Campbell, J. L., Carney, C., and Kantowitz, B. H. (1998). Human factors design guidelines for advanced traveler information systems (ATIS) and

commercial vehicle operations (CVO). Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration. Chandler, R.E., Herman, R., and Montrol, E.W. (1958). Traffic dynamics: Studies in car-following. Operation Research, 1(2),165-184. Chang, M.S., Messer, C.J., and Santiago, A.J. (1985). Timing Traffic Signal Change Intervals Based on Driver Behaviour. Transportation Research Record 1027, 20-30.

135

Dabbour, E. and Easa, S (2009). Perceptual framework for a modern left-turn collision warning system. International Journal of Applied Science, Engineering and Technology, 5(1), 2009, 8-14. Deatherage, B.H. (1972). Auditory and Other Sensory Forms of Information Presentation. In H.P. Van Cott and R.G. Kinkade (Eds.), Human Engineering Guide to Equipment Design (Rev. Ed.). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 123-160. Dingus, T.A.; Hulse, M.C.; and Barfield, W. (1998). Human-System Interface Issues in the Design and Use of Advanced Traveler Information Systems. In W. Barfield and T.A. Dingus (Eds.), Human Factors in Intelligent Transportation Systems. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Drew, D. R. (1995). System Dynamics: Modeling and Applications, ENGR 5104 Study Notes, VPI and SU, Blacksburg, VA. Ervin, R., MacAdam, C., Vayda, A., and Anderson, E. (2001). Applying the SAVME database on inter-vehicle kinematics to explore the natural driving environment. Presented at 80th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C. Farber B. (1991). Designing a distance warning system from the user point of view. APSIS report, Glonn-Haslach: Institute fur Arbeitspsychologie and Interdisziplinare Systemforchung. Gazis, D.C., Herman, R., and Rothery, R.W. (1961). Nonlinear follow-the-leader models of traffic flow. Operation Research, 9(4), 545-567.

136

Gipps, P.G. (1981). A Behavioural car following model for computer simulation. Transportation Research B, 15(B),105-111. Graham, A.K (1980). Parameter Estimation in System Dynamics Models, Studies in the Management Sciences: System Dynamics Review, Vol. 14. pp. 125142. Green, M. (2000). "How long does it take to stop? Methodological analysis of driver perception-brake times." Transportation Human Factors, 2, 195­216. Hanken, A. and Rockwell, T.H. (1967). A model of car following derived empirically by piece-wise regression analysis. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium on the Theory of Traffic Flow, New York, 40-41. Hankey, J. (1996). Unalerted emergency avoidance at an intersection and possible implications for ABS implementation. Ames: University of Iowa. Helly, W. (1959). Simulation of bottlenecks in single lane traffic flow. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Traffic Flow, Research Laboratories, General Motors, 207-238, Elsevier, New York. Heyes, M.P. and Ashworth, R. (1972). Further research on car-following models. Transportation Research, 6, 287-291. Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) (2000). Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, Washington, D.C. Hirst, S., and Graham, R. (1997). The format and perception of collision warnings. In Y. I. Noy (Ed.), Ergonomics and Safety of Intelligent Driver Interfaces, Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 230-219.

137

Horowitz, A.D. and Dingus, T.A. (1992). Warning System Design: A Key Human Factors Issue in an In-Vehicle Front-to-Rear-End Collision Warning System. Proceedings from the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 36th Annual Meeting, Atlanta, GA, 1011-1013. Hogema J.H. and Janssen W.H. (1996). Effect of Intelligent Cruise Control on Driving Behaviour. Human Factors, Soesterberg, The Netherlands. Report TM-1996-C-12. Hranac, R., Margiotta, R., and Alexiadis, V. (2005). Next generation simulation (NGSIM) high-level data plan, Report to Federal Highway Administration, FHWA-HOP-06-011, 2005. ITS America (1997). Proceedings of Intelligent Vehicle Initiative Human Factors Workshop. Washington, DC. Janssen, W.H. and Nilsson, L. (1990). An Experimental Evaluation of In-Vehicle Collision Avoidance Systems. (Drive Project V1041). The Netherlands: Traffic Research Center. Kiefer, R., D. LeBlanc, M. Palmer, J. Salinger, R. Deering, and M. Shulman. (1999). Development and Validation of Functional Definitions and Evaluation Procedures for Collision Warning/Avoidance Systems. NHTSA Technical Report DOT-HS-808-964. Crash Avoidance Metrics Partnership (CAMP), Farmington Hills, Mich. Kikuchi, S. and Chakroborty, P. (1992). Car-following model based on fuzzy inference system. Transportation Research Record 1365, Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 82-91.

138

King, R.A. and Corso, G.M. (1993). Auditory Displays: If They Are So Useful, Why Are They Turned Off? Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 37th Annual Meeting, Santa Monica, CA, 549-553. Kometani, E. and Sasaki, T. (1959). Dynamic behaviour of traffic with a nonlinear spacing-speed relationship. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Theory of Traffic Flow, Research Laboratories, General Motors, 105-119. Korteling, J. E. (1990). Perception­response speed and driving capabilities of brain-damaged and older drivers. Human Factors, 32, 95­108. Krishnan, H., Gibb, S., Steinfeld, A., and Shladover, S. (2001). Rear-end Collision-Warning System: Design and Evaluation via Simulation.

Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1759, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., 50­60. Lamble, D., Kauranen, T., Laakso, M., and Summala, H. (1999). Cognitive load and detection thresholds in car following situations: Safety implications for using mobile (cellular) telephones while driving. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 31, 617­623. Lee, David N. (1976). A Theory of Visual Control of Braking Based on Information about Time-to-Collision. Perception 5(4), 437-459. Lee, J. and Moray, N. (1992). Trust and the Allocation of Function in the Control of Automatic Systems. Ergonomics, 35, 1243-1270.

139

Lerner, N.D. (1993). Brake Perception-Reaction Times of Older and Younger Drivers. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 206-210. Lerner, N. (1994). Brake perception­reaction times of older and younger drivers. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 38, 206­209. Lings, S. (1990). Assessing driving capability: A method for individual testing. Applied Ergonomics, 22, 75­84. Ma X. and Andréasson I. (2006). Estimation of Driver Reaction Time from CarFollowing Data. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the

Transportation Research Board, No. 1965, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., 2006, 130­141. Malaterre, G., Fernandez, F., Fleury, D., and Lechner, D. (1988). Decision making in emergency situations. Ergonomics, 31, 643­655. McCormick, E.J. and Sanders, M.S. (1982). Human Factors in Engineering and Design. New York: McGraw-Hill. Meadows, D.H. (1980). The Unavoidable A Priori. In Elements of the System Dynamics Method. The MIT press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England. Mehmood, A., Saccomanno, F., and Hellinga, B. (2003) Application of system Dynamics in Car Following Models. Journal of Transportation Engineering, 129(6).

140

Mehmood. A. and Easa, S.M. (2009). Modeling reaction time in car-following behaviour based on human factors. International Journal of Applied Science, Engineering and Technology, 5(2), 93-101. Mehmood A. and Easa S.M. (2010a). Development of New and Improved DriverSensitive Car-following Model. Canadian Journal of Transportation (under review). Mehmood A. and Easa S.M. (2010b). Development of In-Vehicle Rear-end Collision Warning Algorithm Considering Driver Characteristics. The Open Transportation Journal (under review). Michaels, R.M. (1963). Perceptual factors in car-following. In Proceedings of 2nd International Symposium on Theory of Traffic Flow, OECD, Paris, 44-59. Nilsson L., Alm H. and Janssen W.H. (1991). Collision avoidance systems : Effects of different levels of task allocation on driver behaviour. Driver Project V1041 Haren, The Netherlands: Generic Intelligent Driver Support System, Deliverable GIDS / Man3, Traffic Research Center. Olson, P. L., and M. Sivak. (1986). Perception-Response Time to Unexpected Roadway Hazards. Human Factors, Vol. 28, 91­96. Ozaki, H. (1993). Reaction and anticipation in the car-following behaviour. In Proceedings of the 13th International Symposium on Traffic and

Transportation Theory, 349-366. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) (2007). Traffic Safety Facts 2007. http://www-

141

nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/cats/listpublications.aspx?Id=E&ShowBy=DocType. Access date, January, 2009. Parkes, A. (1997). The Role of Standards for In-Vehicle MMI. In Y.I. Noy (Ed.), Ergonomics and Safety of Intelligent Driver Interfaces. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Rekersbrink, A. (1995). Mikroskopische verkehrssimulation mit hilfe der fuzzy logik. Strass enverkehrstechnik, 2(95), 68-74. Richard A. and Daniel S. (2001). Collision Avoidance Warnings Approaching Stopped or Stopping Vehicles. Proc. Of the ITS World Congress Conference, Sydney. Roberts, B.E. (1996). System Dynamics: An Introduction. In Managerial Applications of System Dynamics, edited by Roberts, B.E. The MIT Press Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England. ISBN 026218088X. Rockwell, T.H., Ernst, R.L., and Hanken, A. (1968). A sensitivity analysis of empirically derived car following models. Transportation Research, 2, 363373. Saeed, K., (1994), Development Planning and Policy Design: A system dynamics approach, Published by Avebury, England, ISDN 1 85628 672 X. Sakda, P. and Hussein, D. (2005). Comparative evaluation of microscopic carfollowing behaviour. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 6(3), 314-324.

142

Schweitzer, N., Apter, Y., Ben-David, G., Liebermann, D., and Parush, A. (1995). A field study on braking responses during driving II. Minimum driver braking times. Ergonomics, 38, 1903­1910. Siuhi, S. and Kaseko, M. (2010). Parametric study of stimulus-response behaviour for car-following models. In Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C. Sorkin, R.D. (1987). Design of Auditory and Tactile Displays. In G. Salvendy (Ed.), Handbook of Human Factors. New York: Wiley Sterman, J. (2000). Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World. ISBN 0072311355. Irwin McGraw-Hills Companies. Subramanian, H. (1996). Estimation of car-following models. Master Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA. Summala H. (2000). Brake Reaction Times and Driver Behaviour Analysis: Commentary. Transportation Human Factors, 2, 195­216. Summala, H., and Koivisto, I. (1990). Unalerted drivers' brake reaction times: Older drivers compensate their slower reaction times by driving more slowly. In T. Benjamin (Ed.), Driving behaviour in a social context. Caen, France: Paradigme. Summala, H., Lamble, D., and Laakso, M. (1998). Driving experience and perception of the lead car's braking when looking at in-car targets. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 30, 401­407.

143

Tijerina, L., Chovan, J.D., Pierowicz, J., and D.L. Hendricks (1994). Examination of Signalized Intersection, Straight Crossing Path Crashes and Potential IVHS Countermeasures. DOT HS 808 143, August 1994. Transport Canada (2006). Canadian Motor Vehicle Traffic Collision Statistics: 2006. Transport Canada. http://www.tc.gc.ca/roadsafety/tp/tp3322/2006/page11.htm. Access date, June, 2008. Treat, J. R., Tumbas, N. S., McDonald, S .T., Shinar, D., Hume, R. D., Mayer, R. E., Stanisfer, R. L., and Castillan, N. J. (1977) Tri-level study of the causes of traffic accidents. Report No. DOT-HS-034-3-535-77, Indiana University Triggs, T. J. (1987). Driver brake reaction times: Unobtrusive measurement on public roads. Public Health Review,15, 275­290. Ventana Systems (2007). VENSIM Ventana simulation environment: User's guide. Version 5, Ventana Systems Inc., 149 Waverley Street, Belmont, MA, 02178, Van der Horst, R. (1991). Time-To-Collision as a Cue for decision making in braking. In A.G. Gale et al. (Ed.), Vision in Vehicles III, pp 19-26. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. van Winsum, W., and Brouwer, W. (1997). Time headway in car following and operational performance during unexpected braking. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 84, 1247­1257. Ward, N.J. (1996). Interactions with Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS): Effects of Task Automation and Behavioural Adaptation. Proceedings of ITS Focus

144

Workshop: Intelligent Transport Systems and Safety. London: ITS Focus, Ltd. Warnes, A.M., Frasier, D.A., Hawken, R.E., and Sievey, V. (1993). Elderly Drivers and New Transport Technology. In Parkes and Franzen (Eds.), Driving Future Vehicles. London: Taylor and Francis. Wassim Najm, Mark Mironer, Joseph Koziol. Jr, Jing-Shiarn Wang, Ronald R. Knipling (1995). Synthesis Report: Examination of Target Vehicular Crashes and Potential ITS Countermeasures. Report No: DOT HS 808 263, U.S. Department of Transportation National Highway Traffic Safety

Administration, Washington D.C. Wheatley, D. J. and Hurwitz, J. B. (2001). The use of a multi-modal interface to integrate in-vehicle information presentation. Proceedings of the First

International Driving Symposium on Human Factors in Driver Assessment, Training, and Vehicle Design, 93 ­ 97. Wiedemann, R. (1974). Simulation of road traffic flow. Reports of the Institute for Transport and Communication. University of Karlsruhe. Wolf, L.D. (1987). The Investigation of Auditory Displays for Automotive Applications. Society for Information Display Symposium of Technical Papers, XVIII, 49-51. Wolshon, B. and Hatipkarasulu, Y. (2000). Results of car-following analyses using global positioning system. Journal of Transportation Engineering, American Society of Civil Engineering, 126(4), 324-331.

145

Wortman, R.H. and Matthias, J.S. (1983). Evaluation of Driver Behaviour at Signalized Intersections. Transportation Research Record 904, 10-20. Xin, W., Hourdos J., Michalopoulos P., and Davis G. (2008). The Less-thanperfect Driver: A Model of Collision-inclusive Car-following Behaviour. Conference Proceedings, Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. Yikai, K., Satoh, J.I., Itakura, N., Honda, N., and Satoh, A. (1993). A fuzzy model for behaviour of vehicles to analyze traffic congestion. In Proceedings of the International Congress on Modelling and Simulation, University of WA, Perth, Australia. Zhang, Y., Owen, L.E, and Clark, J.E. (1998). Multiregime Approach for Microscopic Traffic Simulation. Transportation Research Record 1644, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, Washington, D.C., 103-115.

146

Appendix A Copies of Consent Agreement and Driver Information Sheet

147

CONSENT AGREEMENT: DRIVER CAR-FOLLOWING BEHAVIOUR

Investigators: Atif Mehmood PhD Candidate, Department of Civil Engineering, Ryerson

University, Said Easa PhD, Department of Civil Engineering, Ryerson University
Purpose of Study: In this part of the study we are examining the effect of different driving

conditions on driver's behaviour.
Description of Study: In this study we will be asking you to drive in a car simulator in three

driving scenarios. In the scenarios you will be asked to drive down streets and maintain a specific speed (asked at the start of each experiment) and apply brake when you feel may collide with the lead vehicle. The lead vehicle brake lights will be turned on when it will be decelerating. You have to drive and behave just like normal driving in a real world. You will be asked to complete these driving simulations under different driving speeds. Each scenario will take you about three minutes to complete. The entire study will take up to 2 hours to complete (including breaks). Remember, that while the car simulator makes you feel as if you are moving, the car is not really in motion. The data will be obtained from the simulator and will be kept confidential. However, if you are interested to know about your own results, they will be provided to you with this belief that it is not prescriptive or useful for anything other than personal curiosity or knowledge. We are seeking the help of approximately seventy-five individuals. You will also receive a copy of this consent form which contains the names and contact numbers of the study investigators.
Confidentiality: Taking part in this study is entirely your choice and you may ask to stop the

session at any time. Your participation (or choice not to participate) has no affect on your status at university/college or at the Life Institute of Ryerson University. Further, when you take part in this study you will be granted total confidentiality. Your name or study results will not be shared with anyone outside of the study investigators. Once the entire study is complete, the information will be used to write a thesis and scholarly paper or for instructional purposes, after this, all the information we collect from you will be destroyed.
Risks and Benefits: The results of this study may help us to better understand driver behaviour at

different driving conditions, but the results will not directly benefit you. Being involved in a study may be a new experience for you and because this is new situation you may feel uncomfortable. Recall that you do not have to participate and at any time you may discontinue participation.
Incentives to participate: You will receive $15/hr for the time you will spend in the experiments.

148

You will receive this compensation even if you decide to discontinue participation at any time in the study. If your time spent in the experiment is less than an hour you will be given a minimum amount of $15.
Voluntary nature of participation: Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of

whether or not to participate will not influence your future relations with Ryerson University. If you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw your consent and to stop your participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits to which you are allowed. In addition, you may withdraw your consent even after participation, up until the time of our data analysis. At any point in the study you may refuse to complete any scenarios or stop participation altogether.
Questions or Concerns about the Study: If you have any questions or concerns about the

research experience feel free to ask them at any time (now, during or after the study). This research has been reviewed and received Ethical Approval by the Research Ethics Board at Ryerson University (Ethics Board contact: Office of Research Services, Ryerson University, 350 Victoria St., Toronto, ON. M5B 2K3, 416-979-5000, ext. 5042 or fax 416-979-5336). If you have any questions about this research or concerns about your treatment as a research participant you may contact Dr. Said Easa at (416) 979-5000 ext. 6451, seasa@gwemail.ryerson.ca or Ryerson's Research Ethics Board (contact information is above).
Agreement:

Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study. Your signature also indicates that you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw your consent to participate at any time. You have been given a copy of this agreement. You have been told that by signing this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your legal rights.

____________________________________ Name of Participant (please print)

_______________________ Signature of Participant

_______ Date

_____________________________________ Signature of Investigator

__________ Date

149

Table A1: Driver information check list

Scenario
Driver's Name Age Gender Driving Experience Average Driving Hrs. per week License Type Check Mark

Normal

N

Speed (km/h) Spacing (m) 100 20 80 20 60 20 100 80 60 100 80 60 30 30 30 40 40 40

150

Appendix B Independent T-test for Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction Time

151

T-Test of Equal Means of AC.RT vs DC. R.T
Paired Samples Statistics Mean .79973 .81000 N 25 25 Std. Deviation .159542 .225954 Std. Error Mean .048104 .068128

Pair 1

Ave.AC.RT Ave.DC R.T

Paired Samples Correlations N Pair 1 Ave.AC.RT & Ave.DC R.T 25 Correlation -.412 Sig. .208

Paired Samples Test Paired Differences 95% Confidence Interval of the Difference Lower Upper -.229211 .208666

Pair 1

Ave.AC.RT - Ave.DC R.T

Mean -.010273

Std. Deviation .325894

Std. Error Mean .098261

t -.105

df 24

Sig. (2-tailed) .919

152

Appendix C Repeated Measure ANOVA Analysis for Normal Scenario

153

Repeated Measure ANOVA for BRT: Normal Scenario
This appendix shows the results of repeated measure ANOVA analysis of BRT for normal scenario. The appendix includes: 1- Description of within and between subject factors 2- Descriptive statistics such as mean and standard deviation 3- Mauchly's test of Sphericity that examines the form of the common covariance matrix. A spherical matrix has equal variances and covariances equal to zero. The common covariance matrix of the transformed within-subject variables must be spherical, or the F tests and associated p values for the univariate approach to testing within-subjects hypotheses are invalid. If sphericity assumption is violated then SPSS performs the correct tests to check the effect of within subject factors. 4- Tests to show the within subject effects 5- Tests to show the trend of models for combination of different variables 6- Tests to show the between subject effects 7- Marginal means of BRT for all variables 8- Profile Plots that show the graphical representation of marginal means of BRT for each variable.

154

Within-Subjects Factors Measure: brt sphdy 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Dependent Variable BRT.60.20 BRT.60.30 BRT.60.40 BRT.80.20 BRT.80.30 BRT.80.40 BRT.100.20 BRT.100.30 BRT.100.40

Between-Subjects Factors Value Label Age middle old young Gender Dr.Exp 0 1 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Dr.Hrs.pe rWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. Male Female N 35 16 8 31 28 20 18 21 11 48

Descriptive Statistics Age Gender Dr.Exp Dr.Hrs .perW eek Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr.

Mean 1.2000 .9400 1.0267 .8000 .8700 .8350 .8900 .9310 .9215 .9340 .9277 .9294 .6700 1.0125

Std. Deviation . .09899 .16563 . . .04950 .26851 .22223 .22222 .24429 .19537 .20247 . .14558

N 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8

BRT.60.20

middle

Male

Beginner

155

Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old Male M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. W.Exp. Total Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Female Beginner Total Total Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

.9744 1.2000 1.2000 .8729 .8729 .9350 .9473 .9459 .9350 .9980 .9875 1.0000 .8700 .9567 .8900 .9071 .9045 .9343 .9382 .9374 .6700 .8686 .8438 .8100 .8100 .6700 .8613 .8400 .9800 1.0350 1.0114 .9800 1.0350 1.0114 .9025 .9291 .9220 .8100 .8100 .9025 .9192 .9150 .8500 .8500 .8500 .8500 .9850 .9850 .9850 .9850 .9175

.17770 . . .15337 .15337 .37477 .16087 .17731 .37477 .13604 .16885 .28284 . .21362 .26851 .19358 .19795 .25139 .17459 .18804 . .13934 .14687 . . . .13065 .13784 .10149 .20372 .15826 .10149 .20372 .15826 .17576 .17649 .17034 . . .17576 .17175 .16693 .13216 .13216 .13216 .13216 .22576 .22576 .22576 .22576 .18584

9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8

young

Male

Beginner Total

156

Total Total Total Male Beginner N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Total Beginner M.Exp. N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.60.30 middle Male Beginner M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.9175 .9175 .9175 1.2000 .8800 .9257 .7350 .8688 .8420 .8900 .9200 .9136 .8900 .8940 .8932 .6700 1.0033 .9777 1.0350 1.0350 1.0350 .8729 .8729 .9620 .9691 .9679 .9350 .9622 .9595 .9350 .9242 .9278 .8900 .9017 .9000 .9227 .9300 .9286 1.0000 1.0900 1.0600 1.1300 1.1400 1.1350 1.2267 1.0700 1.1062 1.1620 1.0785 1.1017 .9400 1.2950 1.2556

.18584 .18584 .18584 . .12083 .16369 .09192 .12900 .13062 .26851 .21396 .21557 .24364 .16596 .17869 . .16604 .18390 .13772 .20372 .16098 .15337 .15337 .20216 .17388 .17521 .37477 .16035 .17455 .19254 .16914 .17159 .26851 .18919 .19404 .21781 .17221 .17950 . .16971 .13077 . . .00707 .53529 .14414 .26088 .39143 .13558 .22474 . .17163 .19944

8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9

Total Female Beginner

M.Exp.

157

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.4000 1.4000 1.3157 1.3157 1.1700 1.3047 1.2888 .9700 1.2540 1.2067 1.2650 1.1400 1.2233 1.2267 1.1712 1.1795 1.1643 1.1996 1.1926 1.2000 1.1971 1.1975 1.4100 1.4100 1.2000 1.2238 1.2211 1.0267 1.3300 1.2000 1.0267 1.3300 1.2000 1.0700 1.2455 1.1987 1.4100 1.4100 1.0700 1.2592 1.2119 1.0850 1.0850 1.0850 1.0850 1.1175 1.1175 1.1175

. . .24636 .24636 .32527 .20213 .21062 .04243 .18325 .19965 .19092 . .15308 .53529 .22358 .26957 .34611 .20628 .23481 . .22028 .20394 . . . .21738 .20350 .23116 .30299 .30000 .23116 .30299 .30000 .20769 .24728 .24366 . . .20769 .24051 .24125 .08347 .08347 .08347 .08347 .09946 .09946 .09946

1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

Male

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Female

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

Male

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

Female

Beginner Total

158

Total Total Beginner Total Total Male Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Female Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

1.1175 1.1013 1.1013 1.1013 1.1013 1.0000 1.0867 1.0743 1.1650 1.1900 1.1850 1.2267 1.1009 1.1279 1.1683 1.1260 1.1342 .9400 1.2358 1.2131 1.1200 1.3300 1.2250 1.3157 1.3157 1.0840 1.2765 1.2421 .9700 1.1861 1.1645 1.1350 1.2367 1.2028 1.2267 1.1844 1.1905 1.1300 1.1981 1.1854 1.6000 2.2200 2.0133 1.9300 1.8000 1.8650 2.0267 1.9040 1.9323 1.9220 1.9446

.09946 .08676 .08676 .08676 .08676 . .09973 .09676 .04950 .20494 .18180 .53529 .17091 .26347 .35045 .16892 .20877 . .17053 .18273 .26546 .30299 .28661 .24636 .24636 .24358 .21336 .22698 .04243 .16425 .16929 .20811 .23773 .22746 .53529 .22409 .26752 .29509 .20409 .22245 . .21213 .38812 . . .09192 .32470 .31146 .30532 .29474 .30374

4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13

Total

Beginner

W.Exp.

BRT.60.40

middle

Male

Beginner

159

Total Female Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old Male M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Female M.Exp. N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total young Male Beginner Total Female Beginner Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total

1.9383 1.9400 2.2875 2.2489 1.9400 1.9400 1.9200 1.9200 1.9400 2.1160 2.0953 1.7700 2.2740 2.1900 1.9350 1.8000 1.8900 2.0267 1.9106 1.9280 1.9271 2.0364 2.0146 1.6700 2.0029 1.9613 2.0000 2.0000 1.6700 2.0025 1.9656 2.0700 1.9350 1.9929 2.0700 1.9350 1.9929 1.9700 1.9782 1.9760 2.0000 2.0000 1.9700 1.9800 1.9775 1.6500 1.6500 1.6500 1.6500 1.7200 1.7200 1.7200 1.7200

.29270 . .35776 .35413 . . .18735 .18735 .00000 .33920 .32263 .24042 .32459 .36048 .00707 . .07810 .32470 .26037 .26457 .24081 .32900 .31330 . .27232 .27823 . . . .25212 .26058 .07000 .26134 .20246 .07000 .26134 .20246 .20801 .25721 .23778 . . .20801 .24532 .22980 .11518 .11518 .11518 .11518 .31570 .31570 .31570 .31570

18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Total

160

Total

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.6850 1.6850 1.6850 1.6850 1.6000 1.8400 1.8057 1.8000 1.9775 1.9420 2.0267 1.9127 1.9371 1.8800 1.9160 1.9090 1.9400 2.0983 2.0862 2.0375 1.9350 1.9863 1.9200 1.9200 2.0180 2.0157 2.0161 1.7700 2.0122 1.9880 1.9583 1.9633 1.9617 2.0267 1.9156 1.9314 1.9427 1.9638 1.9598 1.0700 .9000 .9567 .8600 1.1300 .9950 .7367 .8980 .8608

.22316 .22316 .22316 .22316 . .32187 .30751 .18385 .26212 .25059 .32470 .29689 .29390 .28298 .28471 .28000 . .43209 .41602 .08655 .26134 .18837 .18735 .18735 .08672 .34650 .31455 .24042 .40864 .39750 .16216 .25058 .21993 .32470 .25348 .25835 .21964 .31642 .29920 . .14142 .14012 . . .19092 .17954 .16877 .17816

8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13

Total

Male

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Female

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

BRT.80.20

middle

Male

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

161

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.8280 .9162 .8917 .6700 1.0138 .9756 .8700 .8700 .8971 .8971 .7700 .9593 .9371 .8700 .9910 .9708 .8650 1.1300 .9533 .7367 .8976 .8735 .8114 .9393 .9137 .8000 .8971 .8850 1.0000 1.0000 .8000 .9100 .8978 .7567 .8825 .8286 .7567 .8825 .8286 .7675 .8918 .8587 1.0000 1.0000 .7675 .9008 .8675 .8825 .8825 .8825 .8825 .9050

.19305 .16480 .17202 . .13553 .17089 . . .12867 .12867 .14142 .14109 .15041 .28284 .13715 .15774 .00707 . .15308 .17954 .14910 .15998 .17024 .15124 .16116 . .15074 .14373 . . . .14422 .13980 .10263 .17840 .15475 .10263 .17840 .15475 .08655 .15243 .14643 . . .08655 .14866 .14581 .09946 .09946 .09946 .09946 .16823

5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4

Female

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Total

old

Male

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total Female M.Exp.

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

young

Male

Beginner Total

Female

Beginner

162

Total Total Total Beginner Total Total Male Beginner M.Exp. N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.80.30 middle Male Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.9050 .9050 .9050 .8938 .8938 .8938 .8938 1.0700 .8883 .9143 .8300 .9263 .9070 .7367 .9073 .8707 .8233 .9088 .8923 .6700 .9775 .9538 .7850 .8825 .8338 .8971 .8971 .7620 .9365 .9054 .8700 .9478 .9400 .8000 .9117 .8744 .7367 .9033 .8795 .7955 .9221 .8985 1.0700 1.0800 1.0767 1.0600 1.4700 1.2650 .8667 1.1160 1.0585

.16823 .16823 .16823 .12850 .12850 .12850 .12850 . .10008 .11429 .04243 .16204 .14922 .17954 .16304 .17517 .17305 .14501 .15163 . .14925 .16641 .10116 .17840 .14402 .12867 .12867 .10159 .14810 .15503 .28284 .13867 .14829 .08390 .16078 .14742 .17954 .14665 .15835 .14187 .14560 .15206 . .21213 .15011 . . .28991 .20502 .31384 .30468

4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13

W.Exp.

Female

Beginner M.Exp.

W.Exp.

163

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.9460 1.1377 1.0844 .8000 1.3338 1.2744 1.1400 1.1400 1.0971 1.0971 .9700 1.2233 1.1935 .9350 1.2830 1.2250 1.1000 1.4700 1.2233 .8667 1.1082 1.0720 .9529 1.1836 1.1374 1.6400 1.1414 1.2038 1.2000 1.2000 1.6400 1.1488 1.2033 1.2233 1.2325 1.2286 1.2233 1.2325 1.2286 1.3275 1.1745 1.2153 1.2000 1.2000 1.3275 1.1767 1.2144 1.1425

.18119 .29626 .27836 . .17196 .23985 . . .15681 .15681 .24042 .20063 .21427 .19092 .19861 .23224 .05657 . .21733 .20502 .25439 .25837 .17792 .24854 .25181 . .16708 .23452 . . . .15606 .21937 .16623 .20855 .17601 .16623 .20855 .17601 .24865 .17863 .20234 . . .24865 .17047 .19552 .15174

5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4

Female

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

Male

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

Female

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

Male

Beginner

N.Dr.

164

Total Female Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total Male Beginner M.Exp.

Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.1425 1.1425 1.1425 1.0625 1.0625 1.0625 1.0625 1.1025 1.1025 1.1025 1.1025 1.0700 1.1217 1.1143 1.3500 1.1825 1.2160 .8667 1.1236 1.0686 1.0617 1.1420 1.1265 .8000 1.2433 1.2092 1.2025 1.2325 1.2175 1.0971 1.0971 1.1220 1.1970 1.1836 .9350 1.2028 1.1760 1.2517 1.1992 1.2167 .8667 1.1133 1.0781 1.0891 1.1683 1.1536 1.6700 1.9000 1.8233 1.9400 1.8700 1.9050 1.8200

.15174 .15174 .15174 .10243 .10243 .10243 .10243 .12725 .12725 .12725 .12725 . .15446 .14234 .41012 .19345 .22974 .20502 .29881 .29516 .32640 .23215 .24882 . .19878 .22659 .14198 .20855 .16594 .15681 .15681 .21799 .19227 .19498 .19092 .18992 .20244 .22702 .19048 .19820 .20502 .24774 .25337 .27068 .21352 .22483 . .14142 .16623 . . .04950 .17088

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3

W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Female

Beginner M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

BRT.80.40

middle

Male

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr

W.Exp.

165

Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.8850 1.8700 1.8140 1.8862 1.8661 1.9300 2.0600 2.0456 1.9300 1.9300 1.9157 1.9157 1.9300 1.9927 1.9853 1.8000 2.0280 1.9900 1.9350 1.8700 1.9133 1.8200 1.8976 1.8860 1.8471 1.9432 1.9240 1.9000 1.8029 1.8150 1.8000 1.8000 1.9000 1.8025 1.8133 2.1800 1.9525 2.0500 2.1800 1.9525 2.0500 2.1100 1.8573 1.9247 1.8000 1.8000 2.1100 1.8525 1.9169 1.7500

.22392 .20805 .15421 .19831 .18564 . .31857 .30113 . . .27628 .27628 .00000 .29834 .27985 .18385 .29276 .28473 .00707 . .03786 .17088 .23889 .22791 .13805 .25798 .24028 . .25650 .23994 . . . .23747 .22450 .20298 .14997 .19942 .20298 .14997 .19942 .21695 .22786 .24608 . . .21695 .21789 .23977 .07958

10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4

Female

Beginner

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Total Beginner

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

Male

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Female

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

Male

Beginner

N.Dr.

166

Total Total Female Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total Male Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.100.20 middle Male Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr.

1.7500 1.7500 1.7500 1.7850 1.7850 1.7850 1.7850 1.7675 1.7675 1.7675 1.7675 1.6700 1.8000 1.7814 1.9200 1.8113 1.8330 1.8200 1.8773 1.8650 1.8283 1.8376 1.8358 1.9300 1.9683 1.9654 2.1175 1.9525 2.0350 1.9157 1.9157 2.0800 1.9496 1.9729 1.8000 1.9122 1.9010 2.0517 1.8583 1.9228 1.8200 1.8922 1.8819 1.9427 1.8913 1.9008 1.1400 1.0700

.07958 .07958 .07958 .13503 .13503 .13503 .13503 .10430 .10430 .10430 .10430 . .11747 .11796 .02828 .23865 .21562 .17088 .21397 .20076 .14233 .19967 .18784 . .29646 .28404 .20759 .14997 .18944 .27628 .27628 .19837 .26151 .25326 .18385 .25999 .25190 .19083 .21729 .22373 .17088 .23290 .22293 .20771 .23572 .22994 . .09899

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

Female

Beginner

167

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. old Male M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.0933 .8000 .8700 .8350 .8467 .8220 .8277 .8960 .8638 .8728 1.0100 .9675 .9722 1.2100 1.2100 .8429 .8429 1.1100 .9093 .9329 1.0750 .9880 1.0025 1.0050 .8700 .9600 .8467 .8306 .8330 .9571 .8882 .9020 1.2000 .7914 .8425 .9300 .9300 1.2000 .8088 .8522 .9567 .8850 .9157 .9567 .8850 .9157 1.0175 .8255 .8767 .9300 .9300 1.0175 .8342 .8800

.08083 . . .04950 .08083 .25099 .22012 .14926 .23793 .21312 . .18453 .17319 . . .13326 .13326 .14142 .16964 .17570 .09192 .17158 .16125 .28991 . .21932 .08083 .20544 .19043 .17056 .20153 .19537 . .13969 .19389 . . . .13830 .18370 .32470 .30989 .29091 .32470 .30989 .29091 .29170 .20675 .23769 . . .29170 .19943 .23001

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16

Total

Beginner

168

young

Male

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Female

Beginner Total

Total

Beginner Total

.7650 .7650 .7650 .7650 .9850 .9850 .9850 .9850 .8750 .8750 .8750 .8750 1.1400 .8667 .9057 1.0000 .8013 .8410 .8467 .8318 .8350 .9467 .8304 .8529 1.0100 .9733 .9762 1.0200 .8850 .9525 .8429 .8429 1.0180 .9183 .9361 1.0750 .9378 .9515 1.0133 .8292 .8906 .8467 .8361 .8376 .9791 .8725 .8924 1.1400 1.3000

.15546 .15546 .15546 .15546 .13988 .13988 .13988 .13988 .18048 .18048 .18048 .18048 . .20314 .21228 .28284 .13228 .17182 .08083 .24033 .21324 .18228 .19591 .19601 . .16456 .15788 .29383 .30989 .28873 .13326 .13326 .25450 .18746 .19936 .09192 .17982 .17652 .26059 .19755 .23066 .08083 .20068 .18681 .20954 .19497 .20032 . .14142

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

Total

Male

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Female

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

BRT.100.30

middle

Male

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr.

169

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old Male M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Female M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.2467 1.1400 1.5400 1.3400 1.1733 1.0430 1.0731 1.1600 1.1208 1.1317 1.8400 1.3438 1.3989 1.7000 1.7000 1.1957 1.1957 1.7700 1.2747 1.3329 1.4900 1.3350 1.3608 1.4200 1.5400 1.4600 1.1733 1.1059 1.1160 1.3343 1.2032 1.2294 1.4100 1.1143 1.1513 1.5100 1.5100 1.4100 1.1638 1.1911 1.4467 1.2125 1.3129 1.4467 1.2125 1.3129 1.4375 1.1500 1.2267

.13614 . . .28284 .06658 .13663 .13419 .05050 .20176 .17223 . .23543 .27543 . . .24738 .24738 .09899 .24451 .28282 .49497 .21371 .25156 .39598 . .28844 .06658 .19862 .18520 .30320 .23495 .25077 . .26682 .26824 . . . .28390 .27796 .43547 .17970 .30826 .43547 .17970 .30826 .35603 .23422 .28925

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15

W.Exp. Total

170

W.Exp. Total young Male Beginner Total Female Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total Male Beginner

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.5100 1.5100 1.4375 1.1800 1.2444 1.1000 1.1000 1.1000 1.1000 1.2200 1.2200 1.2200 1.2200 1.1600 1.1600 1.1600 1.1600 1.1400 1.1667 1.1629 1.2750 1.1675 1.1890 1.1733 1.0855 1.1043 1.2017 1.1312 1.1448 1.8400 1.3025 1.3438 1.5100 1.2125 1.3613 1.1957 1.1957 1.5760 1.2543 1.3118 1.4900 1.2572 1.2805 1.4317 1.1825 1.2656 1.1733 1.1283 1.1348 1.3718 1.1902 1.2241 1.9300 2.3000

. . .35603 .24632 .28828 .07071 .07071 .07071 .07071 .06272 .06272 .06272 .06272 .08912 .08912 .08912 .08912 . .13292 .12175 .19092 .28927 .26681 .06658 .19138 .17395 .11161 .21228 .19730 . .20014 .24278 .37745 .17970 .31652 .24738 .24738 .35865 .20928 .26548 .49497 .18830 .22305 .32787 .25010 .29444 .06658 .21495 .19994 .30967 .21766 .24498 . .52326

1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total Female Beginner

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total Total Beginner

M.Exp.

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

Total BRT.100.40 middle Male Beginner

171

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old Male M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Female M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr

2.1767 1.8700 1.8100 1.8400 1.8500 1.7760 1.7931 1.8700 1.8592 1.8622 2.1400 2.0038 2.0189 2.3200 2.3200 2.0014 2.0014 2.2300 2.0027 2.0294 2.0350 2.0630 2.0583 2.0950 1.8100 2.0000 1.8500 1.8688 1.8660 1.9729 1.9361 1.9434 1.8000 1.8586 1.8513 1.7400 1.7400 1.8000 1.8438 1.8389 2.1367 1.8675 1.9829 2.1367 1.8675 1.9829 2.0525

.42724 . . .04243 .15588 .26328 .23893 .11554 .33639 .28817 . .21810 .20901 . . .29430 .29430 .12728 .24679 .24496 .14849 .28814 .26467 .31820 . .27875 .15588 .29077 .27167 .20605 .29526 .27739 . .10367 .09819 . . . .10474 .09905 .17954 .28756 .26980 .17954 .28756 .26980 .22322

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4

172

N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total young Male Beginner Total Female Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total Male Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Total Beginner N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

1.8618 1.9127 1.7400 1.7400 2.0525 1.8517 1.9019 1.7350 1.7350 1.7350 1.7350 1.7475 1.7475 1.7475 1.7475 1.7413 1.7413 1.7413 1.7413 1.9300 1.9233 1.9243 1.8350 1.8525 1.8490 1.8500 1.7727 1.7893 1.8583 1.8344 1.8390 2.1400 1.9183 1.9354 2.1825 1.8675 2.0250 2.0014 2.0014 2.1740 1.9348 1.9775 2.0350 1.9200 1.9315 2.0667 1.8575 1.9272 1.8500 1.8617

.17685 .20158 . . .22322 .17225 .19947 .11504 .11504 .11504 .11504 .16701 .16701 .16701 .16701 .13293 .13293 .13293 .13293 . .38448 .35099 .04950 .09750 .08787 .15588 .25000 .23000 .10722 .25188 .22970 . .23194 .23042 .17289 .28756 .27677 .29430 .29430 .15093 .25334 .25372 .14849 .27981 .26920 .22500 .16928 .20911 .15588 .28372

11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18

Female

Beginner

173

Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1.8600 2.0018 1.8825 1.9047

.26621 .20503 .25496 .24924

21 11 48 59

Multivariate Tests(c) Effect sphdy Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Value .926 .074 12.526 12.526 .403 .623 .564 .478 .382 .618 .617 .617 .387 .649 .485 .300 .479 .521 .921 .921 .444 .599 .599 .434 .195 .805 .243 .243 .498 .554 .710 .532 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .208 .792 F 54.802(a) 54.802(a) 54.802(a) 54.802(a) 1.135 1.169(a) 1.199 2.151(b) 2.699(a) 2.699(a) 2.699(a) 2.699(a) 1.079 1.055(a) 1.030 1.350(b) 4.028(a) 4.028(a) 4.028(a) 4.028(a) 1.285 1.279(a) 1.272 1.952(b) 1.062(a) 1.062(a) 1.062(a) 1.062(a) 1.493 1.502(a) 1.509 2.394(b) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) 1.152(a) 1.152(a) Hypothesis df 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Error df 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 35.000 35.000 Sig. .000 .000 .000 .000 .341 .314 .292 .056 .020 .020 .020 .020 .391 .414 .438 .251 .002 .002 .002 .002 .231 .235 .240 .082 .411 .411 .411 .411 .126 .124 .122 .035 . . . 1.000 .355 .355

174

Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root

.263 .263 .348 .652 .533 .533 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .363 .657 .491 .416 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .000 1.000 .000 .000

1.152(a) 1.152(a) 2.333(a) 2.333(a) 2.333(a) 2.333(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .998 1.022(a) 1.043 1.873(b) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a)

8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000

35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000

.355 .355 .070 .060 .080 .060 . . . 1.000 .468 .445 .426 .095 . . . 1.000 . . . 1.000 . . . 1.000

a Exact statistic b The statistic is an upper bound on F that yields a lower bound on the significance level. c Design: Intercept+Age+Gender+Dr.Exp+Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender+Age * Dr.Exp+Gender * Dr.Exp+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp+Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Within Subjects Design: sphdy
b Mauchly's Test of Sphericity

Measure: brt Epsilon Within Subjects Effect Mauchly's W sphdy .119 Approx. Chi-Square 83.283 df 35 Sig. .000 Greenhous e-Geisser .658
a

Huynh-Feldt 1.000

Lower-bound .125

Tests the null hypothesis that the error covariance matrix of the orthonormalized transformed dependent variables is proportional to an identity matrix. a. May be used to adjust the degrees of freedom for the averaged tests of significance. Corrected tests are displayed in the Tests of Within-Subjects Effects table. b. Design: Intercept+Age+Gender+Dr.Exp+Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender+Age * Dr.Exp+Gender * Dr.Exp+Age * Gender * Dr.Exp+Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs. perWeek+Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Within Subjects Design: sphdy

175

Tests of Within-Subjects Effects Measure: brt Source sphdy Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed

Type III Sum of Squares 32.045 32.045 32.045 32.045 1.084 1.084 1.084 1.084 .678 .678 .678 .678 .495 .495 .495 .495 .797 .797 .797 .797 .658 .658 .658 .658 .390 .390 .390 .390 .824 .824 .824 .824 .000 .000 .000 .000 .488 .488 .488 .488 .837

df 8 5.268 8.000 1.000 16 10.536 16.000 2.000 8 5.268 8.000 1.000 16 10.536 16.000 2.000 8 5.268 8.000 1.000 16 10.536 16.000 2.000 8 5.268 8.000 1.000 16 10.536 16.000 2.000 0 .000 .000 .000 8 5.268 8.000 1.000 8

Mean Square 4.006 6.083 4.006 32.045 .068 .103 .068 .542 .085 .129 .085 .678 .031 .047 .031 .248 .100 .151 .100 .797 .041 .062 .041 .329 .049 .074 .049 .390 .052 .078 .052 .412 . . . . .061 .093 .061 .488 .105

F 109.507 109.507 109.507 109.507 1.851 1.851 1.851 1.851 2.318 2.318 2.318 2.318 .846 .846 .846 .846 2.723 2.723 2.723 2.723 1.124 1.124 1.124 1.124 1.333 1.333 1.333 1.333 1.408 1.408 1.408 1.408 . . . . 1.669 1.669 1.669 1.669 2.861

Sig. .000 .000 .000 .000 .064 .070 .067 .170 .020 .041 .020 .014 .632 .590 .632 .436 .076 .089 .066 .106 .331 .344 .331 .335 .226 .249 .226 .255 .135 .174 .135 .256 . . . . .105 .139 .105 .203 .004

176

Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound Error(sphdy) Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound

.837 .837 .837 .000 .000 .000 .000 .700 .700 .700 .700 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 12.291 12.291 12.291 12.291

5.268 8.000 1.000 0 .000 .000 .000 16 10.536 16.000 2.000 0 .000 .000 .000 0 .000 .000 .000 0 .000 .000 .000 336 221.247 336.000 42.000

.159 .105 .837 . . . . .044 .066 .044 .350 . . . . . . . . . . . . .037 .056 .037 .293

2.861 2.861 2.861 . . . . 1.195 1.195 1.195 1.195 . . . . . . . . . . . .

.014 .004 .098 . . . . .270 .293 .270 .313 . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tests of Within-Subjects Contrasts Measure: brt Source sphdy sphdy Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age Linear Quadratic Cubic Type III Sum of Squares 4.907 .114 5.438 .002 2.525 1.011 17.821 .227 .033 .075 .318 df 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 Mean Square 4.907 .114 5.438 .002 2.525 1.011 17.821 .227 .016 .037 .159 F 147.010 2.797 101.697 .062 106.230 27.178 316.470 10.751 .489 .912 2.970 Sig. .000 .102 .000 .804 .000 .000 .000 .002 .617 .410 .062

177

Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic

.036 .003 .302 .288 .030 .133 .170 1.23E-005 .153 7.82E-005 .009 .179 .034 .072 .008 .006 .200 .035 .133 .024 .017 .541 .044 .115 .090 .002 .000 .005 .001 .103 .100 .039 .036 .001 .186 .140 .053 .036 .022 .009 .073 .070 .164 .015 .000 .231 .232

2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2

.018 .002 .151 .144 .015 .133 .170 1.23E-005 .153 7.82E-005 .009 .179 .034 .036 .004 .003 .100 .017 .066 .012 .008 .541 .044 .115 .090 .002 .000 .005 .001 .051 .050 .019 .018 .001 .093 .070 .027 .036 .022 .009 .073 .070 .164 .015 .000 .115 .116

.689 .065 4.053 2.556 .705 3.988 4.160 .000 5.797 .003 .244 3.172 1.609 1.086 .104 .058 3.782 .733 1.784 .209 .395 16.197 1.064 2.142 3.402 .100 .003 .086 .043 1.536 1.222 .364 .675 .025 2.503 1.242 1.265 1.081 .544 .164 2.771 2.943 4.407 .271 .023 3.456 2.829

.508 .938 .062 .090 .500 .035 .048 .988 .021 .955 .624 .082 .212 .347 .902 .943 .033 .486 .180 .812 .676 .170 .308 .151 .072 .753 .954 .770 .837 .227 .305 .697 .515 .975 .094 .299 .293 .304 .465 .687 .103 .094 .054 .605 .880 .041 .070

178

Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6

.083 .057 .015 .020 .177 .011 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .078 .064 .078 2.04E-005 .017 .151 .046 .054 .200 .094 .070 .049 .013 .102 .274 .035 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .038 .018 .145 .145 .057 .086

2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2

.042 .028 .007 .010 .088 .006 . . . . . . . . .078 .064 .078 2.04E-005 .017 .151 .046 .054 .200 .094 .070 .049 .013 .102 .274 .035 . . . . . . . . .019 .009 .072 .072 .029 .043

.777 1.071 .305 .265 1.569 .264 . . . . . . . . 2.325 1.570 1.457 .001 .720 4.061 .816 2.576 6.003 2.287 1.306 1.869 .541 2.750 4.867 1.637 . . . . . . . . .564 .219 1.355 2.740 1.202 1.159

.466 .352 .738 .768 .220 .769 . . . . . . . . .135 .217 .234 .978 .401 .065 .371 .116 .019 .138 .260 .179 .466 .105 .033 .208 . . . . . . . . .573 .804 .269 .076 .311 .324

179

Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 Error(sphdy) Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

.206 .005 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 1.402 1.718 2.246 1.111 .998 1.562 2.365 .888

2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 42 42 42 42 42 42 42 42

.103 .002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .033 .041 .053 .026 .024 .037 .056 .021

1.830 .108 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.173 .898 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tests of Between-Subjects Effects Measure: brt Transformed Variable: Average Source Intercept Age Gender Dr.Exp Dr.Hrs.perWeek Type III Sum of Squares 346.818 1.111 .331 .115 .051 df 1 2 1 2 1 Mean Square 346.818 .555 .331 .057 .051 F 2737.389 4.384 2.616 .453 .400 Sig. .000 .019 .011 .639 .530

180

Age * Gender Age * Dr.Exp Gender * Dr.Exp Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Error

.096 .157 .119 .000 .089 .008 .000 .081 .000 .000 .000 5.321

2 1 2 0 1 1 0 2 0 0 0 42

.048 .157 .060 . .089 .008 . .040 . . . .127

.378 1.240 .470 . .702 .065 . .318 . . .

.047 .272 .628 . .407 .800 . .729 . . .

Estimated Marginal Means
1. Age Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Age middle old young Mean 1.362(a) 1.366(a) 1.249(a) Std. Error .030 .039 .042 Lower Bound 1.302 1.287 1.165 Upper Bound 1.421 1.445 1.334

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

2. Gender Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Gender Male Female Mean 1.321(a) Std. Error .030 Lower Bound 1.260 Upper Bound 1.381 1.452

1.391(a) .030 1.331 a Based on modified population marginal mean.

3. Dr.Exp Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Dr.Exp Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Mean 1.340(a) 1.378(a) 1.315(a) Std. Error .035 .037 .037 Lower Bound 1.270 1.304 1.240 Upper Bound 1.411 1.452 1.390

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

181

4. Dr.Hrs.perWeek Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Dr.Hrs.perWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. Mean 1.357(a) 1.345(a) Std. Error .040 .023 Lower Bound 1.276 1.298 Upper Bound 1.439 1.391

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

5. sphdy Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval sphdy 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Mean .917(a) 1.175(a) 1.919(a) .892(a) 1.157(a) 1.888(a) .947(a) 1.319(a) Std. Error .032 .040 .050 .027 .038 .042 .036 .038 Lower Bound .851 1.094 1.817 .838 1.081 1.802 .874 1.242 Upper Bound .982 1.256 2.020 .947 1.233 1.973 1.020 1.397 2.020

1.934(a) .042 1.849 a Based on modified population marginal mean.

182

Profile Plots

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

1.38

1.36

Estimated Marginal Means

1.34

1.32

1.30

1.28

1.26

1.24 middle old young

Age

183

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

1.40

Estimated Marginal Means

1.38

1.36

1.34

1.32 Male Female

Gender

184

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

1.358

1.356

Estimated Marginal Means

1.354

1.352

1.35

1.348

1.346

1.344 Ex.Dr N.Dr.

Dr.Hrs.perWeek

185

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

1.38

1.37

Estimated Marginal Means

1.36

1.35

1.34

1.33

1.32

1.31 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp.

Dr.Exp

186

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

2.0

1.8

Estimated Marginal Means

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

sphdy

187

Appendix D Repeated Measure ANOVA Analysis for Surprised Scenario

188

Repeated Measure ANOVA for BRT: Surprised Scenario
This appendix shows the results of repeated measure ANOVA analysis of BRT for surprised scenario. The appendix includes: 1- Description of within and between subject factors 2- Descriptive statistics such as mean and standard deviation 3- Mauchly's test of Sphericity that examines the form of the common covariance matrix. A spherical matrix has equal variances and covariances equal to zero. The common covariance matrix of the transformed within-subject variables must be spherical, or the F tests and associated p values for the univariate approach to testing within-subjects hypotheses are invalid. If sphericity assumption is violated then SPSS performs the correct tests to check the effect of within subject factors. 4- Tests to show the within subject effects 5- Tests to show the trend of models for combination of different variables 6- Tests to show the between subject effects 7- Marginal means of BRT for all variables 8- Profile Plots that show the graphical representation of marginal means of BRT for each variable.

189

Within-Subjects Factors Measure: brt sphdy 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Dependent Variable BRT.60.10 BRT.60.20 BRT.60.30 BRT.80.10 BRT.80.20 BRT.80.30 BRT.100.10 BRT.100.20 BRT.100.30

Between-Subjects Factors N Age middle old young Gender Dr.Exp 0 1 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Dr.Hrs.pe rWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. 35 16 8 31 28 20 18 21 11 48

Descriptive Statistics Age BRT.60.10 middle Gender 0 Dr.Exp Beginner Dr.Hrs.perWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Mean .640 .715 .690 .500 .730 .615 .560 .607 .596 .564 .633 .614 .600 .660 Std. Deviation . .0212 .0458 . . .1626 .0721 .0665 .0679 .0713 .0763 .0795 . .0532 N 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8

190

Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. W.Exp. Total Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

.653 .670 .670 .599 .599 .635 .631 .632 .620 .671 .663 .585 .730 .633 .560 .604 .597 .584 .632 .623 .600 .590 .591 .670 .670 .600 .600 .600 .723 .693 .706 .723 .693 .706 .693 .627 .645 .670 .670 .693 .631 .646 .583 .583 .583 .583 .730 .730 .730 .730 .656

.0536 . . .0724 .0724 .0495 .0683 .0651 .0283 .0528 .0524 .1202 . .1193 .0721 .0669 .0676 .0707 .0708 .0724 . .0480 .0445 . . . .0526 .0492 .0764 .0830 .0752 .0764 .0830 .0752 .0877 .0782 .0831 . . .0877 .0756 .0806 .0918 .0918 .0918 .0918 .1800 .1800 .1800 .1800 .1540

9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8

young

0

Beginner Total

191

Total Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Total Beginner M.Exp. N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.60.20 middle 0 Beginner M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.656 .656 .656 .640 .627 .629 .550 .608 .596 .560 .613 .601 .570 .614 .606 .600 .683 .677 .710 .693 .701 .599 .599 .688 .659 .664 .620 .664 .660 .657 .636 .643 .560 .607 .600 .624 .636 .634 .740 .915 .857 .700 .810 .755 .660 .712 .700 .684 .751 .732 .900 .836 .843

.1540 .1540 .1540 . .0991 .0906 .0707 .0665 .0677 .0721 .0659 .0681 .0654 .0721 .0721 . .1087 .1066 .0678 .0830 .0708 .0724 .0724 .0766 .0999 .0955 .0283 .1063 .1017 .1029 .0803 .0859 .0721 .0668 .0678 .0910 .0885 .0883 . .0212 .1021 . . .0778 .0954 .0851 .0864 .0764 .1073 .1022 . .1165 .1110

8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9

Total 1 Beginner

M.Exp.

192

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.750 .750 .759 .759 .825 .800 .803 .820 .852 .847 .725 .810 .753 .660 .731 .721 .724 .777 .767 .700 .746 .740 .800 .800 .700 .753 .747 .820 .838 .830 .820 .838 .830 .790 .779 .782 .800 .800 .790 .781 .783 .718 .718 .718 .718 .860 .860 .860

. . .0969 .0969 .1061 .1114 .1079 .1131 .1082 .1044 .0354 . .0551 .0954 .0903 .0922 .1024 .1103 .1095 . .0787 .0746 . . . .0754 .0726 .1114 .1884 .1482 .1114 .1884 .1482 .1089 .1285 .1198 . . .1089 .1227 .1159 .1287 .1287 .1287 .1287 .2304 .2304 .2304

1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

0

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

0

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

1

Beginner Total

193

Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

.860 .789 .789 .789 .789 .740 .783 .777 .700 .754 .743 .660 .720 .707 .687 .746 .735 .900 .844 .848 .803 .838 .820 .759 .759 .822 .817 .818 .820 .824 .824 .768 .782 .777 .660 .735 .724 .748 .780 .774 .870 .985 .947 .700 1.000 .850 .827 .987 .950 .810 .988

.2304 .1888 .1888 .1888 .1888 . .1429 .1315 .0000 .0763 .0710 .0954 .0850 .0872 .0686 .0982 .0952 . .1525 .1468 .0974 .1884 .1401 .0969 .0969 .0950 .1435 .1346 .1131 .1481 .1424 .0922 .1228 .1109 .0954 .0891 .0915 .1047 .1259 .1220 . .1202 .1079 . . .2121 .3338 .2035 .2336 .2446 .1797

4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13

Total

Beginner

W.Exp.

BRT.60.30

middle

0

Beginner

194

Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total 1 M.Exp. N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total young 0 Beginner Total 1 Beginner Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total

.938 1.000 1.196 1.174 .800 .800 1.156 1.156 .900 1.177 1.145 .935 1.154 1.118 .750 1.000 .833 .827 1.056 1.022 .836 1.089 1.039 .810 .993 .970 1.070 1.070 .810 1.003 .981 1.073 1.038 1.053 1.073 1.038 1.053 1.008 1.009 1.009 1.070 1.070 1.008 1.014 1.013 .853 .853 .853 .853 1.118 1.118 1.118 1.118

.2088 . .2192 .2152 . . .3803 .3803 .1414 .2940 .2922 .0919 .2165 .2154 .0707 . .1528 .3338 .2913 .3005 .2125 .2616 .2700 . .2342 .2263 . . . .2186 .2143 .2650 .3090 .2674 .2650 .3090 .2674 .2533 .2491 .2410 . . .2533 .2382 .2333 .1118 .1118 .1118 .1118 .3414 .3414 .3414 .3414

18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Total

195

Total

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.985 .985 .985 .985 .870 .897 .893 .755 .994 .946 .827 .995 .959 .810 .971 .940 1.000 1.170 1.157 1.005 1.038 1.021 1.156 1.156 1.004 1.143 1.118 .935 1.079 1.065 .922 1.008 .979 .827 1.057 1.024 .898 1.053 1.024 .640 .635 .637 .600 .800 .700 .707 .595 .621

.2745 .2745 .2745 .2745 . .1227 .1125 .0778 .2169 .2177 .3338 .1947 .2267 .2188 .1856 .1993 . .2527 .2465 .2559 .3090 .2632 .3803 .3803 .2217 .2947 .2846 .0919 .2517 .2430 .2391 .2376 .2347 .3338 .2827 .2931 .2321 .2565 .2575 . .0495 .0351 . . .1414 .2684 .0974 .1467

8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13

Total

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

BRT.80.10

middle

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

196

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.672 .617 .632 .630 .669 .664 .670 .670 .606 .606 .650 .639 .641 .635 .662 .658 .635 .800 .690 .707 .599 .616 .666 .629 .636 .610 .621 .620 .730 .730 .610 .635 .632 .803 .635 .707 .803 .635 .707 .755 .626 .661 .730 .730 .755 .635 .665 .575 .575 .575 .575 .710

.1961 .1028 .1310 . .0633 .0606 . . .1015 .1015 .0283 .0865 .0813 .0071 .0600 .0553 .0495 . .1015 .2684 .0961 .1300 .1609 .0933 .1082 . .0389 .0363 . . . .0526 .0499 .1795 .0635 .1444 .1795 .0635 .1444 .1756 .0465 .1078 . . .1756 .0535 .1056 .0500 .0500 .0500 .0500 .2093

5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Total

old

0

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total 1 M.Exp.

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

young

0

Beginner Total

1

Beginner

197

Total Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner M.Exp. N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.80.20 middle 0 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.710 .710 .710 .643 .643 .643 .643 .640 .595 .601 .605 .644 .636 .707 .607 .629 .662 .616 .625 .630 .683 .678 .770 .635 .703 .606 .606 .742 .651 .667 .635 .653 .652 .715 .641 .666 .707 .607 .621 .698 .633 .645 .710 .720 .717 .700 .900 .800 .680 .724 .714

.2093 .2093 .2093 .1583 .1583 .1583 .1583 . .0543 .0524 .0071 .0727 .0662 .2684 .1010 .1439 .1772 .0825 .1050 . .1221 .1178 .1610 .0635 .1344 .1015 .1015 .1529 .1098 .1206 .0071 .1110 .1051 .1511 .0669 .1044 .2684 .0982 .1291 .1638 .0971 .1137 . .0283 .0208 . . .1414 .1852 .1133 .1253

4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13

W.Exp.

1

Beginner M.Exp.

W.Exp.

198

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.690 .737 .724 .740 .863 .849 .750 .750 .770 .770 .745 .819 .811 .725 .834 .816 .725 .900 .783 .680 .743 .734 .706 .781 .766 .770 .727 .733 1.070 1.070 .770 .770 .770 .830 .823 .826 .830 .823 .826 .815 .762 .776 1.070 1.070 .815 .788 .794 .685

.1317 .1100 .1144 . .0944 .0973 . . .1457 .1457 .0071 .1258 .1203 .0212 .1031 .1026 .0354 . .1041 .1852 .1254 .1318 .1109 .1238 .1236 . .0407 .0406 . . . .1269 .1187 .1015 .2133 .1618 .1015 .2133 .1618 .0881 .1302 .1199 . . .0881 .1527 .1372 .0705

5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

0

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

1

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

0

Beginner

N.Dr.

199

Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner M.Exp.

Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.685 .685 .685 .810 .810 .810 .810 .748 .748 .748 .748 .710 .697 .699 .735 .749 .746 .680 .755 .739 .703 .739 .732 .740 .845 .837 .810 .823 .816 .770 .770 .796 .818 .814 .725 .796 .789 .785 .773 .777 .680 .761 .750 .745 .777 .771 .800 .970 .913 .800 1.000 .900 .857

.0705 .0705 .0705 .2107 .2107 .2107 .2107 .1601 .1601 .1601 .1601 . .0589 .0540 .0495 .0718 .0657 .1852 .1498 .1535 .1223 .1103 .1115 . .1358 .1333 .0920 .2133 .1522 .1457 .1457 .0856 .1495 .1392 .0212 .1347 .1293 .0841 .1304 .1145 .1852 .1440 .1480 .1129 .1352 .1310 . .0424 .1026 . . .1414 .2376

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3

W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

BRT.80.30

middle

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr

W.Exp.

200

Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.970 .944 .834 .972 .934 1.270 1.220 1.226 .870 .870 1.121 1.121 1.070 1.174 1.162 1.035 1.170 1.148 .835 1.000 .890 .857 1.032 1.006 .901 1.080 1.045 .870 .980 .966 1.330 1.330 .870 1.024 1.007 .993 .995 .994 .993 .995 .994 .963 .985 .979 1.330 1.330 .963 1.014 1.001 .810

.3260 .3026 .1708 .2827 .2595 . .1817 .1708 . . .3761 .3761 .2828 .2823 .2756 .3323 .1924 .2075 .0495 . .1015 .2376 .3446 .3317 .2146 .2956 .2877 . .2529 .2374 . . . .2648 .2530 .2003 .2138 .1903 .2003 .2138 .1903 .1748 .2284 .2095 . . .1748 .2394 .2206 .0804

10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4

1

Beginner

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Total Beginner

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

0

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

0

Beginner

N.Dr.

201

Total Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.100.10 middle 0 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr.

.810 .810 .810 1.220 1.220 1.220 1.220 1.015 1.015 1.015 1.015 .800 .863 .854 .835 .983 .953 .857 1.003 .971 .840 .963 .939 1.270 1.220 1.224 .963 .995 .979 1.121 1.121 1.024 1.151 1.128 1.035 1.101 1.095 .920 .987 .964 .857 1.049 1.021 .924 1.053 1.029 .670 .700

.0804 .0804 .0804 .6239 .6239 .6239 .6239 .4665 .4665 .4665 .4665 . .1052 .0990 .0495 .2343 .2164 .2376 .3278 .3085 .1535 .2577 .2439 . .3566 .3417 .1748 .2138 .1816 .3761 .3761 .2045 .3401 .3208 .3323 .3398 .3310 .1522 .2178 .1963 .2376 .3416 .3310 .1943 .3116 .2962 . .1414

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

1

Beginner

202

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. old 0 M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.690 .500 .740 .620 .600 .597 .598 .594 .624 .616 .670 .695 .692 .600 .600 .634 .634 .635 .667 .663 .670 .696 .692 .550 .740 .613 .600 .612 .611 .606 .647 .639 .600 .604 .604 .600 .600 .600 .604 .603 .647 .648 .647 .647 .648 .647 .635 .620 .624 .600 .600 .635 .618 .623

.1015 . . .1697 .0000 .0678 .0588 .0607 .0884 .0810 . .1321 .1239 . . .1039 .1039 .0495 .1197 .1132 .0000 .1257 .1142 .0707 . .1206 .0000 .0836 .0769 .0571 .1067 .0994 . .0503 .0466 . . . .0466 .0436 .0404 .0450 .0395 .0404 .0450 .0395 .0404 .0510 .0475 . . .0404 .0490 .0463

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16

Total

Beginner

203

young

0

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner Total

Total

Beginner Total

.578 .578 .578 .578 .670 .670 .670 .670 .624 .624 .624 .624 .670 .618 .626 .550 .621 .607 .600 .597 .598 .595 .610 .607 .670 .687 .685 .635 .648 .641 .634 .634 .642 .664 .660 .670 .664 .665 .607 .630 .622 .600 .612 .610 .616 .636 .632 .800 .900

.0741 .0741 .0741 .0741 .0990 .0990 .0990 .0990 .0949 .0949 .0949 .0949 . .1063 .0990 .0707 .0669 .0702 .0000 .0644 .0565 .0543 .0743 .0703 . .1180 .1131 .0404 .0450 .0402 .1039 .1039 .0383 .1039 .0953 .0000 .1159 .1097 .0625 .0597 .0599 .0000 .0812 .0750 .0516 .0928 .0866 . .1414

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

Total

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

BRT.100.20

middle

0

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr.

204

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. 1 M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.867 .700 .830 .765 .693 .695 .695 .716 .737 .731 1.340 .915 .962 .750 .750 .736 .736 1.045 .831 .856 1.070 .912 .938 .725 .830 .760 .693 .712 .709 .810 .788 .792 .670 .740 .731 .810 .810 .670 .749 .740 .820 .883 .856 .820 .883 .856 .783 .792 .789

.1155 . . .0919 .0404 .1101 .0967 .0550 .1318 .1143 . .1144 .1775 . . .1056 .1056 .4172 .1411 .1825 .3818 .1115 .1650 .0354 . .0656 .0404 .1069 .0992 .2383 .1426 .1620 . .0852 .0827 . . . .0827 .0817 .2193 .1895 .1873 .2193 .1895 .1873 .1941 .1425 .1503

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15

W.Exp. Total

205

W.Exp. Total young 0 Beginner Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.810 .810 .783 .793 .791 .730 .730 .730 .730 .805 .805 .805 .805 .768 .768 .768 .768 .800 .787 .789 .685 .751 .738 .693 .705 .703 .708 .740 .734 1.340 .878 .914 .803 .883 .843 .736 .736 .910 .836 .849 1.070 .848 .870 .763 .795 .784 .693 .717 .714 .800 .786 .788 .900 1.065

. . .1941 .1359 .1453 .0678 .0678 .0678 .0678 .1756 .1756 .1756 .1756 .1296 .1296 .1296 .1296 . .1203 .1099 .0212 .0851 .0804 .0404 .1100 .0979 .0527 .1063 .0983 . .1402 .1855 .1825 .1895 .1774 .1056 .1056 .2877 .1495 .1769 .3818 .1377 .1712 .1541 .1363 .1387 .0404 .1063 .0992 .2135 .1363 .1515 . .0919

1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total 1 Beginner

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total Total Beginner

M.Exp.

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

Total BRT.100.30 middle 0 Beginner

206

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr

1.010 1.100 .940 1.020 .870 1.057 1.014 .922 1.049 1.014 1.000 1.164 1.146 .800 .800 .901 .901 .900 1.041 1.025 .950 1.144 1.112 .950 .940 .947 .870 .993 .975 .916 1.045 1.019 .870 1.051 1.029 1.410 1.410 .870 1.096 1.071 1.013 1.035 1.026 1.013 1.035 1.026 .978

.1153 . . .1131 .1758 .3995 .3627 .1597 .3486 .3085 . .1103 .1167 . . .1157 .1157 .1414 .1737 .1728 .0707 .1102 .1268 .2121 . .1501 .1758 .3178 .3006 .1430 .2639 .2484 . .1858 .1836 . . . .2137 .2136 .2940 .2689 .2551 .2940 .2689 .2551 .2505

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4

207

N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total young 0 Beginner Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Total Beginner N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

1.045 1.027 1.410 1.410 .978 1.076 1.051 .895 .895 .895 .895 .995 .995 .995 .995 .945 .945 .945 .945 .900 .952 .944 .985 1.038 1.027 .870 1.089 1.042 .913 1.040 1.015 1.000 1.108 1.099 .960 1.035 .998 .901 .901 .968 1.032 1.021 .950 1.056 1.045 .968 1.037 1.014 .870 1.016

.2061 .2115 . . .2505 .2229 .2257 .2113 .2113 .2113 .2113 .2390 .2390 .2390 .2390 .2155 .2155 .2155 .2155 . .1902 .1747 .1626 .1765 .1663 .1758 .3937 .3642 .1445 .2903 .2710 . .1738 .1691 .2627 .2689 .2493 .1157 .1157 .2282 .1928 .1965 .0707 .1895 .1829 .2165 .1988 .2011 .1758 .3236

11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18

1

Beginner

208

Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.995 .938 1.036 1.018

.3080 .1791 .2458 .2366

21 11 48 59

Multivariate Tests(c) Effect sphdy Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Value .797 .203 3.926 3.926 .256 .759 .297 .193 .273 .727 .376 .376 .446 .581 .675 .597 .201 .799 .251 .251 .311 .710 .380 .275 .233 .767 .304 .304 .463 .590 .605 .345 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .118 .882 F 17.175(a) 17.175(a) 17.175(a) 17.175(a) .662 .647(a) .632 .866(b) 1.644(a) 1.644(a) 1.644(a) 1.644(a) 1.292 1.365(a) 1.434 2.687(b) 1.099(a) 1.099(a) 1.099(a) 1.099(a) .827 .817(a) .807 1.238(b) 1.331(a) 1.331(a) 1.331(a) 1.331(a) 1.356 1.321(a) 1.286 1.551(b) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .587(a) .587(a) Hypothesis df 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Error df 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 35.000 35.000 Sig. .000 .000 .000 .000 .038 .038 .038 .036 .015 .015 .015 .015 .226 .185 .152 .072 .387 .387 .387 .387 .037 .047 .047 .043 .261 .261 .261 .261 .189 .210 .232 .174 . . . 1.00 0 .781 .781

209

Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root

.134 .134 .254 .746 .341 .341 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .167 .840 .183 .121 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .000 1.000 .000 .000

.587(a) .587(a) 1.490(a) 1.490(a) 1.490(a) 1.490(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .409 .399(a) .390 .543(b) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a)

8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000

35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000

.781 .781 .196 .196 .196 .196 . . . 1.00 0 .976 .978 .981 .816 . . . 1.00 0 . . . 1.00 0 . . . 1.00 0

a Exact statistic b The statistic is an upper bound on F that yields a lower bound on the significance level. c Design: Intercept+Age+Gender+Dr.Exp+Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender+Age * Dr.Exp+Gender * Dr.Exp+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp+Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Within Subjects Design: sphdy

Mauchly's Test of Sphericity(b) Measure: brt Within Subjects Effect Mauchly's W Approx. ChiSquare df Sig. GreenhouseGeisser .476 Epsilon(a) Huynh-Feldt .729 Lowerbound .125

sphdy

.005

207.786

35

.000

210

Tests the null hypothesis that the error covariance matrix of the orthonormalized transformed dependent variables is proportional to an identity matrix. a May be used to adjust the degrees of freedom for the averaged tests of significance. Corrected tests are displayed in the Tests of Within-Subjects Effects table. b Design: Intercept+Age+Gender+Dr.Exp+Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender+Age * Dr.Exp+Gender * Dr.Exp+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp+Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Within Subjects Design: sphdy

Tests of Within-Subjects Effects Measure: brt Source sphdy Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed

Type III Sum of Squares 3.933 3.933 3.933 3.933 .186 .186 .186 .186 .268 .268 .268 .268 .253 .253 .253 .253 .181 .181 .181 .181 .103 .103 .103 .103 .065 .065 .065 .065 .242 .242 .242 .242 .000

df 8 3.810 5.834 1.000 16 7.621 11.669 2.000 8 3.810 5.834 1.000 16 7.621 11.669 2.000 8 3.810 5.834 1.000 16 7.621 11.669 2.000 8 3.810 5.834 1.000 16 7.621 11.669 2.000 0

Mean Square .492 1.032 .674 3.933 .012 .024 .016 .093 .034 .070 .046 .268 .016 .033 .022 .127 .023 .048 .031 .181 .006 .014 .009 .052 .008 .017 .011 .065 .015 .032 .021 .121 .

F 24.250 24.250 24.250 24.250 1.573 .573 .573 .573 1.653 1.653 1.653 1.653 .780 .780 .780 .780 1.117 1.117 1.117 1.117 1.319 .319 .319 .319 .399 .399 .399 .399 .747 .747 .747 .747 .

Sig. .000 .000 .000 .000 .035 .038 .039 .036 .043 .042 .041 .042 .708 .615 .667 .465 .351 .350 .353 .297 .033 .040 .040 .027 .921 .800 .875 .531 .744 .643 .700 .480 .

211

Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound Error(sphdy) Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound

.000 .000 .000 .084 .084 .084 .084 .072 .072 .072 .072 .000 .000 .000 .000 .131 .131 .131 .131 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 6.813 6.813 6.813 6.813

.000 .000 .000 8 3.810 5.834 1.000 8 3.810 5.834 1.000 0 .000 .000 .000 16 7.621 11.669 2.000 0 .000 .000 .000 0 .000 .000 .000 0 .000 .000 .000 336 160.038 245.046 42.000

. . . .011 .022 .014 .084 .009 .019 .012 .072 . . . . .008 .017 .011 .065 . . . . . . . . . . . . .020 .043 .028 .162

. . . .519 .519 .519 .519 .443 .443 .443 .443 . . . . .403 .403 .403 .403 . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . .842 .713 .789 .475 .895 .768 .845 .509 . . . . .981 .911 .959 .671 . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tests of Within-Subjects Contrasts Measure: brt Source sphdy sphdy Linear Quadratic Type III Sum of Squares .462 .007 df 1 1 Mean Square .462 .007 F 21.268 .301 Sig. .000 .586

212

Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Linear

.719 .016 .350 .003 2.327 .049 .051 .025 .028 .025 .012 .000 .045 .000 .005 .046 .012 .031 2.89E-005 .001 .145 .028 .046 .048 .001 .073 .004 .008 .064 .010 .000 .006 .030 .010 .038 .040 .038 .019 .031 .009 .038 .004 .005 .000 .001 .014 .002

1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1

.719 .016 .350 .003 2.327 .049 .026 .012 .014 .012 .006 .000 .022 .000 .005 .046 .012 .031 2.89E-005 .001 .145 .028 .023 .024 .001 .037 .002 .004 .032 .005 .000 .006 .030 .010 .038 .040 .038 .019 .016 .005 .019 .002 .003 9.07E-005 .001 .007 .002

38.323 1.316 21.181 .270 57.458 2.757 1.177 .564 .756 .991 .367 .010 .550 .011 .253 2.092 .631 2.524 .002 .044 3.581 1.578 1.058 1.091 .032 2.954 .108 .304 .791 .275 .013 .282 1.578 .788 2.297 3.153 .951 1.070 .721 .209 1.009 .168 .161 .007 .017 .392 .078

.000 .258 .000 .606 .000 .104 .032 .573 .476 .380 .695 .990 .581 .989 .618 .156 .432 .120 .967 .835 .065 .216 .356 .345 .968 .063 .898 .740 .460 .761 .910 .598 .216 .380 .137 .083 .335 .307 .035 .812 .373 .846 .852 .993 .983 .678 .782

213

Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

.013 .001 .031 .000 .018 .000 7.53E-005 .098 .003 .021 .051 .003 .015 .039 .013 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .026 .024 .025 .000 .005 7.12E-005 .002 .003 .006 .002 5.97E-006 .023 .001 .004 .010 .026 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

.013 .001 .031 .000 .018 .000 7.53E-005 .049 .001 .010 .026 .001 .007 .020 .007 . . . . . . . . .026 .024 .025 .000 .005 7.12E-005 .002 .003 .006 .002 5.97E-006 .023 .001 .004 .010 .026 . . . . . . . .

.604 .027 2.494 .008 1.433 .004 .004 2.264 .058 .552 2.064 .084 .587 .482 .368 . . . . . . . . 1.183 1.090 1.316 .014 .298 .006 .057 .143 .268 .095 .000 1.845 .043 .352 .235 1.473 . . . . . . . .

.441 .871 .122 .930 .238 .953 .949 .116 .944 .580 .140 .920 .560 .621 .695 . . . . . . . . .283 .302 .258 .907 .588 .940 .813 .707 .608 .759 .986 .182 .836 .556 .630 .232 . . . . . . . .

214

sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

.026 .040 .022 .006 .018 .004 .007 .007 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .911 .915 .788 .521 .694 .528 1.701 .753

2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 42 42 42 42 42 42 42 42

.013 .020 .011 .003 .009 .002 .004 .004 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .022 .022 .019 .012 .017 .013 .040 .018

.593 .927 .579 .222 .558 .162 .091 .209 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.557 .404 .565 .802 .577 .851 .914 .812 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

Error(sphdy)

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

215

Tests of Between-Subjects Effects Measure: brt Transformed Variable: Average Source Intercept Age Gender Dr.Exp Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender Age * Dr.Exp Gender * Dr.Exp Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Error Type III Sum of Squares 128.608 .389 .643 .210 .091 .101 .249 .039 .000 .028 .054 .000 .044 .000 .000 .000 5.741 df 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 0 1 1 0 2 0 0 0 42 Mean Square 128.608 .195 .643 .105 .091 .051 .249 .019 . .028 .054 . .022 . . . .137 F 940.868 1.423 4.708 .767 .665 .371 1.824 .141 . .208 .397 . .160 . . . Sig. .000 .025 .036 .471 .419 .039 .184 .869 . .651 .532 . .852 . . .

Estimated Marginal Means
1. Age Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Age middle old young Mean .801(a) .830(a) .797(a) Std. Error .031 .041 .044 Lower Bound .740 .748 .709 Upper Bound .863 .912 .885

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

2. Gender Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Gender 0 1 Mean .781(a) .850(a) Std. Error .031 .031 Lower Bound .718 .787 Upper Bound .844 .912

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

216

3. Dr.Exp Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Dr.Exp Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Mean .835(a) .787(a) .810(a) Std. Error .036 .038 .039 Lower Bound .762 .710 .732 Upper Bound .908 .864 .888

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

4. Dr.Hrs.perWeek Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Dr.Hrs.perWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. Mean .771(a) .836(a) Std. Error .042 .024 Lower Bound .686 .788 Upper Bound .855 .885

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

5. sphdy Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval sphdy 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Mean .639(a) .780(a) .969(a) .661(a) .781(a) 1.004(a) .632(a) .813(a) Std. Error .014 .022 .048 .021 .023 .055 .016 .022 Lower Bound .610 .736 .872 .619 .734 .893 .601 .768 Upper Bound .669 .824 1.066 .703 .827 1.116 .664 .858 1.094

1.004(a) .045 .914 a Based on modified population marginal mean.

217

Profile Plots

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.835

0.83

Estimated Marginal Means

0.825

0.82

0.815

0.81

0.805

0.8

0.795 middle old young

Age

218

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.85

0.84

Estimated Marginal Means

0.83

0.82

0.81

0.8

0.79

0.78 0 1

Gender

219

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.84

0.83

Estimated Marginal Means

0.82

0.81

0.8

0.79

0.78 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp.

Dr.Exp

220

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.84

0.83

Estimated Marginal Means

0.82

0.81

0.8

0.79

0.78

0.77 Ex.Dr N.Dr.

Dr.Hrs.perWeek

221

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

1.0

Estimated Marginal Means

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

sphdy

222

Appendix E Repeated Measure ANOVA Analysis for Stationary Scenario

223

Repeated Measure ANOVA for BRT: Stationary Scenario
This appendix shows the results of repeated measure ANOVA analysis of BRT for stationary scenario. The appendix includes: 1- Description of within and between subject factors 2- Descriptive statistics such as mean and standard deviation 3- Mauchly's test of Sphericity that examines the form of the common covariance matrix. A spherical matrix has equal variances and covariances equal to zero. The common covariance matrix of the transformed within-subject variables must be spherical, or the F tests and associated p values for the univariate approach to testing within-subjects hypotheses are invalid. If sphericity assumption is violated then SPSS performs the correct tests to check the effect of within subject factors. 4- Tests to show the within subject effects 5- Tests to show the trend of models for combination of different variables 6- Tests to show the between subject effects 7- Marginal means of BRT for all variables 8- Profile Plots that show the graphical representation of marginal means of BRT for each variable.

224

Within-Subjects Factors Measure: brt sphdy 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Dependent Variable BRT.60.20 BRT.60.30 BRT.60.40 BRT.80.20 BRT.80.30 BRT.80.40 BRT.100.20 BRT.100.30 BRT.100.40

Between-Subjects Factors N Age middle old young Gender Dr.Exp 0 1 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Dr.Hrs.pe rWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. 35 16 8 31 28 20 18 21 11 48

Descriptive Statistics Age BRT.60.20 middle Gender 0 Dr.Exp Beginner Dr.Hrs.perWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Mean .5400 .6500 .6133 .5000 .6100 .5550 .5233 .5230 .5231 .5220 .5492 .5417 .4700 .5275 Std. Deviation . .07071 .08083 . . .07778 .06807 .08680 .08014 .05020 .09296 .08276 . .05445 N 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8

225

Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. W.Exp. Total Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

.5211 .5300 .5300 .5671 .5671 .5000 .5460 .5406 .5050 .5520 .5442 .5150 .6100 .5467 .5233 .5412 .5385 .5157 .5475 .5411 .5400 .5686 .5650 .5100 .5100 .5400 .5613 .5589 .6900 .5550 .6129 .6900 .5550 .6129 .6525 .5636 .5873 .5100 .5100 .6525 .5592 .5825 .5700 .5700 .5700 .5700 .6125 .6125 .6125 .6125 .5913

.05442 . . .09013 .09013 .04243 .07337 .07110 .04950 .07436 .07128 .02121 . .05686 .06807 .08824 .08418 .04577 .08145 .07619 . .03579 .03464 . . . .03907 .03723 .13454 .11619 .13413 .13454 .11619 .13413 .13301 .06975 .09445 . . .13301 .06829 .09327 .03464 .03464 .03464 .03464 .13301 .13301 .13301 .13301 .09280

9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8

young

0

Beginner Total

226

Total Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Total Beginner M.Exp. N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.60.30 middle 0 Beginner M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.5913 .5913 .5913 .5400 .5967 .5886 .5200 .5738 .5630 .5233 .5218 .5221 .5250 .5564 .5503 .4700 .5558 .5492 .6500 .5550 .6025 .5671 .5671 .6140 .5591 .5689 .5050 .5694 .5630 .6067 .5675 .5806 .5233 .5394 .5371 .5655 .5577 .5592 .5400 .7200 .6600 .6000 .7300 .6650 .6700 .6360 .6438 .6300 .6562 .6489 .5700 .6675 .6567

.09280 .09280 .09280 . .05854 .05757 .02828 .03623 .04029 .06807 .08244 .07708 .04550 .07059 .06701 . .09199 .09124 .13589 .11619 .12759 .09013 .09013 .14258 .09120 .10123 .04950 .08292 .08170 .12549 .06784 .08928 .06807 .08592 .08229 .10643 .08025 .08474 . .02828 .10583 . . .09192 .05196 .10522 .09474 .06928 .09921 .09068 . .06585 .06964

8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9

Total 1 Beginner

M.Exp.

227

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.8000 .8000 .7129 .7129 .6850 .6887 .6882 .5550 .6780 .6575 .7000 .7300 .7100 .6700 .6676 .6680 .6457 .6736 .6680 .6300 .7000 .6913 .6000 .6000 .6300 .6875 .6811 .6467 .6850 .6686 .6467 .6850 .6686 .6425 .6945 .6807 .6000 .6000 .6425 .6867 .6756 .6850 .6850 .6850 .6850 .6950 .6950 .6950

. . .13913 .13913 .16263 .10494 .10626 .02121 .06286 .07461 .14142 . .10149 .05196 .12250 .11368 .09126 .10177 .09911 . .08327 .08097 . . . .08481 .08162 .13614 .16197 .14041 .13614 .16197 .14041 .11147 .10994 .10892 . . .11147 .10832 .10714 .01732 .01732 .01732 .01732 .16031 .16031 .16031

1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

0

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

0

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

1

Beginner Total

228

Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

.6950 .6900 .6900 .6900 .6900 .5400 .6967 .6743 .6150 .7038 .6860 .6700 .6327 .6407 .6300 .6708 .6629 .5700 .6767 .6685 .6850 .6850 .6850 .7129 .7129 .6620 .6891 .6843 .5550 .6833 .6705 .6617 .6975 .6856 .6700 .6639 .6648 .6445 .6796 .6731 1.0700 1.1200 1.1033 .8000 .8700 .8350 .9500 .8880 .9023 .9440 .9223

.16031 .10569 .10569 .10569 .10569 . .02582 .06373 .02121 .07782 .07849 .05196 .10041 .09177 .06197 .08544 .08215 . .09976 .09999 .13503 .16197 .13805 .13913 .13913 .12775 .11874 .11840 .02121 .08203 .08721 .11107 .10532 .10540 .05196 .11991 .11179 .09342 .10204 .10066 . .02828 .03512 . . .04950 .17059 .07969 .10175 .15405 .11204

4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13

Total

Beginner

W.Exp.

BRT.60.40

middle

0

Beginner

229

Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total 1 M.Exp. N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total young 0 Beginner Total 1 Beginner Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total

.9283 .6700 .8338 .8156 1.4000 1.4000 .9971 .9971 1.0350 .9100 .9247 .8700 .8910 .8875 1.1000 .8700 1.0233 .9500 .9329 .9355 .9700 .9157 .9266 .7100 .8214 .8075 .8100 .8100 .7100 .8200 .8078 1.0000 1.1350 1.0771 1.0000 1.1350 1.0771 .9275 .9355 .9333 .8100 .8100 .9275 .9250 .9256 .8450 .8450 .8450 .8450 .9775 .9775 .9775 .9775

.12060 . .10391 .11148 . . .32541 .32541 .51619 .24062 .26275 .28284 .15184 .16187 .42426 . .32808 .17059 .21528 .20526 .24940 .18879 .19941 . .10221 .10250 . . . .09472 .09589 .13528 .32889 .25572 .13528 .32889 .25572 .18228 .25248 .22949 . . .18228 .24344 .22384 .04796 .04796 .04796 .04796 .15543 .15543 .15543 .15543

18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Total

230

Total

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.9113 .9113 .9113 .9113 1.0700 .9367 .9557 .7550 .8275 .8130 .9500 .8809 .8957 .9050 .8772 .8826 .6700 .8817 .8654 1.1000 1.1350 1.1175 .9971 .9971 1.0140 .9609 .9704 .8700 .9000 .8970 .9850 .9300 .9483 .9500 .9261 .9295 .9545 .9173 .9242 .6000 .6450 .6300 .4000 .7900 .5950 .5267 .5400 .5369

.12789 .12789 .12789 .12789 . .14733 .14363 .06364 .09618 .09262 .17059 .07918 .10082 .16766 .10745 .11852 . .13590 .14275 .22847 .32889 .26283 .32541 .32541 .27592 .24943 .24981 .28284 .13801 .14607 .25273 .24147 .23922 .17059 .21086 .20193 .21851 .19184 .19563 . .07778 .06083 . . .27577 .07371 .08485 .07962

8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13

Total

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

BRT.80.20

middle

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

231

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.5160 .5754 .5589 .6700 .5125 .5300 .6000 .6000 .5571 .5571 .6350 .5333 .5453 .6350 .5390 .5550 .5000 .7900 .5967 .5267 .5471 .5440 .5500 .5529 .5523 .4700 .5471 .5375 .5500 .5500 .4700 .5475 .5389 .6867 .6050 .6400 .6867 .6050 .6400 .6325 .5682 .5853 .5500 .5500 .6325 .5667 .5831 .4600 .4600 .4600 .4600 .6175

.08905 .10767 .10392 . .03536 .06205 . . .08281 .08281 .04950 .06399 .06983 .04950 .06903 .07428 .14142 . .19502 .07371 .08184 .07917 .09522 .08793 .08799 . .03251 .04062 . . . .03012 .03822 .15011 .05323 .10408 .15011 .05323 .10408 .16358 .04834 .09094 . . .16358 .04638 .08830 .04243 .04243 .04243 .04243 .03500

5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Total

old

0

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total 1 M.Exp.

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr.

young

0

Beginner Total

1

Beginner

232

Total Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner M.Exp. N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.80.30 middle 0 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.6175 .6175 .6175 .5388 .5388 .5388 .5388 .6000 .5217 .5329 .4350 .5775 .5490 .5267 .5409 .5379 .5083 .5480 .5403 .6700 .5475 .5569 .6650 .6050 .6350 .5571 .5571 .6660 .5604 .5793 .6350 .5389 .5485 .5883 .5867 .5872 .5267 .5472 .5443 .5800 .5540 .5588 .8000 .7850 .7900 .8000 .8500 .8250 .6833 .6870 .6862

.03500 .03500 .03500 .09156 .09156 .09156 .09156 . .10685 .10193 .04950 .09099 .10159 .07371 .08055 .07658 .08183 .08935 .08807 . .06166 .06812 .13000 .05323 .09739 .08281 .08281 .11261 .06792 .08563 .04950 .07730 .07969 .15728 .07889 .10632 .07371 .07940 .07717 .12329 .07922 .08838 . .12021 .08544 . . .03536 .06658 .08179 .07589

4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3 10 13

W.Exp.

1

Beginner M.Exp.

W.Exp.

233

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.7300 .7146 .7189 .7500 .6088 .6244 .8000 .8000 .6186 .6186 .7750 .6133 .6324 .7750 .6440 .6658 .8000 .8500 .8167 .6833 .6588 .6625 .7429 .6604 .6769 .6400 .6343 .6350 .5700 .5700 .6400 .6263 .6278 .8900 .8100 .8443 .8900 .8100 .8443 .8275 .6982 .7327 .5700 .5700 .8275 .6875 .7225 .6525

.07937 .09597 .08963 . .04824 .06521 . . .08435 .08435 .03536 .06510 .08166 .03536 .09454 .10013 .00000 . .02887 .06658 .08738 .08353 .06993 .09454 .09529 . .04077 .03780 . . . .04406 .04147 .21932 .18203 .18555 .21932 .18203 .18555 .21838 .13710 .16477 . . .21838 .13586 .16430 .06702

5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

0

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

1

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

0

Beginner

N.Dr.

234

Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner M.Exp.

Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.6525 .6525 .6525 .8100 .8100 .8100 .8100 .7313 .7313 .7313 .7313 .8000 .6967 .7114 .7200 .6613 .6730 .6833 .6764 .6779 .7150 .6764 .6839 .7500 .6758 .6815 .8675 .8100 .8388 .6186 .6186 .8440 .6817 .7107 .7750 .6828 .6920 .8183 .7108 .7467 .6833 .6539 .6581 .7736 .6790 .6966 .5400 1.1000 .9133 .9000 .9000 .9000 .7267

.06702 .06702 .06702 .13317 .13317 .13317 .13317 .12889 .12889 .12889 .12889 . .10132 .10040 .11314 .08509 .08757 .06658 .08524 .07924 .07994 .08636 .08527 . .12703 .12335 .18464 .18203 .17250 .08435 .08435 .16832 .13713 .15338 .03536 .11646 .11405 .16975 .13787 .15328 .06658 .08732 .08388 .13808 .11233 .12205 . .28284 .38018 . . .00000 .07371

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2 3 1 1 2 3

W.Exp. Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

BRT.80.40

middle

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr

W.Exp.

235

Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.8050 .7869 .7240 .8577 .8206 .8100 .7150 .7256 1.0000 1.0000 .7186 .7186 .9050 .7167 .7388 .6750 .7920 .7725 .9500 .9000 .9333 .7267 .7694 .7630 .7757 .7821 .7809 1.0100 .7529 .7850 .7000 .7000 1.0100 .7463 .7756 1.0000 .8925 .9386 1.0000 .8925 .9386 1.0025 .8036 .8567 .7000 .7000 1.0025 .7950 .8469 .7950

.06223 .07064 .13759 .14771 .15379 . .05155 .05769 . . .09371 .09371 .13435 .07138 .09746 .19092 .19315 .18950 .07071 . .05774 .07371 .08598 .08392 .15306 .13217 .13422 . .05090 .10240 . . . .05069 .09989 .28792 .01500 .17620 .28792 .01500 .17620 .23514 .08115 .15760 . . .23514 .08296 .15721 .07047

10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4

1

Beginner

M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Total Beginner

Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

old

0

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

young

0

Beginner

N.Dr.

236

Total Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total BRT.100.20 middle 0 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr.

.7950 .7950 .7950 .7850 .7850 .7850 .7850 .7900 .7900 .7900 .7900 .5400 .8967 .8457 .9550 .7713 .8080 .7267 .7955 .7807 .7717 .8120 .8042 .8100 .7383 .7438 1.0000 .8925 .9463 .7186 .7186 .9620 .7591 .7954 .6750 .7911 .7795 .9850 .8117 .8694 .7267 .7656 .7600 .8582 .7867 .8000 1.2400 .6500

.07047 .07047 .07047 .23573 .23573 .23573 .23573 .16116 .16116 .16116 .16116 . .20925 .23380 .07778 .07019 .10250 .07371 .06699 .07173 .16964 .12207 .13030 . .13429 .13010 .23509 .01500 .16457 .09371 .09371 .22061 .12424 .16139 .19092 .17449 .17446 .18684 .08222 .14735 .07371 .08501 .08295 .20913 .12468 .14466 . .07071

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

1

Beginner

237

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. old 0 M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.8467 .5000 .6700 .5850 .6600 .5590 .5823 .7440 .5815 .6267 .4700 .5163 .5111 .6500 .6500 .5700 .5700 .5600 .5413 .5435 .8550 .5430 .5950 .5750 .6700 .6067 .6600 .5635 .5780 .6914 .5600 .5863 .6100 .5514 .5588 .5400 .5400 .6100 .5500 .5567 .6267 .5975 .6100 .6267 .5975 .6100 .6225 .5682 .5827 .5400 .5400 .6225 .5658 .5800

.34429 . . .12021 .06000 .03446 .05876 .28893 .05625 .16578 . .03378 .03516 . . .08602 .08602 .12728 .06717 .07071 .54447 .06800 .21326 .10607 . .09292 .06000 .05894 .06748 .25771 .06452 .13368 . .06149 .06058 . . . .05707 .05701 .11372 .08617 .09092 .11372 .08617 .09092 .09323 .07097 .07796 . . .09323 .06815 .07607

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15 1 1 4 12 16

Total

Beginner

238

young

0

Beginner Total

N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner Total

Total

Beginner Total

.4900 .4900 .4900 .4900 .7825 .7825 .7825 .7825 .6363 .6363 .6363 .6363 1.2400 .5433 .6429 .5550 .5663 .5640 .6600 .5573 .5793 .7217 .5568 .5887 .4700 .6050 .5946 .6325 .5975 .6150 .5700 .5700 .6000 .5930 .5943 .8550 .5844 .6115 .6067 .5767 .5867 .6600 .5622 .5762 .6664 .5742 .5914 .6700 .7350

.13115 .13115 .13115 .13115 .32786 .32786 .32786 .32786 .27908 .27908 .27908 .27908 . .13471 .29062 .07778 .07070 .06769 .06000 .03319 .05757 .26415 .07598 .14364 . .21732 .21141 .09359 .08617 .08536 .08602 .08602 .10886 .16400 .15387 .54447 .19181 .23549 .08981 .07377 .07814 .06000 .05745 .06629 .20896 .12598 .14731 . .04950

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

Total

0

Beginner

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

1

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

Total

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

BRT.100.30

middle

0

Beginner

Ex.Dr N.Dr.

239

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. 1 M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.7133 .6000 .6800 .6400 .6700 .6610 .6631 .6560 .6738 .6689 .9400 .6088 .6456 .8100 .8100 .6686 .6686 .8750 .6367 .6647 .8050 .6340 .6625 .7050 .6800 .6967 .6700 .6641 .6650 .7186 .6539 .6669 .7800 .6500 .6663 .5800 .5800 .7800 .6413 .6567 .7700 .7025 .7314 .7700 .7025 .7314 .7725 .6691 .6967

.05132 . . .05657 .11790 .07141 .07846 .08905 .06923 .07291 . .05515 .12187 . . .08840 .08840 .09192 .07631 .10904 .19092 .07397 .11055 .14849 . .10599 .11790 .07624 .07977 .13459 .07420 .09087 . .07439 .08280 . . . .07318 .08261 .17000 .11529 .13259 .17000 .11529 .13259 .13889 .08949 .10998

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4 11 15

W.Exp. Total

240

W.Exp. Total young 0 Beginner Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner

N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.5800 .5800 .7725 .6617 .6894 .6275 .6275 .6275 .6275 .7425 .7425 .7425 .7425 .6850 .6850 .6850 .6850 .6700 .6633 .6643 .6900 .6538 .6610 .6700 .6536 .6571 .6767 .6560 .6600 .9400 .6533 .6754 .7800 .7025 .7413 .6686 .6686 .8120 .6665 .6925 .8050 .6567 .6715 .7500 .6700 .6967 .6700 .6594 .6610 .7382 .6610 .6754 .6000 .8350

. . .13889 .08912 .11018 .08846 .08846 .08846 .08846 .13376 .13376 .13376 .13376 .12166 .12166 .12166 .12166 . .09092 .08304 .12728 .06968 .07622 .11790 .07201 .07859 .09438 .07292 .07620 . .10560 .12862 .14024 .11529 .12586 .08840 .08840 .14096 .09925 .11912 .19092 .09834 .11250 .13115 .08539 .10622 .11790 .07658 .07993 .13190 .08576 .09938 . .04950

1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18 21 11 48 59 1 2

M.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

W.Exp. Total 1 Beginner

M.Exp.

W.Exp. Total Total Beginner

M.Exp.

W.Exp.

Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

Total BRT.100.40 middle 0 Beginner

241

Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Total Ex.Dr Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Beginner Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total old 0 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total 1 M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr

.7567 .8000 1.3200 1.0600 .7967 .7640 .7715 .7580 .8177 .8011 1.0100 .7313 .7622 1.0000 1.0000 .7643 .7643 1.0050 .7467 .7771 .8050 .7520 .7608 .9000 1.3200 1.0400 .7967 .7641 .7690 .8286 .7796 .7894 .9000 .7829 .7975 .6500 .6500 .9000 .7663 .7811 .9367 .9175 .9257 .9367 .9175 .9257 .9275

.14012 . . .36770 .17039 .08086 .09974 .14940 .16907 .16182 . .05592 .10663 . . .10358 .10358 .00707 .08033 .11406 .28991 .06795 .10883 .14142 . .26230 .17039 .08775 .09840 .17151 .13173 .13916 . .10673 .10714 . . . .10941 .11163 .11547 .28336 .21141 .11547 .28336 .21141 .09605

3 1 1 2 3 10 13 5 13 18 1 8 9 1 1 7 7 2 15 17 2 10 12 2 1 3 3 17 20 7 28 35 1 7 8 1 1 1 8 9 3 4 7 3 4 7 4

242

N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total young 0 Beginner Total 1 Beginner Total Total Beginner Total Total 0 Beginner N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. M.Exp. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total W.Exp. Total Total Beginner N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total M.Exp. W.Exp. Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total Ex.Dr N.Dr.

.8318 .8573 .6500 .6500 .9275 .8167 .8444 .7675 .7675 .7675 .7675 .8050 .8050 .8050 .8050 .7863 .7863 .7863 .7863 .6000 .7900 .7629 .8500 .8500 .8500 .7967 .7536 .7629 .7817 .7932 .7910 1.0100 .7558 .7754 .9525 .9175 .9350 .7643 .7643 .9640 .7865 .8182 .8050 .7672 .7710 .9183 .8725 .8878 .7967 .7578

.18851 .17111 . . .09605 .18724 .17324 .17154 .17154 .17154 .17154 .15416 .15416 .15416 .15416 .15231 .15231 .15231 .15231 . .13914 .14591 .07071 .21408 .19026 .17039 .08406 .10118 .14566 .14879 .14584 . .09895 .11808 .09946 .28336 .19748 .10358 .10358 .08989 .15020 .15611 .28991 .11092 .12477 .09867 .22840 .19265 .17039 .08928

11 15 1 1 4 12 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 8 8 8 1 6 7 2 8 10 3 11 14 6 25 31 1 12 13 4 4 8 7 7 5 23 28 2 18 20 6 12 18 3 18

1

Beginner

243

Total Total Ex.Dr N.Dr. Total

.7633 .8645 .7900 .8039

.09936 .15135 .14791 .15012

21 11 48 59

Multivariate Tests(c) Effect sphdy Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Value .906 .094 9.678 9.678 .481 .573 .650 .429 .469 .531 .882 .882 .613 .467 .970 .738 .327 .673 .486 .486 .474 .580 .632 .401 .321 .679 .473 .473 .596 .488 .874 .570 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .247 .753 F 42.340(a) 42.340(a) 42.340(a) 42.340(a) 1.426 1.404(a) 1.381 1.929(b) 3.861(a) 3.861(a) 3.861(a) 3.861(a) 1.990 2.028(a) 2.062 3.322(b) 2.127(a) 2.127(a) 2.127(a) 2.127(a) 1.397 1.370(a) 1.343 1.806(b) 2.070(a) 2.070(a) 2.070(a) 2.070(a) 1.912 1.886(a) 1.858 2.565(b) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) 1.434(a) 1.434(a) Hypothesis df 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 8.000 8.000 Error df 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 35.000 35.000 Sig. .000 .000 .000 .000 .015 .017 .018 .046 .002 .002 .002 .002 .025 .023 .021 .006 .059 .059 .059 .059 .017 .018 .020 .011 .066 .066 .066 .066 .033 .037 .041 .025 . . . 1.000 .217 .217

244

Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Pillai's Trace Wilks' Lambda Hotelling's Trace Roy's Largest Root

.328 .328 .432 .568 .760 .760 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .719 .389 1.297 1.028 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .000 1.000 .000 .000 .000 1.000 .000 .000

1.434(a) 1.434(a) 3.325(a) 3.325(a) 3.325(a) 3.325(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) 2.525 2.643(a) 2.755 4.624(b) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a) .(a) .(a) .(a) .000(a)

8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 16.000 16.000 16.000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000 .000 .000 .000 8.000

35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 35.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 72.000 70.000 68.000 36.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000 .000 38.500 2.000 34.000

.217 .217 .066 .066 .076 .076 . . . 1.000 .084 .073 .082 .081 . . . 1.000 . . . 1.000 . . . 1.000

a Exact statistic b The statistic is an upper bound on F that yields a lower bound on the significance level. c Design: Intercept+Age+Gender+Dr.Exp+Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender+Age * Dr.Exp+Gender * Dr.Exp+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp+Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Within Subjects Design: sphdy

Mauchly's Test of Sphericity(b) Measure: brt Within Subjects Effect Mauchly's W Approx. ChiSquare df Sig. Epsilon(a) GreenhouseGeisser .560 HuynhFeldt Lowerbound .874 .125

sphdy

.031

135.984

35

.000

245

Tests the null hypothesis that the error covariance matrix of the orthonormalized transformed dependent variables is proportional to an identity matrix. a May be used to adjust the degrees of freedom for the averaged tests of significance. Corrected tests are displayed in the Tests of Within-Subjects Effects table. b Design: Intercept+Age+Gender+Dr.Exp+Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender+Age * Dr.Exp+Gender * Dr.Exp+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp+Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek+ Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Within Subjects Design: sphdy

Tests of Within-Subjects Effects Measure: brt Source sphdy Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Sphericity Assumed

Type III Sum of Squares 2.708 2.708 2.708 2.708 .194 .194 .194 .194 .156 .156 .156 .156 .226 .226 .226 .226 .174 .174 .174 .174 .194 .194 .194 .194 .083 .083 .083 .083 .482 .482 .482 .482 .000

df 8 4.482 6.996 1.000 16 8.965 13.991 2.000 8 4.482 6.996 1.000 16 8.965 13.991 2.000 8 4.482 6.996 1.000 16 8.965 13.991 2.000 8 4.482 6.996 1.000 16 8.965 13.991 2.000 0

Mean Square .338 .604 .387 2.708 .012 .022 .014 .097 .020 .035 .022 .156 .014 .025 .016 .113 .022 .039 .025 .174 .012 .022 .014 .097 .010 .019 .012 .083 .030 .054 .034 .241 .

F 36.829 36.829 36.829 36.829 1.319 1.319 1.319 1.319 2.124 2.124 2.124 2.124 1.536 1.536 1.536 1.536 2.371 2.371 2.371 2.371 1.321 1.321 1.321 1.321 1.133 1.133 1.133 1.133 3.280 3.280 3.280 3.280 .

Sig. .000 .000 .000 .000 .018 .023 .019 .028 .033 .072 .041 .015 .085 .138 .097 .227 .072 .095 .072 .131 .018 .023 .019 .028 .340 .344 .342 .293 .087 .091 .088 .067 .

246

Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound Error(sphdy) Sphericity Assumed Greenhouse-Geisser Huynh-Feldt Lower-bound

.000 .000 .000 .102 .102 .102 .102 .237 .237 .237 .237 .000 .000 .000 .000 .436 .436 .436 .436 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 3.088 3.088 3.088 3.088

.000 .000 .000 8 4.482 6.996 1.000 8 4.482 6.996 1.000 0 .000 .000 .000 16 8.965 13.991 2.000 0 .000 .000 .000 0 .000 .000 .000 0 .000 .000 .000 336 188.257 293.813 42.000

. . . .013 .023 .015 .102 .030 .053 .034 .237 . . . . .027 .049 .031 .218 . . . . . . . . . . . . .009 .016 .011 .074

. . . 1.388 1.388 1.388 1.388 3.224 3.224 3.224 3.224 . . . . 2.968 2.968 2.968 2.968 . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . .200 .235 .210 .245 .072 .091 .063 .079 . . . . .070 .093 .098 .162 . . . . . . . . . . . .

Tests of Within-Subjects Contrasts Measure: brt Source sphdy sphdy Linear Quadratic Type III Sum of Squares .339 .021 df 1 1 Mean Square .339 .021 F 32.880 1.927 Sig. .000 .172

247

Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp Linear

.655 .003 .115 .147 1.359 .069 .016 .013 .065 .001 .007 .007 .054 .032 .001 2.05E-005 .091 .003 .031 .003 .025 .002 .003 .025 .096 .006 .033 .008 .037 .020 .097 .000 .046 .002 .011 .009 .009 .001 .010 .065 .013 .040 .004 .044 .011 .008 .017

1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1

.655 .003 .115 .147 1.359 .069 .008 .006 .033 .001 .004 .003 .027 .016 .001 2.05E-005 .091 .003 .031 .003 .025 .002 .001 .012 .048 .003 .016 .004 .018 .010 .097 .000 .046 .002 .011 .009 .009 .001 .005 .032 .006 .020 .002 .022 .006 .004 .017

50.599 .372 38.880 12.103 154.203 9.453 .763 .572 2.526 .080 1.220 .269 3.049 2.157 .129 .002 7.057 .335 10.594 .226 2.851 .221 .121 1.131 3.698 .353 5.539 .316 2.079 1.382 9.426 .010 3.547 .208 3.713 .737 .964 .146 .461 2.965 .485 2.491 .662 1.796 .627 .568 1.603

.000 .545 .000 .001 .000 .004 .047 .569 .092 .923 .306 .765 .058 .128 .037 .966 .011 .566 .002 .637 .099 .640 .886 .332 .033 .705 .007 .731 .138 .262 .064 .922 .067 .651 .061 .395 .332 .704 .024 .062 .619 .095 .521 .179 .539 .571 .212

248

Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8 sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

.004 .017 .028 .000 .002 .015 .002 .030 .038 .001 .076 .002 .218 .048 .068 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .053 .011 .004 .011 .001 .001 .007 .015 .001 .006 .011 .044 .003 .078 .030 .064 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

.004 .017 .028 .000 .002 .015 .002 .015 .019 .001 .038 .001 .109 .024 .034 . . . . . . . . .053 .011 .004 .011 .001 .001 .007 .015 .001 .006 .011 .044 .003 .078 .030 .064 . . . . . . . .

.324 1.279 3.427 .155 .129 1.732 .215 1.478 1.750 .056 4.691 .271 8.963 2.745 4.664 . . . . . . . . 5.128 .989 .344 1.402 .305 .046 .748 1.986 .110 .549 .837 5.475 .983 6.408 3.370 8.781 . . . . . . . .

.572 .265 .071 .696 .721 .195 .645 .240 .186 .946 .014 .764 .001 .076 .015 . . . . . . . . .063 .326 .561 .243 .584 .832 .392 .166 .741 .463 .365 .082 .327 .015 .073 .067 . . . . . . . .

249

sphdy * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

.018 .024 .049 .016 .019 .048 .189 .074 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .433 .459 .543 .341 .124 .510 .370 .307

2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 42 42 42 42 42 42 42 42

.009 .012 .025 .008 .010 .024 .094 .037 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .010 .011 .013 .008 .003 .012 .009 .007

.890 1.085 1.902 .960 3.221 1.974 10.703 5.060 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.418 .347 .162 .391 .050 .152 .090 .071 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

sphdy * Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

sphdy * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

sphdy * Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

Error(sphdy)

Linear Quadratic Cubic Order 4 Order 5 Order 6 Order 7 Order 8

250

Tests of Between-Subjects Effects Measure: brt Transformed Variable: Average Source Intercept Age Gender Dr.Exp Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender Age * Dr.Exp Gender * Dr.Exp Age * Gender * Dr.Exp Age * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Age * Gender * Dr.Exp * Dr.Hrs.perWeek Error Type III Sum of Squares 100.374 .036 .294 .054 .011 .613 .037 .444 .000 .115 .046 .000 .141 .000 .000 .000 1.772 df 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 0 1 1 0 2 0 0 0 42 Mean Square 100.374 .018 .294 .027 .011 .306 .037 .222 . .115 .046 . .070 . . . .042 F 2378.792 .425 6.978 .637 .272 7.259 .865 5.257 . 2.719 1.093 . 1.666 . . . Sig. .000 .047 .012 .534 .605 .002 .358 .099 . .107 .302 . .201 . . .

Estimated Marginal Means
1. Age Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Age middle old young Mean .725(a) .710(a) Std. Error .017 .023 Lower Bound .691 .664 Upper Bound .760 .756 .756

.707(a) .024 .658 a Based on modified population marginal mean.

2. Gender Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Gender 0 1 Mean .701(a) Std. Error .017 Lower Bound .667 Upper Bound .736 .778

.743(a) .017 .708 a Based on modified population marginal mean.

251

3. Dr.Exp Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Dr.Exp Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp. Mean .716(a) .752(a) Std. Error .020 .021 Lower Bound .675 .709 .622 Upper Bound .756 .795 .709

.665(a) .021 a Based on modified population marginal mean.

4. Dr.Hrs.perWeek Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval Dr.Hrs.perWeek Ex.Dr N.Dr. Mean .733(a) Std. Error .023 Lower Bound .686 .682 Upper Bound .780 .735

.708(a) .013 a Based on modified population marginal mean.

5. sphdy Measure: brt 95% Confidence Interval sphdy 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Mean .558(a) .664(a) .935(a) .575(a) .729(a) .832(a) .628(a) .700(a) .846(a) Std. Error .015 .019 .032 .012 .018 .021 .020 .017 .023 Lower Bound .528 .625 .870 .550 .693 .790 .588 .666 .799 Upper Bound .588 .703 1.000 .600 .765 .874 .669 .733 .893

a Based on modified population marginal mean.

252

Profile Plots

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.75

Estimated Marginal Means

0.74

0.73

0.72

0.71

0.70 0 1

Gender

253

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.9

Estimated Marginal Means

0.8

0.7

0.6

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

sphdy

254

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.725

Estimated Marginal Means

0.72

0.715

0.71

0.705 middle old young

Age

255

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.76

Estimated Marginal Means

0.74

0.72

0.70

0.68

0.66 Beginner M.Exp. W.Exp.

Dr.Exp

256

Estimated Marginal Means of brt

0.735

0.73

Estimated Marginal Means

0.725

0.72

0.715

0.71

0.705 Ex.Dr N.Dr.

Dr.Hrs.perWeek

257

Appendix F Regression Analysis for Normal Scenario

258

Linear Regression Analysis for BRT: Normal Scenario (Model 1)
b,c Variables Entered/Removed

Model 1

Variables Entered Gender, a Age

Variables Removed .

Method Enter

a. All requested variables entered. b. Dependent Variable: BRT c. Linear Regression through the Origin

Model Summary Model 1 R R Square .885b .783
a

Adjusted R Square .782

Std. Error of the Estimate .66506

a. For regression through the origin (the no-intercept model), R Square measures the proportion of the variability in the dependent variable about the origin explained by regression. This CANNOT be compared to R Square for models which include an intercept. b. Predictors: Gender, Age
ANOVAc,d Model 1 Sum of Squares 841.868 233.978 1075.846b df 2 529 531 Mean Square 420.934 .442 F 951.688 Sig. .000a

Regression Residual Total

a. Predictors: Gender, Age b. This total sum of squares is not corrected for the constant because the constant is zero for regression through the origin. c. Dependent Variable: BRT d. Linear Regression through the Origin

Coefficientsa,b Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error .025 .001 .401 .054 Standardized Coefficients Beta .753 .191

Model 1

Age Gender

t 29.121 7.376

Sig. .000 .000

a. Dependent Variable: BRT b. Linear Regression through the Origin

259

Nonlinear Regression Analysis: Normal Scenario (Model 2)
Iteration History (b)

Iteration Number(a) 1.0 1.1 1.2 2.0 2.1 2.2 3.0 3.1 4.0 4.1 5.0 5.1 6.0 6.1 6.2 7.0 7.1 7.2 8.0 8.1 8.2 9.0 9.1 10.0 10.1 11.0 11.1 12.0 12.1 12.2 13.0 13.1 14.0 14.1 15.0 15.1 15.2 16.0

Residual Sum of Squares 185.186 4578.307 68.399 68.399 382.670 58.573 58.573 47.716 47.716 37.752 37.752 30.270 30.270 47.351 29.179 29.179 29.239 29.155 29.155 29.155 29.155 29.155 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.155 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154

Parameter b1 .000 -3.688 -.033 -.033 -.527 -.071 -.071 -.083 -.083 -.152 -.152 -.330 -.330 -.234 -.355 -.355 -.335 -.357 -.357 -.345 -.355 -.355 -.351 -.351 -.343 -.343 -.335 -.335 -.319 -.331 -.331 -.323 -.323 -.315 -.315 -.298 -.309 -.309 b2 .000 .594 -.033 -.033 -.526 -.071 -.071 -.084 -.084 -.153 -.153 -.322 -.322 -.228 -.349 -.349 -.330 -.351 -.351 -.340 -.349 -.349 -.346 -.346 -.338 -.338 -.330 -.330 -.315 -.326 -.326 -.319 -.319 -.311 -.311 -.295 -.305 -.305 b3 .000 .000 .000 .000 -2.634 -.121 -.121 -.570 -.570 -.506 -.506 -.034 -.034 -.289 -.272 -.272 -.305 -.285 -.285 -.296 -.287 -.287 -.291 -.291 -.298 -.298 -.307 -.307 -.324 -.311 -.311 -.320 -.320 -.329 -.329 -.349 -.336 -.336 b4 .000 -1.909 .033 .033 -.209 .071 .071 .071 .071 .079 .079 .089 .089 .310 .088 .088 .137 .095 .095 .118 .099 .099 .106 .106 .122 .122 .137 .137 .168 .145 .145 .160 .160 .176 .176 .208 .187 .187 b5 .000 .000 .000 .000 .013 .014 .014 .013 .013 .013 .013 .007 .007 -.007 .005 .005 .002 .003 .003 .003 .003 .003 .003 .003 .003 .003 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 b6 .000 .051 .015 .015 .027 .016 .016 .017 .017 .020 .020 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025

260

16.1 17.0 17.1 18.0 18.1 19.0 19.1 19.2 20.0 20.1 21.0 21.1 22.0 22.1 23.0 23.1 24.0 24.1 25.0 25.1 26.0 26.1 27.0 27.1 28.0 28.1 29.0 29.1 30.0 30.1 31.0 31.1 32.0 32.1 33.0 33.1 34.0 34.1 35.0 35.1 36.0 36.1 36.2 37.0 37.1 38.0 38.1

29.154 29.154 29.154 29.154 29.153 29.153 29.154 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153

-.298 -.298 -.285 -.285 -.273 -.273 -.249 -.265 -.265 -.250 -.250 -.234 -.234 -.217 -.217 -.200 -.200 -.182 -.182 -.163 -.163 -.143 -.143 -.123 -.123 -.101 -.101 -.078 -.078 -.056 -.056 -.015 -.015 .009 .009 .052 .052 .101 .101 .151 .151 .251 .178 .178 .230 .230 .286

-.295 -.295 -.284 -.284 -.273 -.273 -.251 -.266 -.266 -.253 -.253 -.239 -.239 -.226 -.226 -.213 -.213 -.201 -.201 -.190 -.190 -.180 -.180 -.171 -.171 -.163 -.163 -.156 -.156 -.151 -.151 -.142 -.142 -.140 -.140 -.134 -.134 -.129 -.129 -.126 -.126 -.119 -.124 -.124 -.121 -.121 -.119

-.350 -.350 -.366 -.366 -.384 -.384 -.422 -.397 -.397 -.421 -.421 -.451 -.451 -.485 -.485 -.523 -.523 -.564 -.564 -.610 -.610 -.659 -.659 -.711 -.711 -.763 -.763 -.814 -.814 -.860 -.860 -.940 -.940 -.977 -.977 -1.046 -1.046 -1.116 -1.116 -1.181 -1.181 -1.298 -1.214 -1.214 -1.270 -1.270 -1.324

.208 .208 .231 .231 .254 .254 .300 .269 .269 .296 .296 .326 .326 .356 .356 .386 .386 .416 .416 .446 .446 .476 .476 .506 .506 .535 .535 .565 .565 .592 .592 .641 .641 .667 .667 .717 .717 .770 .770 .823 .823 .929 .852 .852 .907 .907 .966

.002 .002 .002 .002 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000

.025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025

261

39.0 39.1 40.0 40.1 40.2 41.0 41.1 42.0 42.1 43.0 43.1 44.0 44.1 44.2 45.0 45.1 46.0 46.1 47.0 47.1 48.0 48.1 49.0 49.1 50.0 50.1 51.0 51.1 52.0 52.1 52.2 53.0 53.1 54.0 54.1 55.0 55.1 56.0 56.1 56.2 57.0 57.1 58.0 58.1 59.0 59.1 60.0

29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153

.286 .343 .343 .456 .374 .374 .432 .432 .495 .495 .551 .551 .654 .596 .596 .681 .681 .772 .772 .864 .864 .955 .955 1.047 1.047 1.139 1.139 1.222 1.222 1.374 1.271 1.271 1.365 1.365 1.463 1.463 1.553 1.553 1.719 1.607 1.607 1.711 1.711 1.820 1.820 1.920 1.920

-.119 -.117 -.117 -.113 -.116 -.116 -.114 -.114 -.112 -.112 -.111 -.111 -.109 -.110 -.110 -.109 -.109 -.107 -.107 -.106 -.106 -.105 -.105 -.104 -.104 -.103 -.103 -.103 -.103 -.102 -.102 -.102 -.102 -.102 -.101 -.101 -.101 -.101 -.100 -.100 -.100 -.100 -.100 -.099 -.099 -.099 -.099

-1.324 -1.375 -1.375 -1.473 -1.402 -1.402 -1.451 -1.451 -1.501 -1.501 -1.542 -1.542 -1.612 -1.573 -1.573 -1.626 -1.626 -1.685 -1.685 -1.733 -1.733 -1.779 -1.779 -1.813 -1.813 -1.854 -1.854 -1.890 -1.890 -1.952 -1.910 -1.910 -1.947 -1.947 -1.984 -1.984 -2.017 -2.017 -2.074 -2.035 -2.035 -2.070 -2.070 -2.106 -2.106 -2.136 -2.136

.966 1.024 1.024 1.141 1.056 1.056 1.116 1.116 1.180 1.180 1.238 1.238 1.343 1.284 1.284 1.370 1.370 1.463 1.463 1.555 1.555 1.648 1.648 1.740 1.740 1.833 1.833 1.917 1.917 2.070 1.966 1.966 2.061 2.061 2.160 2.160 2.250 2.250 2.417 2.305 2.305 2.409 2.409 2.518 2.518 2.618 2.618

.000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000

.025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025

262

60.1 60.2 61.0 61.1 62.0 62.1 63.0 63.1 64.0 64.1 64.2 65.0 65.1 66.0 66.1 67.0 67.1 68.0 68.1 68.2 69.0 69.1 70.0 70.1 71.0 71.1 72.0 72.1 72.2 73.0 73.1 74.0 74.1 75.0 75.1 76.0 76.1 76.2 77.0 77.1 78.0 78.1 79.0 79.1 80.0 80.1 80.2

29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153

2.105 1.979 1.979 2.091 2.091 2.209 2.209 2.317 2.317 2.519 2.381 2.381 2.505 2.505 2.633 2.633 2.752 2.752 2.974 2.821 2.821 2.954 2.954 3.093 3.093 3.222 3.222 3.464 3.297 3.297 3.439 3.439 3.589 3.589 3.727 3.727 3.988 3.808 3.808 3.965 3.965 4.127 4.127 4.279 4.279 4.567 4.363

-.098 -.099 -.099 -.098 -.098 -.098 -.098 -.098 -.098 -.097 -.097 -.097 -.097 -.097 -.097 -.097 -.096 -.096 -.096 -.096 -.096 -.096 -.096 -.096 -.096 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.095 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094 -.094

-2.191 -2.154 -2.154 -2.187 -2.187 -2.219 -2.219 -2.248 -2.248 -2.300 -2.265 -2.265 -2.296 -2.296 -2.327 -2.327 -2.355 -2.355 -2.405 -2.371 -2.371 -2.400 -2.400 -2.430 -2.430 -2.457 -2.457 -2.505 -2.472 -2.472 -2.500 -2.500 -2.529 -2.529 -2.554 -2.554 -2.601 -2.569 -2.569 -2.596 -2.596 -2.624 -2.624 -2.649 -2.649 -2.695 -2.662

2.805 2.677 2.677 2.791 2.791 2.909 2.909 3.017 3.017 3.219 3.081 3.081 3.205 3.205 3.334 3.334 3.453 3.453 3.676 3.523 3.523 3.656 3.656 3.795 3.795 3.924 3.924 4.166 3.999 3.999 4.142 4.142 4.291 4.291 4.430 4.430 4.691 4.511 4.511 4.668 4.668 4.830 4.830 4.982 4.982 5.271 5.067

.000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 9.80E-005 9.80E-005 9.24E-005 9.64E-005 9.64E-005 9.31E-005 9.31E-005 9.00E-005 9.00E-005 8.73E-005 8.73E-005 8.23E-005 8.59E-005

.025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025

263

81.0 81.1 82.0 82.1 83.0 83.1 83.2 84.0 84.1 85.0 85.1 86.0 86.1 87.0 87.1 88.0 88.1 88.2 89.0 89.1 90.0 90.1 91.0 91.1 91.2 92.0 92.1 93.0 93.1 94.0 94.1 95.0 95.1 96.0 96.1 96.2 97.0 97.1 98.0 98.1 99.0 99.1 99.2 100.0 100.1 101.0 101.1

29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153

4.363 4.526 4.526 4.680 4.680 4.965 4.777 4.777 4.964 4.964 5.141 5.141 5.334 5.334 5.516 5.516 5.858 5.611 5.611 5.797 5.797 5.973 5.973 6.301 6.083 6.083 6.298 6.298 6.503 6.503 6.724 6.724 6.927 6.927 7.303 7.041 7.041 7.268 7.268 7.481 7.481 7.890 7.592 7.592 7.809 7.809 8.021

-.094 -.094 -.094 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.093 -.092 -.093 -.093 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.092 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091

-2.662 -2.688 -2.688 -2.712 -2.712 -2.754 -2.726 -2.726 -2.754 -2.754 -2.779 -2.779 -2.806 -2.806 -2.830 -2.830 -2.875 -2.842 -2.842 -2.866 -2.866 -2.888 -2.888 -2.929 -2.902 -2.902 -2.928 -2.928 -2.952 -2.952 -2.977 -2.977 -3.000 -3.000 -3.040 -3.012 -3.012 -3.036 -3.036 -3.058 -3.058 -3.100 -3.070 -3.070 -3.091 -3.091 -3.112

5.067 5.229 5.229 5.384 5.384 5.670 5.481 5.481 5.668 5.668 5.845 5.845 6.039 6.039 6.221 6.221 6.563 6.316 6.316 6.501 6.501 6.677 6.677 7.007 6.788 6.788 7.004 7.004 7.209 7.209 7.429 7.429 7.633 7.633 8.008 7.747 7.747 7.974 7.974 8.187 8.187 8.596 8.298 8.298 8.515 8.515 8.727

8.59E-005 8.32E-005 8.32E-005 8.08E-005 8.08E-005 7.66E-005 7.95E-005 7.95E-005 7.68E-005 7.68E-005 7.45E-005 7.45E-005 7.21E-005 7.21E-005 7.00E-005 7.00E-005 6.63E-005 6.90E-005 6.90E-005 6.70E-005 6.70E-005 6.53E-005 6.53E-005 6.21E-005 6.43E-005 6.43E-005 6.23E-005 6.23E-005 6.05E-005 6.05E-005 5.87E-005 5.87E-005 5.72E-005 5.72E-005 5.44E-005 5.64E-005 5.64E-005 5.47E-005 5.47E-005 5.33E-005 5.33E-005 5.07E-005 5.26E-005 5.26E-005 5.13E-005 5.13E-005 5.00E-005

.025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025

264

102.0 102.1 102.2 103.0 103.1 104.0 104.1 105.0 105.1 106.0 106.1 107.0 107.1 107.2 108.0 108.1 109.0 109.1 110.0 110.1 110.2 111.0 111.1 112.0 112.1 113.0 113.1 114.0 114.1 115.0 115.1 116.0 116.1 117.0 117.1 118.0 118.1 119.0 119.1 120.0 120.1 121.0 121.1 121.2 122.0 122.1 123.0

29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153

8.021 8.413 8.153 8.153 8.404 8.404 8.647 8.647 8.911 8.911 9.150 9.150 9.623 9.269 9.269 9.507 9.507 9.732 9.732 10.159 9.884 9.884 10.175 10.175 10.462 10.462 10.767 10.767 11.074 11.074 11.363 11.363 11.667 11.667 11.959 11.959 12.263 12.263 12.579 12.579 12.869 12.869 13.392 13.048 13.048 13.410 13.410

-.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.091 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090

-3.112 -3.149 -3.125 -3.125 -3.148 -3.148 -3.171 -3.171 -3.194 -3.194 -3.215 -3.215 -3.256 -3.225 -3.225 -3.245 -3.245 -3.264 -3.264 -3.299 -3.276 -3.276 -3.300 -3.300 -3.322 -3.322 -3.345 -3.345 -3.368 -3.368 -3.389 -3.389 -3.411 -3.411 -3.431 -3.431 -3.451 -3.451 -3.472 -3.472 -3.491 -3.491 -3.524 -3.503 -3.503 -3.525 -3.525

8.727 9.119 8.859 8.859 9.110 9.110 9.353 9.353 9.618 9.618 9.857 9.857 10.330 9.975 9.975 10.213 10.213 10.439 10.439 10.866 10.591 10.591 10.881 10.881 11.169 11.169 11.473 11.473 11.781 11.781 12.070 12.070 12.374 12.374 12.666 12.666 12.970 12.970 13.286 13.286 13.576 13.576 14.099 13.756 13.756 14.118 14.118

5.00E-005 4.78E-005 4.93E-005 4.93E-005 4.79E-005 4.79E-005 4.67E-005 4.67E-005 4.54E-005 4.54E-005 4.43E-005 4.43E-005 4.22E-005 4.38E-005 4.38E-005 4.28E-005 4.28E-005 4.19E-005 4.19E-005 4.02E-005 4.13E-005 4.13E-005 4.02E-005 4.02E-005 3.91E-005 3.91E-005 3.81E-005 3.81E-005 3.71E-005 3.71E-005 3.62E-005 3.62E-005 3.53E-005 3.53E-005 3.45E-005 3.45E-005 3.37E-005 3.37E-005 3.29E-005 3.29E-005 3.22E-005 3.22E-005 3.10E-005 3.18E-005 3.18E-005 3.10E-005 3.10E-005

.025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025

265

123.1 124.0 124.1 125.0 125.1 126.0 126.1 127.0 127.1 127.2 128.0 128.1

29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153 29.153

13.755 13.755 14.085 14.085 14.444 14.444 14.778 14.778 15.479 14.917 14.917 15.168

-.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090 -.090

-3.546 -3.546 -3.566 -3.566 -3.587 -3.587 -3.606 -3.606 -3.646 -3.614 -3.614 -3.628

14.463 14.463 14.792 14.792 15.151 15.151 15.485 15.485 16.187 15.625 15.625 15.876

3.03E-005 3.03E-005 2.96E-005 2.96E-005 2.89E-005 2.89E-005 2.83E-005 2.83E-005 2.70E-005 2.80E-005 2.80E-005 2.76E-005

.025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025 .025

Derivatives are calculated analytically. a Major iteration number is displayed to the left of the decimal, and minor iteration number is to the right of the decimal. b Run stopped after 285 model evaluations and 128 derivative evaluations because the relative reduction between successive residual sums of squares is at most SSCON = 1.00E-008.

Parameter Estimates 95% Confidence Interval Parameter b1 b2 -.090 b3 -3.628 b4 b5 b6 15.876 2.76E-005 .025 Estimate 15.168 Std. Error 26001556 89478.738 26001574 18656.301 10478869 62486879. 000 142818.13 3 .256 .000 Lower Bound 51079872724 18.910 51079906693 91.140 20585664500 75016.000 -280549.325 -.502 .024 Upper Bound 51079872724 49.250 51079906693 90.960 20585664500 75009.000 280581.077 .502 .025

Correlations of Parameter Estimates b1 1.000 -1.000 1.000 -.001 .001 .005 b2 -1.000 1.000 -1.000 .001 -.001 -.005 b3 1.000 -1.000 1.000 -.001 .001 .005 b4 -.001 .001 -.001 1.000 -1.000 .000 b5 .001 -.001 .001 -1.000 1.000 .000 b6 .005 -.005 .005 .000 .000 1.000

b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6

266

ANOVA(a) Sum of Squares 1046.694 29.153 1075.846 124.285 Mean Squares 174.449 .056

Source Regression Residual Uncorrected Total Corrected Total

df 6 525 531 530

Dependent variable: BRT a R squared = 1 - (Residual Sum of Squares) / (Corrected Sum of Squares) = .665.

267

Linear Regression Analysis for BRT: Normal Scenario (Model 3)
b,c Variables Entered/Removed

Model 1

Variables Entered Dis. Headway, Gender, a Speed

Variables Removed .

Method Enter

a. All requested variables entered. b. Dependent Variable: BRT c. Linear Regression through the Origin

Model Summary Model 1 R R Square .985b .970
a

Adjusted R Square .970

Std. Error of the Estimate .24812

a. For regression through the origin (the no-intercept model), R Square measures the proportion of the variability in the dependent variable about the origin explained by regression. This CANNOT be compared to R Square for models which include an intercept. b. Predictors: Dis.Headway, Gender, Speed
ANOVAc,d Model 1 Sum of Squares 1043.340 32.506 1075.846b df 3 528 531 Mean Square 347.780 .062 F 5648.971 Sig. .000a

Regression Residual Total

a. Predictors: Dis.Headway, Gender, Speed b. This total sum of squares is not corrected for the constant because the constant is zero for regression through the origin. c. Dependent Variable: BRT d. Linear Regression through the Origin
Coefficientsa,b Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error .078 .021 -.002 .000 .049 .001 Standardized Coefficients Beta .037 -.108 1.062

Model 1

Gender Speed Dis.Headway

t 3.665 -4.568 45.473

Sig. .000 .000 .000

a. Dependent Variable: BRT b. Linear Regression through the Origin

268

Appendix G Regression Analysis for Surprised Scenario

269

Linear Regression Analysis for BRT: Surprised Scenario (Model 1)
b,c Variables Entered/Removed

Model 1

Variables Entered Speed, Gender, Age, Dis.a Headway

Variables Removed .

Method Enter

a. All requested variables entered. b. Dependent Variable: BRT c. Linear Regression through the Origin

Model Summary Model 1 R R Square .975b .951
a

Adjusted R Square .951

Std. Error of the Estimate .1875

a. For regression through the origin (the no-intercept model), R Square measures the proportion of the variability in the dependent variable about the origin explained by regression. This CANNOT be compared to R Square for models which include an intercept. b. Predictors: Speed, Gender, Age, Dis.Headway
ANOVAc,d Model 1 Sum of Squares 362.841 18.537 381.378b df 4 527 531 Mean Square 90.710 .035 F 2578.871 Sig. .000a

Regression Residual Total

a. Predictors: Speed, Gender, Age, Dis.Headway b. This total sum of squares is not corrected for the constant because the constant is zero for regression through the origin. c. Dependent Variable: BRT d. Linear Regression through the Origin
Coefficientsa,b Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error .001 .000 .109 .016 .023 .001 .003 .000 Standardized Coefficients Beta .055 .087 .574 .312

Model 1

Age Gender Dis.Headway Speed

t 2.380 6.737 24.641 10.788

Sig. .018 .000 .000 .000

a. Dependent Variable: BRT b. Linear Regression through the Origin

270

Nonlinear Regression Analysis: Surprised Scenario (Model 2)

Iteration History(b) Iteration Number (a) Residual Sum of Squares b1 .000 -1.396 -1.396 -5.151 -5.151 -7.644 -5.395 -5.148 -5.148 -5.181 -5.145 -5.145 -5.140 -5.140 -5.155 -5.141 -5.141 -5.147 -5.147 -5.160 -5.149 -5.149 -5.156 -5.156 -5.167 -5.158 -5.158 -5.162 -5.162 -5.171 -5.166 -5.166 -5.172 -5.172 -5.176 -5.176 b2 .000 3.615 3.615 4.869 4.869 2.432 4.630 4.872 4.872 4.840 4.874 4.874 4.879 4.879 4.865 4.879 4.879 4.873 4.873 4.860 4.870 4.870 4.864 4.864 4.853 4.862 4.862 4.857 4.857 4.849 4.854 4.854 4.848 4.848 4.844 4.844 b3 .000 .000 .000 .024 .024 .030 .019 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018

Parameter b4 .000 -1.396 -1.396 -.142 -.142 -2.575 -.382 -.139 -.139 -.174 -.136 -.136 -.132 -.132 -.150 -.135 -.135 -.143 -.143 -.156 -.146 -.146 -.152 -.152 -.162 -.154 -.154 -.158 -.158 -.166 -.161 -.161 -.166 -.166 -.170 -.170 b5 .000 .000 .000 -3.84E005 -3.84E005 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 b6 .000 .019 .019 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 b7 .000 -1.396 -1.396 -.142 -.142 7.226 .587 -.150 -.150 -.045 -.156 -.156 -.167 -.167 -.120 -.162 -.162 -.143 -.143 -.105 -.135 -.135 -.118 -.118 -.084 -.112 -.112 -.098 -.098 -.073 -.089 -.089 -.072 -.072 -.060 -.060 b8 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .020 .005 .002 .002 .004 .002 .002 .002 .002 .003 .003 .003 .003 .003 .004 .003 .003 .003 .003 .004 .004 .004 .004 .004 .005 .004 .004 .005 .005 .006 .006

1.0 1.1 2.0 2.1 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 4.0 4.1 4.2 5.0 5.1 6.0 6.1 6.2 7.0 7.1 8.0 8.1 8.2 9.0 9.1 10.0 10.1 10.2 11.0 11.1 12.0 12.1 12.2 13.0 13.1 14.0 14.1 15.0

49.198 25.891 25.891 16.960 16.960 77953.942 31.534 16.136 16.136 16.200 16.133 16.133 16.129 16.129 16.130 16.129 16.129 16.129 16.129 16.130 16.129 16.129 16.129 16.129 16.129 16.129 16.129 16.128 16.128 16.129 16.128 16.128 16.128 16.128 16.127 16.127

271

15.1 15.2 16.0 16.1 17.0 17.1 18.0 18.1 18.2 19.0 19.1 20.0 20.1 21.0 21.1 21.2 22.0 22.1 23.0 23.1 24.0 24.1 25.0 25.1 26.0 26.1 27.0 27.1 27.2 28.0 28.1 29.0 29.1 30.0 30.1 31.0 31.1 31.2 32.0 32.1 33.0 33.1 34.0 34.1 35.0 35.1 36.0

16.129 16.127 16.127 16.127 16.127 16.126 16.126 16.126 16.126 16.126 16.125 16.125 16.124 16.124 16.126 16.123 16.123 16.122 16.122 16.122 16.122 16.118 16.118 16.117 16.117 16.113 16.113 16.122 16.111 16.111 16.110 16.110 16.107 16.107 16.101 16.101 16.134 16.100 16.100 16.099 16.099 16.096 16.096 16.095 16.095 16.085 16.085

-5.183 -5.177 -5.177 -5.181 -5.181 -5.183 -5.183 -5.187 -5.185 -5.185 -5.189 -5.189 -5.190 -5.190 -5.194 -5.191 -5.191 -5.193 -5.193 -5.195 -5.195 -5.195 -5.195 -5.197 -5.197 -5.197 -5.197 -5.199 -5.197 -5.197 -5.198 -5.198 -5.199 -5.199 -5.199 -5.199 -5.200 -5.199 -5.199 -5.199 -5.199 -5.200 -5.200 -5.200 -5.200 -5.201 -5.201

4.837 4.843 4.843 4.839 4.839 4.837 4.837 4.833 4.835 4.835 4.832 4.832 4.830 4.830 4.827 4.830 4.830 4.828 4.828 4.826 4.826 4.825 4.825 4.824 4.824 4.823 4.823 4.822 4.823 4.823 4.823 4.823 4.822 4.822 4.821 4.821 4.820 4.821 4.821 4.821 4.821 4.821 4.821 4.820 4.820 4.820 4.820

.018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018

-.177 -.171 -.171 -.175 -.175 -.177 -.177 -.181 -.179 -.179 -.182 -.182 -.183 -.183 -.186 -.184 -.184 -.185 -.185 -.187 -.187 -.187 -.187 -.188 -.188 -.189 -.189 -.190 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.190 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189

.000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000

.015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015

-.040 -.056 -.056 -.046 -.046 -.039 -.039 -.027 -.034 -.034 -.024 -.024 -.020 -.020 -.011 -.018 -.018 -.014 -.014 -.008 -.008 -.008 -.008 -.005 -.005 -.004 -.004 -.001 -.004 -.004 -.003 -.003 -.002 -.002 -.001 -.001 .000 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 .000 .000 .000 .000

.008 .006 .006 .007 .007 .008 .008 .010 .009 .009 .011 .011 .013 .013 .017 .014 .014 .016 .016 .021 .021 .023 .023 .027 .027 .030 .030 .038 .032 .032 .035 .035 .040 .040 .046 .046 .057 .047 .047 .049 .049 .054 .054 .062 .062 .067 .067

272

36.1 36.2 37.0 37.1 38.0 38.1 39.0 39.1 40.0 40.1 40.2 41.0 41.1 42.0 42.1 43.0 43.1 43.2 44.0 44.1 45.0 45.1 46.0 46.1 46.2 47.0 47.1 48.0 48.1 49.0 49.1 50.0 50.1

16.099 16.084 16.084 16.082 16.082 16.079 16.079 16.074 16.074 16.115 16.073 16.073 16.071 16.071 16.069 16.069 16.075 16.067 16.067 16.066 16.066 16.063 16.063 16.079 16.063 16.063 16.062 16.062 16.061 16.061 16.060 16.060 16.066

-5.201 -5.201 -5.201 -5.201 -5.201 -5.201 -5.201 -5.201 -5.201 -5.202 -5.201 -5.201 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.202 -5.203 -5.202 -5.202 -5.203 -5.203 -5.203 -5.203 -5.203 -5.203 -5.204

4.820 4.820 4.820 4.820 4.820 4.820 4.820 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.818 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.819 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.818 4.817

.018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018

-.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.189 -.188 -.189 -.189 -.188 -.188 -.188 -.188 -.188 -.188 -.188 -.188 -.188 -.187 -.187 -.186 -.187 -.187 -.187 -.187 -.187 -.187 -.186 -.186 -.185

.000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000

.015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015

-9.67E005 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 -9.12E005 -9.12E005 -1.51E005 -9.07E005 -9.07E005 -7.33E005 -7.33E005 -4.99E005 -4.99E005 -1.91E005 -4.48E005 -4.48E005 -2.90E005 -2.90E005 -2.11E005 -2.11E005 -6.57E006 -2.06E005 -2.06E005 -1.74E005 -1.74E005 -1.22E005 -1.22E005 -9.17E006 -9.17E006 -3.80E006

.076 .069 .069 .072 .072 .077 .077 .084 .084 .096 .085 .085 .088 .088 .092 .092 .102 .095 .095 .100 .100 .105 .105 .115 .106 .106 .108 .108 .112 .112 .116 .116 .125

273

50.2 51.0 51.1 52.0 52.1 53.0 53.1 54.0 54.1 54.2 55.0 55.1 56.0 56.1 57.0 57.1 58.0 58.1 58.2 59.0 59.1 60.0 60.1 60.2 61.0 61.1 61.2

16.059 16.059 16.059 16.059 16.059 16.059 16.058 16.058 16.064 16.058 16.058 16.058 16.058 16.058 16.058 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057 16.057

-5.203 -5.203 -5.203 -5.203 -5.204 -5.204 -5.205 -5.205 -5.207 -5.205 -5.205 -5.205 -5.205 -5.206 -5.206 -5.207 -5.207 -5.231 -5.208 -5.208 -5.211 -5.211 -5.237 -5.213 -5.213 -5.219 -5.216

4.817 4.817 4.817 4.817 4.817 4.817 4.816 4.816 4.814 4.816 4.816 4.816 4.816 4.815 4.815 4.814 4.814 4.791 4.813 4.813 4.810 4.810 4.785 4.808 4.808 4.802 4.805

.018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018 .018

-.186 -.186 -.186 -.186 -.185 -.185 -.184 -.184 -.179 -.184 -.184 -.183 -.183 -.181 -.181 -.179 -.179 -.132 -.178 -.178 -.172 -.172 -.120 -.167 -.167 -.156 -.162

.000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000 .000

.015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015 .015

-8.83E006 -8.83E006 -7.51E006 -7.51E006 -5.36E006 -5.36E006 -4.04E006 -4.04E006 -1.75E006 -3.94E006 -3.94E006 -3.47E006 -3.47E006 -2.66E006 -2.66E006 -2.42E006 -2.42E006 -1.85E006 -2.34E006 -2.34E006 -2.15E006 -2.15E006 -2.14E006 -2.15E006 -2.15E006 -2.15E006 -2.15E006

.117 .117 .119 .119 .123 .123 .127 .127 .135 .128 .128 .130 .130 .133 .133 .135 .135 .138 .135 .135 .136 .136 .136 .136 .136 .136 .136

Derivatives are calculated numerically. a Major iteration number is displayed to the left of the decimal, and minor iteration number is to the right of the decimal. b Run stopped after 143 model evaluations and 61 derivative evaluations because the relative reduction between successive residual sums of squares is at most SSCON = 1.00E-008.

274

Parameter Estimates 95% Confidence Interval Parameter b1 b2 4.805 b3 .018 b4 b5 b6 b7 b8 -.162 .000 .015 2.15E-006 .136 Estimate -5.216 Std. Error 43154271 73849.149 43154271 73848.588 16047584 015.211 730.585 1.496 .001 .000 .119 Lower Bound 84777007552 31.200 84777007552 20.080 31525642687. 159 -1435.403 -2.940 .013 -4.01E-005 -.097 Upper Bound 84777007552 20.770 84777007552 29.690 31525642687. 195 1435.080 2.939 .016 3.58E-005 .370

Correlations of Parameter Estimates b1 1.000 -1.000 1.000 -.001 .001 .008 .184 .177 b2 -1.000 1.000 -1.000 .001 -.001 -.008 -.184 -.177 b3 1.000 -1.000 1.000 -.001 .001 .008 .184 .177 b4 -.001 .001 -.001 1.000 -1.000 .000 .000 .000 b5 .001 -.001 .001 -1.000 1.000 .000 .000 .000 b6 .008 -.008 .008 .000 .000 1.000 .001 .001 b7 .184 -.184 .184 .000 .000 .001 1.000 .998 b8 .177 -.177 .177 .000 .000 .001 .998 1.000

b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6 b7 b8

ANOVA(a) Sum of Squares 365.320 16.057 381.378 30.587 Mean Squares 45.665 .031

Source Regression Residual Uncorrected Total Corrected Total

df 8 523 531 530

Dependent variable: BRT a R squared = 1 - (Residual Sum of Squares) / (Corrected Sum of Squares) = .475.

275

Appendix H Regression Analysis for Stationary Scenario

276

Nonlinear Regression Analysis: Stationary Scenario (Model 1)
Iteration History (b) Residual Sum of Squares b1 .000 -4.095 -4.095 -11.383 -6.813 -6.813 -5.469 -5.469 -4.904 -5.563 -5.563 -5.440 -5.545 -5.545 -5.537 -5.537 -5.639 -5.577 -5.577 -5.629 -5.629 -5.586 -5.586 -5.548 -5.586 -5.586 -5.579 -5.579 -5.565 -5.565 -5.562 -5.562 -5.552 -5.552 -5.546 -5.546 -5.535 -5.542 b2 .000 1.220 1.220 4.865 2.580 2.580 3.901 3.901 4.456 3.809 3.809 3.929 3.826 3.826 3.834 3.834 3.734 3.794 3.794 3.744 3.744 3.785 3.785 3.823 3.786 3.786 3.793 3.793 3.806 3.806 3.810 3.810 3.819 3.819 3.825 3.825 3.836 3.828

Iteration Number(a)

Parameter b3 .000 .000 .000 .018 .018 .018 -.001 -.001 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 b4 .000 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 b5 .000 .014 .014 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 b6 .000 1.220 1.220 4.865 2.580 2.580 -.079 -.079 -1.197 .133 .133 -.130 .105 .105 .087 .087 .276 .163 .163 .239 .239 .156 .156 .081 .156 .156 .141 .141 .115 .115 .109 .109 .090 .090 .078 .078 .057 .072 b7 .000 .000 .000 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 -.025 -.001 -.001 .004 .000 .000 .001 .001 .003 .002 .002 .004 .004 .004 .004 .006 .005 .005 .005 .005 .006 .006 .006 .006 .007 .007 .008 .008 .010 .009

1.0 1.1 2.0 2.1 2.2 3.0 3.1 4.0 4.1 4.2 5.0 5.1 5.2 6.0 6.1 7.0 7.1 7.2 8.0 8.1 9.0 9.1 10.0 10.1 10.2 11.0 11.1 12.0 12.1 13.0 13.1 14.0 14.1 15.0 15.1 16.0 16.1 16.2

916.277 17.344 17.344 22.805 11.545 11.545 10.865 10.865 274.708 9.612 9.612 11.295 9.450 9.450 9.418 9.418 9.442 9.374 9.374 9.364 9.364 9.323 9.323 9.352 9.321 9.321 9.320 9.320 9.320 9.320 9.319 9.319 9.319 9.319 9.318 9.318 9.319 9.317

277

17.0 17.1 18.0 18.1 19.0 19.1 19.2 20.0 20.1 21.0 21.1 22.0 22.1 22.2 23.0 23.1 24.0 24.1 25.0 25.1 25.2 26.0 26.1 27.0 27.1 28.0 28.1 28.2 29.0 29.1 30.0 30.1 31.0 31.1 32.0 32.1 33.0 33.1 34.0 34.1 34.2 35.0 35.1 36.0 36.1 37.0 37.1

9.317 9.316 9.316 9.315 9.315 9.316 9.314 9.314 9.313 9.313 9.311 9.311 9.313 9.310 9.310 9.309 9.309 9.307 9.307 9.308 9.306 9.306 9.305 9.305 9.302 9.302 9.311 9.301 9.301 9.300 9.300 9.300 9.300 9.297 9.297 9.296 9.296 9.295 9.295 9.295 9.294 9.294 9.294 9.294 9.293 9.293 9.293

-5.542 -5.535 -5.535 -5.531 -5.531 -5.523 -5.528 -5.528 -5.523 -5.523 -5.519 -5.519 -5.514 -5.518 -5.518 -5.514 -5.514 -5.512 -5.512 -5.508 -5.510 -5.510 -5.508 -5.508 -5.506 -5.506 -5.503 -5.506 -5.506 -5.504 -5.504 -5.503 -5.503 -5.502 -5.502 -5.501 -5.501 -5.501 -5.501 -5.500 -5.500 -5.500 -5.500 -5.500 -5.499 -5.499 -5.499

3.828 3.835 3.835 3.840 3.840 3.848 3.843 3.843 3.848 3.848 3.851 3.851 3.857 3.853 3.853 3.857 3.857 3.859 3.859 3.863 3.860 3.860 3.863 3.863 3.864 3.864 3.868 3.865 3.865 3.866 3.866 3.868 3.868 3.868 3.868 3.869 3.869 3.870 3.870 3.871 3.870 3.870 3.871 3.871 3.871 3.871 3.872

.006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006 .006

-.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001

.010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010

.072 .058 .058 .050 .050 .035 .045 .045 .035 .035 .030 .030 .020 .027 .027 .020 .020 .017 .017 .011 .015 .015 .011 .011 .008 .008 .004 .008 .008 .007 .007 .004 .004 .004 .004 .003 .003 .003 .003 .002 .002 .002 .002 .002 .001 .001 .001

.009 .010 .010 .011 .011 .013 .012 .012 .014 .014 .015 .015 .018 .016 .016 .019 .019 .021 .021 .025 .022 .022 .025 .025 .028 .028 .034 .029 .029 .031 .031 .036 .036 .038 .038 .042 .042 .044 .044 .048 .046 .046 .049 .049 .052 .052 .055

278

38.0 38.1 39.0 39.1 39.2 40.0 40.1 41.0 41.1 42.0 42.1 43.0 43.1 44.0 44.1 45.0 45.1

9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293 9.293

-5.499 -5.768 -5.768 -6.341 -5.836 -5.836 -5.917 -5.917 -5.825 -5.825 -5.733 -5.733 -5.640 -5.640 -5.733 -5.733

3.872 4.141 4.141 4.715 4.209 4.209 4.290 4.290 4.198 4.198 4.106 4.106 4.014 4.014 4.106 4.106

.006 .005 .005 .004 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005 .005

-.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001 -.001

.010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010 .010

.001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001 .001

.055 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056 .056

9.293 -5.640 4.014 .005 -.001 .010 .001 .056 Derivatives are calculated numerically. a Major iteration number is displayed to the left of the decimal, and minor iteration number is to the right of the decimal. b Run stopped after 102 model evaluations and 45 derivative evaluations because the relative reduction between successive residual sums of squares is at most SSCON = 1.00E-008.

Parameter Estimates 95% Confidence Interval Parameter b1 b2 4.014 b3 .005 b4 b5 b6 b7 .001 .010 .001 .056 Estimate -5.640 Std. Error 27947882 02848.517 27947882 02848.523 35415178 14.015 .000 .000 .004 .051 Lower Bound 54903656641 32.070 54903656641 22.430 6957317118.0 29 -.002 .009 -.007 -.044 Upper Bound 54903656641 20.790 54903656641 30.460 6957317118.0 40 2.22E-005 .011 .009 .156

Correlations of Parameter Estimates b1 1.000 -1.000 1.000 .023 .007 -.004 b2 -1.000 1.000 -1.000 -.023 -.007 .004 b3 1.000 -1.000 1.000 .023 .007 -.004 b4 .023 -.023 .023 1.000 .000 .000 b5 .007 -.007 .007 .000 1.000 .000 b6 -.004 .004 -.004 .000 .000 1.000 b7 .020 -.020 .020 .000 .000 -.996

b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6

279

b7

.020

-.020

.020

.000

.000

-.996

1.000

ANOVA(a) Sum of Squares 265.664 9.293 274.957 16.207 Mean Squares 37.952 .018

Source Regression Residual Uncorrected Total Corrected Total

df 7 524 531 530

Dependent variable: BRT a R squared = 1 - (Residual Sum of Squares) / (Corrected Sum of Squares) = .427.

280

Linear Regression Analysis for BRT: Stationary Scenario (Model 2)
b,c Variables Entered/Removed

Model 1

Variables Entered Dis. Headway, Gender, Age, a Speed

Variables Removed

Method

.

Enter

a. All requested variables entered. b. Dependent Variable: BRT c. Linear Regression through the Origin Model Summary Model 1 R R Square .981b .962
a

Adjusted R Square .962

Std. Error of the Estimate .14058

a. For regression through the origin (the no-intercept model), R Square measures the proportion of the variability in the dependent variable about the origin explained by regression. This CANNOT be compared to R Square for models which include an intercept. b. Predictors: Dis.Headway, Gender, Age, Speed
ANOVAc,d Model 1 Sum of Squares 264.542 10.415 274.957b df 4 527 531 Mean Square 66.135 .020 F 3346.435 Sig. .000a

Regression Residual Total

a. Predictors: Dis.Headway, Gender, Age, Speed b. This total sum of squares is not corrected for the constant because the constant is zero for regression through the origin. c. Dependent Variable: BRT d. Linear Regression through the Origin
Coefficients Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error .002 .000 .035 .012 .001 .000 .017 .001
a,b

Model 1

Age Gender Speed Dis.Headway

Standardized Coefficients Beta .112 .033 .145 .719

t 5.454 2.857 4.985 26.582

Sig. .000 .004 .000 .000

a. Dependent Variable: BRT b. Linear Regression through the Origin

281

Appendix I Regression Analysis for Acceleration/Deceleration Reaction Time

282

Regression Analysis for ADRT
b,c Variables Entered/Removed

Model 1

Variables Entered Gender, a Age

Variables Removed .

Method Enter

a. All requested variables entered. b. Dependent Variable: AC.RT c. Linear Regression through the Origin Model Summary Model 1 R R Square .886b .785
a

Adjusted R Square .774

Std. Error of the Estimate .392159

a. For regression through the origin (the no-intercept model), R Square measures the proportion of the variability in the dependent variable about the origin explained by regression. This CANNOT be compared to R Square for models which include an intercept. b. Predictors: Gender, Age
ANOVAc,d Model 1 Sum of Squares 21.391 5.844 27.235b df 2 38 40 Mean Square 10.695 .154 F 69.547 Sig. .000a

Regression Residual Total

a. Predictors: Gender, Age b. This total sum of squares is not corrected for the constant because the constant is zero for regression through the origin. c. Dependent Variable: AC.RT d. Linear Regression through the Origin

Coefficientsa,b Unstandardized Coefficients B Std. Error .017 .002 .159 .153 Standardized Coefficients Beta .846 .086

Model 1

Age Gender

t 10.184 1.034

Sig. .000 .031

a. Dependent Variable: AC.RT b. Linear Regression through the Origin

283

Appendix J Qualitative Validation of Spacing and Speed Profiles (5 Samples)

284

60 50 Speed (km/h) 40 30 20 10 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Time (sec) Actual Speed Predicted Speed

25

20 Spacing m)

15 10

Actual Spacing Predicted Spacing

5

0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Time (sec)

Speed and Spacing profile of Sample 1

285

60 50 Speed (km/h) 40 30 20 10 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Time (sec) Actual Speed Predicted Speed

30 25 20 15 10 5 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Time (sec) Actual Spacing Predicted Spacing

Spacing (m)

Speed and Spacing profile of Sample 2

286

80 70 60 Speed (km/h) 50 40 30 20 10 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Time (sec) Actual Velocity Predicted Velocity

40 35 30 Spacing (m) 25 20 15 10 5 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 Time (sec) Actual Spacing Predicted Spacing

Speed and Spacing profile of Sample 3

287

60 50 Speed (km/h) 40 30 20 10 0 0 2 Time (sec) 4 6 Actual Speed Predicted Speed

20

15 Spacing (m)

10

Actual Spacing Predicted Spacing

5

0 0 2 Time (sec) 4 6

Speed and Spacing profile of Sample 4

288

60 50 Speed (km/h) 40 30 20 10 0 0 2 Time (sec) 4 6 Actual Speed Predicted Speed

18 16 14 Spacing (m) 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 0 2 Time (sec) 4 6 Actual Spacing Predicted Spacing

Speed and Spacing profile of Sample 5

289

