Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Geography Publications and Research Geography

1-1-2008

Critical Geographies: Preface
Harald Bauder
hbauder@ryerson.ca

Salvatore Engel-di Mauro

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/geography Part of the Geography Commons Recommended Citation
Bauder, Harald and Salvatore Engel-di Mauro (2008) Preface: Free Critical Geographies. In Harald Bauder and Salvatore Engel-di Mauro (eds.), Critical Geographies: A Collection of Readings. Kelowna: Praxis (e)Press, p. ix-xvi.

This Contribution to Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Geography at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Geography Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Preface "Free Critical Geographies"1
Compiling key works of critical geographies is an impossible task. We began this task by conducting a survey among the editorial board members of the journal ACME: An E-Journal of Critical Geographies, asking their opinion for the three most important texts of critical geographies. We anticipated a few key works to emerge from this survey, which we would then include in this collection. However, the survey revealed that no consensus existed among ACME board members and other colleagues we consulted on what the key texts in the field are. In fact, not a single text was even mentioned twice by the survey participants. Furthermore, the idea of compiling "key" texts of critical geographies is highly problematic. Initially, we intended to call this collection "A Reader in Critical Geographies." A colleague, who heard about our intention, remarked that a "reader" suggests "authorization and authority" and cynically added: "Not exactly the natural positions of ,,critical geography...". We began to realize the impossibility of our project. Yet, we decided to continue with it because critical scholarship to us means precisely to engage with the contradictions of our discipline at the practical level. Our above-mentioned colleague suggested the title of "Free Critical Geographies," which would have suited a non-authoritative book and our aims to deliver critical geographies for "free" in an open-access format to audiences around the globe. This title, however, would have been dishonest to our audience because the authority of the editors could not be avoided and, in the end, did shape the contents. The current title Critical Geographies: A Collection of Readings does not deny this editorial authority and, at the practical level, still appeals (we hope) to the audiences we seek to reach. Most importantly, the title reflects the processes by which we selected the chapters. This selection processes was guided by several factors. First, we included texts that were mentioned in the survey. Second, we attempted to maintain a balance and range of geographical themes and topics. Third, we depended on the copyright

This text is licensed under the Creative Commons No Derivative, No Commercial Use 2.5. Canada License.

1

viii

owners for the rights to republish the texts. If we did not obtain these rights, we searched for alternative texts to be included. In the end, we obtained a "collection of readings" based on the input by fellow geographers, restrictions imposed by institutional gatekeepers as well as our editorial authority. Although Critical Geographies may represent a compromise in the manner in which its contents were selected, it does translate important principles of critical geographies into practice. The primary purpose of this book is to implement these principles: First, the book makes critical geographies accessible to new audiences. It is not only a book for the "converted" but also for students who are interested and less familiar with critical work in Geography. The "model" reader we had in mind when editing the texts is a typical student at one of our own universities who asks important questions about the geographic discipline, space and society, people and environment, and representations of Earth, but who has little prior exposure to critical geographies. This book is thus intended as a modest contribution to an infrastructure that enables teaching critical geographies in the classroom and beyond. We fully realize the lack of accessibility of this book for people whose language is not English. It is beyond our abilities and means, however, to include critical geographical work unavailable in English or to provide translations into other languages. It is therefore our hope that this initiative will be replicated by others for speakers of other languages and for other cultural contexts where such an initiative makes sense. Second, as teachers at institutions of higher education, we believe that education should be democratic and free. However, due to the lack of free textbooks, we have found ourselves often in the situation of assigning textbooks in our classes that were too expensive for many students. Moreover, the ever accelerating publication of new editions has undermined the used-book market and literally sucks money out of students pockets. Once a book is available as a new edition, charities ask us to donate the old books to be shipped to poorer countries, where students are apparently expected to learn using the texts no longer used in the wealthier countries. To address this problem, Critical Geographies is freely available from anywhere in the world. Although we realize that speedy internet access ­ a prerequisite for downloading the chapters contained in this book ­ is still exclusionary along the global digital divide, we believe that open-access is a model of textbook distribution that corresponds with the roles and responsibilities of higher education. Third, as educators we have been uneasy with the idea that the education we deliver in the classroom is used by corporate publishers to accumulate capital (Bauder and Engel-Di Mauro, forthcoming). It would be cynical, in our eyes, for example, to compile a textbook on critical geographies and then collect royalties from a corporate publisher to print the book and sell it at a high price to privileged university students who can afford it, while it remains inaccessible to potential readers who do not possess the means to buy the book. Critical Geographies cuts out the corporation that stands between the authors who wrote the chapters reprinted in this book and their audiences.
ix

Preface

Fourth, Critical Geographies intends not only to educate students but also to challenge instructors and researchers to modify their teaching practices and knowledge production. Similar to teachers who must recognize the political economy of textbook publishing, researchers must be aware of the consequences of where they publish their work. We could not include many excellent papers in this book because publishers demanded (sometimes outrageously) high copyright fees. After briefly considering paying the fees for some copyrighted material, we decided to make a point of republishing only work for which publishers and copyright owners permitted republication without charging us anything. Our intention was to stimulate authors awareness of how the copyright to their texts and research will be administered, who will be excluded from access to their work and who will profit from it. Our experience in compiling the copyrights to this book is that a few publishing houses are becoming the gatekeepers of geographical knowledge and they have little interest in sharing this knowledge in a democratic manner (see also Blomley, 2006). At the same time, we appreciate and acknowledge those publishers and copyright owners who support the free and open-access circulation of geographical knowledge and let us republish the work they own in this collection. We recognize that this book only makes a very small contribution towards realizing these ambitious principles. If you continue reading some or all of the following chapters, our intentions will have been more than realized.

Harald Bauder, Stuttgart Salvatore Engel-Di Mauro, New Paltz

References Bauder and Engel-Di Mauro. Forthcoming. Knowledge grab: Corporate appropriation and exploitation of academic geographers. Antipode, in press. Blomley, Nicholas. 2006. Is this journal worth US$1118? Geoforum 37, 877-880.

x

How to Use This Book Critical Geographies caters to several audiences. First, we envision the primary audience to be upper-level undergraduate students at English-speaking colleges and universities. Second, the collection may provide interesting discussion material for graduate students. Third, we hope to attract readers outside of the university classroom, who are interested in critical geographies. We designed this book to appeal to these three audiences. Accordingly, the individual chapters reflect varying levels of difficulty. We do not anticipate that many people will devour the collection chapter-by-chapter, from cover to cover (more realistically, we will also be glad if students will read any of it). Rather, most students and instructors will likely read and assign individual chapters according to their needs and interests. The chapters in this collection represent an edited version of original texts. We organized these chapters based on broad themes (critical reflections, space and society, people and environment, and representing Earth). Although we briefly introduce these themes, we do not claim any authority in categorizing and subdividing the discipline. In fact, readers may find it more useful to read across the themes and follow their own path through the collection. To instructors, in particular, we propose to select individual chapters and help their students to situate these in the context of the given course and the geographic discipline through discussion and/or by providing additional information. The url (uniform resource locator, or simply: internet address) of the book and the chapters can be posted directly into the course syllabus and permit instructors to redesign the sequence of individual chapters. In addition, posting the url in the syllabus or course homepage makes the material easily and directly accessible to students. We edited these texts with several objectives in mind. First, copyediting ensured that the individual chapters conform to a common style of citation, referencing and other editorial details. We intended to make the collection more reader-friendly while maintaining the idiosyncrasies of language use by each author. Second, by explaining some terms and ideas, we attempted to make the texts accessible to an audience unfamiliar with the worst jargon used by critical geographers. In cases when individual terms or concepts are still incomprehensible, we encourage readers to consult a dictionary or Wikipedia. Third, in some cases we cut text that was not immediately relevant to convey the central argument and/or which obstructed the flow of the text. All alterations from the original are marked in [square or box brackets], omissions are marked [...]. In a few instances we converted square brackets in the original text into {curly brackets or braces}. Finally, please remember that this book is free and may not be sold!

xi

Preface

Acknowledgements We thank the ACME Collective who encouraged us to produce this edited collection. In producing the book, we depended on Marie Puddister who typeset the entire collection, designed the front and back covers and helped us with practical matters. Carelynn Loopstra at the University of Guelph and Christine O'Loughlin at SUNY New Paltz have been wonderful student assistants. All remaining editorial errors in the texts are ours. Lawrence Berg performed the final steps and uploaded the book to the Praxis (e)Press server. In copyright matters, we received consultation by Chabriol Calebatch, the copyright officer of the University of Guelph. Our colleague, Pamela Moss, provided additional information on copyright acquisition. We are also grateful to Heather Martin of the University of Guelph library. In selecting the collections individual chapters, we thank the many geographers who participated in our survey. Finally, we thank the Department of Geography at the University of Guelph, the Department of Geography at SUNY New Paltz, Dean Gerald Benjamin of the College of Letters and Science at SUNY New Paltz, Wolf Gaebe at the Institute of Geography at the University of Stuttgart and the Alexander von Humboldt-Foundation.

Photograph Credits We were able to use the photos "Façade" on the front cover and "Abandoned Migrant's Bike - Altar Valley, 2007" on the back cover with kind permissions from Jonas R. Bylund and Michael Hyatt. Bernd Adamek- Schyma gave permission to publish the photo "Fun Fair in Front of the Marx Monument Chemnitz (formerly Karl-Marx-Stadt), Germany, 2007." K. Flo Razowsky permitted us to use the photo "US/Mexico Border Playas de Tijuana, Mexico." We thank Jonas R. Bylund for giving us permission to use the photo "Opencast coal mine, near Leipzig, Germany, 2007." We obtained the image "Utopiae insulae forma" by Thomas More, 1516, from the Bibliotheca Augustana, Augsburg, Germany, http://www.hs-augsburg.de/~harsch/Chronologia/Lspost16/Morus/mor_u202.html In addition, we thank Angela Phillips and Norfolk County Council and Information Centre for permission to use the original images published in McDowell, L. and D. Massey. 1984. A womans place? In, D. Massey & J. Allen (eds.), Geography Matters! A Reader.

xii

Credits to Authors, Publishers and Translators John Clark and Camille Martin permitted us to republish their translation of Reclus, Elisée. 1855. Fragment of a voyage to New Orleans, originally published in Meschabe #11 (Winter 1993), 14-17 and #12 (Spring 1994), 17-22. Ken Knabb permitted us to use the latest version of his translation of Guy Debord. 1955. Introduction to a Critique of Urban Geography, Les Lèvres Nues #6, from his website http://www.bopsecrets.org/SI/urbgeog.htm. It is included in the book Situationist International Anthology (revised and expanded edition), Bureau of Public Secrets, 2006. We thank Richard Peet for permission to republish Abdel-Malek, Anouar. 1977. Geopolitics and national movements: An essay on the dialectics of imperialism. Antipode 9(1), 28-35; Blaut, James. 1970. Geographic models of imperialism. Antipode 2(1), 65-82; Harvey, David. 1972. Revolutionary and counter revolutionary theory in geography and the problem of ghetto formation, Antipode 4(2), 1-13; Hudson, Brian. 1977. "Geography and imperialism" Antipode, 12-19; Lacoste, Yves. 1973. An illustration of geographical warfare. Antipode 5, 1-13; Mackenzie, Suzanne. 1984. Editorial Introduction. Antipode 16(3), 3-10; Peet, Richard. 1979. The geography of human liberation. Antipode 10(3), 119-33; Walker, Richard. 1979. Editor's introduction. Special issue on natural resources and environment. Antipode 11(2), 1-16; Watts, Michael. 1983. Hazards and crises; A political economy of drought and famine in Northern Nigeria." Antipode 15(1), 24-34; Wisner, Ben. 1978. Does radical geography lack an approach to environmental relations? Antipode 10(1), 84-95. Dana Ward allowed us to use the electronic text by Peter Kropotkin. 1885. What Geography ought to be. The Nineteenth Century 18, 940-56, available from the anarchy archives: http://anarchyarchives.org (abridged version). Wiley-Blackwell Publishing Ltd. permitted the republication of Bauder, Harald 2006. Learning to become a geographer. Antipode38(4), 671-9; England, Kim. 1994. Getting personal: Reflexivity, positionality and feminist research. Professional Geographer 46(1), 80-89; Pulido, Laura. 2002. Reflections on a white discipline. Professional Geographer 54(1), 42-9; Wilson, Bobby M. 2002. Critically understanding race-connected practices: A reading of W. E. B. Du Bois and Richard Wright. Professional Geographer 54(1), 31-41. Wiley-Blackwell Publishing Ltd. also granted permission for republishing Pulido, Laura. 2000. Rethinking environmental racism: White privilege and urban development in Southern California. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90(1), 12-40; Robbins, Paul. 2001. Tracking Invasive Land Covers in India or Why Our Landscapes Have Never Been Modern. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91(4), 637-54. In addition, WileyRoutledge Publishing Ltd. allowed us to extract Monk, Janice and Cindi Katz. 1993. When in the World are Women. In, Cindi Katz & Janice Monk (eds), Full Circles:
xiii

Preface

Geographies of Women over the Life Course. London & New York: Routledge, pp. 126 (abridged version). Cambridge University Press allowed us to republish McDowell, Linda and Doreen Massey. 1984. A womans place? In, D. Massey & J. Allen (eds.), Geography Matters! A Reader. Cartographic Perspectives and the North American Cartographic Information Society gave permission to reproduce Edney, Matthew H. 2005. Putting "Cartography" into the history of cartography: Arthur H. Robinson, David Woodward, and the creation of a discipline. Cartographic Perspectives 51, 14-29. Clark University gave permission to reprint Carney, Judith. 1993. Converting wetlands, engendering the environment: the intersection of gender with agrarian change in the Gambia. Economic Geography 69(4), 329-48. The Guilford Press permitted the reprinting of Pickles, John. 1995. Representations in an electronic age: Geography, GIS, and democracy. In, John Pickles (ed.), Ground Truth: The Social Implication of Geographic Information Systems. New York: Guilford, pp. 1-30. James Currey Publishers and Melissa Leach and Robin Mearns allowed the republication of Leach, Melissa and Robin Mearns (1996). Environmental change and policy. In, Melissa Leach & Robin Mearns (eds.), The Lie of the Land. Oxford: James Currey, pp. 1-33. Pion Limited, London, permitted us to republish Blomley, Nicolas. 1994. Activism and the academy. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 383-5; Chouinard, Vera. 1994. Reinventing radical geography: Is all that's Left Right? Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 12, 2-6; Mitchell, Kathryne. 1997. Different diasporas and the hype of hybridity. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 15, 533-3; Smith, Neil and Caroline Desbiens. 1999. The International Critical Geography Group: forbidden optimism? Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 18, 379-82. SAGE Publications granted permission to reproduce Anderson, Kaye. 1997. A walk on the wild side: a critical geography of domestication. Progress in Human Geography 21(4), 463-85; Crampton, Jeremy W. 2001. Maps as social constructions: Power, communication and visualization. Progress in Human Geography 25, 235-52; Schuurman, Nadine. 2000. Trouble in the heartland: GIS and its critics in the 1990s. Progress in Human Geography 24(4), 569-90 Taylor & Francis gave permission to reprint Seager, Joni. 1993. Whats the problem here? In, Joni Seager, Earth Follies. Coming to Feminist Terms with the Environmental Crisis. New York: Routledge, pp. 1-13.
xiv

The University of Georgia Press and Neil Smith granted permission to republish Smith, Neil. 1984/1990. The production of nature. In, Neil Smith, Uneven Development: Nature, Capital and the Production of Space. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 34-65. Verso allowed the reprinting of Wolch, Jennifer and Jody Emel. 1998. Witnessing the animal moment. In, Jennifer Wolch & Jody Emel (eds.), Animal Geographies. London: Verso, pp. 1-26.

xv

