NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI

BIOLOGICAL TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER CONTAINING AUTOMOTIVE ANTIFREEZE SOLUTION USING A PACKED COLUMN

by

M.ADNAN.A.KHAN, B.Eng
M. U. E. T., HYDERABAD, PAKISTAN 1995

A Project Report presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment o f the requirements for the degree o f Master o f Engineering In Chemical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004

©2004 M. Adnan. A. Khan

UMI Number: EC52934

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52934 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Author's Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author o f this report. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this report to other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

M.Adnan.A. Khan

I further authorize Ryersqn University to reproduce this report by photocopying or by other means, in total or parts, at the request o f other institutions or individuals for the scholarly research.

M.Adnan.A.Khan

1 1

Acknowledgements

I would like to express my sincere appreciation to Dr. Huu Dung Doan, my advisor, for his professional support, and understanding. His academic guidance is invaluable. My deep gratitude also goes to Dr. All Lohi, and Dr. Simant Upreti, for providing me their scientific insight during the course o f my study. I would like to thank the following people for their helpful support: - Mr. All Hemmati for his support in laboratory operation. - Mr. P.Scharping for his support in area o f instrumentation.

My thanks also go to the faculty members and staff o f the Department o f Chemical Engineering for their contribution to my career development during my program in the University.

1 deeply thank Mr. Zafar Khan and Mr. H. Abdullah for their friendship and emotional encouragement.

I am especially indebted to my Mother, Atif, Sana and my wife, Faryal A. Khan, for their love and understanding o f my neglect o f them during the busy time.

Ill

Abstract

Simulated wastewater samples containing antifreeze were treated biologically using a packed column as an aerator. The objective o f this project is to determine the rate o f biological degradation o f ethylene glycol at different air flow rates, liquid flow rates, and varied seeding rates at different time intervals, to achieve the highest removal rate o f the BOD. The biological oxygen demand (BOD) o f the wastewater was measured. Under a liquid flowrate o f 5.5 kg m'^s'' the BOD removal increased when the air flowrate was increased from 0.0069 to 0.0414 kg m 'V . However, further increases o f the air flowrate beyond 0.0138 k g m '^s'' did not affect the BOD removal rate significantly. On the other hand, with a constant air flowrate when the liquid flowrate was increased from 5.5 to 11, 16.5, and 27.5 kgm'^s'*, the percent BOD removal appeared to decrease slightly. It was also found that the increase in amount o f seeding has no significant effect on BOD removal. The averaged BOD removal o f about 90% was obtained after 72 hours o f the wastewater treatment.

IV

Table of contents

Author's Declaration Acknowledgments Abstract Table o f contents List o f Figures List o f Tables Nomenclature

Page ii iii iv
V

vii viii ix

Chapter 1 - Introduction 1. Introduction
1

Chapter 2 - A review of different biological treatment processes 2.1 Stages o f wastewater treatment 2.1.1 Primary treatment 2.1.2 Secondary treatment 2.1.3 Tertiary treatment 2.2 Trickling filter 2.3 Rotating biological contractors 2.4 Activated sludge processes 2.5 Lagoons 2.6 Packed bed column in wastewater treatment 3 3 4 4 4
6

9
11 1 2

Chapter 3 - Literature Review 3.1 Treatment of wastewater containing EG 3.2 Biological oxygen demand (BOD) 3.3 Oxygen transfer to wastewater in packed bed 14 18
20

Chapter 4 - Methodology 4.1 Process description 4.2 Experimental procedure 4.3 Biological oxygen demand (BOD) analysis 26 26 31

Chapter 5 - Results and Discussion 5.1 Effect o f air flow rate on BOD removal 5.2 Effect o f liquid flow rate on BOD removal 5.3 Effect o f seeding on BOD removal 5.4 Kinetic model o f the BOD curve 5.5 Effect o f temperature and other parameters on rate constant 34 37 39 42 44

Chapter 6 - Conclusion and Recommendation 6.1 Conclusions 6.2 Recommendation 46 47

7 - References

48

Appendix A: Appendix B: Appendix C: Appendix D; Appendix E:

Summary o f experimental data Sample calculation for BOD 5 Sample calculation for rate constant Graphs o f log (BOD 5 ) vs. treatment time Errors analysis

56 69 73 74 81

VI

List o f Figures

Figure Description______________________________________________________________Page

2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 3.1 4.1 4.2 4.3 5.1

Schematic diagram for a trickling filter Picture o f a rotating biological contactor Schematic diagram o f an activated sludge system Schematic diagram of an aerobic lagoon Schematic diagram o f a typical packed column Profile o f O2 concentration in a gas-liquid contacting device Schematic diagram of the experimental setup used in the present study Front view of the experimental setup Back view o f the experimental setup %BOD; removal of at varied air flow rates vs. treatment time at a fixed liquid flow rate of 5.5 k g m 'V

5 7 10 11 13 22 27 28 29

35 liquid flow rate of 5.5kg m'^s ' at afixed air flow 38 37

5.2 5.3

% BOD; removal vs. air flowrate at

% BOD5 removal at varied liquidflow ratesvs. treatment time rate o f 0.0069 kg m`V*

5.4

% BOD 5 removal at varied liquid flow rates with a fixed air flow rate of 0.0069 kg m -^ s ' 39

5.5

% BOD removal at varied amount o f seeding vs. treatment time with a fixed air and liquid flow rate 41
43

5.6

C hanges in the concentration o f B O D ; rem ainin g and B O D ; rem oval

D .l D.2 D.3 D.4

Rate constant for Run 1 Rate constant for Run 2 Rate constant for Run 3 Rate constant for Run 4

74 74 75 75

V ll

D.5 D.6 D.7 D.8 D.9 D.IO D .ll D.12 D.13

Rate constant for Run 5 Rate constant for Run
6

76 76 77 77 78 78 79 79 80

Rate constant for Rtm 7 Rate constant for Run
8

Rate constant for Run 9 Rate constant for Run 10 Rate constant for Run 11 Rate constant for Run 12 Rate constant for Run 13

List of Tables

Table Description

Page

4-1 4-2 5-1

Experiments with varied air flow rates at a fixed liquid flow rate of 5.5 kg m'^s ' Experiments with varied liquid flow rates at an air flow rate o f 0.0069 kg m'^s'' Rate constant (k) for the BOD removal at different operational conditions

30 31 44

V lll

Nomenclature

a B] B2

Area where diffusion occurs (m^) DO o f seed control before incubation (mg/1) DO o f seed control after incubation (mg/1)

BOD 5 Biological oxygen demand C Ci Cl Dc DO I DO 2 DEG EG f He k kc L Le Lo M Dissolved oxygen concentration (g/m^) Concentration o f dissolved oxygen at the interface (g/m^) Concentration o f oxygen (g/m^) Diffusion coefficient o f oxygen in the water (m^/s) Dissolved oxygen of diluted sample immediately after preparation (mg/1) Dissolved oxygen o f diluted sample after 5 days of incubation at 20 °C (mg/1) Diethylene glycol Ethylene glycol Ratio o f seed in diluted sample to seed in seed control Henry's constant Rate constant (hr"' ) Liquid phase mass transfer coefficient (m/s) Concentration (mg/1) BOD remaining at time t (mg/1) Ultimate BOD (mg/1) Mass transfer rate o f oxygen per unit time (g/s)

IX

Decimal volumetric fraction o f sample used Partial pressure o f oxygen in bulk gas (atm) Pi Equilibrium pressure o f oxygen dissolved in the liquid (atm)

PEG Polyethylene glycol PG Propylene glycol

TOC Total organic carbon X] X2 y Independent variable Independent variable
B O D 5 exerted at any time (mg/1)

1. INTRODUCTION

A large quantity o f de-icing agents is used in automobile engine coolants and at many airports to de-ice air planes before taking off during winter. De-icing agents usually contain ethylene glycol (EG), polyethylene glycol (PEG), diethylene glycol (DEG) and propylene glycol (PG). EG based fluids are the most common deicing / anti-icing fluids used in North America [1], EG is commonly used in the production o f antifreezes, asphalts, emulsion paints, heat transfer agents, brake fluids, polyester fibers and films, solvent and deicing fluids for planes [2 ].

EG belongs to a group o f organic compounds named aliphatic alcohols that are characterized by the presence of two hydroxyl functional groups. The octanol-water coefficient o f EG is very low, and hence, bioaccumulation is not expected to be significant [3]. Under most environmental conditions glycols are not volatile because o f their low vapor pressure.

In Canada, about 60% of EG, which consumed in 1991, was used in the production o f aircraft deicing fluids/antifreeze fluids and all weather automobile cooling system fluids. An additional
1 1

% was used for the production o f polyethylene terephthalate which is often

generically referred to as PET, or simply polyester. Minor uses include the processing o f oil and gas and the production o f solvent, explosives, cellulose film, and glycol esters. Canada's production o f EG has increased from 97,000 tons in 1976 to 513,200 tons in 1993. Industry expansion increased total EG production capacity to 850,000 tons, in 1995 [4]. Production capacity was expected to remain constant at 850,000 tons in 1998. Global demand for EG is expected to increase by more than 5% annually [5].

1

Chemical product information {CPI) product profiles (1996) indicated that antifreezes for aircraft deicing and automobile cooling system contributed to about 70% o f the EG used in Canada. Disposal o f spent antifreeze is a major source o f glycol compounds to the environment [6 ]. Melted snow and runoff water, containing EG, mix with municipal sewage water and end up in river and lakes. Many investigations have proved that wastewater

containing EG may cause a severe disturbance in the sewage treatment, or may leave a toxic effect on the aquatic life in rivers or lakes. Waste o f automobile coolants also creates the same problem since it mainly contains EG. EG in wastewater can be degraded by a biological oxidation process. The biological degradation o f organic matters could be aerobic or anaerobic. In aerobic oxidation o f wastewater, the removal o f the biological oxygen demand (BOD) is enhanced by aeration o f the wastewater. Biodegradability is known as the extent o f the removal o f organic compounds by using microorganisms in a biological waste treatment process. There are several techniques used for the determination o f biodegradability such as the biological oxygen demand and the petrochemical method [7].

The objective o f this project is to determine the rate o f biological degradation o f ethylene glycol at different air flow rates, liquid flow rates, and varied seeding rates at different time intervals, to achieve the highest removal rate o f the BOD. An automotive coolant wastewater was treated using a packed column. While air is blown from the bottom, the packed column provides a good oxygen transfer from air to the wastewater and hence acts as an excellent aerator.

2. A REVIEW OF DIFFERENT BIOLOGICAL TREATM ENT PROCESSES

2.1 Stages of Wastewater Treatment A number o f physical (sedimentation, filtration, equalization, etc.), chemical (precipitation, neutralization, coagulation, softening, etc.), and biochemical (activated sludge, aerobic and anaerobic digestion, rotating biological contactor, packed bed, etc.), processes are used in environmental engineering field. Wastewater treatment plants are usually classified as primary, secondary or tertiary (advanced) treatment processes, depending on the purification level to which the plants provide treatment [8 ].

2.1.1

Primary Treatment

In primary treatment, a physical operation (usually sedimentation) is used to remove the floating and settable materials in wastewater [9]. This process is the first step to treat

wastewater. Untreated wastewater initially enters a primary treatment process. In the primary treatment, a bar screening is usually used to remove large objects and insoluble particle that can damage the treatment plant. Wastewater then enters into large settling basins. Due to gravity, sedimentation occurs during which the solids will settle to the bottom to form sludge, while oil and grease remain on the top and are removed by a skimmer. Primary treatment only removes one fifth of BOD and hardly any dissolved mineral. This is the least effective method o f treatment [ 1 0 ].

2.1.2

Secondary Treatment

Secondary treatment involves removing the remaining organic molecules that are left over from the primary treatment process. Biological process is commonly used to remove organic matters. The effluent is brought in contact with oxygen and aerobic microorganisms to help break down organic matter. The combination o f primary and secondary treatment can remove up to 90% o f BOD. The two main methods used for the secondary treatment are a suspended growth process (also known as an activated sludge process), and a fixed film process (also known as a trickling filter) [ 1 0 ].

2.1.3

Tertiary Treatment

Primary and secondary treatment processes removed the majority o f BOD and solids in the wastewater. The tertiary treatment process removes any remaining nitrates, phosphates, and heavy metals that are left over from the primary and secondary treatment processes. These inorganic compounds can cause eutrophication o f the surface water receiving the effluent, which causes algae to grow. Unlike primary treatment process, tertiary treatments are usually chemical processes [ 1 0 ].

2.2

Trickling Filter

Trickling filter or percolating biological filter has been used to provide the biological wastewater treatment o f municipal and industrial wastewaters for nearly a hundred years. Trickling filter is a popular alternative to an aetivated-sludge process. Trickling filter is a non submerged fixed-film biological reactor using rock or plastic packing over which wastewater is distributed continuously. A trickling filter is filled with packing material on which the

biofilm grows. The size o f a trickling filter depends on the BOD load per unit reactor volume
[111-

Oxygen free to flow in tank W ater trickled over tank

Wastewater

into tank

Wastewater trickled over bacteria covered media and BOD eaten by

bacteria which eventually
die and flow out Treated water flows to secondary sedimentation tank (dead bacteria removed as sludge)

Figure 2.1: Schematic diagram for a trickling filter [12]

The biological treatment in a trickling filter is a fixed film biological process that removes BOD and suspended solids in the wastewater. Wastewater containing organic contaminants is in contact with microorganisms that are fixed or attached to the surface o f filter media. The depth o f the packing ranges from 0.9 to 2.5 m (3 to
8

ft), and is 1.8m (6 ft) on an average.

Rock filter beds are usually circular, and wastewater is distributed over the top o f the bed by a rotary distributor. Many conventional trickling filter using rock as packing material have been

converted to plastic packing to increase treatment capacity. Virtually all new trickling filter are now filled with plastic packing [13].

Two or more trickling filters may be connected in series, and sewage can be re-circulated in order to increase treatment efficiencies. In predicting the performance o f trickling filter, the organic and hydraulic loading, and the degree o f treatment required are among the important factors that must be considered [14]. This technology is however less effective in treating wastewater with a high concentration o f soluble organic compounds [15].

2.3 Rotating Biological Contactors Rotating biological contactors (RBC) were first installed in West Germany in 1960, and later introduced into the United States of America. An RBC consist o f a series o f closely spaced circular disks o f polystyrene or polyvinyl chloride that are submerged in wastewater and rotated through it. The disks are attached to a horizontal shaft and are provided at standard radius o f approximately 3.5m. RBC plants have found widespread application in small and medium size wastewater treatment plants in particular. The RBC plants are compact, causing little impact on landscape. In addition, they produce sludge with a good settling ability and digestibility characteristics [16].

In an RBC, wastewater comes into contact with a biological medium in order to facilitate the
rem oval o f contam inants. T he b io lo g ica l grow th, w h ich attached to the d isk s, assim ilates the

organic materials in the wastewater.

Aeration is provided by the rotating action that exposes the disks to the air after contacting the wastewater. Excess biomass is sheared off in the tank where the rotating action o f the disks keeps the solids in suspension. Eventually the flow o f the wastewater carries the solids out o f the system and into a clarifier where they are separated. By arranging several sets o f disks in series, it is possible to achieve a high degree o f organic removal and nitrification [17].

Where a single RBC is not sufficient to achieve the desired level o f treatment, a series (train) o f RBCs is normally used. The performance o f an RBC depends on the temperature and concentration o f the pollutants, and the rate at which the treatment is expected to proceed. Studies have shown that, in terms o f BOD removal, there is a critical hydraulic retention time o f 3 hours and that any further increase in the retention results in little or no improvement in performances. Both hydraulic and organic loading rate criteria are used in sizing units for secondary treatment [18].

Figure 2.2: Picture o f a rotating biological contactor [19]

Advantages of RBC 1) 2) Operation is simple and operation costs are relatively low. RBC units are covered to prevent algae growth, excessive heat loss in cold conditions, and UV exposure. 3) 4) 5)
6

Short contact periods are required because o f the large active surface. Short retention time. Low power requirements. Low sludge production and excellent process control [11]

)

Disadvantages of RBC 1) 2) 3) 4) 5)
6

Shaft bearing and mechanical drive require frequent maintenance. Requirement for covering RBC units in cold climates to protects against freezing. Structural failure o f the shaft, media support systems. Less than anticipated treatment performance. Excessive development o f nuisance organisms. Development o f excessive or uneven biomass growth. Inadequate performance o f air-driven systems to rotate the shaft [11]

)

7)

The key advantage in using RBCs rather than trickling filter is that RBCs are easier to operate under varying load conditions as keeping the solids medium wet is easier. On the other hand, it is difFieult to control the growth o f biomass using RBCs [20].

2.4

Activated Sludge Processes

The activated sludge process is commonly used for the biological treatment o f municipal and industrial wastewaters. The antecedents o f the activated sludge process date back to the early 1880s by Dr. Angus Smith.

The activated sludge process consists o f the following three components:

1)

A reactor in which the microorganisms responsible for the treatment o f wastewater are kept in suspension and aerated

2) 3)

Liquid solids separation, usually in sedimentation tank A recycle system for returning solids removed from the liquid-solids separation unit back to the reactor [ 1 1 ]

Activated sludge process is the most widely used biological treatment process, in part because the recirculation o f the biomass allows microorganisms to adapt to the changes in wastewater composition in a relatively short acclimation period [2 1 ].

`ACTIVATED SLUDGE' PROCESS
sewage

outfall

screening tank

first settling tank

oxidation pond (aerobic bade.ia)

tank

effluent to river

air Inlet

digester

(anaerobic bacteria)

F igu re 2.3: Schematic diagram o f an activated sludge system [22]

The wastewater from the primary treatment process enters an aeration tank, or a bioreactor, where it is then mixed with microorganisms and oxygen. Oxygen is provided by using either aerators or diffusers. The microorganisms then grow into brownish lumps known as floes, which are mostly aerobic microorganisms that feed on each other, and the nutrients in the wastewater. As nutrients are consumed, new cells are produced to form sludge in the effluents. As a result, settling occurs and the effluent water then either undergoes tertiary treatment, or is discharged. The sludge and water are then separated by a clarifier. A part o f the sludge is then recycled back into a tank to act as a seed for the continuous process [23].

10

The main advantages o f the activated sludge process are:

1) 2) 3) 4)

The plant occupies a smaller area compared with trickling filters. The process produces no offensive smell. Sludge has a greater fertilizer value. The process is capable o f treating dissolved, suspended and colloidal matter [24].

2.5 Lagoon Lagoons are relatively shallow earthen basins varying in depth from 2 to 5 ft, provided with mechanical aerators on floats or fixed platforms. The mechanical aerators are used to provide oxygen for the biological treatment o f wastewater, and to keep the biological solids in suspension. Suspended growth aerated lagoons are operated on either a flow through basis or with solids recycle [11].

R aw W astewater Effluent

Figure 2.4: Schematic diagram o f an aerobic lagoon [25]

11

Lagoons are fitted with a liner to prevent seepage, and aerators to supply air at all depth. The classification o f lagoon depends on the oxygen availability to the lagoon.

Aerobic lagoons are two to five feet in depth and are kept aerobic by mechanical mixing while facultative lagoons are three to nine feet in depth and have no forced aeration, which results in an upper, middle and lower zone o f liquid. The upper zone operates aerobically; the lower zone operates anaerobically, while the middle zone contains facultative bacteria [26].

The principle types o f suspended growth lagoons process, classified based on the manner in which the solids are handled, are as follows:

1) 2) 3)

Facultative partially mixed Aerobic flow through with partial mixing Aerobic with solids recycle and nominal complete mixing

Differences in the manner in which the solids are handled affects the treatment efficiency, power requirements, hydraulic and solids retention time, sludge disposal, and environmental considerations [27].

2.6 Packed Column in Wastewater Treatment Packed columns, also called packed towers that are widely used in chemical industry, also find a new application in water and wastewater treatment. A packed colunm consists principally of a cylindrical tower, packing material contained in the tower, a centrifugal blower, and a water pump. It is used for continuous contact o f liquid and gas in both counter current and

12

co-current flow. A packed column reactor is filled with some type o f packing material, such as rock, slag, steel, ceramic, or now more commonly, plastic. With respect to liquid flow, a packed bed can be operated in either the downflow or upflow mode [11]. The extremely large surface area provided by packing in a column, combined with forced air flowing countercurrent to the flow of the wastewater provides high liquid-gas transfer compared with other conventional aeration methods.

The quantity o f air pumped in relation to the amount o f water flowing through the column is known as air-to water ratio [28]. In general, aeration is used for transferring oxygen to water for the biological degradation o f pollutants. The driving force for mass transfer is the difference o f oxygen concentration between the gas and liquid phases. Equilibrium concentration o f a solute in air is directly proportional to the concentration o f the solute in water at a specific temperature.

" M m Ini ffO

li.stnhirtor

Packing

su p p o rt

bm ucni

Figure 2.5: Schematic diagram o f a typical packed column [17]

13

3.

LITERATURE REVIEW

3.1 Treatment o f Wastewater Containing Ethylene Glycol (EG) Several processes can be used to decompose EG. In different studies, it has been established that EG can be degraded up to 99% [29]. The role o f the biodégradation in the ultimate fate of EG has been examined in numerous studies, using a variety o f microbes, as well as methods of measuring biodegradability as explained in detail below. Various studies have also examined aerobic and anaerobic treatment, UV treatment with Fenton's reagent, photo Fenton system, fluidized bed treatment, methylene blue and riboflavin treatment, and enzymatic processes for the degradation o f EG.

The results o f many studies confirmed that EG underwent extensive primary and ultimate biodégradation and was considered readily biodegradable. Nearly complete biodégradation of EG occurred in hours under aerobic conditions [30]. In another study by Boatman, et n/.,[3I] the biodégradation of EG is as extensive and rapid as primary aerobic biodégradation. Degradation rates ranged fiom 70% production o f the theoretical CO 2 in 2 days and up to 91% in 21 days [31]. Assuming that the BOD removal follows a first order kinetics, half lives (for 50% BOD removal) generally ranged fi'om 3 to biodégradation [30].
8

days for both primary and ultimate

The removal o f EG has also been extensively tested using methods that simulate environmental conditions. Methods used include semi-continuous activated sludge (SCAS), river die-away (RDA) assays and tests that used soil or groundwater. The results o f simulation tests show that EG is extensively biodegradable in SCAS and RDA assays, as well as in soil or

14

groundwater. In water from several rivers, EG was completely degraded in 3 days at 20 ^C, in 5 to 14 days at
8

°C, and in 11 to 14 days at 4 `'C [32].

The fate, effect, and potential environmental risks o f EG in the environment were examined by Charles e t.a l, EG undergoes rapid biodégradation in aerobic and anaerobic environments (-100% removal o f EG within 24 to 28 days). In air, EG is decomposed by a photo chemical reaction that produces hydroxyl radicals with a half life o f 2 days [33].

In various soils and at different temperatures EG at concentration o f 100-1000 mg/kg, was aerobically degraded with primary degradation half-lives o f
6

to 17 hours. However at a

concentration o f 10,000 mg/kg EG a substantial inhibition of degradation was observed [34].

Glycol biodégradation was observed in soil gathered near airport runways. The concentration o f EG in soil is ranging from 392-5278 mg/kg. EG was extensively degraded at the rates o f 20 and 93 mg EG/kg soil per day at temperatures o f 8 °C and 20 °C respectively [35].

Anaerobic biodégradation appears to be extensive for EG when active anaerobic microbial consortia are used. Removal o f approximately 75-100% EG over one to several weeks was obtained in various test systems used to measure the anaerobic biodégradation o f EG [36], [37].

Charles developed generalized degradation half-lives that one may anticipate in various environmental compartments. The author also estimated the half-life o f EG to be 2-12 days in surface water, 4-24 days in groundwater, and 2 -1 2 days in soil, based on unacclimated
15

microorganism populations. The author further estimated aerobic biodégradation half-lives to be 8-48 days, and wastewater treatment plant efficiencies to be 88-100% [38].

EG was found to be degraded to less than 5 mg/1 with spikes up to 10,000 mg/1 in the influent. Higher concentrations o f EG led to pH inhibition even with an addition o f CaCOs 6000 mg/1 o f wastewater to moderate the pH [39]. at

EG and Propylene glycol (PG) are also treated in a 15-cm deep sand bed column.

The

biodégradation o f greater than 99% was achieved for all flow rates and loading conditions
( 8

to 25° C temperature and concentration was 39 to 52 mg/kg) tested [40].

Degradation rates o f ethylene glycol in riboflavin solutions exposed to sunlight ranged from 0.22± 0.11 to 1.52 ± 0.50 mg/l-h. Significant degradation rates were noted in systems using
6

and 10-mg/l riboflavin at pH values o f 4, 7, and 10. Methylene blue used as a photodynamic sterilization and as a photosensitizer. No significant degradation was found in the system using methylene blue as the photosensitizing agent [41].

The enzymatic degradation o f EG estimated by weight loss was enhanced significantly by the presence o f a lipase and increased by the incorporation o f glycol. The weight loss also increased with increases in the adipic acid ( 6 A) content and n, the number o f repeat unit in adipic acid, which could be correlated to the increase o f the water absorption and the increase in the concentration o f aliphatic ester linkages in the main chain o f the enzyme [42].

16

The bioremediation o f EG and PG using the aerobic biological fluidized bed (BFB) technology was evaluated by Wen et. al. [43] Under steady-state conditions, they found that BFB reactors were capable o f achieving a good total organic carbon (TOC) removal (> 96%) in the bed after 1.7 hours with a TOC loading as high as 0.88 g/1- day [43].

Aerobic degradation o f glycol based Type 1 aircraft de-icing fluids (ADFs) was characterized using suspended growth fill and draw reactors. Both type o f ADFs tested showed near complete anaerobic degradation. First order degradation rate constant o f 3.5/d for the PG based type-1, ADFs and 5.2/d for the EG based type ADFs were obtained through continuousculture means under mesophilic conditions (35 `^C) [44].

Degradation o f EG in photo Fenton systems was investigated by Dietrick et. al. [45]. EG loss rate constant o f 1.0 ± 0.40 h/d was achieved in photo Fenton systems containing o f 1000 mg EG/1. EG was converted to formic acid resulting in a loss o f calculated chemical oxygen demand. The optimal pH was 3.0, significant decreases in the degradation rate were observed at pH below 2.8 and above 3.2. A high TOC loss was also noted in UV/ H 2 O 2 systems [45].

In another study o f degradation o f EG using Fenton's reagent and UV by Dietrick et. al, oxidation o f EG in aqueous solution was found to occur with the addition o f Fenton's reagent [46]. Further conversion was observed upon UV irradiation. The pH range studied was 2.5 to 9.0 with initial H 2 O2 concentrations ranging from 100 to 1000 mg/1. The application o f the method to airport storm water could potentially reduce the chemical oxygen demand by the conversions o f EG to oxalic and formic acids. They also found that smaller H 2 O 2 doses were

17

associated with increases in the ratio EG removed per unit H 2 O 2 . EG removal was enhanced by exposure to UV light after treatment with Fenton's reagent [46].

3.2 Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) The most widely used parameter o f organic pollution applied to both wastewater and surface water is the 5-day biochemical oxygen demand, (BOD 5 ) [47]. The more organic matter there is (e.g. in the sewage), the greater the number o f microbes. The more microbes there are, the greater the need for oxygen to support them, consequently the higher BOD. It is the most important parameter for the design and operation o f industrial treatment plants. BOD is a reliable gauge o f the organic pollution in water. One o f the main reasons for treating sewage or wastewater prior to its return to a water resource is to lower its BOD, which in return reduces its need o f oxygen and thereby lessens its demand from the streams or rivers into which it is released [48]. In order to get meaningful results, the sample must be diluted with distilled water so as to reduce the concentration o f the pollutants in the concentrated solution. For samples containing large population o f microorganism, seeding is not necessary. If required, the dilution water is "seeded" with a bacterial culture that has been present in the wastewater.

The Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) is also an useful indication o f the water quality because o f the following factors:

a) BOD is used to determine the approximate quantity o f oxygen that will be required to biologically stabilize the organic matter present in wastewater.

18

b) BOD can be used to measure the efficiency o f unit operations in wastewater treatment processes. c) BOD is used to estimate the size o f wastewater treatment facilities [49].

The BOD depends upon the temperature, the concentration o f organic matter, the nature o f the organic matter, the concentration o f bacteria and the type o f the bacteria. Assuming the rate o f oxidation o f organic matter at any instant is proportional to the amount o f oxidizable matter present, it can be represented by a first-order reaction [50].

BOD is exerted by the following three classes o f materials: a) Carbonaceous organic materials usable as a source o f food by aerobic organisms. b) Oxidizable nitrogen derived fi'om nitrite, ammonia and organic nitrogen compounds that serve as a food source for specific bacteria (Nitrosomomas and Nitrobacter). c) Chemical reducing compounds such as Fe^^, and S^` which are oxidized by dissolved oxygen.

Organic matter present in a sample is primarily metabolized by bacteria in early stages. Some o f the organic matter is oxidized, and the remainder is transformed into new bacteria cells. As
the su pp ly o f th ese organic matter, or "fo o d " for th e m icroorgan ism s b eco m es scare, so m e

types o f bacteria including protozoa will predate on the living and dead bacteria present. The different mixtures o f organic components and amount o f seed can shift the duration and the maximum population of the individual microbial groups. However, it is generally true that

19

oxygen uptake in the initial stages is higher than in the latter stages because o f not only the higher concentration o f the organic matter but also the higher degradability o f the organic matter is initially than after it has been transformed into microbial cells [51].

The BOD o f a water sample is determined by measuring the change in dissolved oxygen in water over a specific time with an oxygen probe or by an iodo-metric titration. The BOD test has been standardized by requiring the test to be run in the dark at 20°C for 5 days. The 5-day BOD, or BOD 5 , is the oxygen used by microorganisms in the water sample over 5 days of incubation. The BOD test is normally carried out in a standard BOD bottle. Details about the test can be found in Standard Methods fo r the Examination o f Water and Wastewater [9].

3.3 Oxygen Transfer to Wastewater In Packed bed Packed beds are widely used in for continuous gas-liquid contact operations in chemical industry. Over the past fifty years a number o f mass transfer theories have been proposed to explain the mechanism o f gas transfer across gas-liquid interfaces. The simplest and most commonly used is the two-film theory proposed by Lewis and Whitman in 1924 [52]. The penetration model proposed by Higbie in 1935 [53], and the surface-renewal model proposed by Danckwerts in 1951 [54], were more theoretical and take into account more o f the physical phenomena involved. The two film theories remain popular because, in more than 95% o f the situations encountered, the result obtained were essentially the same as those obtained with the more complex theories. The liquid is distributed over the packed bed and the gas is introduced at the bottom o f the tower. The liquid trickles down the packed bed exposing a large surface area to contact rising gas.

20

The rate o f the mass transfer o f a gas-phase controlled system is expected to increase with the increase o f the gas flow rate. This is due to the fact that, as the gas flow rate is increased, the thickness o f the gas film at the gas-liquid interface decreases, which results in the lowering of the resistance to mass transfer. Also, due to the counter flow o f gas and liquid, high gas flow rate increases the retention time o f liquid in the packing [ 1 1 ].

Although for the gas-phase controlled system the resistance to mass transfer in the liquid film is negligible, the overall mass transfer rate could still vary with liquid flow rate. This is due to the.fact that higher liquid flow rate will result in a better liquid distribution over the packing, which increases the effective area o f the packing that is available for the mass transfer. Therefore, the overall mass transfer rate is expected to increase with liquid flow rate [55].

For effective BOD removal, oxygen, wastewater, and microoganisms must be brought into contact. Under steady state conditions, the rate o f mass transfer o f a gas through gas film must be equal to the rate transfer through liquid film. Using Pick's first law o f Diffusion, the rate of the molecular diffusion o f a gas in liquid can be defined. The mass rate (M) o f oxygen per unit time is proportional to the oxygen concentration gradient normal to the area where diffusion occurs (dC/dy), which is expressed by the following equation: [11]

M =-D a-- c dy

(1)

Where, a is the area where diffusion occurs, C is the dissolved oxygen concentration, y is the linear dimension normal to the area considered, and Dc is the diffusion coefficient o f oxygen in the water. This equation describes the diffusion o f gas into a liquid at the liquid film [54].

21

The concentration profile o f oxygen in the gas-liquid contacting device can be depicted as in the following sketch:

Gas

Liquid

Figure 3.1: Profile o f O 2 concentration in a gas-liquid contacting device

The rate transfer for any transfer process, is the product o f a transfer driving force and a transfer coefficient. For dissolved oxygen, the driving force is the difference between the oxygen in the gas phase and the liquid phase. For gas phase, the rate o f mass transfer is expressed in terms o f partial pressure and so equation ( 1 ) can be rearranged to describe the mass transfer o f oxygen in the gas phase by the equation:

M = kga(Pb-p.)

(2)

W here, M is the m ass rate o f o x y g en , a is th e interfacial area ,

is the partial pressure o f

oxygen in bulk gas in bulk gas, p. is the equilibrium pressure o f oxygen dissolved in the liquid at the gas-liquid interface, and k^is the gas mass transfer coefficient. This equation gives the oxygen transfer rate in the gas phase [54]. 22

The partial pressure gradient is the driving force in the gas phase, while the concentration gradient is the driving force in the liquid phase. The mass transfer rate o f oxygen in the liquid phase can also be expressed helow [54]: M = kX C ,-C ) (3)

Where, kc is the liquid phase mass transfer coefficient, C, is the concentration o f dissolved oxygen at the interface, and C| is the concentration o f dissolved oxygen in the bulk liquid.

The interfacial concentration (C, ) is the concentration o f the dissolved oxygen in the liquid phase at the gas-liquid interface. At the interface, p.andC. are in equilibrium, according to Henry law as below: C.=p.H (4)

Where He is the Henry Law constant for oxygen.

The mass transfer rate is usually expressed in terms o f the bulk concentration (p^andC^), since these concentration can be measured easily as compared to the interfacial concentration (p.andC .). Therefore, in order to find M, the interfacial concentration (p .an d C .) are eliminated. This is done by rearranging equation (2) to solve for p. :

M

23

By multiplying He to equation (5):

g or

By rearranging equation (3) the following expression for C, is obtained: M

or

M = C .-C ,

(8)

By adding equation (6 ) and ( 8 ):

M=

PbHc_- C j

(9 )

(H,/kga) + (l/k,a)

A fictitious liquid phase concentration (C ) is defined as the concentration o f oxygen that is in equilibrium with the oxygen in the bulk gas. C* can be readily obtained from Henry Law with the known partial pressure o f oxygen in the bulk gas. Henry Law for oxygen can be rewritten as: C*=p^H^ (10)

24

Substitution o f equation (10) in equation (9): r *-- C M = ----------------- !---------

(H ,/k ,a ) + (l/k,a)

(11)

An overall mass transfer coefficient (k| a) for the liquid phase is defined by the following equation;

^ k ,a

kga

+-- k^a

( 12)

Therefore equation (11) can be rewritten as:

M = ka(C*-C|)

(13)

25

I. METHODOLOGY

LI Process Description \ 18-cm diameter cylinder filled with plastic spheres o f
2

mm diameter was used as an aerator

IS shown in Figures 4.1, 4.2, and 4.3. The height o f packing bed was 40 cm. Simulated A^astewater containing EG was placed in a liquid tank. Wastewater was pumped from the liquid ;ank to the top o f the column, liquid flowrate was measured using a rotameter (Dwyer instrumentation Inc.). Air entered the bottom o f the packed tower counter-current to the liquid îtream. The air flow was also measured by a rotameter. The wastewater leaving the packed ;ower went back to the liquid tank where it was recirculated back to the packed column. A :opper cooling coil was put in the wastewater tank to maintain the wastewater at 20°C.

4.2 Experimental Procedure The objective o f this project was to study the effect o f seeding the wastewater, and air and liquid flowrate on the removal o f biological oxygen demand (BOD) o f the wastewater. Seeding was done to add microorganisms to the simulated wastewater that did not have microorganisms originally. In order to evaluate the effects o f seeding using Polyseed ®, and liquid and air flow rate on the BOD removal, pH o f wastewater was 6.9 to 7.3, a series o f runs set at different flow rates o f air and liquid with different amounts o f seeding were carried out. Followings are different levels o f the parameters o f interest: · Levels of air flowrate 0.0069, 0.0138, 0.0207, 0.0276, 0.0345, and

0.0414 kg m V . · · Levels o f liquid flowrate: 5.5,
1 1

, 16.5, and 27.5 k g m ' V ' .

Seeding: various amounts and frequencies can be found in Table 4.1

26

Air Out

Flow Meter Packed

Bed

AirIn

Air Flow Meter

1

Cooling Water Out

Figure 4.1: Schematic diagram o f the experimental setup used in the present study

27

Figure 4 .2 : Front view o f the experimental setup

28

If
«ÆMTO -CEO'

Figure 4.3: Back view o f the experimental setup

29

-1 Table 4.1: Experiments with varied air flow rates at a fixed liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m"2 s

Run
1

Air Flow Rate (kg m'^s * ) 0.0069 0.0069 0.0069 0.0069

Amount o f Seeding Put in Wastewater*
2

capsules at capsules at

0

hour hour

2

6

0

3 4

W ithout seeding 2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

5

0.0138

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

6

0.0207

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

7

0.0276

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

8

0.0345

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

9

0.0414

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

*Note: 1 Capsule contains O.llOg biomass on dry basis.

30

Table 4.2: Experiments with varied liquid flow rates at an airflow rate o f 0.0069 kg m' s'

-2-1

Run
1 0

Liquid Flow Rate (kg m^s ' ) 5.5

Amount o f Seeding Put in W astewater 2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

11

11

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

1 2

16.5

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

13

27.5

2 capsules at 0, 24, and 48 hours

A total o f four samples were taken for each run. For every sample taken, the amount of dissolved oxygen was initially measured using a D O meter (Model 52C, YSl Incorporated Yellow springs, Ohio, USA) and the sample was incubated for five days at 20° C. After five days, the amount o f dissolved oxygen in the samples was measured again. The B O D 5 o f the wastewater was then calculated.

4.3 Biological Oxygen Demand Analysis Biological oxygen demand (BOD) is the quantity o f oxygen required for the biological

oxidation o f waterborne substances under test conditions. Materials, which may contribute to the BOD, include carbonaceous organic materials usable as a food source by aerobic 31

organisms, oxidizable nitrogen derived from nitrites, ammonia and organic nitrogen compounds which serve as foods for specific bacteria [55].

BOD5 can be calculated using the following equation: , [(D,-D ;)-(B|-B,)]f P Where, Di = Dissolved oxygen o f dilution sample immediately after preparation, mg/1 D 2 = Dissolved oxygen o f dilution sample after 5 days incubation at 20°C, mg/1 P = Decimal volumetric fraction o f sample used B | = Dissolved oxygen o f the seed control before incubation, mg/1 B 2 = Dissolved oxygen o f the seed control after incubation, mg/ 1 f = Ratio o f the seed in the sample to seed in control( %seed in D | / % o f seed in Bj)

One Polyseed® capsule is diluted with 300 ml distilled water. This solution is used as a seed control. The dissolved oxygen o f a seed control was also measured. The seed control acts as a blank for quality control, and so the initial and final dissolved oxygen levels should be similar. Similar values indicate that the values determined for the wastewater sample are correct. That is, if the initial and final dissolved oxygen values for the seed control are similar, the dissolved oxygen values for the sample are acceptable. Detailed calculation is shown in Appendix B.

The test procedure o f BOD for wastewater had a number o f steps. At first the sample had to be aerated for at least fifteen to twenty minutes, which allowed the initial dissolved oxygen of the BOD sample to be at saturation. After aeration, the sample was put into a standard 300 ml

32

BOD bottle. The dissolved oxygen in the sample was then measured, using a calibrated dissolved oxygen meter.

The solubility o f oxygen in water varies with water temperature. The dissolved oxygen meter m ust be calibrated at the temperature o f the wastewater sample. The sample bottle was put on top o f a stir plate, with a stir bar inside the bottle. The oxygen level in the liquid at the membrane surface was continuously depleted. Therefore, in order to read the dissolved oxygen measurement accurately the water must be in a continuous motion [9].

After the dissolved oxygen o f the sample bottle was taken, the wastewater bottle was incubated at 20°C. The sample bottle must not have any air bubbles present. Some dilution water was added to the bottle and the cap was placed carelully to prevent air bubbles to be entrapped in the bottle. The glass collar around the cap should also be covered with water. An over cap such as parafilm paper or aluminium foil can be placed over the bottle stopper to prevent the evaporation of the water seal. These procedures insure that no air present in the BOD bottle.

After five days, the sample bottle was taken out o f the incubator. The dissolved oxygen o f the water sample in the bottle was then immediately measured. The BOD 5 o f the wastewater was then calculated from initial and final dissolved oxygen values [2 ].

33

5. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION:

5.1 Effect of Air Flow Rate on BOD Removal It can be expected that the percentage o f BOD removal will be increased as the air flow rate increases. This is due to the fact that there must be enough dissolved oxygen in the wastewater for the complete oxidation o f organic matter. If there is not enough dissolved oxygen, the moicrooganisms will not be able to oxidize the organic matter, which in turn hinders the BOD removal. An air flow in contact with the wastewater allows the mass transfer o f oxygen from the air into the wastewater. Aeration helps to maintain a sufficient amount o f oxygen in the wastewater for the complete oxidation o f organic matter. It was expected that at a low air flow rate o f 0.0069 kg m 'V , the percentage o f BOD removal would be low. At a low air flow rate, the mass transfer o f oxygen from the air into the wastewater was low. A low level o f oxygen in the wastewater will cause the microoganisms to oxidize a small amount o f organics. On the other hand, at a higher air flow rate o f 0.0414 kg m 'V , the percentage o f BOD removal

would be high. Since the mass transfer o f oxygen from the air into the wastewater would be high. A level of oxygen in the wastewater would thus be sufficient for the microorganisms to oxidize a large amount o f the organie matters.

It was found that the percentage o f BOD removal generally increased when the air flow rate increased as shown in Figure-5.1. It was expected that a higher air flow rate would result in a
h igh er B O D rem oval. H ow ever, the p ercen tage o f B O D rem oval after 7 2 hours o f treatm ent at

the air flow rate of 0.0414 kg m'^s'^ was not that much higher than the BOD removal at 0.0069, 0.0138, 0.0207, 0.0276, and 0.0345 kg m ' V ' . For all treatment time (24, 48, 72 hours)

34

I Q
m

1

··

TREATM ENT TIM E (H our) -0.0069kgm-2s-l W S -0.0276kgm-2s-l W S 0.0138kgm-2s-l W S 0.0345kgm-2s-l W S -0.0207kg m-2s-l W S -0.0414kgm-2s-l W S

Figure 5.1: %BOÜ 5 Removal o f at varied air flow rates vs. treatment time at a fixed liquid flow rate
o f 5.5 kg m ^s '

35

the BOD removal did not change significantly when the air flow rate was increased beyond 0.0138 kg m'^s"' as can be seen in Figure-5.2.

From Appendix A, for seeding at 0, 24, and 48 hours and, at 0.0069 kg m'^s'* air flow rate (Run 4), the percentage of BOD removal after 72 hours o f treatment was 80%. When the air flow rate was increased to 0.0345 kg m'^s'* (Run
8

), the percentage o f BOD removal only

increased to 93.2%. When the air flow rate was further increased to 0.0414 kg m'^s'' (Run 9), the percentage o f BOD removal only increased to 94.7%. When evaluating Appendix A, it is observed that for all the other runs at different amounts o f seeding, the percentage o f the BOD removal at the air flow rate o f 0.0414 kg m'^s'' is generally not that much higher than the percentage o f the BOD removal at the air flow rates 0.0138 and 0.0069 kg m '^s'\

The oxygen transfer rate from air to water in the packed column aerator decreased when the dissolved oxygen concentration in the liquid increased. Once the dissolved oxygen concentration in the wastewater was close to saturation, the oxygen transfer rate from air to liquid became very small regardless o f the air flow rate. Since the saturated dissolved oxygen concentration in the wastewater is rather small ( at 20 °C is 9.09 mg/1), the oxygen transfer from air to liquid was not significantly improved when the air flow rate was increased to 0.0414 kg m '^s'\ As a result, the percentage o f BOD removal at 0.0414 kg m'^s'' was not that much significantly higher than the percentage o f BOD removal at 0.0138 and 0.0069kg m'^s"'. Therefore, to save energy and cost, the air flow rate should be set at 0.0138 kg m'^s'* for this experimental set-up to get an acceptable BOD removal.

36

100

I

80

i

20

0

0.0069

0.0138

0.0207

0.0276

0.0345

0.0414

AIRFLOW RATE (kgm^ s'') HR. -72 HR

Figure 5.2: % BOD 5 removal vs. air flow rate at liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m-2,,-l 's

5.2 - Effect of Liquid Flow Rate on BOD Removal The effect o f the liquid flow rate on the BOD removal o f wastewater containing EG was also investigated. The experiments with liquid flow rates o f 5.5, 11, 16.5, and 27.5 kg m'^s'*,

while keeping the air flowrate constant at 0.0069 kg m'^s"' were carried out. The data obtained are plotted Figure-5.3. The BOD removal was reduced by 30% with liquid rate for a short treatment time (24 or 48 hours), this removal may be due to a lower concentration o f dissolved oxygen (DO) in water, which was necessary for the oxidation o f organic material under an aerobic treatment. Aeration rate must be adequate to provide a sufficient DO concentration to

37

fulfil the BOD requirements o f the waste. Therefore, keeping the air fiowrate constant and increasing liquid fiowrate resulted in the decrease o f BOD removal. On the other hand,

increasing the air fiowrate and keeping the liquid fiowrate constant resulted in a higher percent o f BOD removal. However at longer treatment time, i.e., 72 hrs, the effect o f liquid rate on the BOD removal became moderate with a decrease o f 10% in the BOD removal, when liquid rate was increased from at 5.5 to 27.5 kg m'^s'' as can be seen in Figure 5.4.

100

<
6

^

60

50
40

8 P3

0

24

48

72

TREATM ENT TIME (Hours) 5.5kg m-2s-1 ·11kg m-2s-1 16.5kg m-2s-1 " · --27.5kg m-2s-1

Figure 5.3; % BOD; removal at varied liquid flow rates vs. treatment time at a fixed air flow rate of 0.0069 kg m'^s'

38

100

80

0

60 -

1
D
O
00

50-40 4
30

20 10
0 45.5 11 16.5

41 0 22
27.5

LIQUID FLOW RATE Kg m

s'

0 HR

24 HR

·48 HR

·72 HR
2 -I

Figure 5.4: %BOD; removal at varied liquid flow rates with a fixed air flow rate o f 0.0069 kg m

s

5.3 Effect of Seeding on BOD Removal The effect o f seeding on the BOD removal o f wastewater was evaluated by running the experiments with different amounts o f seeding. The experimental values for the percentage o f BOD removal affected by the different amounts o f seeding are plotted in Figure-5.5.

A theoretical assumption can be made that the percentage o f BOD removal will increase as the amount o f seeding increases. This assumption is based on the fact that seeding is done to ensure that enough microorganisms are present in the wastewater in order to completely oxidize the organic material. It is expected that for low amount o f seeding, the percentage o f

39

BOD removal will be low. At a low amount seeding, the amount o f microorganisms in the wastewater might not he sufficient for the oxidation o f organic matter, which will result in a low percentage o f BOD removal. It is expected that for a high amount o f seeding, the percentage o f BOD removal will he high. Since the number o f microorganisms present in the wastewater will he sufficient for the oxidation o f the organic matter.

It was expected that the percentage o f B O D removal would he increased when the amount of seeding increases. However, from the evaluation Figure-5.5, it was found that the percentage o f B O D removal did not always increase when the amount o f seeding increased. The B O D 5 removed for initial seeded wastewater sample was about 3 times higher than that o f the unseeded sample as shown in Figure-5.5. Nevertheless additional seeding at 24 and 48 hours o f treatment did not increased the B O D removal significantly. This might he due to the fact that with the initial seeding the amount o f microorganisms in the wastewater was sufficient to oxidize the organic matter, hence additional seeding did not significantly increase the percentage o f B O D removal.

It was also found that when the amount o f the initial seeding was increased to

6

polyseed

capsules, the percentage o f the BOD removal was not that much different than the BOD removal with a lower amount o f initial seeding (2 capsules). When the amount o f seeding was increased, more microoganisms were present in the wastewater sample to oxidize the organic matter. However, when the amount o f microorganisms in the wastewater was already sufficient to oxidize the organic matter, an additional input o f seeding did not significantly increase the biological oxidation o f organic matters in the waste since the organic concentration because a rate limiting factor. Therefore, by adding more seeding material into

40

the wastewater, the percentage o f BOD removals were not significantly higher than when there was no additional seeding since the latter already has a high amount o f microorganisms. In Figure;5.3, seeding at 0 hours in both runs are not showing similar value, it may be due to the uncertainty/error in experiment. Detail information can be seen in Appendix E.

100

90 80

70

60 50

a
S 40 30

20

0

24
T REA T M E N T T (M E ( H o u r s ) No S e e d lin g

48

72

S eed in g at 0 hrs

S eed in g at 0 ,2 4 , and 48, Hrs j

Figure 5.5: % BOD removal at varied amount o f seeding vs. treatment time with fixed air flow rate
0.0069 kg m 's ' and liquid flow rate 5.5 kg m'^s"

41

5.4- Kinetic M odel of BOD Curve The kinetic o f the BOD reaction is in accordance with first order reaction kinetics and can be expressed as follows; [ 1 0 ].

~ = -k L dt Where, L is the concentration (mg/1) o f organic matter at time (t) k is the reaction rate constant By integrating equation (1) on both sides and letting L = Lo at t=0

(14)

L

j ^ = _ k jd t L o

In-- = kt Ln Therefore, the amount of BOD remaining at time t:

L

^ = G -^
o (15)

L = L ^ e-k t The amount o f BOD that had been exerted at any time t equals (i.e. removed):

y=

- L

^i6)

Substituting equation (2) in (3) we get [49]

}

I, (1 - e--!*)
o
42

(17)

From Appendix-A (Run- 8 ), a plot o f the amount o f the BOD 5 remaining versus time produces an exponential decay. The amount o f BOD 5 removal versus time also shows a exponential curve as shown in Figure 5.6.

100
80

60 40

20

24 Time (Hours)

48

72

BOD5 Remaining --A . -- BOD5 Removal

Figure 5.6; Changes in the concentration o f BOD 5 remaining and BOD 5 removal

From Table-5.1, runs 4 to

1 0

at liquid flow rate 5.5 kg

m'V,

and gas flow rate 0.0069,

0.0138, 0.0207, 0.0276, 0.0365, and 0.0414 kg

m'V,

found that, gas flow rate has effect o f

the BOD removal. Therefore, k values are averaged and the averaged k is 0.03 h'* at average temperature "T" 22® C (295 °K). The first order kinetics for the BOD removal o f antifi-eeze can be written as below

y =LQ(l-e-003t)

(18)

43

5.5- Effect of Temperature and Other Parameters on Rate Constant The rate constant (k) was found by taking the slope o f the line o f the logarithmic oxygen utilization (y) versus time (t). A plot o f the logarithmic oxygen utilization versus time (t) can be found in Appendix C, and D, for each o f the eleven runs.

Table 5.1: Rate constant (k) for the BOD removal at different operational conditions

S/No:
1

Run 4 5
6

Rate Constant k ( hr ') 0.0216 0.0244 0.0306 0.0338 0.0363 0.0389 0.0269 0.0294 0.0227 0.0193

Temperature ("C)
2 0

2

18
2 2

3 4 5
6

7
8

2 2

23 24
2 2

9
1 0

7
8

11

2 1

9
1 0

1 2

2 0

13

19

W hen evaluating Table 5.1, it was observed, that rate constants vary considerably at each S/No: The rate constants o f S/No: 3 to
8

are higher than for S/No: 1 ,2 ,9 , and 10.

44

This can be explained by the fact that a different runs EG may be not properly mixed in tank, or in other words, the EG used for the runs were collected from a tank that is not mixed. If the EG is not properly mixed, the EG in the water are not equally distributed. Therefore, it is possible that the concentration of the EG in the water used for S/No: 1 , 2 , 9 , and 10, will not have the same concentration o f EG in the water used for S/No: 3 to
8

, since the sample was

collected at different times. This can be the one cause, that's why the rate constant for S/No: 3 to
8

are significantly higher than most o f the rate constant for S/No: 1 , 2 , 9 , and 10. Therefore

the rate constant depends on the concentration o f EG used in water.

In other hand, some rate constant in S/No: 1 , 2 , 9 , and 10 are different, the rate constant o f S/No: 1 and 9 are slightly higher than the others S/No. It may be the result o f an increase in temperature. The temperature o f EG wastewater for all the runs was maintained at 20°C, however the temperatures o f the wastewater for some o f the runs were lower or higher than 20*^C. For example, the temperature for S/No:
6

was 24°C, which caused its rate constant to be

higher than the others rate eonstants for S/No: 3 to 8 . Similarly, it can be seen in Table 5.1 that some o f the rate constant are higher than others; therefore, temperature affects the rate constant.

45

6

. CONCLUSION AND RECOMENDATIONS

6.1 Conclusion The experimental values showed that the percentage o f BOD removal did not increase significantly when the air flow rate was increased beyond 0.0138 kg m'^s ' It was also found that the BOD removal at a high air flow rate o f 0.0414 kg m'^s'Vwas not significantly higher than the low air flow rates o f 0.0069 and 0.0138 kg m'^s"'. Therefore, the flow of 0.0138 kg m'^s'* was sufficient for a packed bed column aerator.

It was found that the percentage o f BOD removal decreased when liquid fiowrate was increased, for 24 hours treatment. However, the decrease in the BOD removal was subdued with longer treatment time, i.e., 72 hours.

The experimental values showed that the percentage o f BOD removal did not always increase when the amount o f seeding was increased. Additional seeding at 24 hour and 48 hours did not enhance the percentage of BOD removal significantly. Initial seeding was adequate for the treatment o f EG.

46

6.2 Recommendations

1)

The temperature o f the wastewater in the experimental setup was controlled by the use o f a eooling coil that was put in the storage wastewater tank. It was very difficult to continuously monitor the temperature manually during the entire run o f 72 hours. An automatic temperature control should be used to maintain the constant temperature o f the wastewater.

2)

The glass collars around the cap o f the bottle were not always covered with water. An over cap should always be use to prevent evaporation o f the water seal during incubation.

47

7. REFERENCES

[1]

Nitschke, L., Wagner, H., Metzner, G., Wilk, A., and Huber, L., 1996. Biological treatment o f wastewater containing glycol fro m de-icing agents. Water Res. Vol. 30, N o.3, pp 644 - 648.

[2]

Dawyer, D., and Tiedje J., 1983. Degradation o f ethylene glycol and polyethylene glycol by methanogenic consortia. Applied Environ. Microbial. Vol. 46, pp 185-190.

[3]

Verschueren, K., 1983. Handbook o f environmental data on organic chemicals. Van Nostrand Rienhold, NY. Vol. II, pp 647-649.

[4]

Chinn, H., 1993. Chemical economics handbooks, product review, ethylene glycol. SRI International: NY, 652.4000A-652.4001P.

[5]

CPI product profiles. 1996. Ethylene glycols (mono, di, tripethylene glycols); Camford information system; Don Mills, Ontario.

[6 ]

Miller, L., 1979. Wastewater treatment. Report No. PB80-109119, Franklin Research Centre: Philadelphia, pp 35-40.

[7]

Dohanyos, M. Zabranska, J. and Gran, P., 1988. Anaerobic breakdown, In Aerobic
48

digestion Process, 5*'' International Symposium on Anaerobic Digestion, Bologna, Italy, pp 287-294.

[8 ]

Drinan, E., 2001. Water & wastewater treatment: A guide fo r the non engineering

professional. Tech; Publishing Company, Inc, Pennsylvania, pp 133-137.

[9]

Lenore, S., Arnold, E., and Andrew, D., Standard methods fo r the examination o f water and wastewater. 2000. 19* Edition. McGraw-Hill, Section 5-2 - 5-9.

[10]

Tchobanoglous, G., 1991. Wastewater engineering: treatment, disposal, and reuse. 3 "^^ Edidtion, Boston: McGraw- Hill, pp 139-145.

[11]

Wastewater engineering treatment and reuse., 2003. By M etcalf and Eddy 4* Edition 10-12, 890-930, 930-940, 1608-1621.

[1 2 ]

http:// www.swicg.org/trickling filter

[13]

Wolfgang, S., and Wolfgang, G., 2001. Particle size distribution in ejfluent o f trickiling filters and humus tanks. Water Res. Vol.35, No. 16, pp 3993-3997.

49

,[1 4 ]

Burton,

L.,

Frankl

and

Tchobanoglous.

G.,

1991.

Wastewater

treatment

disposal and reuse. 3

Edition, McGraw Hill Inc, pp 403-429.

[15]

Renzo, D., 1981. Pollution control technology fo r industrial wastewater, Noyes Data Corporation, USA. pp 356-403.

[16]

Giuseppe, A., Luigi, M., Francessco, P., and Arturo, P., 1997. Rotating biological contactor system fo r the treatment o f wastewater from small communities. Water Science Tech. Vol. 35, No. 6 , pp 109-118.

[17]

Wesley, E., 1989. Industrial water pollution control, 3'^'^ Edition McGraw-Hill Inc, pp 188-203.

. [18]

Pereira, N., and Wang, L., 1986. Handbook o f environmental engineering biological treatment process. The Human Press Inc, New Jersey Vol.3, pp 366-435.

[19]

http ://www. rotating biological contact

[20]

Water environment federation: 2000. Aerobic growth reactors, A special edition by aerobic fixed growth reactors task force o f the WEE under the direction o f municipal subcommittee o f the technical practice committee.

50

[21]

Nemerow, N., 1978. Industrial water pollution. Addison-W esely Publishing Company, Inc. pp 142-146.

[2 2 ]

http://www.envirocircle.com/feature/ cetp icass.asp

[23]

Guyer, H., 1998. Industrial processes and waste stream management, P' NY; John Wiley & Sons, pp 139-168.

Edition,

[24]

James.V., 1971. Water treatment. CRC Press: Cleveland, pp 281-290.

[25]

http://www.swbic.org / env-engr/collectonsitetreat/ onsite.

[26]

Arceivala, J., 1981. Wastewater treatment and disposal, 2"^ edition, UMl, Bell and Howell Company Michigan, pp 741-752.

[27]

Treybal, R.E., 1980. Mass transfer operation. 3^ Edition. McGraw Hill Toronto, pp 187-263.

[28]

Ciaccio, L., 1972. Water and wastewater pollution handbook. Dekker Inc, New York: Vol. 3. pp 132-137.

Edition. Marcel

[29]

Means, L., and Anderson, J., 1981. Comparâow o f fiv e different methods fo r measuring biodegradability in aqueous environments. Water, air soil pollut. Vol. 16, pp. 301-315. 51

[30]

Waggy, T., Conway, A., Hansen, L., and Blessing, L., 1994. Comparison o f 20-d BOD closed bottle biodégradation tests. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. V ol.13, pp 1277-1280.

[31]

Boatman, J., Cunningham, L.,

and Ziegler, A.,

1986. Aerobic degradation

Environ.Toxicol. Chem. Vol.5, pp 233- 243.

[32]

Evans, H., and David, J., 1

9

7

4

.

o / mo u o -

d i- , and triethylene

glycol in river waters under controlled laboratory conditions. Water Res. Vol. 8 , pp. 97-100.

[33]

Charles, S., James, W., Gordon, C., and Kathleen, R., 2000. Fate, effect and potential environmental risks o f ethylene glycol: a review. Chemosphere Vol. 43, pp 377-383.

[34]

McGahey, C., and Bouwer, J., 1992. Biodégradation o f ethylene glycol in simulated subsurface environments. Water Sci. Technol. Vol. 26 (1/2), pp 41-49.

[35]

Klecka, M., Carpenter, L., and Landenberger, D., 1993. Biodégradation o f aircraft deicing fluids in soil at low temperatures. Eco Toxicol. Env. Safety Vol. 25, pp 280-295.

[36]

Dwyer, F., and Tiedje, M., 1983. Degradation o f ethylene glycol and polyethylene glycol by methanogenic consortia. Appl. Environ. Micor. pp 185-190.

52

[37]

Kameya, T., Mrayama, T., Urano, K., and Kitano, M., 1995. Biodégradation ranks o f priority organic compounds under anaerobic conditions. Sci. Tot. Environ. Vol. 170, pp 43-51.

[38]

Howard, 1991. Handbook o f environmental degradation rates, vol. 11. Lewis Publishers, Chelsea, Ml.

[39]

John, M., Stewart, Sanjoy, K., Bhattacharya, Richard, L., Madura, Stephen, H., and Cressend, S., 1995. Anaerobic treatability o f selected organic toxixants in

petrochemical wastes. ^a ï.B .Q sV ci\2 9 , No. 12, pp 2730-2738.

[40]

Angela, B., Tissa, I., Megan, U., and Rlsanna, L., 2002. Biodégradation o f propylene glycol and associated hydrodynamic effect in sand. Wat. Res. Vol. 36, pp 1707- 1714.

[41]

Dietrick, B., Dean, A., and Joe, M., 1999. Evaluation o f methylene blue and riboflavin fo r the photosenstized degradation o f ethylene glycol. Environment International, Vol, 25, No. 8 . pp 953- 959.

[42]

Minoru, N., Tsuyishi, M., and Naoto, T., 1997. Enzymatic degradation o f polyethylene terephalate copolymers with aliphatic dicaroxylic acids and / or poly ( Ethylene glycol). Eur. Polym. Vol.33 N o.10-12, pp 1701-1705.

[43]

Wen. K. S., John A. L., and Iraj, Z., 1998. Biological fluidized bed treatment o f ethylene and propylene glycols. Wat. Sci. Tech. Vol. 38, No. 4-5, pp 145-153.

53

[44]

Schoenberg. T., Veltman. S., and Switzenbanum. M., 2001. Kinetic o f anaerobic degradation o f glycol based type-1 aircraft deicing fluids. Biodégradation Vol 12, pp 59-68.

[45]

Dietrick, B., Dean, A., and Joe, M., 1999. Degradation o f ethylene glycol in photo fentons systems. Wat. Res. Vol 34, pp 2346-2354.

[46]

Dietrick, B., Dean, A., and Joe, M., 2001. Degradation o f ethylene glycol using fe n to n ' s reagent and UV. Chemosphere Vol 45, pp 101-108.

[47]

Curi, K., 1980. Theory and practice o f biological wastewater treatment. Sijthoff and N oordhoff International Publisher, Netherlands, pp 5-10.

[48]

Vesilind, P., Peirce, J., and Weiner, R., 1994. Environmental engineering._ 3"^^ Edition. Butterworth-Heinemann. Toronto, pp 68-95.

[49]

Droste, R., 1997. Theory and practice o f water and wastewater treatment. John Willey & Sons, Inc New York., pp 201-235.

[50]

Lewis, K., and Whitman, C., 1984. Principal o f gas absorption. Journal Industrial and Engineering Chemistry. Vol. 16, pp 1215-1220.

54

[51]

Hegbie, R., 1965. The rate o f absorption o f pure gas into a still liquid during short periods o f exposure. Transaction American Institute o f Industrial Chemistry, Vol: 31, pp 365-366.

[52]

Dancwerts, V., 1951. Significant o f liquid film coefficient in gas absorption. Journal Industrial Engineering Chemistry,. Vol. 2, pp 1460-1465.

[53]

Winkler, A., 1981. Biological treatment o f wastewater. Willey & Sons Inc, pp 84-89.

Edition, Toronto: John

[54]

Seader, D., 1998. Separation process principes. Sons, pp 97- 99.

Edition. Toronto: John Wiley &

[55]

Conner, J., and Eckenfelder W., 1961. Biological waste treatment. Pergamon Press, N.Y. pp 188-195.

[56]

Kline, J., and McClintock, A., 1953. Describing uncertainties in single-sample experiments, Mech.Eng., January 1953, pp. 3-8.

55

A P P E N D IX -A Summary of Experimental data: Table A-I Run-1: 0.0069 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

air flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0-hour, with 5.5 kg
DOi DO2 B2

-2^-1

liquid flow rate
B O D s ave ABOD5 %BODs

BOD5

Seeding

(mg/L)
8.5
8 .6

(mg/L)
2 .4
2 .6

(mg/L)
9 .4

(mg/L)
9.1

(mg/L) 82.85
8 1 .4 2

(mg/L) 82.13

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

2

24

9 .0 9.1

6 .4

9 .4

9.1

32.85
3 7 .1 4

34.99

4 7 .1 4

57.39

0

6 .2

3

48

9.3 9 .2

7 .3 7.1 7 .5 7 .7

9 .4

9.1

2 4 .2 8 2 5 .7 1

2 4 .9 9

5 7 .1 4

6 9 .5 7

0

4

72

9 .0 9.1

9 .4

9.1

1 7 .1 4 15.71

1 6 .4 2

6 5 .7 1

80.01

0

56

Table A-2

Run-2: 0.0069 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

-2 ,, -l air flow rate, 6 Capsules at 0-hour, with liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m'^^s

DOi

DO2

B2

BODs

B O D s , ave

ABODs

% BODs

Seeding

(mg/L)
8 .6

(mg/L) 3.1
2 .9

(mg/L) 9.1

(mg/L)
8 .9

(mg/L) 75.71 74.28

(mg/L) 74.99

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 6

8 .3

2

24

8 .9

7.4 7.3 7.5 7.7
8 .6 8.5

9.1

8 .9

18.57
2 2 .8 5

20.71

5 4 .2 8

7 2 .3 8

0

9.1 3 48
9 .2

9.1

8 .9

2 1 .4 2

1 8 .5 6

5 6 .4 3

7 5 .2 5

0

9.0 4 72 9.3 9.1

15.71 9.1
8 .9 7 .4 1


1 2 .8 5 6 2 .1 4 8 2 .8 6
0

5.71

57

Table A 3

Run-3: 0.0069 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

-2,,-l air flow rate, without seeding, with liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m'"^s
DOi DO2 Bi B2 BOD5 B O D s ave ABODs %BODs

Seeding

(mg/L) 9.2
9.3

(mg/L)
3.8 3 .9 4 .7 4 .6 5.3 5 .4 5 .6 5 .9

(mg/L)
9.3

(mg/L) 9.2

(mg/L)
7 5 .7 1

(mg/L) 75.64

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 0

75.57
9 .3 9 .2 6 5 .4 2 65 .3 5

2

24

9 .4 9 .3

10.29

20.23

0

65.28
9.3 9 .2 5 9 .0 2

3

48

9.6 9.6

58.98

1 6 .7 4

25 .01

0

58.42
9.3 9 .2 5 4 .1 4 5 2 .7 1 5 3 .1 4 2 2 .5 0

4

72

9 .5 9.5

29.36

0

58

Table A-4

Run-4: 0.0069 kg Time Sample (hours) 1 0

2-1 air flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0 ,2 4 , and 48 hour, with liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m'^s
-

DOi

DO2

Bi

B:

BODs

B O D s , ave

ABODs

% BODs

Seeding

(mg/L) 8.8 8.7

(mg/L) 3.8 3.9 6.7 6.6 7.1 7.1 7.5 7.6

(mg/L) 9.6

(mg/L) 9.3

(mg/L) 66.71 63.57

(mg/L) 65.14

(mg/L) 0

(mg/L) 0 2

2

24

9.4 8.9

9.6

9.3

34.28 28.57

31.42

33.72

51.71

2

3

48

8.8 9.0

9.6

9.3

20.0 22.42

21.21

43.93

67.41

2

4

72

8.8 8.9

9.6

9.3

14.7 11.85

13.27

51.87

79.62

59

Table A-5

Run-5: 0.0138 kg m'^s'` air flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0, 24 and 48 - hour, with liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m "V' Time Sample (hours)
1 0 DOi DO2 Bi B] BODs B O D s, ave ABODs % BODs

Seeding

(mg/L)
8 .2

(mg/L)
2 .5 2 .4 6 .9 6 .4 8.5 8 .4 7 .9 8 .4

(mg/L)
9.3

(mg/L)
9.0

(mg/L)
7 8 .2 7 9 .8

(mg/L)
7 9 .0 6

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

8.3 2 24 9 .0
8 .8

9.3

9 .0

2 7 .4 2 3 1 .7 1

2 9 .5 8

4 9 .4 8

6 2 .3 2

2

3

48

10.1 9 .9

9.3

9 .0

1 9 .2 8 1 8 .4 2

18 .8 5

60 .2 1

7 6 .1 2

2

4

72

9.3 9 .4

9.3

9.0

1 5.71 1 0 .0 0

12 .8 5

6 9 .0 6

87 .3 1

60

Table A-6

Run-6: 0.0207 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

air flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0, 24, and 48 -hour, with liquid flow rate of 5.5 kg m
DOi DO2 Bi Bz BODs B O D s , ave

-2

- 1

ABODs

%BODs

Seeding

(mg/L)
8.5
8 .6

(mg/L) 4.8
4 .6

(mg/L) 8.9

(mg/L)
8 .6

(mg/L)
4 9 .1 4 5 3 .1 4

(mg/L)
5 1 .1 4

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

2

24

9.0
9.1

6.9
7.1

8.9

8 .6

26.28
2 4 .8 5

25.56

25.58

57.92

2

3

48

9.8 9.6

8 .6

8.9

8 .6

14.01 1 3 .5 7

1 3 .7 9

37.35

7 3 .1 8

2

8 .4 9 .2 9.1

4

72

9.8
9 .7

8.9

8 .6

5 .0

5 .4

4 5 .7 4

89.41

5.8

61

Table A-7

Run-7: 0.0276 kg m'^s* air flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0, 24, and 48-hour, with liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m'^ ^ s Time Sample (hours)
1 0

-2,,-I

DOi

DO2

Bi

B2

BODs

B O D s , ave

ABODs

% BODs

Seeding

(mg/L)
8 .5

(mg/L) 3.1 3.4 7.9 7.8
8 .8

(mg/L) 9.1

(mg/L)
8 .9

(mg/L) 74.14 68.71

(mg/L) 71.42

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

8.4
2

24

1 0 .2

9.1

8 .9

2 9 .8 5

31.99

3 9 .4 3

64.12

2

10.4 3 48 10.4
1 0 .1

34.14 9.1
8 .9

20.14
1 6 .2 8

18.21

5 3 .2 1

7 4 .5 1

2

8 .8

4

72

9.5 9.4

8.4
8 .6

9.1

8 .9

5 .7 2

5.71

65.71

92.01

5.71

62

Table A-8

Run-8: 0.0345 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

-2,,-l air flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0, 24, and 48-hour. with liquid flow rate o f 5.5 kg m'^^s

DOi

DO2

Bz

BOD5

B O D s ave

ABODs

% BODs

Seeding

(mg/L)
9 .5 9.3

(mg/L)
7.1 7 .2 7.2 7.3

(mg/L)
9 .4

(mg/L)
9.2

(mg/L)
8 4 .1 4

(mg/L)
8 0 .2 8

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

8028
9 .4

2

24

9 .2 9 .2

9.2

2 6 .7 1 2 5 .5 7

2&14

5 4 .1 4

65 .4 1

2

3

48

9.3 9 .4

8.4
8 .2

9 .4

9 .2

1 1 .2 8 1 5 .1 4

13.21

6 7 .0 7

79^2

2

4

72

9 .7

8 .8

9 .4

9.2

5 .1 9 5.71

5 .4 7

7A88

9 3 .2 1

9.6

8.9

63

Table A-9

Run-9: 0.0414 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

2,,-l air flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0 ,2 4 , and 48-hour, with liquid flow rate 5.5 kg m'^^s
DOi DO2 Bz BODs B O D s , ave ABODs %BODs

Seeding

(mg/L)
10.1

(mg/L)
6.5

(mg/L)
9 .0

(mg/L) 8.9

(mg/L)
4 8 .8 5

(mg/L)
4 0 .9 2

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

9.8
2 24 1 0 .2 10.1 3 48

6.9
8.5
8 .6

310
9 .0

8.9

2 1 .5 7 19.0

2Ü28

2 0 .6 4

6 7.41

2

9.6
9.5

8.9
8 .8

9 .0

8.9

8 j7 155

156

3135

8122

2

4

72

9.2
9.3

8.9
8 .8

9 .0

8.9

1.71 3 .1 4

142

3151

94.71

64

Table A-10

Run-10: 5.5 kg m'^s'* liquid flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0,24, and 48 -hour, with 0.0069 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

-2,,-l

air flow rate
ABODs %BODs

DOi

DO2

Bi

B2

BODs

B O D 5 , ave

Seeding

(mg/L) 8.5
8 .6

(mg/L)
3.5 3.3
6 .6

(mg/L)
9.5

(mg/L)
9.3

(mg/L)
6 8 .5 7

(mg/L)
70 .7 1

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

7Z85
9.5 9.3

2

24

9.1 9 .2

3Z85 31.42

3 2 .1 3

3 8 .5 8

5 4 .5 6

2

6 .8

3

48

9 .4

7 .9 7 .8

9.5

9.3

1 8 .5 7 1 7 .1 4

17.85

5186

7 4 .7 4

2

9.2
4 72 9 .4 9.3

8.4
8.5

9.5

9.3

1 1 .4 2

&99

6 0 .7 2

8 5 j^

8J7

65

T able A l l

Run-11:

11 kg Time

liquid flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0 ,2 4 , and 48-hour, with 0.0069 kg
DOi DOz Bi Bz BODs

-2,,-l air flow rate
B O D s , ave ABODs % BODs

Seeding

Sample (hours)
1 0

(mg/L) 8.5 8.3

(mg/L)
3.3 3 .4 6.1 6 .4 7.8 7.5

(mg/L)
9 .4

(mg/L) 9.2

(mg/L)
7 1 .4 2 6 7 .1 4

(mg/L) 6928

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

2

24

9.2
9.3

9 .4

9.2

4 1 .4 2

3 9 .9 9

2929

4 2 .2 7

2

3&57
9 .4

3

48

9.8
9 .4

9.2

2185 2428

2L56

4 5 .7 2

6199

2

4

72

9 .2 9.3

8.4
8 .6

9 .4

9.2

8J7
7 .1 4

185

6 1 .4 3

8 8 .6 6

2

66

Table A-12

Run-12: 16.5 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

2-1 liquid flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0, 24, and 48 -hour, with 0.0069 kg m'^s`` air flow rate

DOi

DO2

Bi

B2

BODs

B O D 5, ave

ABODs

% BODs

Seeding

(mg/L)
8 .8

(mg/L)
4 .5 4 .6 6 .9 6 .9 7.1 7 .2 8 .5 8.3

(mg/L)
9.3

(mg/L)
8 .9

(mg/L)
5 5 .7 1 5L 42

(m gL )
5156

(m gL )
0

(m gL )
0 2

8 .6

2

24

9.3 9 .4

9.3

8 .9

28 3 0 .0 8

2928

2428

4133

2

3

48

9.1 9 .3

9.3

8 .9

2185 2428

2156

3 0 .0

56 .01

2

4

72

9 .5 9 .4

9.3

8 .9

8J7 1 0.0

928

4 4 .2 8

8167

2

67

Table A-13

Run-13: 27.5 kg Time Sample (hours)
1 0

liquid flow rate, 2 Capsules at 0,24, and 48-hour with 0.0069 kg
DOi DOz Bi Bz BODs

-

2-1

air flow rate
ABODs % BODs

B O D s , ave

Seeding

(mg/L)
8 .4
8 .6

(mg/L)
4 .4 4.3
6 .2

(mg/L)
9.5

(mg/L)
9.3

(mg/L)
5 4 .2 8 5 8 .5 7

(mg/L) 5642

(mg/L)
0

(mg/L)
0 2

2

24

8 .8

9.5

9 .3

34.28
3 5 .7 1

3499

2 1 .4 3

37.98

2

9.0
3 48 9.3 9 .4 4 72

6.3 7 .0 7 .2
8 .6

9.5

9.3

3 0 .0 2 8 .5 7

2928

2 7 .1 4

4 8 .1 0

2

9.8
9 .7

9 .5

9.3

14.21 1 1 .4 2

1181

4 3 .6 1

77.29

2

8 .7

68

APPENDIX- B

Calculating Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)

Where Di = Dissolved oxygen o f dilution sample immediately after preparation, mg/1 D2 = =Dissolved oxygen o f dilution sample after 5 days incubation at 20°C, mg/1 P = Decimal volumetric fraction o f sample used B] = Dissolved oxygen of the seed control before incubation, mg/1 B%= Dissolved oxygen of the seed control after incubation, m g /1 f = Ratio o f the seed in the sample to seed in control( %seed in Di / % o f seed in Bi) The experimental values for all thirteen runs can be found in Appendix A. A sample calculation for Run 4 is given below [55].

At 0 hour o f treatment, the BOD 4 values for Run 4 o f the two trials can be calculated bv equation (at:

B 0 D 5 ,i= rr8.8-3.8Vf9.6-9.3t11 0.07

- 66.71

69

BODs,2=

iï8.7 -3.9U9.6-9.3)11
0.0 7

= 63.57

Therefore the average B O D s can then be calculated as:

A t 24 hours o f treatment, the BODs values for the two trials can be calculated bv:

B O D s.i=

rr9 .4 - 6 .7 Vr 9 . 6 - 9 . 3 n i 0 .0 7

= 3 4 .2 8

B O D s,2=

rr8 . 9 -

6 .6

V r 9 .6 - 9 . 3 n i

= 2 8 .5 7

0.0 7

70

It 48 hours o f treatment, the BODs values for the two trials can be calculated bv:

)0 D 5.i=

rf8.8-7.lW9.6-9.3111
0.07

= 20.0

30D s,2=

rf9.0-7.lW 9.6-9.3l1l 0.07

= 22.42

B O D , ,, , = 3 2 ± |? i ^ = 21.21

\ t 72 hours o f treatment, the BODi values for the two trials can be calculated bv:

B0D5,i=

rf8.8-7.51-f9.6-9.3111

= 14.7

0.07

B 0D s,2=

rf8.9-7.8W 9.6-9.3111

= 11.85

0.07

b o d ,...

= 13.27

71

Therefore, the BODsavg at 0, 24, 48, and 72 hours o f treatment are 65.14, 31.42, 21.21, and 13.27 mg/1 respectively. The calculated BODsavg for each o f the runs are listed in Appendix A.

The percentage o f BOD removal for Run 4 is calculated below:

At 0 Hours, the percentage of BOD removal is 0 mg/1.

At 24 hours, the percentage o f BOD removal is:

% B O D Rem oval =

31.42)m g/l qq ^ 65.14m g/l

5

^.7 %

At 48 hours, the percentage o f BOD removal is:

%BOD Re moval =

21.21)m g/l 65.14m g/l

_ 67.4%

At 72 hours, the percentage o f BOD removal is:

%BOD Re moval = (65-14 13.27)m g/l 65.14m g/l

_ 79.62%

72

\PPE N D IX -C

Calculating Rate Constant usine Log - Differential Method

Referring to Appendix A. We know that (from Equation 15): log (L) = log ( L q e""^^ )

Log (L) = -kt (log e) + log ( L q ) Slope = -k loge k = - slope / loge k = - slope / 0.4343

Using Excel, a linear regression equation can be found. The slope o f the equation is equivalent to the rate constant k, Therefore from Figure D .l, Rate Constant Run 1, the equation was found to be y - -0.0089X + 1.8462 k = 0.0089 / 0.4343
k = 0 . 0 2 0 4 / hr

Similarly, all the rate constant can be found in Run 1 to Run 13 in rate constant figures.

73

A P P E N D IX -D Graphs o f Log (BODs ) vs. Treatment time.

2 C apsules at 0 hours with 5.5 kg.m- s- liquid flow rate @ 0.0069 kg.m-"s-' air flow rate

2
1.8

o 1.6 O m O ) 1.4
1.2
1 0 24 Tim e ( H our) 48 72 V = -0.0089X + 1.8462 = 0.9366



Log BOD

Linear (Log BOD )

Figure D .l - Rate Constant For Run -1

6 C apsules at 0 hours with 5.5 kg.m- s- liquid flow rate ! 0.0069 kg.m- s- air flow rate

2
1.8

O 1.6 O CD O ) 1.4
1.2
1

-0.0098X+ 1.7439 = 0.8227____

0

24 Tim e( H our)

48

72



Log BOD

Linear(Log BOD]

F igure D.2 - R ate C onstant F o r R un -2

74

N o S e e d i n g w i t h 5 .5 k g .m - ^ s - ' i i q u i d f l o w r a t e @ 0 .0 0 6 9 k g .m - ^ s - ' a i r f l o w r a t e

1.85

1.75

y = -0.002x+ 1.867 = 0.9974

0


24

Tim e ( H our)

48

72

Log BOD

" Linear (Log BOD ]

Figure D.3 - Rate Constant For Run -3

2 Capsuies at 0,24 and 48 hours with 5.5 kg.m- s- iiquid flow rate @ 0.0069 kg.m-^s-' air fiow rate

2
1.6
1.4

1.2

y = -0.0094x + 1.7761

1 0
24
Time (Hour)

48

72

Log BOD removal --

Linear (Log BOD removal)

F igure D.4 - R ate C onstant F o r R un -4

75

2 C a p s u l e s a t 0 ,2 4 , a n d 4 8 h o u r s w i t h 5 .5 k g . m - s - l i q u i d f l o w r a t e

I 0.0138 kg.m -^s-' a ir flow rate

2
1.9
1.8

8 :::
g 1.4 " 1.3

1.2 1.1
1

y-=-Q704Q 6)M ^8464

R^079466-----

0
P 

24
Log BOD removal

Time ( Hour)

48

72

Linear (Log BOD removal) ]

Figure D.5 - Rate Constant For Run -5

2 Capsuies at 0,24 and 48 hours with 5.5 kg.m-^s-' liquid flow rate @ 0.0207 kg.m-^s-' air flow rate

O )
0.9 0.7 0.5
V = -0.0133x+ 1.7259

= 0.9917

0


24
Log BOD

Time (Hour)

48

72

Linear (Log BOD ]

F igure D.6 - R ate C onstant F o r R un -6

76

2 C a p s u l e s a t 0 ,2 4 a n d 4 8 h o u r s w i t h 5 .5 k g . m - s - l i q u i d f i o w r a t e @ 0 .0 2 7 6 k g . m - ^ s - ' a i r f l o w r a t e

1.9

1.7

Q 1.3 S
1.1 0.9 0.7 0.5
V = -0.0147x+ 1.8739

1.5

= 0.9802

0


24

Time ( Hour)

48

72

Log BOD

Linear (Log BOD )

F igure D.7 - R ate C onstant F o r R un -7

2 Capsules at 0,24 and 48 hours with 5.5 kg.m- s- iiquid fiow rate @ 0.0345 kg.m-^s-^ air flow rate

2.1

1.5

O )
0.9 0.7 0.5 y = -0.0158x+ 1.8614 R'' = 0.9914

0


24
Log BOD

Time (Hour)

48

72

Linear (Log BOD )

F igure D.8 - R ate C onstant F o r R un -8

77

2 C a p s u l e s a t 0 ,2 4 a n d 4 8 h o u r s w i t h 5 . 5 k g .m -^ s -^ l i q u i d f l o w r a t e @ 0 .0 4 1 4 k g . m - ^ s - ' a i r f l o w r a t e

1.8

1.6 1.4

O §

1.2

1 0.8

0.6 0.4 0.2

y = -0.0169x+ 1.6664

0


24
Log BOD

Time ( Hour)

48

72

Linear (Log BOD )

Figure'D.9 - Rate Constant For Run -9

2 Capsules at 0,24 and 48 hours with 5.5 kg.m- s- liquid flow rate @ 0.0069 kg.m-^s-' air fiow rate

1.7 Q 1.5 O C O 1.3

3
0.9 0.7 0.5
0 
24

V= -0.0117x+ 1.822 = 0.9939

Time (Hour)

48

72

Log BOD

Linear (Log BOD )

F igure D IO - R ate C onstant F o r R un -10

78

2 C a p s u l e s a t 0 ,2 4 a n d 4 8 h o u r s w i t h 11 k g . m - s - li q u i d f io w r a t e

0.0069 kg.m-^s-^ air fiow rate 2.1

1.9 1.7

o 1.5 o 1.3 O ) o
1.1

0.9 0.7 0.5
0

_^zO.Q128x + 1.8868. = 0.9639____ 24  48 72

Time ( Hour)

Log BOD

·Linear (Log BOD ) I

Figure D .l l - Rate Constant For Run -11

2 Capsuies at 0,24 and 48 hours with 16.5 kg.m-^s- iiquid fiow rate @ 0.0069 kg.m-^s-^ air flow rate

O O m O ) 5 0.9
0.7 0.5
0

y = -0.0099x+ 1.7398

= 0.9446

24  Log BOD

Time( Hour)

48

72

Linear (Log BOD )

F igure D.12 - R ate C onstant F o r R un -12

79

2 C a p s u l e s a t 0 ,2 4 a n d 4 8 h o u r s w i t h 2 7 .5 k g . m - s - li q u i d f lo w r a t e @ 0 .0 0 6 9 k g . m - ^ s - ' a i r f l o w r a t e

d* 16 O
CO

1.4 y = -0.0084x+ 1.7684 = 0.9345 0  24 48 72

Tim e ( H our)

Log BOD

Linear (Log BOD )

Figure D.13 - Rate Constant For Run -- 13

80

IPPENDIX-E

îrrors Analysis: n performing experiments, errors play a factor in obtaining good results. The errors in experimental data are th o se^ cto rs that are always vague to some extent and carry some unount o f uncertainty. A reasonable definition o f experimental uncertainty/error may be aken as the possible value the error may have. This uncertainty/error may have a great leal depending on the circumstances o f the experiment.

Uncontrollable errors associated with the standardized BOD5 test, temperature, air, and liquid flow rate fluctuations with the experimental apparatus are factors that contributed to the discrepancies among the experiments. For the present project the measurement of dissolved oxygen was very crucial in determining the biological oxygen demand. The dissolved oxygen meter (YSl Incorporated Ohio, USA, Model 52-C) must be turn on 10 minutes to stabilize before taking the measurement, otherwise there would be discrepancies among the DO readings. The membrane o f the dissolved oxygen probe should be perfectly flat, smooth and without leaks.

The Kline and Me Clintok method is used for estimating uncertainty in experimental results [56]:

BOD = (DO, - D O J x f

(19)

81

8

BOD

A'  f

®BOD --

ax,

-C O DO,

( ÔBOD \ ax,
-CO D O ,

(20)

Where,

co^qq is uncertainty in result, cO pQ and,cOgQ^ are the uncertainties in the

independent variables, X\ and X 2 are independent variables (Xi=DOi, X 2 -D O 2 ).

By using data from Appendix A.

® D 0,

--0.1

®D0 2 --0 . 1 æ oD Sx, æ oD Sx, -1 4

--1 4

®BOD ={( i 4 xc0 doJ + ( - 1 4 X o o J f =1.98

®BOD =1.98 = 2.0

BODs= 82.1 + 2.0

Therefore, the expected uncertainty/errors in this project was approximately ± 2.0 mg/L.

82

