ADMISSION CONTROL AND BANDWIDTH ALLOCATION FOR CLASSA TRAFFIC IN RPR NETWORKS

By Zhenning Xu Bachelor of Computer Engineering, Shenyang, China, 1997

A thesis submitted to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in Computer Networks

Computer Networks Program Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004

© Copyright by Zhenning Xu, 2004

ry erso n

PROPERTYOF WWVSflCITY LIBRARY

UMI Number: EC52991

All rights reserved INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is d e p en d en t upon the quality of the copy subm itted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignm ent can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a com plete m anuscript and there are missing pages, th e s e will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be rem oved, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52991 Copyright 2008 by ProQ uest LLC All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United S ta te s Code.

ProQ uest LLC 789 E ast E isenhow er Parkway P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Author's Declaration:

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. Signature: I further authorize Ryerson UKiversity to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. Signature:

u

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all tiie persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

m

Admission Control and Bandwidth Allocation for ClassA traffic in RPR Networks, Master of Applied Science, 2004, Zhenning Xu, Graduate Program in Computer Networks, Ryerson University

Abstract

In this thesis, we study the admission control and bandwidth allocation methods for classA traffic in RPR networks. First, we investigate the performance of classA traffic under the current RPR protocol. The simulation results show that RPR networks can support low-delay classA traffic even if the networks are congested with classB and classC traffic. The low-delay performance, however, is subject to the condition that the load of classA traffic must be properly controlled. Consequently, an admission control mechanism must be used for classA traffic. In this thesis, several admission control algorithms are studied. They are the Simple Sum algorithm, the Measured Sum algorithm, and the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm. The simulation results show that the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm is the most suitable to use as the admission control mechanism for classA traffic. The admission control mechanism makes admission decision based on the available bandwidth allocated to the classA traffic. The existing RPR standard assumes the bandwidth allocated for classA traffic at each node is fixed. The fixed bandwidth allocation introduces inflexibility and inefficient use of bandwidth for classA traffic. In this thesis, three bandwidth allocation algorithms are proposed to dynamically allocate bandwidth for classA traffic. These algorithms have different levels of complexity and can be applied to different traffic environments. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithms improve the bandwidth efficiency of the RPR networks. The proposed algorithms are also readily integrated with the existing Internet Quality of Services (QoS) paradigms such as Diffserv and RSVP services.

IV

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisor, Prof. N. W. Ma, for his intellectual support, constructive comments, and the time he spent with me. His great lectures on computer networks have immensely helped me on both this thesis and my career life. Special thanks to Steven Zhang and Gary Yip for their always available professional advices and willingness to help. Also, many thanks to Arseny Taranenko for his technical help on OPNET. And finally, I am again grateful to my girlfriend Anne Luo, for all of her support and encouragement.

Table of Contents
Abstract Acknowledgement iv v

Chapter 1: Introduction: 1.1 Introduction to RPR networks 1.2 Quality of Service (QoS) 1.2.1 Traffic policing 1.2.2 Traffic Shaping 1.2.3 Admission Control 1.3 QoS Support in the Internet 1.3.1 Integrated Services (IntServ) 1.3.2 Differentiated Service (DiffServ) 1.4 ClassA traffic in RPR network 1.4.1 SubclassAO & SubclassA1 1.4.2 Transmit Operation 1.4.3 Inefficient bandwidth usage problem for classA traffic in RPR network 1.5 Organization of the Thesis 1 2 2 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 5 6 7

Chapter 2:The Study of Traffic Shaping and Admission Control for ClassA Traffic 2.1 Traffic Shaping 2.1.1 Token bucket implementation 2.1.2 Simulation study on traffic shaper 2.1.3 Conclusion of the simulation study 2.2. Admission Control 2.2.1 Simple Sum 2.2.2 Measured Sum 2.2.3 Simulation study on the performance of classA traffic 2.2.4 Equivalent Bandwidth 2.2.4.1 Equivalent bandwidth derivation 2.2.4.2 Simulation result using Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm 2.3 Conclusion 8 8 9 12 12 13 14 14 19 20 21 23

VI

Chapter 3 Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Using Common Bandwidth Pool 3.1 Introduction 3.2 Definitions 3.3 State Tables 3.3.1 Transmit State Table 3.3.2 Transit State Table 3.4 Packet Formats 3.5 Basic Reservation Algorithm 3.5.1 Admission control procedure at the source node 3.5.2 Admission control procedure for the transit nodes 3.5.3 Admission control procedure at the destination node 3.5.4 Reservation release for the traffic flow 3.6 Retransmission mechanism 3.6.1 Retransmission mechanism at the source node 3.6.2 Retransmission mechanism at the transit node 3.6.2.1 Reception of a Bandwidth Request packet 3.6.2.2 Reception of a ReleaseReservation packet 3.6.2.3 Reception of a reply packet 3.6.3 Retransmission mechanism at the destination node 3.6.4 Retransmission Examples 3.6.5 Guaranteed Bandwidth Hole problem 3.6.6 General Observations for the basic reservation algorithm 3.7 Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm 3.7.1 Reservation Adjustment 3.7.2 Identification of Flow Candidate 3.7.3 Examples 3.7.3.1 Reservation release example for Procedure 2 3.7.3.2 Reservation release example for Procedure 4 3.7.4 General observations of using Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm 3.8 Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm 3.8.1 Introduction to the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm 3.8.2 Reservation setup process in the Hop-by-Hop reservation algorithm 3.8.3 Reservation release process in the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm Vll 25 26 27 27 27 28 29 30 33 35 36 37 37 37 37 38 38 38 38 41 42 42 44 44 45 46 46 47 48 48 50 53

3.8.4 General Observations 3.9 Simulations and Results 3.10 Conclusion Chapter 4 Integration with DiffServ and RSVP 4.1 Integration with Differentiated Services (DiffServ) 4.2 Integration with Integrated Services (IntServ) Conclusion and Future works References

54 54 66

68 69 72 73

vm

List of Figures
Figure 1.1 RPR MAC datapaths Figure 2.1 Token bucket algorithm used in MAC shaper Figure 2.2 RPR Network Topology Figure 2.3 Throughput of classA traffic shaped by classA shaper Figure 2.4 Throughput of classC traffic shaped by downstream shaper Figure 2.5 Throughputs of traffics shaped by classA and downstream shaper Figure 2.6 Delay with two classA traffic flows (Simple Sum) Figure 2.7 Delay performance with multiple flows Figure 2.8 High priority transit buffer size in the transit nodes Figure 2.9 Delay performance with multiple traffic sources in one node Figure 2.10 Delay performance with Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm Figure 3.1 Packet Format for dynamic bandwidth allocation method Figure 3.2 RPR Network Setup Figure 3.3 Delay performance with dynamic bandwidth allocation method Figure 3.4 High priority transit buffer sizes in transit nodes Figure 3.5 Available common bandwidth pool size with Basic Reservation Algorithm Figure 3.6 Guaranteed bandwidth hole problem with Basic Reservation Algorithm Figure 3.7 Available common bandwidth size with Flow-based Reservation Algorithm Figure 3.8 Inefficient bandwidth allocation problem with Basic Reservation Algorithm Figure 3.9 Inefficient bandwidth allocation problem solved by Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm Figure 3.10/Figure 3.11 Available common bandwidth pool sizes with Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm Figure 4.1 Interworking between DiffServ and RPR reservations Figure 4.2 Interworking between IntServ and RPR reservations 65 68 71 63 62 60 59 58 5 9 10 10 11 12 15 17 17 19 23 28 39 56 57

IX

List of Tables
Table 2.1 Traffic parameters for multiple traffic flows in the network Table 2.2 Traffic parameters for multiple traffic sources in one node Table 2.3 Traffic parameters for multiple traffic flows in one node with equivalent bandwidth algorithm Table 3.1 Traffic flow parameters used for Flow-base Reservation Algorithm examples Table 3.2 Traffic parameters for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.1 Table 3.3 Class C traffic parameters used for simulation case 3.1 Table 3.4 Traffic parameters for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.2 Table 3.5 traffic parameters used for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.3 Table 3.6 traffic parameters for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.5 Table 3.7 Traffic parameters for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.7 46 55 55 58 59 61 64 22 16 18

List of Flowcharts
Flowchart 3.1 Basic Reservation Algorithm at the source node Flowchart 3.2 Admission control procedure at the transit node Flowchart 3.3 Flow-based Reservation Algorithm at the source node Flowchart 3.4 Hop-by-hop Reservation Algothrim at the source node 31 34 43 51

XI

List of Abbreviations
RPR: Resilient Packet Ring MAC: Media Access Control ClassA: High Priority Traffic ClassB: Media Priority Traffic ClassC: Low Priority Traffic PTQ: Primary Transit Queue STQ: Secondary Transit Queue CIR: Committed Information Rate EIR: Excess Information Rate QoS: Quality of Service IntServ: Integrated Services DiffServ: Differentiated Services RSVP: Resource Reservation Protocol ISP: Internet Service Provider CAM: Operational and Maintenance (procedure) GOS: Grade of Service FIFO: First In First Out ACK: Acknowledgement (packet) NAK: Negative Acknowledgement (packet) B(? *: Guaranteed bandwidth at node k 'Bagj - Available guaranteed bandwidth at node k Bc_k- Common bandwidth pool size at node k B acj - Available common bandwidth pool size at node k ^LCj- Common bandwidth reserved by local sources at node k C, : Equivalent bandwidth of flow i AC,: Requested bandwidth Crc- Common bandwidth to be released BU(n): Bandwidth usage on hop n RH(n): Requested common bandwidth for reservation/release on hop n DC(n): Difference between bandwidth usage and guaranteed bandwidth on hop n

XU

Chapter 1 Introduction
It is important to guarantee the high priority traffic (classA traffic) in Resilient Packet Ring (RPR) networks to achieve low end-to-end delay performance. This thesis studies several admission control algorithms to support low delay performance for high priority traffic. Our simulation study shows that with proper control of classA traffic load, the delay o f classA traffic can be kept low, even though the network is congested with lower priority traffic (classB and classC traffic). The study also shows that most o f the delay is introduced at the source node. Once the traffic enters the network, the delay is minimum and is almost equal to the propagation delay. Admission Control for classA traffic in RPR networks must be supported by the bandwidth reservation procedure, which is in turn, affected by how the bandwidth is allocated to each node in the network. In the current RPR draft, no reservation algorithm or bandwidth allocation method is proposed. One approach to deal with bandwidth allocation is to allocate fixed bandwidth to each node. However, our study has shown that fixed bandwidth allocation is not efficient. In this thesis, we propose a dynamic bandwidth allocation method using the concept o f common-bandwidth pool. Three reservation algorithms based on the dynamic bandwidth allocation method are then proposed and studied. Our results show that the proposed algorithms can provide better bandwidth efficiency than the fixed bandwidth allocation method. In the rest of this chapter, the basic concepts in RPR networks, classA traffic and Quality o f Service (QoS) will be briefly covered.

1.1 Introduction to RPR networks Resilient Packet Rings (RPR) are data optimized networks, with at least two counter rotating fiber ringlets in which multiple nodes share the bandwidth without the requirement o f provisioning circuits [1]. For the best-effort traffic, the nodes on the ring can automatically negotiate for bandwidth among themselves via the Fairness Algorithm. Each station has a topology map o f the ring and can send data on the optimal ringlet towards its destination.

RPR layer 2 technologies define a media access control (MAC) protocol that decides the manner in which available bandwidth can be utilized by transmitting stations. The MAC protocol also decides how a station would react to congestion on the media. Finally, the MAC regulates access to the media by buffering and prioritizing packets onto the media. The RPR MAC supports three service classes: 1) High priority traffic (class A): The traffic class requires Committed Information Rate (CIR) services. The service supports guaranteed bandwidth and low latency/jitter applications. Voice, video, and circuit emulation applications can utilize this class of traffic. Within this class, the MAC uses two subclasses, sub cl assAO for reserved bandwidth and subclass A 1 for reclaimable bandwidth. 2) Medium priority traffic (class B): This traffic class requires CIR services that have less stringent (but still bounded) jitter/latency requirements. Any usages above the CIR are considered EIR (excess information rate) and are subject to the fairness algorithm. Bursty data applications can utilize this traffic class. 3) Low priority traffic (class C): This traffic class is used for best- effort traffic. Nodes negotiate to receive a fair share of the ring capacity using the RPR fairness algorithm. Most of the Internet traffic belongs to this traffic class.

1.2 Quality of Service (QoS) Networks today are carrying more data than ever in the form of bandwidth-intensive, real-time voice, video, and data, which stretch network capability and resources. So QoS issue plays more and more important role to provide better service to the selected network traffic. The primary goals of QoS are to provide better and more predictable network service by providing dedicated bandwidth, controlled jitter and latency, and improved loss characteristics. To achieve these goals, several QoS tools have been developed. These tools include traffic policing, traffic shaping [4] and admission control [6]. Below, we will briefly describe these QoS tools.

1.2.1 Traffic policing Traffic policing allows a network to control the rate of traffic transmitted or received on a network interface. A traffic policer monitors the traffic flow and tries to detect non

conforming packets. A packet is deemed non-conforming if the transmission of that packet means that the traffic flow violates the agreed policing parameters such as peak data rate, mean data rate and maximum burst length. A non-conforming packet is either discarded or marked. Marked packets are usually treated with lower QoS.

1.2.2 T raffic Shaping Traffic shaping is similar to traffic policing, except that traffic shaping uses a buffer to store the nonconforming packets, thus the nonconforming packets are delayed, instead o f being discarded or marked. If the buffer is full, however, nonconforming packets will also be discarded. Traffic shaping is used extensively to control the traffic flow at the MAC layer of the RPR network.

1.2.3 Adm ission C ontrol Admission control is the procedure for the network to determine if it should admit a new flow. A flow is usually characterized by a given source/destination pair. By computing or measuring existing traffic load, the network decides if there are sufficient resources to meet the QoS required by the new connection. The role of any admission control algorithm is to ensure that admittance of a new flow into a resource constrained network does not violate service commitments made by the network to the existing flows.

1.3 QoS S upport in the Internet Two models are used in the Internet for QoS support. They are the Integated Services [2] and Differentiated Services models [3]. These models are briefly described below.

1.3.1 In tegrated Serviees (IntServ); In the IntServ model, routers treat each flow separately according to its required QoS. Each flow makes its own reservation using the Resource Reservation protocol (RSVP). The admission control mechanism in each router interworks with RSVP to decide if a flow is admitted or not. While such architecture provides required QoS per flow, it has significant scalability problems. Routers must process per-flow reservation requests, and must keep many per-flow states. This will place a lot o f burden on routers, especially those routers in the Internet Service Provider (ISP) networks, where there

can be tens of thousands of flows.

'

1.3.2 Differentiated Service (DiffServ): DiffServ is another approach to provide QoS in the Internet. DiffServ requires no perflow admission control or signaling, and routers do not maintain any per-flow state. In DiffServ, a potentially large number of traffic flows are merged into a much fewer number of traffic classes. Each traffic class receives different QoS service; while flows in each class receive the same QoS service. Because DiffServ only needs to deal with a small number of traffic classes, it is more scalable than IntServ. DiffServ is widely used in today's ISP networks. Note that RPR also only define a small number of service classes (three), thus, its structure in QoS support is very similar to DiffServ.

1.4 ClassA traffic in RPR network:

1.4.1 SubclassAO & SubclassAl: As it is mentioned before, classA service provides guaranteed bandwidth and supports low latency/jitter applications. Internai to the MAC, classA traffic is partitioned into two subclasses: subclassAO and subclassAl. The bandwidth reserved for subclassAO cannot be used (reclaimed) by traffic from other classes even it is not used by subclassAO traffic; while unused bandwidth reserved for subclassAl can be reclaimed by traffic from classB and classC. Note that the MAC client has no notion of subclassAO and subclassAl services. The client just passes the classA traffic to the MAC layer. It is up to the MAC layer to assign traffic to different subclasses. The amount of bandwidth that can be allocated for subclassAl depends on the sizes of the secondary transit queues (STQ) in the RPR nodes (STQ will be discussed next). In this thesis, subclassAO and subclassAl are combined and treated as a single classA class since both subclasses receive essentially the same QoS treatment. Distinguishing subclassAO and subclassAl only has the effect on the performance of classB and classC traffic.

1.4.2 Transmit Operation A RPR node has to deal with both the transmit traffic and the transit traffic. The transmit traffic is the traffic originated from the local MAC clients; while the transit traffic is received from the upstream RPR node. At the MAC layer, four traffic shapers are used to shape the traffic from four different transmit traffic classes (subclassAO, subclassAl, class B and class C). The shaped traffic is then selected to enter the stage queue based on the priorities o f the traffic classes. SubclassAO has the highest priority; subclassAl has the second highest priority; while class C has the lowest priority. The RPR MAC datapaths are shown in Figure 1.1.

C lien t

MAC control sublayer
addM ac

j-hMlSgSSi

fairn ess control

Medium access control

rate m onitors checker

.! r

I Ur

PTC & STO

L egend:

shAO: subclassA O sh a p e r sh D : dow nstream sh a p e r shM ; MAC control sh a p e r

shA l : su b c lassA l s h a p e r shF : fa irn ess eligible s h a p e r

shB ; ClassB s h a p e r sh l: idle s h a p e r

normal frame path

< alternative control
fram e path

MAC Internal information p ath

Figure 1.1 RPR MAC datapaths [ 1] The client labels its frames as classA, classB and classC. The classA client adds classA flows (addA) through subclassAO or subclassAl shaper. The classB client adds classB flows (addB) through classB or fairness eligible shaper. The classC client adds classC flows (addC) through fairness eligible shaper. Fairness eligible traffic (ClassB-ElR and classC) is controlled by fairness eligible shaper and uses the available bandwidth from the unallocated bandwidth and unused reclaimable bandwidth. All unreserved transmit and transit traffic

flows are shaped by the downstream shaper. Accepted client traffic is placed in the stage queue. The transmit traffic at the stage queue has to compete with the transit traffic for the access of the outgoing link of the node. The transit traffic is buffered in the transit queue. There are two types of MAC transit queueing designs: single-queue and dual-queue. The single-queue design places all transit traffic into a primary transit queue (PTQ), and sends the frames in the queue in the first-infirst-out sequence. The dual-queue design places classA transit traffic into a higherprecedence PTQ, and classB and classC transit traffic into a lower-precedence secondary transit queue (STQ). In this thesis, we will only consider the dual-queue operation for it provides the best QoS support for classA traffic. In the dual-queue operation, the traffic at the PTQ (the transit classA traffic) has the highest priority for transmission. If there is no traffic waiting for the transmission at the PTQ, then the traffic from the stage queue is selected for transmission. Finally, traffic at the STQ will be transmitted if there is no traffic waiting at both PTQ and the stage queue. For the purpose in this thesis, the brief description of the transmission operation above is sufficient. The exact transmission operation, however, is more complicated. It is because the transmission operation also has to deal with the transmission of control frames and the prevention of buffer overflow of the STQ. See the RPR document for more details [ 1].

1.4.3 Inefficient bandwidth usage problem for classA traffic in RPR network In the RPR draft, no bandwidth allocation method is proposed. The bandwidth allocated for classA traffic at each node is assumed to be assigned statically through some Operational and Maintenance (0AM) procedures. Once the reserved bandwidth is assigned to an individual node, the node can only use that much bandwidth to transmit classA traffic even though there is more bandwidth available. It makes the bandwidth usage for classA traffic in RPR network not very efficient. This is especially true for subclassAO type because the bandwidth allocated for this class of traffic, in general, cannot be spatially reused. We will investigate the inefficient bandwidth usage problem in more detail in Chapter 3 and propose three bandwidth reservation algorithms to tackle the problem.

1.5 Organization of the Thesis The rest of the thesis is organized as follows. In Chapter 2, the effect o f traffic shaping in the control o f traffic throughput at the RPR MAC layer is studied. In the same chapter, three admission control algorithms are introduced and their effectiveness on the delay performance o f classA traffic is investigated. In Chapter 3, we introduce the concept o f common-bandwidth pool, where RPR nodes can dynamically reserve bandwidth firom it. The introduction of common-bandwidth pool makes the bandwidth usage in RPR networks more efficient. Three bandwidth reservation algorithms are proposed to dynamically reserve and release bandwidth firom the pool. They are: Basic Reservation Algorithm, Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm and Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm. Finally, Chapter 4 describes the integration o f the proposed dynamic bandwidth allocation algorithm with DiffServ and RSVP.

Chapter 2 The Study of Traffic Shaping and Admission Control for ClassA Traffic
To ensure that the classA traffic has low delay and jitter, admission control and traffic shaping must be used in the RPR networks. Admission control is used to make sure that the network resources are not oversubscribed; while traffic shaping regulates the input traffic to prevent temporarily traffic overload. In this chapter, we first introduce the traffic shaping method used in the RPR MAC layer and study the effect of traffic shaping on regulating the traffic load in the RPR network. We then focus on the admission control. Three admission control algorithms are introduced and their effects on the delay performance of classA traffic are investigated.

2.1 Traffic Shaping
2.1.1 Token bucket implementation The traffic shapers used at the RPR MAC layer is implemented based on the token bucket algorithm [1]. In the token bucket algorithm, a frame can only be transmitted if there are enough credits (tokens) in the bucket. Every time a frame is transmitted, corresponding number of tokens (decsize) will be removed from the bucket. If there are not enough tokens in the bucket upon the arrival of a frame, then the frame cannot be transmitted until more tokens become available. Tokens are added to the bucket at a constant rate, which is the average rate at which frames are transmitted. This is accomplished by incrementing the credits in the token bucket by incsize at a constant interval. If no frames are waiting in the transmit buffer, then tokens begin accumulating in the bucket. The tokens stop accumulating when the bucket is full. The number o f tokens at a given time represents the maximum number of bytes that can be sent. It is never possible for the number of credits to become negative after subtracting the number of bytes in the transmitted frame. Figure 2.1 illustrates how the credits are accumulated and depleted.

credits wühdnw n when no ore wakng"

omdMkna
whenno&eme#

iowRn»!
send indbalion w hhdw /n when credits reduced betow taw imil

increasing Ane Figure 2.1 Token bucket algorithm used in MAC shaper [1] There are two threshold values in the token bucket: loLimit threshold and hiLimit threshold. The loLimit threshold is used to generate a rate-limiting indication when the number o f credits goes below the loLimit threshold. When no frames are ready for transmission, credits are reduced to loLimit (if currently higher than loLimit) and can accumulate to no more than loLimit. The loLimit is set to MTU_S1ZE (maximum transmission unit size) in order to allow the transmission of a full sized frame without reducing the credits below zero. The hiLimit threshold limits the positive credits, to avoid overflow. When frames are ready for transmission (and are being blocked by transmit traffic), credits can accumulate to no more than hiLimit. The hiLimit value should be at least MTU SIZE. If it is set to exactly MTU SIZE, no bursts are allowed.

2.1.2 Simulation study on traffic shaper In this section, simulation results are presented to illustrate the effect of using the traffic shaper to regulate the traffic in the RPR network. In all the simulation scenarios, a RPR network with 20 nodes shown in figure 2.2 is used. Each of the nodes is a RPR router. The nodes are connected by dual-ring. The link rate for the transmission link is 622Mbps. And the distance between two adjacent nodes is 14 kilometers.

nii<le_20

nedc_19

node_lB

i>odt_17

node_16

node_15

jiDde_14

nodt_13

nod«_12

n o d e _ tl :

Figure 2.2: RPR Network Topology

Case 2.1: Traffic regulation using classA shaper In this case, classA traffic shaper at nodcl is set to support data rate o f 200 Mbps. Nodcl, however, generates 300 Mbps of classA traffic to nodeS. The simulation result in Figure 2.3 shows that the shaper has successfully reduced the throughput to 200 Mbps. The excess traffic is queued in the transmit buffer and got delayed. Once the buffer is full, the excess traffic was dropped by the MAC layer.
mode l of Logical Network
T r a ff ic Sourced - Outer R ing<bits/seo> 225,000,000 snn non non 175,non non 150 non non % 6*75 non non îimn,nnn,nnn 75 non non 50 000,000 25,000,000 ,

AAAA A A AAA A A A AAA AA A A A AA A A AA

Os

.02s

.04s

.OGs

Tiae

Figure 2.3: Throughput of classA traffic shaped by classA shaper

Case 2.2: Traffic regulation using downstream shaper Downstream shaper is used to regulate the traffic that does not make any bandwidth reservation. In this simulation scenario, the reserved traffic bandwidth for classA traffic is set

10

to 200Mbps. Consequently; the downstream shaper is set to support the rate of the unreserved bandwidth, which is (622Mbps - 200Mbps) = 422Mbps. If node! generates 600Mbps of classC traffic, then only 422Mbps of traffic should be sent. Figure 2.4 shows the simulation result on this scenario.
node l of Logical Network
T r a f f i c S ourced - O uter s i n g 0 > its /s e c } SOD, 000^000

«intij onn^ (inn

300,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 .........

?on 0 0 0 - non

y nn nnn Afin

1

1 ,0 2 s

'

-1 04s

'

1 .0 6 s

^

1 .0 8 s

'

Figure 2.4: Throughput of classC traffic shaped by downstream shaper

Case 2.3 : Traffic regulation with both classA and downstream shapers In this case, the reserved rate for classA traffic is set to 100Mbps, so the unreserved rate is 522Mbps. Here, 300Mbps of classA traffic is generated fi-om nodel to nodeS; 600Mbps of class C traffic from node 2 to node 9; and 600Mbps o f class C traffic from nodeS to node 10, Because the link rate is 622Mbps, congestion happens in this scenario. Figure 2.5 shows the simulation results. From the results, we can see that the throughput of classA traffic is restricted to 100Mbps. Node2 and NodeS fairly share the unreserved bandwidth o f 522Mbps through the use o f the RPR fairness algorithm. Consequently, they both send about 260Mbps o f ClassC traffic.

11

RPR.Traffic Sourced - Outer Ring (bIts/sec)
- a f f i c s o u r c e d - o u t e r R in g ( b i t s / s e c ) n o d e_ l

" iso, 000,000
100, 000,000
5 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0

A - _A- -- A

A

-- A

-- A 

m A m.«A

tra ffic

s o u r c e d - o u t e r R in g ( b i t s / s e c )

node_3

5 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 4 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 3 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0

200 , 000 , 000
1 0 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 0 ----------------------------------------------------------------t r a f f i c s o u r c e d - o u t e r R in g ( b i t s / s e c ) 3 0 0 ,0 0 0 , 000 node_2

200 , 000 , 000 100, 000, 000

Figure 2.5 Throughputs of traffics shaped by classA and downstream shaper

2.1.3 Conclusion of the simulation study The simulation results presented in the previous section demonstrate the effectiveness o f using traffic shapers to control the traffic load. The results also demonstrate that, with the control of the rate of classA shaper, the bandwidth allocated for classA traffic can be properly reserved and excessive classA traffic is discarded by the shaper. To prevent large portion of classA traffic to be discarded, admission control must be implemented to keep the admitted traffic load below the bandwidth allocated to classA. In the next section, we will study the admission control process.

2.2. Admission Control
In admission control, a traffic flow must first get admitted before the data traffic is allowed to enter the network. The admission decision is usually based on the available network resources and made at the management node or traffic nodes along the path from the source to the destination. There are many admission control algorithms in the literature. Here,

12

we will study the bandwidth admission control algorithms [6,7]. These algorithms have the advantage o f being relatively simple and thus suitable to be implemented in h i^-sp eed environments such as RPR. In bandwidth admission control, a certain amount of reservable bandwidth is allocated to each traffic class. A flow of a given traffic class that wants to get admitted will first provide a set o f traffic parameters to the admission control process to assist the process to make the admission decision. The traffic parameters usually include average data rate, peak data rate and maximum burst length. Based on the parameters, the admission process calculates the request bandwidth of the flow and adds this value to the current traffic load. If the sum is less than the reservable bandwidth, then the flow is admitted. There are two basic approaches to bandwidth admission control. The first, which we call the parameter-based approach, make the admission control decision simply based on the traffic parameters provided by the source. Once the admission control algorithm admits the flow, it uses these parameters to calculate the new traffic load. An example of parameter-based approach is Simple Sum. The second, the measurement-based approach, does not rely on the traffic parameter provided by the source to compute the traffic load, but instead, uses the measurement o f actual traffic load in making a d m issio n decisions. An example of measurement-based approach is Measured Sum.

2.2.1 Simple Sum: Simple Sum admission control algorithm simply ensures that the sum of all the requested bandwidth does not exceed the reservable bandwidth. Let v be the sum o f the reserved bandwidth, u be the reservable bandwidth and r° be the requested bandwidth for flow a. The Simple Sum admission control admits the new flow as long as it satisfied the following condition: v+ r° <u (2.1)

Simple Sum admission method is easy to implement. But it has some drawbacks. Firstly, because it merely relies on the traffic parameter provided by the source. If the source reserves more bandwidth than it actually uses, the unused bandwidth cannot be reassign to other flows. Secondly, equation 2.1 does not account for the multiplexing effect on the outgoing link. Consequently, the requested bandwidth may be too large if peak data rate is used and too small if average data rate is used.

13

2.2.2 Measured Sum Whereas the "Simple Sum" algorithm merely uses the sum of the requested bandwidths of the existing flows to compute the current traffic load, the "Measured Sum" algorithm measures the current load on the link, and makes the admission control based on the measurement and the requesting bandwidth of the new flow. Let v ' be the measured load on the link and a be the user-defined utilization target. The Measured Sum algorithm admits the new flow, a, with the requested bandwidth of r` ' if the following condition is satisfied:
V'+

<a.u

(2.2)

Here we define a utilization target value, a, to keep the link utilization below a certain level to prevent a large delay variation at high link utilization. The Measured Sum algorithm measures the average network load, v ', periodically. The choice of the length of the measured period, S, has a significant impact on the performance of the algorithm. If S is too short, the value measured may not truly reflect the actual traffic load of the overall traffic. If S is too large, the measurement process may not react fast enough to the change o f traffic load. In either case, a wrong admission decision may result. Consequently, the accuracy of the load measurement depends on the proper choice o f S.

2.2.3 Simulation study on the performance of classA traffic In this section, we study the performance of classA traffic using the two admission control algorithms discussed above. The simulation is based on the topology shown in Figure 2.2. The study focuses on the end-to-end delay performance since classA service is designed to provide services to delay-sensitive traffic. The main components in the end-to-end delay here are propagation delay and queueing delay. To calculate the propagation delay in the simulated RPR network, we note that the distance between two adjacent nodes is 14 kilometers, and the light travels inside the optical fiber at the speed of 200,000 kilometers per second. Thus, the propagation delay between two adjacent nodes is 14km/200,000km/sec = 0.07ms. In the simulation, we choose the packet size to be 1500 bytes including the RPR packet header. We use on-off bursty traffic source in the simulation.

Case 2.4: Delay performance with two classA traffic flows In the simulation, two classA traffic flows fi-om nodel to node20 starting at O.OIs are

14

generated. The peak/average rates required by these two flows are 200/100Mbps and 90/45Mbps, respectively. We also generate 600Mbps classC traffic from both nodel and nodc3 to n odel9 to create congestion in the network. Here, the "Simple Sum" algorithm makes the admission control decision based on the average rates of the flows. Figure 2.6 shows the end-to-end delay and the classA queue size at nodel. The end-to-end delay in this simulation is around 28.6ms. The maximum queue size in the trzinsmit buffer of nodel is about 4M bits. Thus, the maximum queueing delay at nodel is about 26.6ms, which contributes the large portion o f the overall delay of 28.6ms. The result can be explained as follows: Since nodel is the source node, the classA transmit traffic is shaped by a classA shaper and experiences substantial delay because of that. Once the traffic gets inside the network, it uses the PTQ and can virtually consume all the bandwidth available (622Mbps), so the delay experienced by the classA traffic is small at the transit node.
, nod«,,a of LofficAi Network p rio ri^ s u f f e r Queujlngr S i t t ( b its )

mmmm 2,000,000 .........

.fAfAfWwWv

riode_20 of Loçic-ii Network

0.4s

0 . 6s

0.8*

Figure2.6: Delay with two classA traffic flows (Simple Sum)

Case 2.5: Delav performance with multiple classA traffic flows In this part, we study the delay performance with multiple traffic flows in the network. The total reservable bandwidth for classA traffic in the network is 210Mbps. Ten nodes generate classA traffic flows and share the reservable bandwidth uniformly, so each has

15

21Mbps. They all start generating traffic flows at O.OIs. The traffic parameters are o f these traffic flows are given in the following table: Peak Rate Nodel-Node20 (classA) Node2-Nodel9 (classA) Node3-Nodel8 (classA) Node4-Nodel8 (classA) Node5-Nodel8 (classA) Node6-Nodel8 (classA) Node?-Node 18 (classA) Node8-Nodel8 (classA) Node9-Nodel8 (classA) 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps ON Period OFF Period Average Rate

Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 20Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 300Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 300Mbps

Node 10-Node 18 (classA) 40Mbps Node 11-Nodel (classC) Nodel 2-Node 1 (classC) 600Mbps 600Mbps

Table 2.1 : Traffic parameters for multiple traJfic flows in the network

Figure 2.7 shows the throughput and delay performances. The simulation results show that the maximum delay is around 115ms. It is much higher than the previous cases. The reason is that the ON state period is longer (O.OIs) and the ClassA shaper rate is much lower (21Mbps) than the previous cases. The longer ON state period causes a longer data queue buildup; and the lower shaper rate means it takes more time for the traffic to be drained out of the transmit queue. We can also take a look at the transit queue size in the transit nodes shown Figure 2.8. The transit buffer in the node is used to store the transit frames which are passing through the node via the ring. From the graph, we can see that the transit buffer size in the transit nodes is only about one packet. It means that once a classA frame enters the network, the queueing delay for the frame experienced at a transit node is small. Most of the delay is introduced by the queueing delay at the source node.

16

a:
n o d e _ l oC L o g i c a l N etw ork P r i o r i t y TjruLSOLi-t S jx f^ e r O ueuing S i z e ( b i t : )

ifsob'.ooo
1 , 000,000

' 500,000

0
^0% % n a d e _ 2 o f L o g i c a l n e tw o rk P r i o r i t y T r a n s m i t S u f f e r Q ueuijia S i z e ( b i t t ) i n g S i z e

Z , 000,000 1,000,000
Delap (te c ) 0. 08
0 . 0 6 ____
node 20 o f L o g i c a l n etw o rk

0. 04
0 . 02

0. D O Delap (sec) O.IS
0 . 10

node_19 a f L o g ic a l n e tw o rk

0. 05

0. 00 ^ ' / ol

0 .2 5 s

0. 5s

0.25s

T iiw >

Os

Figure 2.7: Delay performance with multiple flow s
B u f f e r . O u te r R ing Hi P rio rity T r a n s i t B u f f e r Q u e u in g S iz e ( b i t s )
n o d e _ 0 o f L o g i c a l n e tw o r k Q w te t B in g H i P r i o r i t p T r a n s i t D u f f e r Q u e u in g s i z e ( b i t s )

g

1,250 a, 000 750 . 500 ' 250

I
E m

n o d e _ 9 o f L o g i c a l n e tw o r k O u t e r B i n g H i P r i o r i t p T r a n s i t D u f f e r Q u e u in g S i z e ( b i t s )

a, 500 a, 250 a, 000 750 500 250

II 1! _ a I ; iiJi 1 1 1 I 1 à J f U l U i U L 1 1 1 1 Hi i i j
Osi
0 .2 s 0 .4 s 0. Es

&

.

Time"

Figure 2.8; High priority transit buffer size in the transit nodes

17

Case 2.6: Delav performance with multiple traffic sources in one node In this part, we study the end-to-end delay and the transmit buffer size with multiple traffic sources in one node. In this test, 150Mbps of bandwidth is reserved for the classA traffic at node 1. Ten traffic sources are setup to generate 10 high priority traffic flows to nodc20 at O.OIs. The traffic parameters for the traffic flows by the 10 sources are as the following table: Peak Rate Source 1 Source 2 Source 3 Source 4 Source 5 Source 6 Source 7 Source 8 Source 9 Source 10 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 20Mbps 10Mbps 10Mbps 40Mbps 10Mbps ON Period OFF Period Average Rate 20Mbps 20Mbps 20Mbps 20Mbps 20Mbps 10Mbps 5Mbps 5Mbps 20Mbps 5Mbps

Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (12ms) Exponential (12ms) Exponential (12ms) Exponential (12ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) Exponential (12ms) Exponential (12ms)

Table 2.2: Traffic parameters for multiple traffie sourees in one node

We use the "Simple Sum" admission control method in this case. Because the sum of the average rates requested by the 10 traffic sources is 145Mbps, all these 10 flows are admitted into the network. We also define both nodel 1 and nodel2 to generate 600Mbps (average rate) classC traffic to cause the congestion in the network. Figure 2.9 shows the queue length of the transmit queue at the source node (nodel) and the end-to-end delay of the class A packets.

18

_ , ^

node 1 o f L o q ic iX n etw ork P r i o r i t y T r a n s m it B u f f e r Q ueu in g S iz e ( b i t s }

3,000,000

2,000,000
1 , 000,000

*^de_20 of L o g ic a l network 0.025 0.020 0.015
0.010

0.005
0.000 Os 0 .2 s

0 .4 s

0. 6s

0 .8 s

Tnri'"`

Figure 2.9: Delay performance with multiple traffic sources in one node The result shows that the maximum delay is around 22ms, which is smaller than the 28.6ms maximum delay found in Case 2.4 where there are only two traffic flows. The higher number o f traffic flows introduce a smaller delay because o f the multiplexing effect. Simply summing the average bandwidths of the flows cannot capture the multiplexing effect because the multiple flows' aggregate statistical behavior differs from the sum o f their individual statistical representations. In the next section, we will utilize the concept of Equivalent Bandwidth in the admission control algorithm to make the algorithm compute the traffic load more accurately. 2.2.4 Equivalent Bandwidth High-speed network architectures are capable of supporting a wide range of connections with different bandwidth requirements and traffic characteristics. While this environment provides increased flexibility in supporting various services, its dynamic nature poses difficult traffic control problems when trying to achieve efficient use o f network resources. One such problem is the issue of bandwidth management and allocation. When connections are statistically multiplexed, their aggregate statistical behavior differs from their

19

individual statistical representation. One needs, therefore, to define other metrics to represent the effective bandwidth requirement of an individual connection as well as the total effective bandwidth requirement of connections multiplexed on each link. In this section, the concept of equivalent bandwidth is introduced. By using the equivalent bandwidth, the actual bandwidth requirement of the multiplexed connections can be determined more accurately.

2.2.4.1 Equivalent bandwidth derivation The equivalent bandwidth C(e) of a set of connections multiplexed on a link is defined as the amount of bandwidth required to achieve a desired grade of service (GOS), such as guaranteed delay value or buffer overflow probability, given the offered aggregate bit rate generated by the connections[8]. Here, we measure the GOS by s, which is the probability of the buffer overflow. To calculate the equivalent bandwidth of a single traffic flow, we use the traffic parameters of the traffic source. When a source asks for the permission of connection, it should provide the peak rate (p), the burst period (b), and the utilization (u) which is the fi-action of time when the source is active. We define the maximum of the burst period to be bmax- Reference [6] provides a simple approximation of C(e) by Cs(e): « (:,(;;)== (= I where N is the number of multiplexed connections, and C ,- is the equivalent bandwidth for the i-th connection and is given by the following equation:
_ o * ,(l-K i)P i - Z +

,

(:L3)

-Jt:y

Where a = ln(l/e) and %is the buffer size; pi, bi and U j are the peak rate, burst period and utilization of i-th connection respectively. In RPR node, we use the following equation to determine the maximum buffer size for a single traffic flow: X=bmax(pi-C/) . By substituting equation (2.5) into equation (2.4), we get + - K p , + ^ ( b ^ ( l + u , ) - K Y p,^ (2.5)

20

Where K = ln (l/8)bi(l-U i). Essentially the calculation o f the equivalent bandwidth for multiple traffic flows using equation (2.3) is to sum the equivalent bandwidths for all the traffic flows together. Thus, equation (2.3) uses the same approach as the Simple Sum method does, except that the requested bandwidth o f a flow is equivalent bandwidth of that flow, rather than the average bandwidth. By using equation (2.3), we can simplify the bandwidth reservation algorithms proposed in the next chapter. We have also investigated other methods to calculate the equivalent bandwidth provided in references [7]. The main advantage of equation (2.3) is its computational simplicity. However, by simply summing the equivalent bandwidths of individual flows we overestimate the equivalent bandwidths once the flows are multiplexed. Other methods may be more accurate when we calculate the equivalent bandwidth for a large number o f connections multiplexed over relatively long burst periods. But those methods are more complicated to implement, and their accuracy is not significantly better compared with that from (2.3) when the number of connections in the network is not too large. In RPR network, a node makes the admission control decision based on the equivalent bandwidth calculation for a classA traffic flow using (2.3) and (2.6). Let C(e) be the sum o f the equivalent bandwidths for all the existing flows, Q be the equivalent bandwidth for the coming flow and u be the outgoing link capacity. Then the equivalent bandwidth admission control admits the new flow as long as it satisfies the following condition:
C(e) + C i< u .

(2-7)

Note that equation (2.7) has the same form as equation (2.1) of the Simple Sum algorithm. In the next section, we will show the simulation results using the Equivalent Bandwidth admission control algorithm.

2.2.4.2 Simulation result using the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm Case 2.7: Delav parameters measured using the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm In this case, we use the same simulation setup as in case 2.6. We reserve 150Mbps bandwidth for the classA traffic at node 1. We also have 10 traffic sources to generate 10 classA flows using the same traffic parameters used in case 2.6. The traffic parameters, together with the corresponding equivalent bandwidth, are given in Table 2.3:

21

Start Time Peak Rate

O N Period

OFF Period

Equivalent Bandwidth

Source 1 O.OIs Source 2 0.02s Source 3 0.03s Source 4 0.04s Souree 5 0.05s Source 6 0.06s Source 7 0.07s Source 8 0.08s Source 9 0.09s Source 10 0.10s

40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 40Mbps 20Mbps 10Mbps 10Mbps 40Mbps 10Mbps

Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 25.98Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 25.98Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 25.98Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 25.98Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 25.98Mbps Exponential (10ms) Exponential (10ms) 12.99Mbps Exponential (12ms) Exponential (12ms) 6.49Mbps Exponential (12ms) Exponential (12ms) 6.49Mbps Exponential (3ms) Exponential (3ms) 25.98Mbps

Exponential (12ms) Exponential (12ms) 6.49Mbps

Table 2.3 Traffic parameters for multiple traffic flows in one node with equivalent bandwidth algorithm

With the use of the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm, the source node can only accept 7 traffic flows firom source 1 to source 7, because the sum of equivalent bandwidth for the 7 flows is 149.38Mbps and the source node carmot accept the traffic flow from source 8, source 9 and source 10. Figure 2.10 shows the queue size of the source node and the end-to-end delay.

22

....

Ko

a o d e _ l o f L o g i c a l n e tw o rk P r i o r i t y T r a n s m it B u f f e r Q ueuing S iz e ( B i t s )

aoo^ooQ
700.000 600.000 500.000 400.000 300.000
200.000 100,000
0

u l l J
node_20 o f L o g ic a l n e tw o rk

D elay (sec) 0.008 0.007 0.006 0.005 0.004 0.003
0 002 0.001 0.000 Os

...... -- --a -

h -ill0. Es 0 .0 s

- h

i

0 .2 s

0 .4 s

l.O l T iittt

Figure 2.10 D elay performance with Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm From the figure, we can see that the maximum end-to-end delay in this case is 7.8ms, which is much smaller than the 22ms maximum end-to-end delay introduced by the Simple Sum algorithm in case 2.6. On the other hand, the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm admits a smaller number o f flows. Thus, there is a trade-off between the number of admitted flows and the delay performance. Since classA service is more concerned with the delay/jitter performance. Equivalent bandwidth is a more suitable choice for this type of service. In the rest o f the thesis, the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm will be used as the underlying admission control process.

2.3

Conclusion
In RPR network, it is important to provide high QoS to classA traffic. Here we study

different bandwidth admission control methods to control the classA traffic. From our simulation results, we observed that with the use of bandwidth admission control, the delay performance is usually acceptable. We also observed that most o f the delay is introduced by

23

the classA shaper at the source node. After the data traffic enters the network, the delay in the network is almost the same as the propagation delay. Out of the three admission control algorithms studied, we conclude that the Equivalent Bandwidth algorithm is the most suitable to use for classA admission control process.

24

Chapter 3 Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Using Common Bandwidth Pool
3.1 Introduction
In the RPR standard, the reserved bandwidth for classA traffic at each node is statically assigned. Once the reserved bandwidth is assigned to a node, the node can only use that much bandwidth to transmit classA traffic even though there is more bandwidth available. For instance, consider the case where a network has 11 nodes, and the reserved bandwidth for classA traffic is 100Mbps in the whole network. If we equally assign reserved bandwidth to each node, each node receives 10Mbps bandwidth because only 10 nodes can use any given link at the same time. Based on this assignment, each node can only send maximum 10Mbps classA traffic even if all the other nodes are not using their shares of bandwidth. In this chapter, we will investigate a more efficient method in which bandwidth is dynamically allocated. In this method, two types of bandwidth are defined: guaranteed bandwidth and common bandwidth. The guaranteed bandwidth for classA traffic is pre assigned to each node. Besides an assignment of guaranteed bandwidth to each node, a common-bandwidth pool is created where all the nodes share the bandwidth in the pool. The bandwidth firom the common-bandwidth pool is called common bandwidth. If a node requires more bandwidth than its guaranteed bandwidth, it can send request to reserve the extra bandwidth firom the common-bandwidth pool along the path of the traffic flow. All the nodes along the path must then perform admission control to decide if the request for common bandwidth should be granted. The admission control adopted in this chapter is based on the equivalent bandwidth algorithms covered in Chapter 2. If there is enough available bandwidth firom the common-bandwidth pool to satisfy the request, the request will be granted. The path is successfully setup if all the nodes along the path grant the request. If the available bandwidth from the common-bandwidth pool in any transit node is not enough to grant the request, a negative acknowledgment will be sent back to the source node and the reservation setup fails. After the bandwidth reservation for a flow is successfully set up, the source node can start sending data fi'ames from that flow. In what follows, we will propose and study three bandwidth reservation algorithms for

25

classA traffic based on the equivalent bandwidth calculation. These algorithms are: Basic Reservation Algorithm, Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm and Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm.

3.2 Definitions
In this section, we define some important terms that are associated with the reservation algorithms to be discussed in this chapter. 1) Guaranteed Bandwidth (B^jt); The Guaranteed bandwidth is the bandwidth statically assigned to node k in the RPR network used for classA traffic. 2) Available Guaranteed Bandwidth (B^c_t): The available guaranteed bandwidth indicates how much bandwidth from the guaranteed bandwidth pool is available for a new connection at node k. The initial value for B a g j is the same as Bcjt- Once the node admits a new flow, i, it adjusts the Ba c j value by using: B ag j = max (0, B a g j - C,) (3.1)

Where Cj is the equivalent bandwidth of flow i. When B^c ^ becomes zero, it means no more guaranteed bandwidth left for new connections. 3) The Requested Bandwidth (AC,.): AC; is the bandwidth required from the common bandwidth pool to support the new traffic flow, i, and is carried in the bandwidth request packet to set up the reservation. When the equivalent bandwidth from a new traffic flow is greater than the value B a g j , the source node k calculates the AC; by using: AC,- C, - B^g_a ^ . (3.2)

4) Common-bandwidth pool size (Bc^t); The common-bandwidth pool size specifies the amount of common bandwidth at node k to be shared by all the nodes in the RPR network. 5) Available Common Bandwidth (B a c j )- The available common bandwidth indicates how much bandwidth from the common-bandwidth pool at node k is available for a new connection. The initial value for B^c_t is the same as Be k. Once node k admits a new connection, it adjusts the B^c_k value by using: B^c_* = B^c_a - AC,. (3.3)

26

Note that if

- AC,- is less than zero, the reservation request will be rejected.

6) Released Bandwidth (C/fc): Released bandwidth is calculated at the source node. It indicates how much bandwidth from the common bandwidth pool should be released downstream when the connection is terminated. 7) Total Bandwidth: the "Total Bandwidth" for a node is the sum of the guaranteed bandwidth and the common-bandwidth pool size, B cjt+ B^jt- Total bandwidth is the maximum bandwidth available to node k.

3.3 State Tables
Each node uses two state tables, the transmit state table and transit state table, to record the reservation states of all traffic flows.

3.3.1 Transmit State Table The transmit state table is used by the source node to record the traffic parameters for the locally sourced flows. Every locally sourced flow has one entry in the transmit state table. Each entry contains the following fields: source flow ID, destination address, flow bandwidth, request bandwidth and the flag. Further definitions of these fields are given below.

1) Source flow ID: The source flow ID of a traffic flow uniquely identifies that traffic flow from other traffic flows that have the same source node. 2) Destination address: It records the destination address of the traffic flow. 3) Flow Bandwidth: It records the equivalent bandwidth o f the traffic flow. 4) Request Bandwidth: It records the requested common bandwidth of the flow. 5) Flag: It indicates whether this flow has reserved bandwidth from the commonbandwidth pool. Flag=l indicates that a reservation is made; Flag=0 indicates the opposite of that.

3.3.2 Transit State Table: The transit state table is used to keep track of the transit flows. Every transit flow has one entry in the transit state table. Each entry only contains one field which is the flow ID. The flow ID consists of the MAC address of the source node and the source flow ID. The

27

flow ID uniquely identifies a flow at the transit node. Note that the transit state table does not record the request bandwidth of a flow. The common bandwidth reservation and release are only controlled by the source node. This characteristic allows a RPR node to handle tens of thousands of flows without requiring significant storage and processing.

3.4 Packet Formats
The reservation algorithm defines 5 control packet types: bandwidth_request, Release Reservation, acknowledgment (ACK_BR) for bandwidth request packet, acknowledgment (ACK_RR) for Release Reservation packet and negative acknowledgment (NAK). The packet formats for the five packet types are the same. These packets are encapsulated by RPR control frame and are processed by each hop along the path from the source to the destination. Figure 3.1 shows the basic packet format:

src addr

source flow Id n Gbits)

bandwidth length

type (8 bits) bandwidth field 1 bandwidth field 2 (64 bits) bandwidth field 3 (64 bits)

:

....

:

A

Figure 3.1: Packet Format for dynamic bandwidth allocation method

The "src addr" field contains the station addresses of the node that generates the control packet. The "dest addr" field contains the station address of the destination of the control packet. The "bandwidth" field contains the hop address and requested bandwidth for that hop. The first six bytes of the "bandwidth" field contain the "hop address" in the network which is the MAC address of the transit node, while the last two bytes of the "bandwidth" field is the actual "requested bandwidth". The number of bandwidth fields in the Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm (discussed in section 3.8) is the number of hops of the flow minus one. The "bandwidth length" field indicates the number of the bandwidth fields in the packet. In the Basie Reservation Algorithm and the Flow-based Reservation Algorithm, the "hop address" is not used and is set to be Oxffffffff. There is only one bandwidth field in the packets for these two algorithms. The "source flow ID" field contains the souree flow ID of the traffic flow. When the transit node receives the bandwidth request/release packet, it

28

combines the MAC address of the source node and the source flow ID carrying in the packet and gets the flow ID o f the incoming traffic flow. The flow ID is unique in the whole network. The "type" field is used to identify different packet types. The description o f each packet type is given below.

1) Bandwidth Request Packet:Bandwidth Request packet (type = 0) carries the requested bandwidth from the source node to the destination node to set up the reservation for the new traffic flow 2) Release Reservation Packet: When a traffic flow has terminated, the source node generates the Release Reservation packet (type = 1 ) downstream to the destination node to release the reservation of the flow. 3) Acknowledgment Packets: The acknowledgment packet (ACK) is generated by the destination node of the flow. It is used to acknowledge the reception of the bandwidth request packet or bandwidth release packet. We define two types of acknowledgement packet: the ACK for Bandwidth Request packet (type = 2) and the other is the ACK for Release_Reservation packet (type = 3). In the acknowledgment packet, the "bandwidth" field is the amount of common bandwidth to be reserved or released for the flow. 4) Negative Acknowledgment Packet: The negative acknowledgment packet (NAK) is generated by any o f the transit nodes along the path from the source node to the destination node who does not has the enough bandwidth available in its commonbandwidth pool to support the new traffic flow. There is no NAK packet for the bandwidth release packet.

3.5 Basic Reservation Algorithm
In this section the basic reservation algorithm is introduced. In the basic reservation algorithm, when the MAC layer of the source node receives a connection request o f a traffic flow firom the local MAC client, it decides whether it needs to reserve bandwidth fi"om the common-bandwidth pool for the connection. If it does, it will generate the bandwidth request packet downstream to setup the reservation. When the traffic flow is terminated, the MAC layer decides whether it needs to release the common bandwidth. If it does, it will generate

29

the bandwidth release packet downstream to release the reservation. In the rest of the section, the algorithm will be described in detail.

3.5.1 Reservation procedure at the source node: The reservation procedures at the source node, transit node and destination node are different. They will be described separately. First, we will describe the admission control procedure at the source node. We assume that the source node currently supports i-1 classA coimections and a new classA connection request from traffic flow i just arrives. The reservation procedure at the source node can be described by the following flowchart. The next few paragraphs give detailed explanations of the flowchart.

30

New Connection Request

Calculate the equivalent bandwidth for the new flow (C,) 1. Accept the new traffic flow 2. Create an entry for this traffic flow in the transmit state table

Yes

No Calculate the extra bandwidth needed to support the new connection: A C, = C, - B^g k

Yes

Reject the new traffic flow

No 1. Send the Bandwidth Request packet downstream to destination node and wait for the reply packet. 2. Create an entry for this traffic flow in the transmit state table.

Wait for the reply packet

Received packet (ACK or NAK)?

ACK

Accept the new traffic flow

NAK 1. Reject the new traffic flow 2. Clear the entry for this traffic flow in the transmit state table Flowchart 3.1: Basic Reservation Algorithm at the source node

31

When the MAC layer of node k receives a new traffic flow connection request from its upper layer, the MAC layer goes through the following steps according to the above flowchart: 1) When a new connection request for traffic flow i arrives, the MAC layer calculates the equivalent bandwidth (C, ) for the new flow using equation (2.6). 2) If C, is less than 'Q ag j , the request is granted and no common bandwidth reservation is required. The MAC layer creates an entry in the transmit state table for the new traffic flow and save the C, and AC, values (AC, = 0 in this case) in the new entry. The information is used to modify B ag j and B a c j values when this traffic flow is terminated. The MAC layer also updates Ba g j using equation (3.1). If C, is greater than Ba g j , go to step (3). 3) Calculate the extra bandwidth needed to support the new traffic flow by using equation (3.2). The MAC layer compares the AC, value with the B a c j value. If the AC, value is less than B a c j , the MAC layer generates the Bandwidth Request packet downstream to the destination node. The requested bandwidth carried in the Bandwidth Request packet is the AC, value. MAC layer also creates an entry in the transmit state table for the new traffic flow and saves the C, and AC, values in the "flow bandwidth" and "request bandwidth" fields of the new entry. After generating the Bandwidth Request packet, MAC layer updates the B ag j and Ba c j value by using the equations (3.1) and (3.3). This means that an amount of bandwidth equivalent to the requested bandwidth is removed from the common bandwidth pool and is unavailable for new reservation requests. The source node also starts a time-out timer and waits for the reply packet from the downstream node. If the AC, value is greater than the B a c j value, MAC layer rejects the connection request. 4) When the source node k receives the reply packet from its downstream node, it checks the packet type (ACK or NAK). If the packet is an ACK packet, the connection is established. If the packet is a NAK packet, the source node rejects this traffic flow and adjusts the B^o_/tand B ac j values according to the following equations: B a c j ^ B ac j + AC, + (C, - AC,) (3.4) (3.5)

32

5) If the retransmission timer started in step (3) times out and no reply packet received, the MAC layer retransmits the Bandwidth Request packet. The MAC layer expects to receive an ACK or NAK of the request eventually. If it does not receive any reply after many tries, it generates a system error to alert the administration for the possible network problems.

3.5.2 Admission control procedure for the transit nodes: W hen a transit node receives the bandwidth request packet, it goes through the following steps to make the admission control decision:

33

Receive the bandwidth request packet (flow id, AC,- )

Yes (Find flow id in the transit state table)?

Forward the request packet downstream

^r

No Reject the traffic flow and generate NAK upstream to the source node

No

Yes 1. Forward the bandwidth request packet downstream 2. B ac j --B acj - AC,3. Create an entry for the flow id in transit state table

Wait for the reply packet

ACK Packet received (ACK or NAK)? NAK 1. Forward the reply packet upstream to the source node 2. B ac j --Bac j + AC,3. Erase the flow id entry in the transit state table

Forward the reply packet upstream to the source node

Flowchart 3.2: Admission control procedure at the transit node

34

When the transit node k receives the Bandwidth_Request packet, first it tries to locate the flow ID in its transit state table. If the transit node finds an entry for the flow ID in the transit state table, it means the node has already set up the reservation for this flow and the node just simply forward this request packet downstream. This situation happens when the Bandwidth Request packet is retransmitted. If the transit node k does not find an entry for the flow ID in the transit state table, it compares the requested bandwidth (AC,) with the available bandwidth left in its common bandwidth pool. If the requested bandwidth is less than the available bandwidth in the common bandwidth pool, it means this node has enough available bandwidth left for the new connection. Then the node admits the new traffic flow and forwards the B and w idthR equest packet downstream. At the same time the node saves the flow ID carried in the request packet into the transit state table and adjusts the size of the common bandwidth pool using equation (3.3). If the requested bandwidth is greater than the available bandwidth in the common bandwidth pool, the node rejects the new traffic flow and generates NAK packet upstream to the source node. When the transit node receives the reply packet, it checks the reply packet type. If the reply packet is an ACK packet, the transit node forwards the reply packet upstream to the source node. If the reply packet is a NAK packet, the node also forwards the reply packet upstream to the source node. In addition, it deletes the entry of the flow from its transit state table and releases the common bandwidth reservation by the amount indicated in the NAK packet. The reservation release can be performed simply by adjusting the available common bandwidth B,c_. = using equation (3.6): + AC, (3.6)

3.5.3 Adm ission control procedure at the destination node: When the destination node receives the bandwidth request packet, it generates an acknowledgment (ACK) packet back to the source node. The source and destination addresses, the request bandwidth and the flow ID field are directly copied fi-om the corresponding fields in the bandwidth request packet.

35

3.5,4 Reservation release for the traffic fiow: Whenever a flow is terminated, the source node determines if the terminated flow has reserved common bandwidth based on the flag value stored in the transmit state table. If the flag value is 0, no common bandwidth is reserved for the flow and the source node does not generate the Release Reservation packet. Instead it just modifies the value using equation (3.7): + C, (3.7)

If the flag value is 1, the terminated flow has reserved common bandwidth and the source node will generate a Releasc Reservation packet towards the destination node to release the bandwidth reservation. The Release_Reservation packet specifies the amount of common bandwidth to be released. Let C^c denoted as the amount of common bandwidth to be released. In the Basic Reservation Algorithm, we have Cy;c = AQ (3.8)

The values of B^G_t and B acjc are then adjusted by using equations (3.9) and (3.10): B^c_* = B^c_/t + Crc B ^gj = BxG_t + C; - Crc (3.9) (3.10)

When the transit node receives the Release Reservation packet, it searches for an entry in its transit state table that has the same flow ID. If the entry is found in the transit state table, the transit node knows it has reserved certain bandwidth for this traffic flow and now it need to release the bandwidth as indicated by Crc- The transit node goes through the following steps to release the reservation: 1) It erases the entry from the transit state table; 2) It adjusts the B^c_* value by using the equation (3.9); 3) It forwards the Release Reservation packet downstream to the destination node. When the destination node receives the Release Reservation packet, it sends the ACK for bandwidth release packet to the source node carrying the flow ID of the flow. When the transit node receives the ACK packet for the Release Reservation packet, it simply forwards the ACK packet upstream to the source node. When the source node receives the reply packet for the ReleaseReservation packet, it removes the entry of the corresponding traffic flow in it's transmit state table.

36

3.6 Retransmission mechanism
Because the MAC layer does not provide reliable b-ame transfer, a retransmission mechanism is required in the algorithm to deal with the possible control packet loss. The retransmission mechamsm will be explained from the angles of the source node, transit node and destination node.

3.6.1 Retransmission mechanism at the source node: W henever the MAC layer of the source node sends a bandwidth request or release packet, it starts a retransmission timer. It also saves the source flow ID and the requested bandwidth for this traffic flow in the transmit state table. When the MAC layer receives either the acknowledgment (ACK) or the negative acknowledgment (NAK), it clears the retransmission timer. If the MAC layer has not received any acknowledgment (ACK or NAK) when the retransmission timer expires, it retransmits the packet.

3.6.2 Retransmission mechanism at the transit node: The transit node does not perform any retransmission. It also does not try to distinguish if a received control packet is an original or a retransmission. Each control packet carries a flow ID. A transit node processes a control packet differently based on whether it can find the corresponding flow ID at its transit state table. The flow IDs are very important for the packet retransmission. Whenever there is a flow ID in the transit state table, it means the transit node has already accepted the traffic flow and reserved certain bandwidth for this traffic flow. Without the flow ID, the same bandwidth may be reserved or released multiple times due to retransmission.

3.6.2.1 Reception of a Bandwidth Request packet When the transit node receives a Bandwidth Request packet, it searches for the Flow ID carried in the Bandwidth Request packet in the transit state table. If the flow ID is not found in the transit state table, it means the node has not reserved any bandwidth for this traffic flow. In this case, the transit node will perform the normal reservation procedure as described in the previous section. If the flow id in the received Bandwidth Request packet is found in the transit state

37

table, the transit node knows it already reserved the bandwidth for this traffic flow, so it will not make another reservation. It just forwards the Bandwidth Request packet downstream to destination node without any changes locally.

3.6.2.2 Reception of a Release Reservation packet If the node finds the flow ID at the transit state table that corresponds to the flow ID carried by the Release_Reservation packet, it will perform the normal reservation release procedure. If the flow ID is not found in the transit state table, the transit node knows there is no reservation for this traffic flow at this node and there is nothing to release. So the transit node just simply forwards the Release Reservation packet downstream.

3.6.2.3 Reception of a reply packet Since all the ACK and NAK packets are end-to-end significant. The transit node should pass these types of packets upstream towards the source. In addition, if NAK for bandwidth reservation request is received, the transit node will release the requested bandwidth only if it found the corresponding flow ID in its transit table.

3.6.3 Retransmission mechanism at the destination node The destination node does not perform retransmission. It just replies to requests, either requests for reservation or reservation release, by sending back an ACK. The source/destination addresses, source flow ID fields and the bandwidth field in the ACK are directly copied from those in the request packet. The destination node does not generate NAK packets for it does not reserve bandwidth destined to itself.

3.6.4 Retransmission Examples: When the Bandwidth Request packet, Release Reservation packet or the associated reply packets are lost, the source node will perform retransmission. It is very important to make sure that the same bandwidth is not reserved or released multiple times. Our packet retransmission algorithm handles this problem well. The handlings of the lost packets are illustrated in several examples given below.

38

All the examples are based on a RPR network with 6 nodes. Node 1 tries to set up a reservation from node 1 to node 6. The flow id for this traffic flow is 10, and the requested bandwidth is 10Mbps. We use the following notation to identify the type o f control packet and the content in the packet: (Source flow ID, Request Bandwidth, Type) Based on the above notation, the Bandwidth Request packet, Release Reservation packet, ACK packet and NAK packet can be described as (10, 1OM, R), (10, lOM, RR), (10, lOM, A) and (10, lOM, N), repectively.

de ^

xiode_2

node_3

------- ----------no de_4

aode_S

Figure 3.2 RPR Network Setup Example 1: A Bandwidth Request packet is lost on the link between node 3 and node 6. In this case, when node 3 first receives the Bandwidth Request packet (10, lOM, R), it looks for the flow ID "MAC,,ode/ + 10" in the transit state table. Suppose there is no such flow ID found in the table, node 3 will create an entry for the flow ID "MAC,,o^e/ +10" into the local table, adjusts the 'Ba c j value with "B^^. j = B^^ j - lOM", and forward the Bandwidth Request packet downstream to node 6. If the request packet is lost on the way from node 3 to node 6, the retransmission timer for this request at node 1 will expire. Node 1 generates another Bandwidth Request packet (10, lOM, R) to node 6. When node 3 receives this retransmission packet, it finds the flow ID "MAC,,o^e/ +10" in its transit state table. It then deduces that it has already reserved bandwidth for this traffic flow and it just forwards the packet downstream. The same bandwidth is not doubly reserved in this case. When node 6 receives the retransmission packet, it generates the ACK packet back to node 1. Example 2: The ACK packet is lost on the link between node 3 and node 1. In this case, node 3 receives the ACK packet (10, lOM, A) from node 6. Node 3 just forwards the packet upstream to node 1 without any changes locally. If the ACK packet gets

39

PROPfmVOF RYER35FJ tJfJiVEfiSi r r LIBRARY

lost on the way from node 3 to node 1, node 1 retransmits the Bandwidth Request packet (10, lOM, R). When node 3 receives the retransmission packet, it finds the flow ID "MAC,,orfe/ +10" in its transit state table. Node 3 just forwards the retransmission packet downstream to node 6. When node 6 receives the retransmission packet, it generates another ACK packet (10, 1OM, A) back to node 1. The loss of an ACK causes the retransmission of Bandwidth Request packets. Again, our algorithm prevents repeated reservation of the same flow. Example 3: The NAK packet is lost on the link between node 3 and node 1. In this case, node 3 receives the NAK packet (10, lOM, N) from downstream node and it finds the flow ID "MAC«orfe/ +10" in its transit state table. Node 3 knows the set up for this traffic flow has been failed. Thus, it removes the entry with flow ID "MAC,,orfe;+10" from its transmit state table, adjusts the B
acj

value with

^

^ + 1OM", and forwards the reply

packet upstream to the source node. The NAK packet gets lost on the way from node 3 to node 1. Node 1 generates another Bandwidth Request packet (10, lOM, R) to node 6. When node 3 receives this retransmission packet, it searches for the flow ID ''MAC,,oiiei +10" in its local table and can not find the corresponding flow ID in the table. Thus, node 3 reserves 10Mbps bandwidth for this traffic flow, and forward the request packet downstream to node 6. In this case, node 3 still only reserves the 10Mbps bandwidth for the traffic flow once. Eventually, the NAK packet will be retransmitted and Node 3 releases the bandwidth reservation again. Example 4: The Release Reservation packet lost in the links between node 3 and node 6. Node 1 generates the Release Reservation packet (10, lOM, RR) to node 6 to release the reservation. When node 3 receives the Release Reservation packet (10, lOM, RR), it finds the flow ID "MAC,jodei +10" in its transit state table. Node 3, thus, deletes the entry with flow id "MACnodei +10" in the transit state table, adjusts the B ac j value with "B^,. ^ = B^,. ^ + lOM", and forwards the Release Reservation packet downstream to node 6. This packet gets lost on the way from node 3 to node 6. After the retransmission timer for release reservation times out at node 1, node 1 generates another Release Reservation packet to node 6 carrying the same information (10, lOM, RR). When node 3 receives this retransmission packet, it searches for the flow ID "MAC,,odei +10" in its transit state table. Because node 3 has deleted the entry with flow ID "MAC,,odei +10" in the last step, it cannot find it now. Node 3 just

40

forwards the Release Reservation packet downstream to node 6 without any changes locally. The 10Mbps bandwidth is not released twice in this case. From the above examples, one can see that our algorithm works well to deal with the loss o f control packets.

3.6.5 Guaranteed Bandwidth Hole problem In the reservation procedure, a node will use up its guaranteed bandwidth before making reservation o f common bandwidth. It is because the guaranteed bandwidth is more restrictive for it cannot be reserved by the other nodes even if it is not used by the node that owns it. Extending this concept, a desirable reservation condition is that a node should not have any common bandwidth reservation at any time if its available guaranteed bandwidth is non-zero. Condition 1 below describes the desirable operating condition: Blcj : > 0 only if B^c_/t=0, (Condition 1)

Where B lc_a is the amount of common bandwidth reserved by the locally sourced flows at node k. Unfortunately, the Basic Reservation Algorithm sometimes introduces the situation that does not satisfy condition 1. More specifically, situation may arise such that Bz,cjt> 0 even if B^ g'_a>0. This undesirable situation is termed as guaranteed bandwidth hole problem. A simple example is given here to illustrate how the problem arises. Consider a node k with B e j of 10 Mbps and Bcjt of 50 Mbps. Suppose the node makes two reservations for the locally sourced flows: flow I and flow 2. Flow 1 requests a reservation o f 8 Mbps first, and later Flow 2 requests a reservation of 7 Mbps. After the two reservations, B j g j and B^c_*have the values of 0 and 5 Mbps, respectively. Note that Flow 1 did not make any common bandwidth reservation. Now suppose Flow I is terminated and since it did not make any reservation from the common-bandwidth pool, the node just releases the bandwidth back to the guaranteed bandwidth pool. The new B l c j and Bagj. values are 5 Mbps and 8 Mbps, respectively. In other words, the node has some guaranteed bandwidth unused but at the same time occupied bandwidth from the common-bandwidth pool. This obviously violates condition 1. In the extreme case, the node may uses up all the available common bandwidth but leaves its guaranteed bandwidth untouched. This is an undesirable situation for other nodes cannot make reservation of the unused guaranteed bandwidth. In the

41

next two sections, two modified reservation algorithms will be presented to deal with the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem.

3.6.6 General Observations for the basic reservation algorithm Even the basic reservation algorithm may introduce the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem, it is still an attractive algorithm due to its simplicity. Furthermore, the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem does not affect the effectiveness of the reservation for the types of flows that come with large number and require small bandwidth reservation individually. A good example of this type of flows is VoIP connections. This type of flows creates small guaranteed bandwidth hole that only exists in short duration for a hole will be quickly filled up by a new flow request.

3.7 Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm
The flow-based reservation algorithm is used to reduce the effect caused by the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem. The central idea of the algorithm is to adjust the existing flows to "fill up" the guaranteed bandwidth hole left by a newly terminated flow. Following is the flowchart that describes the algorithm performed by the source node.

42

Flow i is terminated

Yes

Procedure 1: Release the guaranteed bandwidth C,

Procedure 2: Release reservation by adjusting the bandwidth reservation o f a flow candidate

No Yes (flag=0)? No Yes Procedure 3: Release guaranteed and common band widths. Send bandwidth release packet with C/?c= AC/

No

Procedure 4: Release reservation by adjusting the bandwidth reservation of a flow candidate Flowchart 3.3 Flow-based Reservation Algorithm at the source node The algorithm consists of four different bandwidth release procedures. Procedure 1 deals with the case where B lcj . = 0. In this case, the source node simply releases the guaranteed bandwidth reserved by the terminated flow (flow /)· Procedure 3 is another simple case where AC, = B lc k- This case implies that all the current common bandwidth reservation was reserved by flow i. Thus, the source node simply releases the guaranteed and common bandwidths using the release procedure from the basic reservation scheme. Procedures 2 and 4 are more complicated. They involve the bandwidth reservation adjustment of the existing flows. To adjust the bandwidth reservation of the existing flows, the source node first calculates how much common bandwidth, Crc, it can release. Crc can be

43

determined using the following equation: Crc = min { B /,o C ,} Once
C rc

(3.11)

is determined, the source node searches for the flow candidates (the concept o f

flow candidate will be discussed later) that it can use to adjust the bandwidth reservation. Depending on the availability of the flow candidates and the characteristics of these flows, the amount of common bandwidth released could be less than or equal to
C rc.

In the rest o f this

section, the mechanism for bandwidth adjustment is first described. Then the criteria of choosing flow candidates for Procedures 2 and 4 are given.

3.7.1 Reservation Adjustment Assume that the source node has already identified flow j as the flow candidate for reservation adjustment, it will then check if C r c is less than or greater than or equal to AC,. If Crc is greater than or equal to
ACy,

the source node simply releases the common bandwidth

of flow j downstream and updates the corresponding entry of flow j in the transmit state table. Specifically,
AQ

and flag are both set up zero. If Crc is less than ACy, the source node will

first make another reservation for flow j with different flow ID and the common bandwidth reservation of ACy', where A C/-ACy-C;;c. (3.12)

If the new reservation is successful, the source node will tear down the old reservation for flow j. The amount of common bandwidth released is the difference between which is
C rc.

ACy'

and

ACy,

Also note that if the amount of bandwidth released is less than C/jc,the

adjustment procedure can be repeated for other flow candidates. The adjustment process will stop if the total amount of released bandwidth is equal to Crc or if no more flow candidate is available.

3.7.2 Identification of Flow Candidate The identification of flow candidate for reservation adjustment depends on the release procedure used. First let consider Procedure 2. Procedure 2 is performed under the situation where the terminated flow did not make any common bandwidth reservation. In this case, the source node can choose any other flow sourced by the node to adjust the reservation. To maximize

44

the reservation efficiency, the source node should choose the flow with the largest span (i.e., largest number of hops). It is because by releasing common bandwidth reservation o f the flow with the largest span, more nodes will release the common bandwidth, thus, more bandwidth is available for other traffic flows. Bandwidth release in Procedure 4 is performed under the condition that the common bandwidth reservation by the terminated flow is greater than zero but less than B ^cj- hi this case, the selection of flow candidate is more restrictive. In this case, the candidate must have the same destination. If it is not, the mechanism may release common bandwidth over more number o f hops than it should in the case where the candidate has a longer span than the terminated flow, and lesser number of hops in the case where the candidate has a shorter span. There are other useful guidelines to select the flow candidates. One obvious guideline is to select the candidate with the reserved common bandwidth equal to C rc- This selection will avoid the overhead o f establishing a new reservation. Another guideline is to choose the flow with the largest bandwidth. This choice has the potential to reduce the number o f flows that need to be adjusted.

3.7.3 Examples To demonstrate the Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm, we use the RPR network with six nodes presented in Figure 3.2. In this network, we assign 10Mbps guaranteed bandwidth and define 50Mbps common-pool bandwidth at each node. We have five traffic flows in this network. The traffic flow parameters are described in table 3.1. In the following sections, we will study several cases about the reservation release.

45

Start time

Source

Destination Equivalent Bandwidth (Mbps)

Ba g j, Bacj

and B l c j values

after the flow is admitted
Bagj Bacj Blcj

(Mbps) Flow 1 Flow 2 Flow 3 Flow 4 Flow 5 0.1s 0.2s 0.3s 0.4s 0.5s Node2 Node2 Node 2 Node 1 Node 2 Node 4 Node 4 Node 5 Node 6 Node 4 5 6 10 10 8 5 0 0 0 0

(Mbps) 50 49 39 29 21

(Mbps) 0 1 11 11 19

Table 3.1 Traffic flow parameters used for Flow-base Reservation Algorithm examples

3.7.3.1 Reservation release example for Procedure 2: First let us consider the example for Procedure 2 where the terminated flow did not make any common bandwidth reservation. At 0.6s, flow 1 is terminated at node 2. Node 2 will go through the following steps to adjust the reservation. First, node 2 calculates the Crc value using equation (3.11):
C rc

= min {5, 19} = 5 Mbps

Next, node 2 will identify the flow candidate. As flow 1 did not make any common bandwidth reservation, node 2 will choose an existing flow sourced by node 2 with the largest span to adjust the bandwidth reservation. In this example, node 2 will choose flow 3 to adjust the reservation. In the adjustment procedure, node 2 makes another reservation for flow 3 using a different flow ID with the common bandwidth reservation of 5 Mbps (10 Mbps --5 Mbps). After the new reservation has been set up, node 2 tears down the old reservation for flow 3. After the old reservation has been released, the B a cj value becomes 26 Mbps and B l c j value becomes 14 Mbps. Compare to the B ac j and B rcj values before flow 1 was terminated, we can see the equivalent bandwidth of the terminated flow has been successfully released without the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem.

3.V.3.2 Reservation release example for Procedure 4; Next, we consider the example for the Procedure 4 where the common bandwidth

46

reservation by the terminated flow is greater than zero but less than B^c * · At 0.6s, flow 2 is terminated at node 2. Node 2 will go through the adjustment procedure to release the common bandwidth reservation. First, node 2 calculates the C rc value using equation (3.11): Crc = min (6, 19} = 6 Mbps Next, node 2 will identify the flow candidate. Based on the selection guidelines, node 2 will select the flow candidate that has the same source and destination as the terminated flow and has the largest common bandwidth reservation (node 2 cannot find a candidate with the common bandwidth reservation same as Crc) In this example, flow 2 will select flow 5 to adjust the bandwidth reservation. To do that, node 2 makes a new reservation for flow 5 with a common bandwidth reservation of 2 Mbps. After the new reservation has been set up, node 2 tears down the old reservation for flow 5. After the old reservation for flow 5 has been released, we have 'Qagj = 0, B^c_2= 27 Mbps and B^c 2= 13 Mbps. Again, by compare with the Bac _2 and B r c j values before flow 2 was terminated, we can see that the equivalent bandwidth o f the terminated flow has been successfully released without the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem.

3.7.4 G eneral observations of using Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm The Flow-Bsed Reservation Algorithm is more complicated than the Basic Reservation Algorithm, but it alleviates the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem. The Basic Reservation Algorithm may be used in the situation where lots of small bandwidth connections come and go fast. In this situation the bandwidth hole is small and filled up quickly. Thus, there is no need to make the reservation algorithm more complicated. However, in the situation where there are a number of large-bandwidth flows with long connection life times, the Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm may be more suitable to use. It is because the guaranteed bandwidth hole is larger and lasts longer in this case. The Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm will help to eliminate or reduce the size of the hole. Note that the Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm cannot completely eliminate the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem when the MAC layer of the source node cannot find the suitable flow candidate. To completely eliminate the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem, a Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm is introduced in the next section.

47

3.8 Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm
The Flow-Based reservation algorithm only solves the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem partially. Since the reservation is released per flow, not per hop. Here, a hop is defined as a link between two adjacent nodes. The address of the hop is the address of the outgoing interface of the transmitted node. When a reservation is reserved or released, every hop along the path from the source to the destination makes the same amount of bandwidth reservation or release. This forces the flow-based algorithm, in some cases, to only select the flows that have the same source/destination as the terminated flow for bandwidth adjustment. If no such flow exists, the guaranteed bandwidth hole cannot be filled. The per-flow reservation also leads to an inefficient bandwidth allocation. The following example illustrates the inefficiency. Let consider a RPR network with 6 nodes as shown in figure 3.2. A guaranteed bandwidth of 5 Mbps and a common bandwidth of 50 Mbps are assigned to each node. Suppose node 1 generates two traffic flows; flow 1 and flow 2. Flow 1 requests a bandwidth of 5 Mbps; while flow 2 requests a bandwidth of another 5 Mbps. Destinations of flow 1 and flow 2 are node 4 and node 5, respectively. Node 1 made a reservation for flow 1 first. After the reservation, B a g j = 0. Later node 1 made another reservation for flow 2. This reservation causes nodes 1, 2, 3, and 4 to reserve 5 Mbps of bandwidth from the commonbandwidth pool. Note that there are 5 Mbps of guaranteed bandwidth owned by node 1 at the hop between node 4 and node 5 that is not used. In fact, the guaranteed bandwidth at this hop will not be available for any other flows as long as the reservation of flow 1 is not released. This situation is not desirable for the reason that if the guaranteed bandwidth of that hop was available for flow 2, then flow 2 did not need to make reservation from the commonbandwidth pool at that hop, which, in turn, allowed more common bandwidth at that hop to be available to other flows. Clearly, a hop-by-hop reservation approach will provide a more flexible and efficient reservation mechanism.

3.8.1 Introduction to the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm: In the hop-by-hop reservation algorithm, every node maintains a bandwidth usage table to record the total bandwidth reserved on every hop for the flows sourced from this node.

48

The bandwidth usage table is used for the local transmit traffic only, not for the transit traffic. For the N nodes network, the total number of entries in the table is N-1. When the source node receives a new traffic flow request, it checks the bandwidth usage table to decide how much common bandwidth it should request on every single hop towards the destination node for the new flow. The requested bandwidth at each hop may not be the same. The bandwidth reservation is done hop-by-hop. Using this approach, node 1 in the example from the previous section did not need to request the 5Mbps common bandwidth reservation on the link between node 4 and node 5 for flow 2. Because the bandwidth usage on the link between node 4 and node 5 in the bandwidth usage table would be zero after the reservation of flow 1, thus, flow 2 could use the guaranteed bandwidth on the link between node 4 and node 5 instead. To reserve different bandwidth on different hops, we need to add a node address field and the bandwidth field for each hop between the source and the destination in the bandwidth request packet. The node address field identifies the hop (The output interface o f the node) and the corresponding bandwidth field indicates the requested bandwidth to be reserved or released on that hop. When the source node generates the bandwidth request packet, it puts the different requested bandwidth values on different bandwidth fields. When the transit node receives the bandwidth request packet, it looks into the bandwidth fields and gets the requested bandwidth for its outgoing link. The transit node may admit or reject the new traffic flow by comparing the requested bandwidth with the available common bandwidth o f that link. When the traffic flow is terminated, the source node needs to release the reservation for this flow downstream and adjust the bandwidth reservation for other flows on every hop. We cannot just simply release the same bandwidth value on all the hops downstream to the destination because the source node may reserve different bandwidths on different hops before. To properly release the bandwidth on each hop, the source node should calculates released bandwidth for each hop using the algorithm described in later sections. The source node puts different released bandwidth values on different bandwidth fields in the Release Reservation packet and sent the bandwidth release packet downstream to the destination. When the transit node receives the bandwidth release packet, it gets the released bandwidth value for its outgoing link and adjusts its available common bandwidth

49

accordingly.

3.8.2 Reservation setup process in the Hop-by-Hop reservation algorithm The following flowchart summarizes the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm performed at the source node.

50

New Connection Request

Calculate the equivalent bandvvidth (C,) for the new flow 1. Generate the bandvvidth request packet to the destination. The requested bandwidth for this flow is 0. 2. Update the bandwidth usage table for all the links from the source to the destination

Yes

No 1r Calculate the extra bandwidth needed to support the new connection: AC, = C i - B a g j 1r

Reject the new traffic flow Generate the NAK to the traffic flow

1. Calculate the requested bandwidth on different hops 2. Generate bandwidth request packet to the destination node. 3. Update the B a c j and B a g j value. 4. Update the bandwidth usage table.

Wait for reply packet Receive the reply packet NAK (ACK or NAK)? 1. Reject the new traffic flow 2. Update the B ag and B ag value. 3. Update the bandwidth usage table.

Accept the new traffic flow Flowchart 3.4: Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm at the source node

51

Let us define BU(«) and RH(«) as the bandwidth usage on hop n and the request common bandwidth for reservation/release on hop n. The bandwidth usage table holds the values of BU(«) for n = 1, 2, , N-1. When the MAC layer of the source node receives a

new traffic flow connection request from its client, it goes through the following steps; 1) The MAC layer calculates the equivalent bandwidth for the new flow C, using the equation (2.6). 2) If C, is less than B ag j , MAC layer generates the Bandwidth Request packet to the destination node. The requested bandwidth for this flow is 0. The algorithm sets up the reservation for every flow including the flows using the guaranteed bandwidth. Recall that the source node does not make the reservation for the flows using guaranteed bandwidth in Basic Reservation Algorithm and Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm, because the source node may not need to release the reservations for the terminated flows in these two algorithms. For Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm, it is more efficient for the source node to release every terminated flow even if the flow did not make any common-bandwidth reservation. We will talk about the reservation release process later. MAC layer updates the bandwidth usage table for all the links from the source to the destination using the equation (3.13): BU(«) = BU(«) + C, (3.13)

The MAC layer also updates the B a g j value using the equation (3.1). If C, is greater than B a g j , go to step (3). 3) Calculate the extra common bandwidth needed (AC,) to support the new traffic flow by using equation (3.6). If the AC, value is greater than the
Bacj

value, MAC layer

rejects the connection request for the coming traffic flow and generates the NAK message to the traffic source. If the AC, value is less than B a c j , go to step (4). 4) In this step, MAC layer generates Bandwidth Request packets to set up the reservations. MAC layer calculates the requested bandwidth values on different links according to entries in the bandwidth usage table. If the bandwidth usage value on of hop n is grater than the guaranteed bandwidth of the source node, the requested bandwidth for hop n is the same as C,. If the bandwidth usage value of given hop n is less than the guaranteed bandwidth for the source node, MAC layer calculates the requested bandwidth on this hop using the equation (3.14):

52

RH(n) = C ,-(B G jt-B U (/j))

(3.14)

After the MAC layer calculates all the requested bandwidth on all the links, it generates the bandwidth request packet to the destination node. The bandwidth request packet cam es different requested bandwidth values in different requested bandwidth fields. After generating the bandwidth request packet, MAC layer updates the Bxc * and B/4cjc values by using equations (3.1) and (3.3). MAC layer also updates the bandwidth usage table for all the links from the source to the destination using the equation (3.13). Then MAC layer waits for the reply packets for the bandwidth request packets. 5) W hen the source node receives the reply packet, it checks the reply packet type. If the packet is a NAK packet, the MAC layer rejects this traffic flow and adjusts the Bxc_t and Bxc_t value using equations (3.5) and (3.6). The MAC layer also updates the bandwidth usage table for all the hops from the source to the destination using the equation (3.15): BU(n) = BU(n) - C, If the packet is an ACK packet, the MAC accepts the traffic flow. The reservation mechanism at the transit node and the destination node in the Hop-byHop Reservation algorithm is the same as the previous two algorithms. (3.15)

3.8.3 Reservation release process in the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm When a flow is terminated, the MAC layer of the source node starts the reservation release process. The MAC layer calculates the released bandwidth on every single link downstream to the destination using the following algorithm: (1) If the bandwidth usage value on a given link n is less than the guaranteed bandwidth, the released bandwidth is zero on this link. (2) If the bandwidth usage value on a given hop n is greater than the guaranteed bandwidth, MAC layer calculates the difference (DC(«)) between the bandwidth usage value and the guaranteed bandwidth using equation (3.16): DC(n) = BU(n) - B c jt. (3.16)

The MAC layer then calculates the released bandwidth on hop n (C/fc(«) ) using (3.17).

53

Qc<«) = min {DC(n), Q}

(3.17)

After the source node sends the bandwidth release packet carrying the released bandwidths on different hops downstream to the destination node. The source node updates the bandwidth usage table using equation (3.18): BU(/z) = BU(«) - C, (3.18)

When the transit node receives the bandwidth release packet, it looks into the packet and obtains the released bandwidth for its outgoing link. Then the transit node modifies the available common pool size using the same mechanism we described in the previous two algorithms.

3.8.4 General Observations The Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm can completely eliminate the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem. But it is more complicated to implement. The source node needs to maintain an extra bandwidth usage table and make a number of calculations for each reservation or release request. Furthermore, the Bandwidth Request or Release Reservation packet for a flow can be quite large if the number of hops for that flow is large. On the other hand, the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm provides the most advantage in a situation where there are only few connections and each connection consumes a large amount of bandwidth. In addition, this algorithm does not require the search of flow candidates and the bandwidth adjustment of the flow candidates, unlike the Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm.

3.9 Simulation Results
This section presents some simulation results that illustrate the performance of the reservation algorithms proposed in this chapter. All the simulation uses the 6-node topology shown in Figure 3.2. All the traffic flows go through the outer ring. The total bandwidth reserved for class A traffic is 100Mbps. We define the guaranteed bandwidth to each node as 10Mbps and put 50Mbps bandwidth into the common bandwidth pool. So each node can use maximum 60Mbps bandwidth for its classA traffic. All the traffic sources are the on-off sources.

Case 3.1: Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation

54

This case demonstrates how the dynamic bandwidth allocation method admits more class A traffic. The result in this case also demonstrates that the delay for class A traffic is quite small with proper admission control even the RPR network is congested with class C traffic. In this case, we set up 5 class A traffic flows from nodel to node 4 and one class A traffic flow for each o f the following node pairs: node 6-> node 5, node 5 -> node 4, node 4 -> node 3 , node 3 -> node 2 and node 2 -> node 1. We also generate 600 Mbps class C traffic flows fi*om node 2 to no d el. The traffic parameters of the Class A traffic flows are shown in the following table: Start Source Destination Time Flow 1 0.10s Node 1 Flow 2 0.12s Node 1 Flow 3 0.14s Node 1 Flow 4 0.16s Node 1 Flow 5 0.18s Node 1 Flow 6 0.10s Node 6 Flow 7 0.10s Node 5 Flow 8 0.10s Node 4 Flow 9 0.10s Node 3 Flow 10 0.10s Node 2 Node 4 Node 4 Node 4 Node 4 Node 4 Node 5 Node 4 Node 3 Node 2 Node 1 Peak Rate Burst Period 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Utilization Equivalent Bandwidth 16.58Mbps 14.70Mbps 14.70Mbps 12.99Mbps 19.48Mbps 9.74Mbps 9.74Mbps 9.74Mbps 9.74Mbps 9.74Mbps

30Mbps 0.004s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s 30Mbps 0.004s 15Mbps 0.008s 15Mbps 0.008s 15Mbps 0.008s 15Mbps 0.008s 15Mbps 0.008s

Table 3.2 Traffic parameters for class A traffic flow s in simulation case 3.1

The traffic parameters for the Class C traffic flow fi-om node 2 to node 1 are shown in the following table: Utilization 0.5

State Time 0.05s

Peak Rate 1200Mbps

B urst Period 0.001s

Table 3.3 Class C traffic parameters used for simulation case 3.1

55

At node 1, the equivalent bandwidth for the traffic flows 1-4 together is 58.99 Mbps. So these 4 traffic flows are admitted. The traffic flow 5 at node 1 is rejected because the requested bandwidth for flow 5 is more than the available common-pool bandwidth. The other 5 classA traffic flows sourced from the rest of the 5 nodes are all admitted because the equivalent bandwidth for each flow is 9.74Mbps which is less than the guaranteed bandwidth. In this case, the equivalent bandwidth of the total flows for the hops between nodel and node4 is almost 100Mbps that is the maximum reserved bandwidth for classA traffic, and there is 600Mbps classC traffic from nodel to nodel. Figure 3.3 shows the simulation results of classA transmit queue size at node 1 and the end-to-end delay from node 1 to node 4. It can be seen that the maximum end-to-end delay for classA traffic is only about 5 ms, even though the network is congested with classC traffic.

n o< iê_l o f L o g i c a l n e tw o r k O u t e r R in g H i P r i o r i t y T r a n s m i t B u f f e r Q u e u in g S i z e ( b i t s )

4U U ,U U U
300,000

20 0,0 00

1 00 ,0 00

RPR.Delay (see ) 0.005 0.004

0 . 00 2 0 . 00 1
0.000 Is .4 s

0. 5s

Figure 3.3: Delay performance with dynamic bandwidth allocation method

Figure 3.4 shows the high priority transit queue size in nodes 3 and 4.The maximum queue size is equivalent to one packet. This illustrates that the major contribution of the end-

56

to-end delay for classA traffic is at the source node. The delay experienced by a classA packet at the transit node is negligible as observed in the previous chapter. This case also demonstrates the effectiveness of using dynamic bandwidth allocation method. By dynamically allocating bandwidths for different flows, node 1 can send up to 60 Mbps classA traffic while 10 Mbps o f bandwidth can still be allocated to each of the other 5 nodes. Without the dynamic bandwidth allocation method, only 20 Mbps bandwidth could be statically assigned to each node (assume bandwidth is uniformly assigned) and node 1 would have to reject all the flows, except flow 1. The method can also allow the support o f more connections in the network. For instance, if every connection requires 1Mbps bandwidth and we statistically assign 20Mbps bandwidth to each node, the maximum number o f the connections that can be supported is 20*6 = 120. If we use dynamic bandwidth allocation method, we can support maximum 60*6 = 360 connections in the network in the case where all the connections are between adjacent nodes.

B u ffe rlb u ie r rang Hi Priority T ra n sit Buffer Queiflng S h e (b its )

OUtttr

2,000 1,?S0
a , soo a , 250

Xi Prioritv Transit Buffer Queuina size (bits)

node 3 o£ L o a i c e l N etw ork

1,000
500 250 0
O a.t« £
,

node 4 o f L o a i c i i n e tw o r k . ^ M l p r i o r i t v T r a n s i t B u t t e r O ueuina S iz e ( X )its )

1,000
800 800 400

f

200 a.

Figure 3.4 High priority transit buffer sizes in transit nodes

57

Case 3.2: Bandwidth reservation and release process using Basic Reservation Algorithm In this case, the bandwidth reservation and release process using the Basic Reservation Algorithm is simulated. Four classA traffic flows with the following traffic parameters are used in the simulation: Start Time Flow 1 0.10s Flow 2 0.12s Flow 3 0.14s Flow 4 0.16s Stop Time 0.50s Node 1 0.45s Node 1 0.40s Node 1 0.35s Node 1 Node 4 Node 5 Node 4 Node 4 Source Destination Peak Rate Burst Period 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.5 Utilization Equivalent Bandwidth 16.58Mbps 14.70Mbps 14.70Mbps 12.99Mbps

30Mbps 0.004s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s

Table 3.4 Traffic parameters for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.2 Figure 3.5 shows the simulation result for available common bandwidth at node2. The simulation results for the available common bandwidth at node 1 and node 3 are the same. The results demonstrate that the Basic Reservation Algorithm handles the bandwidth reservation and release process correctly.
n o d e 2 o f L o g ical N e tw o r k
Common B a n d v id th P o o l s i z e - o u t e r R in q ( b i t s )

S O , 000, 000

40,000,000

30,000,000

20 , 000,000

5,000,000

Os

0 .2 s

0 .4 s

Figure 3.5: Available common bandwidth pool size with Basic Reservation Algorithm

58
I !

Case 3.3: Guaranteed Bandwidth hole problem of the Basic Reservation Aleorithm This case illustrates the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem. Four class A traffic flows with the following traffic parameters are used in this simulation: Start Time Flow 1 0.10s Flow 2 0.12s Flow 3 0.14s Flow 4 0.16s Stop Time 0.34s Node 1
-

Source Destination

Peak Rate

B urst Period

Utilization

Equivalent Bandwidth

Node 4 Node 5 Node 4 Node 4

10Mbps 0.004s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s

0.4 0.6 0.6 0.5

5.52Mbps 14.70Mbps 14.70Mbps 12.99Mbps

Node 1 Node 1 Node 1

-

-

Tab e 3.5 traffic parameters used for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.3 Figure 3.6 shows the simulation result for the available common bandwidth at node 2. The simulation results for the available common bandwidth at node 1 and node 3 are the same.
n o d e _ 2 o f L o g ic a l N e t w o r k
CODunon B a n d w i d th F o o l s i z e - O u te r R in g f b i t s 1

5 0 , 0 0 0 ,0 0 0 I

.

4 0 , 0 0 0 ,0 0 0

3 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0

20 , 0 0 0 ,000

10 , 000,000

Is

.2 s

.3 s

0 .4

Tiii

Figure 3.6: Guaranteed bandwidth hole problem with Basic Reservation Algorithm When node 1 made a reservation for flow 1 (at 0.1 s), it accepts this traffic flow without

59

making common bandwidth reservation; instead, this flow only uses the guaranteed bandwidth. Thus, the available common bandwidth remains to be 50 Mbps. After the successive reservations for flows 2, 3 and 4, the available common bandwidth is reduced to 12Mbps. At 0.34s, flow 1 is terminated, but node 1 does not release the bandwidth for this traffic flow because this flow only used guaranteed bandwidth, and the available common bandwidth remains to be 12 Mbps. Consequently, bandwidth of 5.52 Mbps is not available for reservation to class A traffic flows from nodes other than node 1. In the next case, the FlowBased Reservation Algorithm is used to deal with the problem.

Case 3.4: Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm In this case, we try to solve the bandwidth hole problem observed in the case 3.3. Figure 3.6 shows the simulation results for the available bandwidth at node 2 using the Flowbased Reservation Algorithm. The simulation results for the available common bandwidth at node 1 and node 3 are the same. In this case, after flow 1 was terminated, node 1 started to adjust the bandwidth reservation using the Flow-Based Reservation Algorithm. Because flow 1 did not make any common bandwidth reservation, node 1 chose the existing flow sourced by node 1 with the largest span. Node 1 used the traffic flow 2 to adjust the reservation.
node_2 of Logical Network
I Common Bandnridth P o o l size - o u te r R iug ( b i t s ) 5 0,000,000

4 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0

3 0,000,000

20 , 0 0 0 ,0 0 0

10 , 000,000

Os

. Is

1 :

.3 s

0 .4 s

0 .5 s

_ " 5s

T im e

Figure 3.7; Available common bandwidth size with Flow-based Reservation Algorithm

60

Firstly, node 1 set up a new bandwidth reservation downstream to node 4 asking for 1'^-^0"5-52=9.18 Mbps o f bandwidth. After the new reservation has been successfully set up, the values at node 1, 2 and 3 are 2.66 Mbps. Then node 1 started to release the

bandwidth used by flow 2 downstream. After the bandwidth is successfully released, the values at node 1, 2 and 3 were 17.5 Mbps. The result shows that the bandwidth reserved by flow 1 (5.52 Mbps) is properly released by the Flow-based Reservation Algorithm and the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem is avoided.

Case 3.5: Inefficient bandwidth allocation problem This case illustrates the inefficient bandwidth allocation problem observed in the Basic Reservation and Flow-Based Reservation Algorithms. In the simulation, node 1 generates several traffic flows to node 4 and node 5. The traffic parameters are shown in the following table; Start Time Flow 1 Flow 2 Flow 3 Flow 4 0.10s 0.12s 0.14s 0.16s Node 4 Node 5 Node 4 Node 4 Destination Peak Rate 30Mbps 20Mbps 20Mbps 20Mbps 0.004s 0.006s 0.006s 0.006s 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.5 B urst Period Utilization Equivalent Bandwidth 16.58Mbps 14.70Mbps 14.70Mbps 12.99Mbps

Table 3.6 traffic parameters for classA traffic flow s in simulation case 3.5

Figure 3.8 shows the simulation results for the available common bandwidth at node 2 and node 4. At 0.1s, node 1 sets up 6.58Mbps bandwidth reservation for flow 1. After 0.1s, the common bandwidth pool size at node 2 is 43.4Mbps, and the available guaranteed bandwidth at node 1 becomes zero. At 0.12s, node 1 sets up 14.7Mbps bandwidth reservation for flow 2. After 0.12s, the available common bandwidth at node 2 and node 4 are 29.7Mbps and 35.3Mbps, respectively. Node 4 has reserved 14.7Mbps bandwidth for flow 2, even though 10 Mbps of guaranteed bandwidth owned by node 1 remain used. If that 10 Mbps o f bandwidth could be utilized, node 4 would have 10 Mbps more of available common bandwidth that can be used to support other traffic flows. In the next case, the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm is applied for a more efficient use o f the guaranteed bandwidth.

61

R P R .C o m m o n B a n d w id th Pool S iz e - O u te r R ing ( b i t s )
n o d e 2 o f L o t r i c â l n e tw o rk 5 0 , 0 0 0 ,0 0 0

2 0 , 0 0 0 , 000

10 , 0 0 0 , 000

n o d e 4 o f L o c r i c a i n e tw o r k Common B a n d w id th P o o l S i z e - O u t e r R in g ( b i t s ) 5 0 ,0 0 0 , 000 ---------------------------------------4 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0

ao; 000, 000
20 ^ 000 , 000

lo ', 000 , 000

0
Os . Is .2 s

Figure 3.8: Inefficient bandwidth allocation problem with Basic Reservation Algorithm

Case 3.6: Solving the inefficient bandwidth allocation problem by using Hop-bv-hop Reservation Algorithm In this case, the simulation has the same setup as in case 3.5, except that the Hop-byHop Reservation Algorithm is used. Figure 3.9 shows the simulation results. Based on the Hop-by-Hop Reservation Algorithm, node 1 only reserves 4.7 Mbps of common bandwidth on the link from node 4 to node 5. Thus, the available bandwidth at node 4 is 10 Mbps larger than that in case 3.5.

62

R P R .C D m m on B a n d w id th P pol S iz e - O u te r Ring ( b i t s ) _ . node 2 o£ L ooicA l Me W ork Common Bandwxdth P o o l S ize - O u t e r Ring ( h it* )
50,O Q P,000
*

4 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 30.000.000

L

20.000.000
10 , 000,000

; node 4 of L o o i c i l Network Common Bandw idth P o o l s iz e - O uter Ring ( b i t s ) 50 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 --------------, 4 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 3 0 .0 0 0 .0 0 0 20 000.000 10 , 000,000
0

.

I

. Is

.2 s

Figure 3.9; Inefficient bandwidth allocation problem solved by Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm

Case 3.7: Bandwidth reservation and release using the hop-bv-hop reservation algorithm In this case, 7 traffic flows are generated. The traffic parameters for the traffic flows are shown in the following table: Start Stop Source Destination Time Time Flow 1 0.10s 0.50s Node 1 Flow 2 0.12s 0.45s Node 1 Flow 3 0.14s 0.40s Node 1 Flow 4 0.16s 0.35s Node 1 Flow 5 0.10s 0.50s Node 2 Flow 6 0.36s 0.60s Node 3 Flow 7 0.20s 0.55s Node 3 Node 4 Node 5 Node 4 Node 4 Node 1 Node 6 Node 6 Peak Rate B urst Period 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Utilization Equivalent Bandwidth 16.58Mbps 14.70Mbps 14.70Mbps 12.99Mbps 9.74Mbps 12.99Mbps 9.74Mbps

30Mbps 0.004s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s 20Mbps 0.006s 15Mbps 0.008s 20Mbps 0.006s 15Mbps 0.008s

63

Table 3.7 Traffic parameters for classA traffic flows in simulation case 3.7 Figures 3.10 and 3.11 show the simulation results of the available common bandwidth at nodes 2 , 3, 4 and 5. Using these figures, the reservations setup and release using the hopby-hop reservation algorithm will be described in detail below. 1. At 0.1s, node 2 makes a reservation for flow 5. Since node 2 uses the guaranteed bandwidth for the reservation, it does not affect the available common bandwidth. 2. Between 0.1 s and 0.16s, nodes 2, 3 and 4 has reserved the common bandwidth for flows 1-4. After the reservation setup, the available common bandwidth at node 2 and node 3 almost becomes zero; while node 4 only reserved 4.7 Mbps bandwidth for flow 2. It is because only flow 2 actually uses the link between node 4 and node 5. There is no reservation at node 5 for flows 1-4. 3. At 0.2s, a reservation for flow 7 is made. Node 3 uses its guaranteed bandwidth to support the reservation. 4. At 0.35s, flow 4 is terminated. Both nodes 1, 2 and 3 release 12.99Mbps of common bandwidth. 5. At 0.36s, node 3 generated flow 6. Then node 3, 4 and 5 reserve 12.99Mbps bandwidth for flow 6. 6. At 0.40s, flow 3 is terminated. Node 1, node 2 and node 3 release 14.70Mbps of common bandwidth. 7. At 0.45s flow 2 is terminated. Node 1, node 2 and node 3 release 14.70Mbps of common bandwidth; while node 4 release 4.70Mbps of common bandwidth. 8. At 0.50s flow 1 and flow 5 are terminated. After the release of flow 1, Node 1, node 2 and node 3 release 6.58Mbps of common bandwidth. In the case of flow 5, since node 2 does not make any common-bandwidth reservation, no release of common bandwidth occurs. 9. At 0.55s flow 7 is terminated. Node 3, node 4 and node 5 release 9.74Mbps of common bandwidth. 10. At 0.60s flow 6 is terminated. Node 3, 4 and 5 release 2.99Mbps of common bandwidth.

From the above simulation results, we can see that the hop-by-hop reservation algorithm handles the reservation setup and release well. It completely solves guaranteed

64

b a n d w id th h o le p r o b le m .

RPR.Common Bandwidth Pool Size - (kiter Ring Qilts)
" _ .. ^ n o d e 2 o f L o q i c a l n e tw o rk P o o l S iz e - o u t e r R in g ( b i t s )

j

,

'

'

4 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 ; 3 0 . 0 0 0 .0 0 0

 .... Lj

20 000.000
1 0 , 0 0 0 ,0 0 0 0 5 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0

.

.
L

.. n o d e 3 o f L o o i c a i n e tw o r k Common B a n d w i d t h P o o l s i z e - o u t e r R i n g ( b i t s )

4 0 ,0 0 0 ,0 0 0 30, 0 0 0 ,0 0 0 ..

20 , 000,000

^ \ f'' r
0 .2 s 0 .4 s

i/ ' ' 7
Tim#

Figure 3.10: Available common bandwidth pool sizes with Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm

65

É

R P R .C o m m o n B a n d w id th P&ol S iz e - O u te r Ring

d ic a l H HetKforlc n o d e 4 of of L o g e tw o rk côttm on B a n d w id th P o o l s i z e - o u t e r R in g ( b i t s ) 5 0 , 0 0 0 ,0 0 0

L

4 0 . 0 0 0 .0 0 0 3 0 . 0 0 0 .0 0 0

b r J ^

20 000.000 10 , 000,000

.

n o d e 5 o f L o g i c a l N e tw o rk common B a n d w id th P o o l s i z e - o u f e r R in g ( b i t s ) 5 0 , 0 0 0 ,0 0 0 ------------------------------------------4 0 . 0 0 0 .0 0 0 3 0 . 0 0 0 .0 0 0

20 000.000
10 , 0 00 ,0 0 0

.

o!
Os
0.2s 0 ,4 s 0 .6 s

Figure 3.11 : Available common bandwidth pool sizes with Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm

3.10 Conclusion
The dynamic bandwidth allocation using common bandwidth pool method can make the bandwidth usage in the RPR network efficiently. We introduced three bandwidth reservation algorithms in this paper. Each of them has its own advantage and drawback. The Basic Reservation Algorithm is easy to implement, but it may cause the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem and exhibits the inefficient bandwidth allocation problem during the bandwidth reservation process. The Flow-based Reservation Algorithm is more complicated than the Basic Reservation Algorithm. It can eliminate the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem in most cases. But it still has the inefficient bandwidth allocation problem during the bandwidth reservation process. The Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm is the most complicated one. It can completely eliminate the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem and the inefficient bandwidth allocation problem. Note that the three algorithms can be deployed in the same network. It is because only the source node needs to decide which algorithm to use. The

66

transit node and the destination node nse the same mechanism for all three algorithms.

67

Chapter 4 Integration with DiffServ and RSVP
4.1 Integration with Differentiated Services (DiffServ)
RPR and DiffServ have similar QoS structure. The best-effort class, the assured forwarding classes, and the Expedited forwarding class in DiffServ can be mapped to RPR classC, classB, and classA service classes, respectively. In addition, the reservation algorithms proposed here can be incorporated with the bandwidth allocation method used by the DiffServ. More specifically, the DiffServ bandwidth allocation method can use the proposed reservation algorithms to reserve bandwidth at the RPR MAC layer. Figure 4.1 illustrates the integration between the DiffServ bandwidth allocation mechanism and the RPR reservation algorithm.

DiffServ Bandwidth
allocation request IP node

DiffServ Bandwidth

allocation request
IP node

reservation primitives

RPR
RPR node 1 RPR node 2

c>

RPR node 3

RPR-level reservation Figure 4.1 : Interworking between DiffServ and RPR reservations

In the figure, IP node A receives a DiffServ bandwidth allocation request. The request can be generated by a bandwidth booker or some other management entity. Suppose the request is to allocate certain amount of bandwidth for some traffic class from the link from IP node A to IP node B. To make the requested bandwidth allocation, a bandwidth reservation at the RPR MAC layer from node 1 to node 3 is required. The proposed reservation algorithms can be used for the reservation. Note that IP node A (B) and RPR node 1 (3) are logical entities. Usually, they are co-Iocated in the same physical router.

68

Since the bandwidth allocation is relatively static under the DiffServ paradigm, the Hop-by-Hop Reservation algorithm seems to be the best choice among the three proposed reservation algorithms. It is because the Hop-by-Hop Reservation algorithm provides the most efficient mechanism for bandwidth reservation. At the same time, the major drawback o f the algorithm, that it is relatively complex to implement, does not incur a significant processing overhead under the DiffServ operation for reservation requests do not happen very often.

4.2 Integration with Integrated Services (IntServ)
The resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) [9] is the signaling protocol used for reservation in IntServ-enabled networks. The reservation principles adopted by the proposed reservation algorithms and RSVP are quite different. In RSVP, it is the receiver that initiates the reservation; in the proposed reservation algorithms, it is the sender that initiates the reservation. The sender-initiated reservation is chosen for the proposed reservation algorithms because the sender is the only node that can decide how much common bandwidth reservation is required for each flow. RSVP uses soft-state approach to maintain the reservation. That means the reservation must be refreshed periodically; otherwise, the reservation will be released automatically. The proposed reservation algorithms in contrast uses hard-state approach, in which, the reservation will persist until it is released explicitly by exchanging reservation release control packets among nodes. The hard-state approach is chosen because RPR routes do not change as frequently as those in the general IP networks. Consequently, the ability of the soft-state approach in adapting the changes of routes does not provide that much advantage in the RPR environment. On the other hand, the soft-state approach incurs the overhead o f sending reservation packets periodically for each flow. The overhead may significantly affect the performance o f the RPR networks, since we expect the networks will handles tens of thousands o f flows at any given time. The hard-state approach has no such overhead. Even RSVP and the proposed reservation algorithms uses different approaches for reservation, nevertheless, RSVP can still incorporate the proposed reservation algorithms to make reservation at the RPR path between two RS VP-capable routers. Figure 4.2 illustrates the interworking between RSVP and the proposed reservation algorithms. In the figure, the two RSVP-capable routers first exchange RSVP Path and Resv messages

69

(steps 1 and 2). When IP node A receives the Resv message, it will invoke reservation at the MAC layer (steps 3 and 4). This leads to the exchanges of request and ack messages at the MAC layer (steps 5 and 6) based on the proposed reservation algorithms. Finally, if the reservation is successful, node A will receive the confirmation (steps 7 and 8). Since RSVP Path and Resv messages are periodically exchanged between the two routers, a convergence sub-layer is required to distinguish the original RSVP Path and Resv messages from the subsequent RSVP Path and Resv messages. When the RSVP Path message for the already established connection is generated by the RSVP process, the sub layer will not invoke another reservation. Instead, it will automatically generate the RSVP Resv message back to the process. In this way, no new reservation or extra traffic is created in the RPR network. In addition the convergence sub-layer should also issue RSVP Path messages to the downstream IP node (node B in Figure 3.3) periodically. The RSVP Resv messages received in response to the RSVP Path messages will be accepted by the convergence sub-layer and silently discarded. In the event where the reservation has not been refreshed within certain time-out period (this may happen, for instance, when node A has not received any RSVP Path message from its upstream node in a given time-out period), the convergence sub-layer will issue a release primitive, which in turn, invoke the bandwidth release process at the MAC layer based on the proposed reservation algorithms. It must be emphasized that this chapter only provides preliminary outlines on how to integrate the proposed reservation algorithms with DiffServ and IntServ system. More careful study must be done to complete the full integration.

70

9

1. RSVP_Path message IP node

A
^

<3-

2. RSVP Resv message

IP node

B

3. reservation command

8. reservation confirm

IP

V
Convergence Sub-Layer

4. request primitive

7. confirm primitive RPR node 1

^ o

reservation_requests RPR RPR node 2 o RPR node 3

6. RPR reservation acks Figure 4.2: Interworking between IntServ and RPR reservations

71

Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we studied the admission control methods used in RPR networks and proposed the dynamic bandwidth allocation method for classA traffic in RPR network. The simulation results show that with the use of admission control, the delay of classA traffic can be kept small. Most of the delay is introduced by the processing and queueing delay at the source node. Once the traffic enters the RPR network, the total delay introduced by the transit nodes is almost the same as the propagation delay. We studied three admission control methods: Simple Sum, Measured Load and Equivalent Bandwidth, Simple Sum is the simplest one and it is easy to implement, while Equivalent Bandwidth method should be used in the situation where many classA traffic flows are multiplexed. We implemented three reservation algorithms for the dynamic bandwidth allocation method: Basic Reservation Algorithm, Flow-based Reservation Algorithm and Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm. Basic Reservation Algorithm is easy to implement but it is also easy to cause the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem and insufficient bandwidth allocation problem. Flow-based Reservation Algorithm can eliminate the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem in many cases but it still cannot solve the insufficient bandwidth allocation problem. Hop-by-hop Reservation Algorithm is the most complex one but it can completely eliminate the guaranteed bandwidth hole problem and the insufficient bandwidth allocation problem. The three algorithm and be implemented in the same network because only the source node decides which algorithm to use; the transit nodes behave the same in all three algorithms. The dynamic bandwidth allocation method is also integrated well with the existing Internet Quality of Services (QoS) paradigms such as DiffServ and RSVP services. In this thesis, we only focus the admission control and bandwidth allocation methods for the classA unicast traffic in RPR networks. The admission control and bandwidth allocation methods for multicast traffic in RPR networks need further study. In addition, this thesis has not addressed the situation when there is an equipment or facility failure and the two rings are wrapped to form a single ring. In this case the existing reservations will be disrupted and new reservations may be required. A more efficient reservation method to deal with this situation is desirable.

72

Reference
[1] IEEE Draft P802.17/ D2.3 June 16, 2003 [2] RFC 2998. A Framework for Integrated Services Operation over Diffserv Networks [3] RFC 2983: Differentiated Services and Tunnels [4] Isli Hjalmtysson and Alan G. Konheim, "Policing and Traffic Shaping at the UserNetwork-Interface (UNI)", the Journal on Telecommunication Systems Vol. 6, Nos. 3,4, February 1997, pp. 261-288. [5] G. Bianchi, F. Borgonove, A. Capone, L.Fratta and C.Petrioli, "Endpoint Admission Control with Delay Variation Measurements for QoS in IP Networks", ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communications Review, Volume 32 , Issue 2 (April 2002) [6] Sugih Jamin, Scott J. Shenker and Peter B. Danzig, "Comparison of Measurement-based Admission Control Algorithms for Controlled - Load Service", Proc. IEEE INFOCOM '97, April 1997 [7] Sally Floyd, "Comments on Measurement-based Admissions Control for Controlled-Load Services", Technical report, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, July 1996. URL ftp://flp.ee.lbl.gov/papers/admit.ps.Z [8] Roch Guerin, Hamid Ahmadi and Mahmoud Naghshineh, "Equivalent Capacity and Its Application to Bandwidth Allocation in High-Speed Networks", IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 9, no. 7, pp 968-981, 1991. [9] RFC 2210: The Use of RSVP with IETF Integrated Services [10] Sassan Pejhan, Mischa Schwartz, Life Fellow and Dimitris Anastassiou, "Error Control Using Retransmission Schemes in Multicast Transport Protocols for Real-Time Media", lEEE/AC M Transactions on Networking (TON), Volume 4, Issue 3 (June 1996) [11] Nasser M.Marafih, Ya-Qin Zhang and Raymond L. Pickholtz, "Modeling and Queueing Analysis o f Variable-Bit-Rate Coded Video Sources in ATM Networks", Circuits and Systems fo r Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on Volume 4, Issue 2 (Apr 1994) [12] Hans-Peter Schwefel and Lester Lipsky, "Impact of Aggregated, Self-similar ON/OFF Traffic on Delay in Stationary Queueing Models", Performance and Control o f Network Systems III, August 1999, pp. 184-195 [13] Jeong-Soo Han, Seong-Jin Ahn and Jin-Wook Chung, "Study o f delay patterns o f

73

weighted voice traffic of end-to-end users on the VoIP Network", International Journal o f Network Management, Volume 12, Issue 5 (May 2002).

74

