Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2011

The Soul of the Matter: Maurice Maeterlinck, Alvin Langdon Coburn and The Intelligence of the Flowers
Marissa Potvin
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Photography Commons Recommended Citation
Potvin, Marissa, "The Soul of the Matter: Maurice Maeterlinck, Alvin Langdon Coburn and The Intelligence of the Flowers" (2011). Theses and dissertations. Paper 1575.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

        

THE  SOUL  OF  THE  MATTER:  
MAURICE  MAETERLINCK,  ALVIN  LANGDON  COBURN     AND  THE  INTELLIGENCE  OF  THE  FLOWERS            by      Marissa  Potvin   BA  Honours,  Art  History,  Carleton  University,  2007               A  thesis      presented  to  Ryerson  University  and  George  Eastman  House   International  Museum  of  Photography  and  Film         in  partial  fulfillment  of  the      requirements  for  the  degree  of      Master  of  Arts      in  the  Program  of      Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management                  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2011      ©Marissa  Potvin  2011  

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  
         I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for   the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.              I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or  by   other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.  

  

ii  

ABSTRACT  
   Marissa  Potvin   The  Soul  of  the  Matter:  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  and  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers   Master  of  Arts,  2011   Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management   Ryerson  University  and  George  Eastman  House  International  Museum  of  Photography  and  Film    

   The  holiday  edition  of  Maurice  Maeterlinck's  essay  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,   published  in  1907  by  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company  and  illustrated  with  four  photogravures   from  photographs  by  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  (1882  ­  1966),  is  analyzed  in  order  to   address  the  means  by  which  Coburn's  illustrations  reflects  his  antimodernist  desire  to   escape  the  materialism  of  early  twentieth  century  society,  as  this  is  exemplified  through   his  photographic  use  of  mysticism  and  floral  symbolism.  Through  an  examination  of   Coburn's  publications  (notably  his  1906  collaboration  with  the  American  novelist  Henry   James)  and  personal  correspondence  prior  to  1907,  as  well  as  secondary  sources   detailing  the  history  and  context  of  Maeterlinck's  publication,  it  is  argued  that  Coburn   was  interested  in  mysticism  from  the  onset  of  his  photographic  career,  leading  to  an   interest  in  floral  symbolism  including  its  use  by  the  early  twentieth  century  homosexual   community,  and  that  all  of  these  factors  variously  affected  his  use  of  symbolic   illustrations  in  Maeterlinck's  publication.

  

iii  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS    
         I  am  indebted  to  several  specific  individuals  for  the  completion  of  this  thesis,  and  am   grateful  to  even  more  for  their  kind  words  of  support  throughout  the  process.        I  owe  my  deepest  gratitude  to  my  first  reader,  Elspeth  Brown,  whose  notes  and   conversations  helped  me  turn  a  mountain  of  research  into  a  focused  project.  Her   enthusiasm  propelled  my  motivation,  without  which  I  would  have  been  lost.      I  would  also  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  my  second  reader,  David  Harris.  The  interest   and  careful  attention  he  showed  this  body  of  work  during  its  final  stages  of  completion   was  hugely  appreciated.  He  challenged  me  to  be  greater,  and  I  am  so  very  thankful.      Finally,  to  each  and  every  person  who  has  had  to  listen  to  me  ramble  in  half  sentences   and  broken  thoughts  over  the  past  year  about  Coburn  and  Maeterlinck,  you  can  finally   rest  easy.  

  

iv  

DEDICATION  
   For  my  family,  in  every  sense  of  the  word.

  

v  

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  
   List  of  Illustrations   1.  Introduction                                                                                                                                       vii   1   4   12   20   27   34   41   49   55   69  

2.  Literature  Review     

3.  Description  of  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers   4.  Mysticism  at  the  Turn  of  the  Century   5.  Coburn's  Spirituality,  1900  ­  1907     6.  The  History  of  Floral  Symbolism      7.  Coburn's  Interest  in  Floral  Symbolism              

8.  Conclusion:  An  Analysis  of  the  photogravures   Appendix  A:  Illustrations   Bibliography                          

  

vi  

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  
APPENDIX  A:  ILLUSTRATIONS   Figure  1:  Gertrude  Käsebier   [Portrait  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn],  1902  -  1912   Platinum  print,  20.4  x  15.6  cm   GEH  1967:0099:0036   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House      Figure  2:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   Maurice  Maeterlinck,  1915   Photogravure  print,  23  x  17  cm   From  More  Men  of  Mark,  by  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  3:  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  decorated  by  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Cover],  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  1907   New  York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company,  20.9  x  13  x  2.8  cm   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  4:  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Past-down  endpaper  and  free  endpaper  decoration],  1907   20.4  x  12.5  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  5:  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Title  page  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  6:  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  7:  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  decorated  by  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House        

  

vii  

Figure  8:  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  9:  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  10:  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Sundial  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  11:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Water  lilies],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.5  x  9  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  12:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Cascade  of  flowers  in  urn],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.9  x  8.5  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  13:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Garden  vista],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  8.5  x  13.9  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  14:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Sundial],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.8  x  8.9  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  15:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   The  Dolphin  Fountain,  ca.  1910   Photogravure  print,  16.2  x  10.2  cm   GEH  1967:0150:0012   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House      viii  

Figure  16:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Delphiniums],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13  x  9  cm   GEH  1967:0152:0008   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House      Figure  17:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Rose],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  14.1  x  9.2  cm   GEH  1967:0152:0009   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House      Figure  18:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Tree  trunk],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.6  x  9.1  cm   GEH  1967:0152:0010   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House      Figure  19:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   The  Faubourg  St.  Germain,  1906   Gelatin  silver  print,  28.3  x  22.6  cm   GEH  1967:0149:0003   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House      Figure  20:  Adolphe  Braun   [Floral  still  life],  1854-57   Albumen  print,  28.4  x  22.7  cm   GEH  1967:0045:0019   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House      Figure  21:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   Andrew  Lang,  August  27  1904   Photogravure  print,  20.5  x  16.2  cm   GEH  1967:0153:0048   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House  

  

ix  

1.  INTRODUCTION  
A  book  is  a  physical  object,  created  in  one  particular  location  at  a  specific   moment  in  time.  As  though  joined  by  an  invisible  tether  for  the  remainder  of  its   existence,  the  object  can  never  be  absolutely  separated  from  the  period  of  time  in   which  it  originated.  Although  its  history  is  often  forgotten,  neglected  or  even   intentionally  cast  aside,  if  an  individual  were  to  look  hard  enough,  dig  deep  enough,  a   book  will  tell  you  its  story.  This  is  one  such  story.   Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  (1882  ­  1966)  (figure  1)  was  a  photographer  of  many   talents  and  notable  friends,  for  whom  the  ability  to  adapt  a  photographic  process  to  his   own  needs  came  seemingly  effortlessly.  One  of  the  many  processes  mastered  by  the   young  photographer  was  that  of  hand-pulled  photogravure.  Fascinated  with  the  process   throughout  his  career,  Coburn  supervised  the  printing  of  his  photographs  as   photogravures  illustrating  the  work  of  prominent  literary  figures  such  as  Henry  James   (1843  ­  1916)  and  H.G.  Wells  (1866  ­  1946)  from  as  early  as  1906,  going  on  to  publish   compilations  of  his  own  hand-pulled  photogravures  beginning  in  1909.  Although  Coburn   developed  relationships  with  many  notable  figures  throughout  his  lifetime,  one  now   lesser-known  individual  in  Coburn's  history  is  Maurice  Maeterlinck  (1862  ­  1949)  (figure   2).   A  Belgian  poet,  playwright,  and  essayist,  Maeterlinck's  writing,  in  all  its   manifestations,  is  infused  with  symbolism,  and  with  a  mysticism  that  guided  his  life  and   work.  According  to  Welsh  poet  and  essayist  Arthur  Symons  (1865  ­  1945),  "the  whole  

  

1  

aim  of  Maeterlinck  is  to  show  how  mysterious  all  life  is."1  Writer  and  architect  Claude   Bragdon  (1866  ­  1946)  described  him  as  belonging  to  "that  small  Brotherhood  of   Consolation,  who  look  on  men  and  things  with  the  inner  eye  of  the  spirit,  and  keep  open   the  great  road  which  leads  from  the  seen  to  the  unseen."2  According  to  pastor  and   theological  essayist  Paul  Revere  Frothingham  (1864  ­  1926),  Maeterlinck  believed  "that   the  writings  of  the  mystics  are  the  purest  diamonds  in  the  vast  treasures  of  humanity;   their  truths  have  a  strange  privilege  over  ordinary  truths,  for  they  neither  grow  old  nor   die."3  With  this  belief  in  mind,  Maeterlinck  studied  the  writings  of  some  of  the  world's   preeminent  mystics,  believing  himself  not  a  singular  messenger  of  mystical  principles   but  simply  a  descendent  in  a  line  of  mystics  throughout  history.4     By  1907,  Coburn  was  in  the  process  of  illustrating  the  book  that  is  analyzed   throughout  this  essay:  Maeterlinck's  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.  It  is  clear  that  the   work  of  Maeterlinck  had  a  profound  influence  on  Coburn,  his  work,  and  his  life,  though   this  fact  was  never  explicitly  stated  by  Coburn  himself.  What  better  way  to  reveal  clues,   meanderings  and  motivations  from  the  early  years  of  Coburn's  career  than  to  ask  the   object  that  initially  brought  the  pair  together:  the  book.  Published  in  1907,  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  is  illustrated  with  four  photogravures  from  photographs  by   Coburn,  and  a  copy  is  currently  housed  in  the  collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay   Menschel  Library  at  George  Eastman  House  (GEH),  bequeathed  by  the  photographer  in                                                                                                                    1   Arthur  Symons,  "Maeterlinck  As  a  Mystic,"  The  Contemporary  Review  72   (1897):  352.   2   Claude  Bragdon,  "Maeterlinck,"  The  Critic  45  (1904):  156.   3   Paul  Revere  Frothingham,  "The  Mysticism  of  Maeterlinck,"  The  Harvard   Theological  Review  5,  no.  2  (1912):  257.   4   Ibid,  256.      2  

1967  as  part  of  the  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  collection.5  Through  its  analysis,  this  essay  will   address  the  means  by  which  Coburn's  illustration  of  the  publication  reflects  his  desire  to   escape  the  rampant  materialism  of  early  twentieth  century  society,  exemplified  through   his  use  of  mysticism  and  floral  symbolism.     In  order  to  fully  explore  Coburn's  aversion  towards  materialism,  the  following   essay  is  divided  into  eight  sections.  Following  the  literature  review  and  description  of   The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  (in  sections  two  and  three),  the  debate  between  science   and  spirituality  that  arose  during  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  is  outlined  in   section  four,  Mysticism  at  the  Turn  of  the  Century,  explaining  the  growth  of  interest  in   mysticism  by  the  latter  decades  of  the  century,  therefore  placing  Maeterlinck's   publication  within  its  appropriate  historical  context.  Section  five,  Coburn's  Spirituality,   1900  ­  1907,  provides  evidence  of  Coburn's  leaning  toward  spirituality  as  a  system  of   belief  rather  than  science  prior  to  his  illustration  of  Maeterlinck's  essay,  resulting  in  his   introduction  to  a  form  of  visual  symbolism  as  a  device  to  escape  the  reality  of   materialism  through  his  collaboration  with  Henry  James  between  1906  and  1907.  The   history  of  floral  symbolism  in  the  nineteenth  century  is  subsequently  discussed  in   section  six,  The  History  of  Floral  Symbolism,  incorporating  Alison  Syme's  recent  scholarly                                                                                                                    5   The  entire  Coburn  collection  consists  of  "over  1700  negatives  and  2000  prints   of  photographs  taken  by  Coburn"  housed  in  the  Print  Collection,  "cameras,  lenses  and   associated  equipment"  housed  in  the  Technology  Collection,  as  well  as  personal   correspondence,  written  works,  scrapbooks  and  ephemera  housed  in  the  Richard  and   Ronay  Menschel  Library  along  with  "copies  of  all  of  Coburn's  books."  For  a  detailed   finding  aid  of  the  collection,  see  Notes  on  Photographs,  "Finding  Aid  to  the  Papers  and   Ephemera  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,"  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George   Eastman  House  International  Museum  of  Photography  and  Film,   http://notesonphotographs.org/index.php?title=Coburn,_Alvin_Langdon:_Finding_Aid_t o_the_Papers_and_Ephemera_of_Alvin_Langdon_COBURN  (accessed  August  9,  2011).      3  

writings  on  the  naturalization  of  non-reproductive  sexuality  through  floral  symbolism.   This  history  of  floral  symbolism  provides  further  context  to  both  the  publication  as  well   as  Coburn's  interest  in  the  subject  matter.  Section  seven,  Coburn's  Interest  in  Floral   Symbolism,  describes  the  connections  between  Coburn  and  floral  symbolism,  as  well  as   his  connection  to  the  early  twentieth  century  homosexual  community.  This   interpretation  of  Coburn's  interests  further  supports  Coburn's  use  of  the  illustrations  in   The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  to  escape  materialism  and  conservative  thought  by   arguing  that  that  Coburn  may  have  used  floral  symbolism  in  an  effort  to  naturalize   homosexuality  in  a  spiritual  manner.  The  essay  concludes  with  an  analysis  of  the  four   photogravures  used  to  illustrate  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  in  section  eight,  in   relation  to  the  two  contexts  discussed  throughout  the  essay,  in  order  to  highlight  the   ways  in  which  Coburn's  interest  in  both  mysticism  and  floral  symbolism  were  translated   into  photography.       

2.  LITERATURE  REVIEW  
   The  existing  scholarship  on  these  subjects  is  scattered  and  diverse,  as  it  covers  a  

range  of  sources  concerning  Coburn,  Maeterlinck,  and  their  joint  publication  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.  Although  primary  sources  were  predominantly  used  to   research  this  essay's  main  figures,  Coburn  and  Maeterlinck,  secondary  sources  were   required  to  fill  in  gaps  in  context,  history,  and  culture.  In  this  chapter,  the  decisions   made  and  the  sources  consulted  while  researching  this  essay  are  discussed  in  order  to  

  

4  

give  the  reader  a  better  sense  of  where  it  and  its  research  fits  into  the  existing  body  of   work  produced  about  Coburn.      In  order  to  understand  Coburn,  his  personality,  and  his  approach  to  photography  

and  printing,  there  is  no  better  source  than  the  photographer's  own  writing  ­  and  there   is  a  great  deal  of  it.  Coburn  was  an  avid  writer,  publishing  a  number  of  articles  in  the   periodicals  of  his  time  on  topics  such  as  his  projects,6  his  photographic  techniques  and   methodology,7  as  well  as  his  thoughts  and  ideologies  concerning  art.8  These  articles   inform  this  essay  in  diverse  ways  depending  on  when  they  were  written.  Those  written   before  the  publication  of  Maeterlinck's  book  in  1907  are  used  to  locate  signs  of   Coburn's  interest  in  mysticism,  while  articles  written  after  19079  are  used  to  establish  a   trajectory  of  influence  and  interest  throughout  the  photographer's  career.  In  addition  to   his  articles,  Coburn's  autobiography10  provides  a  retrospective  of  his  life  and  work,  as   well  as  compelling  anecdotes  that  help  identify  the  friends  that  Coburn  kept,  the  circles   in  which  he  moved,  and  the  likely  influences  that  may  have  emanated  from  these   experiences.                                                                                                                      6   See  Coburn's  series  of  articles  detailing  his  trips  to  various  Missions  in  California   in  1902  such  as  "The  California  Missions:  San  Fernando  Rey,"  Photo  Era  9,  no.  2  (1902):   51-53  and  "The  California  Missions:  Santa  Barbara,"  Photo  Era  9,  no.  3  (1902):  116-118.   7   See,  for  example,  "Photogravure,"  Platinum  Print  1,  no.  1  (1913):  1-5  and  "Alvin   Langdon  Coburn,  Artist-Photographer,"  The  Pall  Mall  Magazine  51,  no.  242  (1913):  757- 763.   8   Such  as  "American  Photographs  in  London,"  Photo  Era  6,  no.  1  (1901):  209-215   and  "The  Relation  of  Time  to  Art,"  Camera  Work,  no.  36  (1911):  72-73.   9   See,  for  example,  "Photography  and  the  Quest  for  Beauty,"  The  Photographic   Journal  64,  no.  48  (1924):  159-167  and  "Retrospect,"  The  Photographic  Journal  98   (1957):  36-40.   10   Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An   Autobiography  with  Over  70  Reproductions  of  His  Works,  ed.  Helmut  and  Alison   Gernsheim  (New  York:  Dover  Publications,  Inc.,  1966).      5  

Traveling  further  still  into  Coburn's  personal  thoughts  and  activities,  a   fundamental  collection  of  primary  documents  exists  in  the  photographer's  papers,   correspondence,  and  ephemera  bequeathed  to  George  Eastman  House  and  housed  in   its  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library.  This  collection  provides  evidence  of  the  writers   and  artists  with  whom  Coburn  was  in  regular  contact,  such  as  George  Bernard  Shaw   (1856  ­  1950)  and  Alfred  Stieglitz  (1864  ­  1946),  the  interests  of  those  individuals,  as   well  as  the  ways  in  which  Coburn  spent  his  time,  be  it  photographing  notable  figures,   traveling  with  friends  and  family,  or  taking  part  in  religious  ceremonies  and  rituals.        While  Coburn  was  alive  and  writing  about  his  work,  however,  other  writers  

likewise  took  up  Coburn  as  subject  matter,  thus  preserving  information  about  the   reception  and  contemporary  opinions  about  the  photographer  and  his  bodies  of  work.   Of  the  time  period  surrounding  the  publication  of  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  (from   approximately  1902-1913),  exhibition  reviews  are  the  most  common  source  of   information.  Although  exhibitions  are  not  discussed  in  this  examination  of  Maeterlinck's   book,  these  reviews  reveal  that  Coburn's  work  was  received  in  both  America  and   England,  almost  without  fail,  in  a  very  positive  way.11        The  articles  and  books  produced  about  Coburn  since  his  death  in  1966  provide  

an  overview  of  his  photographic  career  and  lifelong  passions,  including  mysticism.  Many   articles  take  as  their  subject  the  examination  of  the  well-know  relationship  between                                                                                                                    11   See,  for  example,  Sidney  Allan,  "Exhibition  of  the  Photo-Secession,"  The   Photographic  Times  Bulletin  36,  no.  3  (1904):  97-105,  George  Bernard  Shaw,   "Photographs  By  Mr.  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,"  The  Amateur  Photographer  43,  no.  1114   (1906):  111-112,  Frederick  H.  Evans,  "The  London  Photographic  Salon  for  1906,"  Camera   Work,  no.  17  (1907):  30-33  and  Sidney  Allan,  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  ­  Secession   Portraiture,"  Wilson's  Photographic  Magazine  44  (1907):  251-252.        6  

Coburn  and  Henry  James12  that  developed  through  Coburn's  illustration  of  James's  New   York  Edition.  Additional  publications  focus  more  broadly  on  the  history  of  Coburn's   career  and  the  personal  relationships  formed  along  the  way.13  Particularly  useful  for  its   analysis  of  Coburn  is  Aperture's  monograph,14  in  which  Mike  Weaver,  then  Reader  in   American  Literature  at  Oxford  University  and  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Photography   Advisory  Group  of  the  Arts  Council  of  Great  Britain,  discusses  Coburn  in  regards  to  his   symbolist  and  mystical  tendencies.  In  addition,  a  bibliography  and  chronology  of  the   major  events  in  Coburn's  life  are  supplied  in  the  monograph,  providing  a  helpful  starting   point  for  mystical  literature,  as  well  as  a  useful  reference  for  dating  activities  and   publications  in  Coburn's  life.   Throughout  the  primary  and  secondary  material,  three  related  instances  occur  in   which  Coburn  and  Maeterlinck  intersect  directly.  The  first  intersection  is  in  a  short  letter   from  Maeterlinck  to  Coburn,15  dated  June  30th  1915,  in  which  Maeterlinck  writes  to  set   up  a  time  for  Coburn  to  take  his  portrait.  The  second  instance  occurs  in  Coburn's                                                                                                                    12   See,  for  example,  Joseph  J.  Firebaugh,  "Coburn:  Henry  James's  Photographer,"   American  Quarterly  7,  no.  3  (1955):  213-233,  Leon  Edel,  Henry  James,  the  Master:  1901- 1916  (Philadelphia  and  New  York:  J.B.  Lippincott  Co.,  1972)  and  Betsy  L.  Jablow,   "Illustrated  Texts  from  Dickens  to  James,"  PhD  diss.  (Stanford  University,  1978).   13   See  Paul  Blatchford,  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,"  in  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  1882- 1966:  An  Exhibition  of  Photographs  from  the  International  Museum  of  Photography,   George  Eastman  House,  Rochester,  New  York  (London:  Arts  Council  of  Great  Britain,   1978),  an  exhibition  catalog,  and  Karl  Steinorth  ed.,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn:  Photographs   1900-1924  (Zürich,  New  York:  Edition  Stemmle,  1998).   14   Mike  Weaver,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Symbolist  Photographer,  1882-1966:   Beyond  the  Craft  (New  York:  Aperture,  1986).   15   Letter  from  Maurice  Maeterlinck  to  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  dated  June  30th,   1915.  Papers  and  Ephemera  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Box  8,  Item  621,  Richard  and   Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House:  International  Museum  of  Photography   and  Film,  Rochester,  New  York.      7  

preface  to  his  More  Men  of  Mark,16  a  series  of  photographs  for  which  Maeterlinck's   portrait  was  taken  on  July  2nd,  1915.  In  the  book's  preface,  Coburn  discusses  his   relationship  with  Maeterlinck  (as  he  does  with  each  of  his  `men  of  mark'),  stating  "for   sixteen  years  I  was  an  admirer  of  the  writings  of  Maurice  Maeterlinck  before  I   photographed  him."17  Having  photographed  Maeterlinck  in  1915,  it  can  thus  be   assumed  that  Coburn  was  first  introduced  to  the  writer's  work  around  1899.18  Finally,   Coburn  describes  the  third  instance  in  his  autobiography,  explaining  that  following  the   aforementioned  1915  portrait  session,  "the  great  Belgian  writer  did  me  the  honour  of   calling  upon  me  to  collect  his  prints,  and  inscribed  a  copy  of  the  book  I  had  illustrated."19   This,  however,  is  the  only  primary  evidence  connecting  the  two  men.  As  this  information   does  not  provide  evidence  as  to  why  Coburn  decided  to  illustrate  Maeterlinck's  essay  in   1907,  an  analysis  of  Coburn's  interests,  in  addition  to  the  indirect  connections  between   Coburn  and  Maeterlinck,  create  a  more  complete  picture  of  the  joining  forces  between   the  two  men.        Primary  and  secondary  research  on  Maeterlinck,  on  the  other  hand,  focused  on  

acquiring  a  general  picture  of  the  writer's  work,  beliefs,  and  writing  style  in  order  to   clarify  Coburn's  attraction  to  the  writer.  Contemporary  biographical  texts,20  for                                                                                                                    16   Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  More  Men  of  Mark  (London:  Duckworth  &  Co.,  1922).   17   Ibid,  17.   18   See  page  47  for  a  detailed  discussion  of  Coburn's  introduction  to  Maeterlinck.   19   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  100.   20   For  example  Gérard  Harry,  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  a  Biographical  Study,  with   Two  Essays  by  M.  Maeterlinck,  trans.  Alfred  R.  Allinson  (London:  G.  Allen  &  Sons,  1910),   Montrose  Jonas  Moses,  Maurice  Maeterlinck:  A  Study  (New  York:  Duffield  &  Company,   1911)  and  Jethro  Bithell,  Life  and  writings  of  Maurice  Maeterlinck  (London,  New  York:   Walter  Scott  Publishing  Company,  1913).      8  

example,  often  describe  the  writer's  character,  as  well  as  the  diversity  and  quantity  of   work  accomplished  by  Maeterlinck  throughout  his  career.  Maeterlinck's  publications,  on   the  other  hand,  are  an  invaluable  source  from  which  to  understand  his  personal  mystical   philosophy,  as  well  as  the  way  in  which  the  term  mysticism21  was  understood  and   received  at  the  time.  Although  the  original  editions  of  Maeterlinck's  volumes  were   published  in  French,  due  to  his  popularity  in  Western  culture  at  the  time  of  his  writing,   nearly  all  of  his  books  were  published  in  English22  and  French  simultaneously.   Additionally,  contemporary  authors  wrote  many  articles23  about  the  mysticism  of   Maeterlinck's  work  during  the  early  twentieth  century.      Broadening  the  spectrum  beyond  the  range  of  Coburn  and  Maeterlinck,  the  

debate  between  science  and  spirituality  was  gaining  momentum  throughout  the   nineteenth  and  into  the  twentieth  century,  generating  the  context  within  which  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  was  published.  Sources  describing  this  development  are   therefore  important  in  placing  Maeterlinck's  essay  within  its  appropriate  context.   However,  understanding  this  context  becomes  difficult  when  attempting  to  produce  a   broad  history  of  the  divide  between  science  and  spirituality  after  the  mid  nineteenth                                                                                                                    21   For  more  information  regarding  the  history  and  meaning  of  mysticism,  see  F.C.   Happold,  Mysticism:  A  Study  and  an  Anthology  (Baltimore:  Penguin  Books,  Inc.,  1963)   and  Steven  T.  Katz,  ed.,  Mysticism  and  Religious  Traditions  (New  York:  Oxford  University   Press,  1997).   22   See,  for  example,  Ruysbroeck  and  the  Mystics,  trans.  Jane  T.  Stoddart  (London:   Hodder  &  Stoughton,  1891),  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  trans.  Alexander  Teixeira  de   Mattos  (New  York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company,  1907),  and  The  Buried  Temple,  trans.   Alfred  Sutro  (New  York:  Dodd  Mead  and  Company,  1911).   23   See,  for  example,  Arthur  Symons,  "Maeterlinck  As  a  Mystic,"  The   Contemporary  Review  72  (1897):  349-354,  Claude  Bragdon,  "Maeterlinck,"  The  Critic  45   (1904):  156-158,  and  Paul  Revere  Frothingham,  "The  Mysticism  of  Maeterlinck,"  The   Harvard  Theological  Review  5,  no.  2  (1912):  251-268.      9  

century.  The  problem  arises  from  the  large  number  of  societies  and  organizations  that   arose  on  both  sides  of  the  debate,  such  as  Spiritualism  and  Positivism,  and  the   similarities  between  them.  Unfortunately,  publications  tend  to  focus  on  specific   organizations  rather  than  survey  the  entire  period.  For  this  reason,  introductions  and   prefaces  to  books  focusing  on  particular  organizations,24  whether  scientific  or  spiritual,   are  helpful  in  garnering  an  understanding  of  the  whole  debate.  Publications  that  discuss   the  entire  subject  matter,25  on  the  other  hand,  tend  to  do  so  from  the  standpoint  of   scientific  naturalism.  These  are  nonetheless  excellent  sources  from  which  to  gain  an   understanding  of  the  scientific  world  during  this  time  and  the  way  that  it  related  to   spirituality.      In  addition  to  aspects  of  science  and  spirituality  that  are  found  throughout  The  

Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  floral  symbolism  is  likewise  an  essential  component  of  the   book,  and  the  history  of  its  use  throughout  the  nineteenth  century  helps  to  inform  one   of  the  two  contexts  of  Maeterlinck's  book.  Of  the  texts  devoted  to  the  symbolic  use  of   flowers  in  the  nineteenth  century,  most  are  historical  and  cultural  accounts  of  floral  

                                                                                                                 24   See,  for  example,  Tom  Sorell,  Scientism  (New  York:  Routledge,  1991),  Bret  E.   Carroll,  Spiritualism  in  Antebellum  America  (Bloomington:  Indiana  University  Press,   1997),  Robert  Laurence  Moore,  In  Search  of  White  Crows:  Spiritualism,  Parapsychology,   and  American  Culture  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1997),  and  Rudolph  Steiner,   Madame  Blavatsky,  and  Theosophy:  An  Eyewitness  View  of  Occult  History  (Great   Barrington,  MA:  Anthroposophic  Press,  2001).   25   See,  for  example,  Frank  Miller  Turner,  Between  Science  and  Religion:  The   Reaction  to  Scientific  Naturalism  in  Late  Victorian  England  (New  Haven:  Yale  University   Press,  1974),  J.A.V.  Chapple,  Science  and  Literature  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  (London:   Macmillan,  1986),  and  Richard  Holmes,  The  Age  of  Wonder:  How  the  Romantic   Generation  Discovered  the  Beauty  and  Terror  of  Science  (New  York:  Pantheon  Books,   2008).        10  

symbolism  and  the  `language  of  flowers,'26  or  discussions  of  the  pointed  use  of  floral   symbolism  in  art,27  while  one  text,  Flora  Photographica,  Masterpieces  of  Flower   Photography:  1835  to  the  Present,28  is  dedicated  to  the  discussion  of  flowers  used  in   photography.  These  publications  provide  a  thorough  and  varied  history  of  flowers  in  art   and  society,  creating  an  entry  point  for  the  discussion  of  floral  symbolism  within  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.   Further  research  into  floral  symbolism,  however,  suggests  supplementary   motives  as  to  Coburn's  resolve  to  illustrate  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  with  floral   imagery.  In  Alison  Syme's  recent  publication,29  the  author  discusses  the  use  of  flowers   and  floral  symbolism  by  the  Western  fin-de-siècle  homosexual  community  as  markers  or   codes,  as  a  covert  way  of  referring  to  non-reproductive  sexuality.  Since  Coburn   scholarship  to  date  does  not  address  the  photographer's  sexuality  (though  it  is  most   frequently  assumed  that  Coburn  was  heterosexual),  it  can  be  argued  that  Syme's   premise  presents  a  bridge  between  Coburn  and  the  early  twentieth  century  homosexual   community  and  the  role  of  Coburn's  cousin,  F.  Holland  Day,30  in  this  respect.                                                                                                                    26   See  Beverly  Seaton,  The  Language  of  Flowers:  A  History  (Charlottesville  and   London:  University  Press  of  Virginia,  1995).   27   Ella  M.  Foshay,  Reflections  of  Nature:  Flowers  in  American  Art  (New  York:   Weathervane  Books,  1984).   28   William  A.  Ewing,  Flora  Photographica,  Masterpieces  of  Flower  Photography:   1835  to  the  Present  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1991).     29   Alison  Syme,  A  Touch  of  Blossom:  John  Singer  Sargent  and  the  Queer  Flora  of   Fin-de-Siècle  Art  (University  Park,  PA:  The  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press,  2010).   30   For  information  about  F.  Holland  Day,  his  work,  and  career,  see  for  example   Estelle  Jussim,  Slave  To  Beauty:  The  Eccentric  Life  and  Controversial  Career  of  F.  Holland   Day,  Photographer,  Publisher,  Aesthete  (Boston:  David  R.  Godine,  1981),  Verna  Posever   Curtis  and  Jane  Van  Nimmen,  eds.,  F.  Holland  Day:  Selected  Texts  and  Bibliography  (New   York:  G.K.  Hall,  1995),  and  Patricia  J.  Fanning,  ed.,  New  Perspectives  on  F.  Holland  Day:      11  

The  use  of  primary  and  secondary  sources,  which  range  from  biographical  and   historical  to  social  and  editorial,  has  inevitably  led  to  a  multidisciplinary  approach  to  the   interpretation  of  the  book.  With  an  understanding  of  the  work  and  beliefs  of  Coburn   and  Maeterlinck,  the  history  and  various  contexts  of  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers   illuminates  the  reasons  why  Coburn  was  attracted  to  the  book's  illustration  and  his  use   of  floral  illustrations  as  symbols  representing  his  interest  in  mysticism  and  his  desire  to   escape  a  highly  materialistic  society.  This  cannot  be  fully  appreciated,  however,  without   a  close  study  of  the  book  as  an  object.     

3.  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  INTELLIGENCE  OF  THE  FLOWERS  
By  the  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the  name  of  Maeterlinck  was   exceptionally  well  known  as  playwright  and  essayist,  and  over  a  period  of  a  few  years,   Maeterlinck  would  use  scientific  observation  to  support  his  mystical  ideas.  Continually   building  his  oeuvre,  Maeterlinck  published  his  first  study  of  the  natural  world  in  1901   under  the  title  La  Vie  des  Abeilles,31  published  in  English  as  The  Life  of  the  Bee.32  With   the  success  of  his  foray  into  scientific  study  and  observation,  Maeterlinck  succeeded  his   first  nature  study  with  a  collection  of  essays  on  nature,  politics,  and  immortality,  among                                                                                                                    Selected  Presentations  from  the  Fred  Holland  Day  In  Context  Symposium  Held  at   Stonehill  College  North  Easton,  Massachusetts  April  19,  1997  (North  Easton,  Mass.:   Stonehill  College,  1998).   31   Maurice  Maeterlinck,  La  Vie  des  Abeilles  (Paris:  Bibliothèque-Charpentier,   1901).   32   Maeterlinck,  The  Life  of  the  Bee  (London:  George  Allen,  1901).  For  an  overview   of  Maeterlinck's  work  and  the  context  in  which  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  was   written,  see  Philip  Mosley,  introduction  to  The  Intelligence  of  Flowers,  by  Maurice   Maeterlinck  (Albany:  The  State  University  of  New  York  Press,  2008),  IX-XXVII.      12  

other  things,  bearing  the  title  L'Intelligence  des  Fleurs33  (or  The  Intelligence  of  the   Flowers,  in  its  English  incarnation).  The  eponymous  essay  in  L'Intelligence  des  Fleurs  was   first  published  in  English  as  a  series  of  articles  in  Harper's  Monthly  magazine  in   December  1906,  February  1907  and  March  1907.34  Following  on  its  heels,  New  York's   Dodd,  Mead  and  Company  published  the  essay  in  The  Measure  of  the  Hours,35  the  same   collection  of  essays  that  formed  the  French  edition  of  L'Intelligence  des  Fleurs,  with  the   inclusion,  however,  of  one  additional  essay.36  Ruskin  House  in  London  published  this   same  book  concurrently,  under  the  title  Life  and  Flowers.37  In  December  of  1907,  Dodd,   Mead  and  Company  published  a  "Holiday  Edition"38  of  Maeterlinck's  essay,  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers39  ­  the  object  of  study  in  this  essay.   Differing  from  the  publishing  house's  previous  publications  in  style  and  design,   the  holiday  edition  of  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  is  highly  decorated  by  bookplate   designer  William  Edgar  Fisher  (1872  ­  1956).  Observable  in  figure  3,  the  cover  of  the   book  is  covered  in  green  paper,  ornamented  with  a  floral  design  and  an  applied  green                                                                                                                    33   Maeterlinck,  L'Intelligence  des  Fleurs  (Paris:  Bibliothèque-Charpentier,  1907).   34   C.  Stuart  Gager,  "Science  and  Poetry  ­  A  Protest,"  Science  N.S.  25,  no.  649   (1907):  908.   35   Maeterlinck,  The  Measure  of  the  Hours,  trans.  Alexander  Teixeira  de  Mattos   (New  York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company,  1907).   36   The  essay  "Rome"  was  not  included  in  the  original  French  edition  of   L'Intelligence  des  Fleurs,  but  was  included  in  both  the  New  York  and  London  editions  of   the  collection  of  essays.   37   Maeterlinck,  Life  and  Flowers,  trans.  Alexander  Teixeira  de  Mattos  (London:   Ruskin  House,  1907).   38   The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  was  included  among  several  of  Maeterlinck's   other  titles  as  "Holiday  Editions,"  listed  in  the  publisher's  advertisement  printed  in   Maeterlinck's  The  Buried  Temple,  trans.  Alfred  Sutro  (New  York:  Dodd,  Mead  and   Company,  1911).   39   Maeterlinck,  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.      13  

label  stating  the  volume's  title  and  author.  Opening  the  cover,  a  similar  floral  decoration   pervades  the  paste-down  endpaper  and  free  endpaper  of  the  front  and  back,  as  seen  in   figure  4.  Fisher's  decorations  fill  the  porous,  textured  pages  of  the  book,  appearing  as  a   piping  herm  of  pan  flanked  by  pruned  rose  bushes  on  the  title  page  (figure  5),  and  as   four  variations  of  a  decorative  floral  border  alternately  surrounding  the  text  of  each   page  (figures  6  through  9).  Though  it  seems  easy  to  dismiss  this  decoration  as  whimsical   and  superficial,  Fisher  broke  tradition  as  a  bookplate  designer  in  the  early  twentieth   century,  using  his  designs  for  symbolic  and  associative  reasons  rather  than  to  simply   beautify  the  page.40  His  decoration  of  Maeterlinck's  book  was  intentional  and   deliberate,  including  floral  motifs  as  well  as  a  beehive  (see  figure  7)  and  sundial  (figure   10),  referencing  Maeterlinck's  previous  nature  studies.   Coburn  illustrated  the  publication  with  four  untitled  photogravures,  heightening   the  symbolism  that  is  already  prominent  within  the  book's  text  and  decoration.  The   frontispiece  for  the  publication  (figure  11)  depicts  three  water  lilies  sitting  on  the   water's  surface  in  a  sea  of  lily  pads.  The  second  photogravure  (figure  12),  facing  page   44,  shows  a  cascade  of  flowers  planted  in  an  urn,  sitting  in  a  garden  bed  that  is  bordered   by  stone.  Figure  13  illustrates  the  third  photogravure,  facing  page  92,  of  a  meticulously   groomed  garden  vista.  This  same  image  was  later  printed  in  Coburn's  1913  book  Moor   Park41  as  plate  VI,  "The  Italian  Garden."  The  fourth  photogravure  in  Maeterlinck's  book,                                                                                                                    40   W.G.  Bowdoin,  "American  Designers  of  Book-Plates:  WM.  Edgar  Fisher,"  in   Book-Plates  of  To-Day,  ed.  Wilbur  Macey  Stone  (New  York:  Tonnelé  &  Company,  1902),   3.   41   Coburn,  Moor  Park  (London:  Duckworth  &  Co.,  1913).  This  publication  contains   a  series  of  photographs  by  Coburn  of  the  mansion  and  grounds  of  Moor  Park,  located  in      14  

facing  page  140,  was  subsequently  published  in  Moor  Park  as  plate  III,  "The  Sun  Dial"   (figure  14).     Although  there  is  no  documentation  noting  where  the  first  two  images  from  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  were  taken,  due  to  similarities  in  detail,  it  is  possible  that  all   four  photogravures  were  made  from  photographs  taken  at  Moor  Park.  In  figure  12,  for   example,  the  edging  of  the  flowerbed  is  composed  of  two  long  pieces  of  stone,  meeting   at  the  corner  with  one  triangular  stone.  This  same  type  of  stone  edging  exists  in  the   garden  cutting  through  the  middle  ground  of  figure  14,  a  photograph  that  was  definitely   taken  at  Moor  Park.  Additional  evidence  suggests  that  the  frontispiece  from  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  (figure  11)  may  have  been  taken  in  Moor  Park  as  well.   Although  the  photograph  could  easily  have  been  taken  elsewhere,  water  lilies  are  clearly   visible  in  the  pool  of  The  Dolphin  Fountain  (figure  15),  plate  XII  in  Moor  Park,  displaying   flowers  that  are  well  spaced  out,  as  are  those  in  Coburn's  print  published  in  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.     Likewise  uncertain  is  the  year  during  which  Coburn  took  the  photographs  used   to  illustrate  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.  Although  the  book  was  published  in  1907,  all   four  photogravures  are  undated,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  images  were  taken  by   Coburn  in  1906.  In  Aperture's  Monograph  on  Coburn,  Mike  Weaver  explains  that   Coburn  had  been  introduced  to  Lady  Ebury,  owner  of  Moor  Park,  by  Henry  James,  and  

                                                                                                                 Hertfordshire,  England,  a  preface  by  Lady  Ebury,  who  resided  at  Moor  Park  in  Coburn's   time  and  was  his  pupil  in  photography,  describing  the  history  of  Moor  Park,  as  well  as  a   selection  from  the  writings  of  William  Temple,  seventeenth  century  author  and   statesman  who  was  so  fond  of  Moor  Park  that  he  named  his  own  property  after  it.      15  

that  the  images  taken  by  Coburn  of  Moor  Park  might  have  been  made  in  1906.42  Dr.   Francis  Ebury,  photography  and  art  historian  at  the  University  of  Melbourne,  likewise   dates  some  of  Coburn's  Moor  Park  images  to  1906,  explaining  "although  Maeterlinck's   book  came  out  in  1907,  publication  lead  times  make  1906  a  plausible  date  for  the   photographs."43     It  is  similarly  unclear  who  was  responsible  for  the  inclusion  of  specific   photogravures  in  the  publication,  which  establish  the  book's  mood  and  tone.  Based  on   contemporaneous  practice,  it  is  possible  that  Coburn  sent  the  publisher,  Dodd,  Mead   and  Company,  a  selection  of  prints  with  which  to  illustrate  the  book,  leaving  the  final   decision  in  the  hands  of  the  publisher.  This  theory  is  strengthened  by  the  existence  of   three  additional  photogravures  (figures  16,  17  and  18)  bequeathed  to  GEH  in  the  Alvin   Langdon  Coburn  collection.  Although  the  color  of  the  additional  photogravures  differs   from  those  in  Maeterlinck's  publication,  they  were  acquired  alongside  similarly  brown- toned  versions  of  the  four  photogravures  used  to  illustrate  The  Intelligence  of  the   Flowers,  leading  to  the  possibility  that  Coburn  had  submitted  seven  images  and  that   three  prints  were  rejected  for  the  publication.     The  text  and  style  of  the  essay  itself  is  likewise  intriguing,  as  it  offers  a   fascinating  combination  of  scientific  fact  and  mystical  theory  common  in  Maeterlinck's   writing  style.  In  the  most  general  sense,  Maeterlinck's  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  is  a   study  of  flowers.  More  specifically,  it  is  a  declaration  of  the  author's  mysticism,  a                                                                                                                    42   Weaver,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Symbolist  Photographer,  28.   43   Francis  Ebury,  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  at  Moor  Park,"  History  of  Photography   29,  no.  1  (2005):  36.      16  

commentary  on  the  nature  of  the  "genius  of  the  earth,"44  Maeterlinck's  term  for  what   Philip  Mosley,  Professor  of  English,  Communications,  and  Comparative  Literature  at   Penn  State  University  refers  to  in  his  introduction  to  a  2008  edition  of  The  Intelligence  of   the  Flowers  as  an  "all-encompassing  spiritual  force"  that  "brings  [Maeterlinck]  as  close   to  religious  belief  [or  the  divine]  as  he  allows."45  Throughout  the  essay,  Maeterlinck   describes  the  "wisdom  and  ingenuity"46  of  various  species  of  plants  through  the   description  of  their  pollination  and  fertilization  processes,  using  precise  detail  acquired   through  scientific  observation  and  study.  Maeterlinck  makes  use  of  the  flower's   reproductive  process,  its  composition,  mechanics,  and  evolution  over  time,  as  evidence   of  the  intelligence  of  flowers.  He  goes  on  to  explain  that  through  this  process  of   perfecting  their  ability  to  pollinate  and  fertilize,  flowers  are  able  to  overcome  their   destiny  of  being  rooted  to  the  ground  by  propelling  their  seeds  away  from  themselves   and,  essentially,  learning  to  fly.47  Maeterlinck  concludes  his  essay  by  explaining  that  it  is   not  the  study  of  the  single  species  of  flower  that  is  of  importance,  but  the  ways  in  which   that  flower  reflects,  in  his  words,  the  "genius  of  the  earth"  that  flows  through  it.48     Although  many  different  types  of  mysticism  have  existed  for  centuries,   mysticism  has  recently  been  defined  by  University  of  California  historian  and  author  Hal   Bridges,  as  the  "selfless,  direct,  transcendent,  unitive  experience  of  God  or  ultimate  

                                                                                                                 44   Maeterlinck,  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  165.   45   Philip  Mosley,  introduction  to  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  xxii.   46   Maeterlinck,  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  8.   47   Ibid,  11-12.   48   Ibid,  154-155.      17  

reality,  and  the  experient's  interpretation  of  that  experience,"49  such  as  is  found  in   Maeterlinck's  mystical  writing.  There  is  not  one  singular  type  of  mysticism,  but  rather   many  different  forms  as  experienced  by  countless  individuals.  The  mystic,  according  to   Frothingham,  is  therefore  "one  who  looks  within,  lives  within,  and  loves  to  interpret  all   things  from  the  standpoint  of  the  soul,"50  a  designation  Frothingham  publicly  applied  to   Maeterlinck  during  the  latter's  lifetime.51  The  message  expressed  in  The  Intelligence  of   the  Flowers  faithfully  mirrors  Maeterlinck's  personal  mysticism,  which  can  be  aptly   summarized  through  a  passage  from  his  1911  publication  The  Buried  Temple.  He  states:   "It  is  not  the  incomprehensible  in  nature  that  masters  and  crushes  us,  but  the  thought   that  nature  may  possibly  be  governed  by  a  conscious,  superior,  reasoning  will:  one  that,   although  superhuman,  has  yet  some  kinship  to  the  will  of  man."52  Maeterlinck  believed   that  a  general  intelligence,  comparable  to  the  divine,  ran  through  all  things  like  a  fluid.53   By  studying  and  observing  this  intelligence  in  one  of  its  many  manifestations  (such  as   flowers),  Maeterlinck  believed  that  he  could  more  easily  come  to  understand  and   commune  with  the  "universal  genius"  of  the  world.54     In  every  facet  of  its  production  and  publication,  Maeterlinck's  book  reveals  its   purpose  as  a  deluxe  holiday  edition.  Created  with  the  intention  of  being  purchased  as  a                                                                                                                    49   Hal  Bridges,  American  Mysticism:  From  William  James  to  Zen  (New  York:   Harper  &  Row,  1970),  4.     50   Paul  Revere  Frothingham,  "The  Mysticism  of  Maeterlinck,"  The  Harvard   Theological  Review  5,  no.  2  (1912):  257.   51   See  Frothingham,  "The  Mysticism  of  Maeterlinck,"  256.   52   Maurice  Maeterlinck,  The  Buried  Temple,  trans.  Alfred  Sutro  (New  York:  Dodd,   Mead  and  Company,  1911),  183.   53   Maeterlinck,  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  175.   54   Ibid,  155.      18  

gift,55  the  publication  is  highly  embellished  and  rather  feminine,  possibly  a  sign  of  its   being  geared  towards  female  shoppers.  Likewise  a  sign  of  its  use,  forty-two  of  the  pages   in  GEH's  copy  of  the  book  are  unopened.56  As  this  book  was  acquired  by  GEH  as  part  of   the  bequest  from  Coburn,57  and  was  likely  the  photographer's  copy,58  the  unopened   pages  may  lead  to  the  assumption  that  Coburn  did  not  read  this  copy  of  Maeterlinck.   Due  to  its  previous  publication  in  Harper's  and  other  publications  prior  to  the  holiday   edition,  however,  it  is  highly  probable  that  Coburn  had  already  read  the  essay  and   owned  publications  containing  it  prior  to  his  illustration  of  The  Intelligence  of  the   Flowers.  This  theory  is  supported  by  Coburn's  interest  in  mysticism  and  floral  symbolism   during  the  early  twentieth  century,  two  factors  that  likely  attracted  Coburn  to   Maeterlinck's  work,  which  are  discussed  in  the  next  four  sections  of  this  essay.     

  
                                                                                                                 55   This  particular  book  was  advertised  in  the  December  issue  of  The  Atlantic   Monthly  Advertiser  100,  no.  6  (1907):  23  under  the  heading  "Beautifully  Illustrated  and   Bound  and  Especially  Suitable  for  HOLIDAY  GIFTS."     56   According  to  John  Carter  and  Nicolas  Barker,  ABC  for  Book  Collectors,  8th  ed.   (New  Castle,  DE:  Oak  Knoll  Press,  2004),  226,  unopened  pages  of  a  book  "means  that   the  leaves  of  a  book  issued  entirely  untrimmed  (and  therefore  having  the  folding  of  its   component  sections  still  intact  at  the  top  and  fore-edges)  have  not  been  severed  from   their  neighbours  with  the  paper-knife."   57   A  label  is  attached  to  the  verso  of  the  book's  free  endpaper,  stating  "From  the   bequest  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn.  Collection  of  George  Eastman  House."  For  further   information  regarding  the  acquisition  of  this  collection,  see  Marianne  Fulton,  "Alvin   Langdon  Coburn  Collection  at  George  Eastman  House,"  in  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn:   Photographs  1900-1924,  ed.  Karl  Steinorth  (Zürich,  New  York:  Edition  Stemmle,  1998),   181-183.   58   The  copy  referred  to  here,  which  is  currently  housed  at  GEH,  is  not  the  copy   inscribed  by  Maeterlinck  in  1915,  referred  to  by  Coburn  in  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  100.  Research  has  not  yet  located  the  whereabouts  of   the  inscribed  copy.      19  

4.  MYSTICISM  AT  THE  TURN  OF  THE  CENTURY  
By  1907,  interest  in  mysticism  was  common  in  popular  culture,  providing  the   ideal  environment  for  the  proliferation  and  reception  of  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.   Though  the  study  and  propagation  of  various  forms  of  mysticism  had  developed  over   several  centuries,  a  renewed  focus  was  placed  on  mysticism  in  the  latter  half  of  the   nineteenth  century  and  first  decade  of  the  twentieth  century,  encouraging  the  American   public  to  welcome  a  book  such  as  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  as  a  result.  One  of  the   main  changes  affecting  this  public  embrace  was  the  role  of  science  within  society  and  its   opposition  to  nearly  all  forms  of  spirituality.      Most  studies  of  the  period  agree  that  by  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century,  a  

spiritual  crisis  had  developed  in  many  parts  of  the  Western  world,  leading  to  a  division   between  spirituality  and  science,  as  well  as  the  separation  of  modern  thinkers  from  their   antimodern  opponents.  As  discussed  by  Dr.  Bret  E.  Carroll,  Professor  of  early  U.S.   History  at  California  State  University,  this  crisis  grew  out  of  "the  successive  impact  first   of  Enlightenment  religious  thinking,  which  encouraged  a  rational  and  scientific  approach   to  deity,  and  then  of  Romanticism,  which  called  for  greater  attention  to  subjective   religious  insight  and  feeling,"59  leaving  the  general  public  unsure  of  what  to  think  or   whom  to  believe.  The  results  of  this  crisis  were  varied  and  often  confusing,  as  a  religious   pluralism  permeated  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.60  It  became  increasingly                                                                                                                    59   Bret  E.  Carroll,  Spiritualism  in  Antebellum  America  (Bloomington  and   Indianapolis:  Indiana  University  Press,  1997),  2.   60   Mary  Farrell  Bednarowski,  New  Religions  and  the  Theological  Imagination  in   America  (Bloomington  and  Indianapolis:  Indiana  University  Press,  1989),  2.      20  

difficult  for  organized  religions  to  maintain  their  power  against  the  growing  popularity   of  science  and  its  ability  to  explain,  with  quantifiable  evidence,  life's  assorted   experiences.61  Proponents  of  modernism  and  that  era's  technological  innovations  began   to  observe  and  understand  the  capabilities  of  science  in  daily  life  and  the  focus  that   science  placed  on  aspects  of  materiality.  With  time,  this  point  of  view  developed  into   materialism,  whose  definition  extended  to  both  its  scientific  connotations  of  matter   being  composed  of  only  real  and  substantial  material,  therefore  denying  any  life  force  or   divine  intelligence  in  the  world,  as  well  as  the  focus  that  this  belief  put  on  material   objects  and  reality.  Antimodern  supporters,  on  the  other  hand,  were  drawn  to  what  is   termed  by  American  cultural  and  intellectual  historian  T.J.  Jackson  Lears  the  "ecstasy  of   the  mystic"  due  to  the  "sense  that  modern  life  [had]  grown  dry  and  passionless,  and   that  one  must  somehow  try  to  regenerate  a  lost  intensity  of  feeling."62  By  the  turn  of   the  century,  materialism  was  a  common  subject  matter  and  cause  for  debate,  finding   many  adversaries  in  popular  culture  and  artistic  circles,  including  Coburn  and  his  group   of  friends,  mentors  and  heroes.  For  example,  Joseph  Shiffman,  Associate  Professor  of   English  at  Long  Island  University,  discussed  the  rebellion  of  Wells,  Shaw  and  Stieglitz   (three  individuals  with  whom  Coburn  was  good  friends)  against  commercialism,63   leading  to  their  interest  in  Maeterlinck  as  relief  from  a  materialistic  society  through  

                                                                                                                 61   Ibid.   62   T.J.  Jackson  Lears,  No  Place  of  Grace:  Antimodernism  and  the  Transformation   of  American  Culture  1880  ­  1920  (New  York:  Pantheon  Books,  1981),  142.   63   Commercialism  refers  to  an  excessive  emphasis  on  profit  or  monetary  gain.   Due  to  its  emphasis  on  physical  objects,  adversaries  of  commercialism  frequently   opposed  materialism  as  well.      21  

spiritual  enlightenment.64  Due  to  these  important  differences  between  scientific  study   and  spiritual  inclinations,  most  personal  opinions  and  systems  of  belief  following  the   spiritual  crisis  fell  under  one  of  two  classifications:  science  or  spirituality.      Over  the  course  of  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries,  the  belief  in  science's  

ability  to  explain  the  ways  in  which  the  world  worked  came  to  be  known  by  many  names   --  scientism,  positivism,  rationalism,  free  thought  --  however  the  most  common  term   was  scientific  naturalism.65  Flourishing  predominantly  between  1850  and  1900,   followers  of  scientific  naturalism  held  that  all  things  were  part  of  nature,  existing  in  a   specific  time  and  place.  Because  scientific  enquiry  was  a  way  of  analyzing  the  natural   world,  science  could  therefore  be  used  for  the  "expression,  explanation  and  guidance  of   human  life."66  This  idea  was  based  on  the  writings  and  thoughts  of  celebrated  scientists   of  the  time,  such  as  Sir  John  Herschel  (1792  ­  1871),  who,  in  1831,  wrote  that   everything  that  occurred  in  the  natural  world  could  be  explained  by  a  principle  of   science.67  In  fact,  many  changes  were  taking  place  within  the  nineteenth  century   scientific  community,  ultimately  making  way  for  the  public  acceptance  of  scientific   naturalism.  One  such  change  was  rooted  in  the  very  nature  of  what  is  meant  by  the   term  `science.'    

                                                                                                                 64   Joseph  Shiffman,  "The  Alienation  of  the  Artist:  Alfred  Stieglitz,"  American   Quarterly  3,  no.  3  (1951):  249.   65   Frank  Miller  Turner,  Between  Science  and  Religion:  The  Reaction  to  Scientific   Naturalism  in  Late  Victorian  England  (New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press,  1974),  11.   66   Ibid,  9.   67   J.A.V.  Chapple,  Science  and  Literature  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  (Houndmills,   Basingstoke,  Hampshire:  Macmillan,  1986),  147.      22  

Prior  to  the  mid  nineteenth  century,  science  was  marked  by  a  lack  of   professionalism  and  clearly  defined  boundaries,68  allowing  for  the  production  and   proliferation  in  popular  culture  of  scientific  studies.  In  due  course,  the  shift  towards  a   more  structured  discipline  caused  a  break  between  science  and  theology,  as  scientists   began  to  research  and  focus  entirely  on  their  own  field  of  study  to  answer  and  elucidate   life's  many  quandaries  through  scientific  explanations  alone.69  Professionalism  in   science  was,  however,  still  in  its  early  stages.  It  was  therefore  possible,  and  indeed  was   one  of  the  last  times,  that  science  could  still  be  studied  and  understood  by  laymen70   such  as  Maeterlinck  and  his  readers.  Without  need  for  special  training  to  fully   understand  scientific  theories  and  ideas,  an  ideal  environment  was  in  place  for  the   propagation  of  scientific  naturalism  to  the  general  public.        Although  many  accepted  the  shift  towards  science  as  a  refreshing  and  

enlightening  change,  there  were  also  those  who  were  not  satisfied  with  scientific   naturalism  and  its  tenets,  and  whose  personal  inclinations  led  them  down  a  variety  of   spiritual  paths.  Many  of  these  individuals  may  have  believed  in  science,  but  simply  did   not  feel  that  it  could  answer  everything.71  Stemming  from  the  same  crisis  of  faith  that   led  to  scientific  naturalism,  individuals  who  believed  in  some  form  of  spirituality  made   up  its  opposing  camp.  The  difficulty  in  now  understanding  the  nature  of  spirituality   during  the  mid  and  later  nineteenth  century,  however,  is  often  related  to  discrepancies   in  the  use  of  the  term  `spiritual.'  Distinguished  intellectual  historian  Frank  Miller  Turner                                                                                                                    68   Turner,  12.   69   Ibid.   70   Ibid.   71   Ibid,  2.      23  

explains  that  by  the  1850s,  the  meaning  of  this  term  usually  "excluded  Christian   doctrine  and  ceremony  but  preserved  in  a  non-Christian  context  the  questions,  issues,   and  problems  of  human  life  previously  addressed  by  that  faith"72  and  was  often  referred   to  as  mysticism.  While  differing  greatly  from  one  organization  or  religion  to  another,   most  spiritual  belief  systems  were  based  in  some  form  of  spirit  world  and  inner   consciousness  or  soul.  Such  a  belief  was  one  of  the  main  differences  between  scientific   naturalism  and  spirituality.  While  scientific  naturalism  was  rooted  strongly  in  reality  and   its  materiality,  spirituality  called  for  a  belief  in  something  that  could  not  be  scientifically   quantified.        In  addition  to  variations  in  use  of  the  term  `spirituality,'  further  confusion  about  

the  term  stems  from  the  multitude  of  spiritual  branches  in  existence  during  the   nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries  and  whose  belief  systems  sometimes  embraced   scientific  elements.  Many  spiritual  organizations,  for  example,  frequently  attempted  to   furnish  scientific  evidence  to  prove  the  validity  of  their  beliefs.73  Likewise,  many   scientific  organizations  began  to  incorporate  spiritual  elements  into  their  teachings.  It   seems  that  as  much  as  the  two  opposing  views  tried  to  distance  themselves  from  one   another,  one  just  could  not  work  without  the  other.  Exemplifying  the  merging  of   opposing  sides  is  the  premise  of  a  Life  Force,  developed  by  distinguished  Scottish   surgeon  John  Hunter  (1728  ­  1793)  and  first  made  public  by  John  Abernathy  (1764  ­   1831),  Professor  of  Anatomy  at  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  in  a  series  of  annual  

                                                                                                                 72   Ibid,  3.   73   Ibid,  117.      24  

public  lectures  that  began  in  1814.74  The  theory  suggested  that  blood  contained  the   secret  of  `Vitality,'  an  invisible  substance  that  was  added  to  matter.  Due  to  the  fact  that   Vitality  was  added  to  the  blood,  it  followed  that  it  had  to  have  been  added  by  someone   or  something,  in  effect  scientifically  proving  the  "theological  notion  of  the  soul."75  Over   time,  this  theory  gained  a  number  of  followers  who  came  to  be  known  as  Vitalists.   These  individuals  believed  that  the  notion  of  the  Life  Force  explained  the  very  nature  of   life  itself,  as  well  as  the  existence  of  the  mind,  body,  and  soul,  through  scientific   analysis.76        A  variant  of  the  Vitalists,  Friedrich  Schelling's  theory  of  Naturphilosophie77  

gained  a  small  following  at  the  University  of  Jena  in  Germany.  Author  and  biographer   Richard  Holmes  in  The  Age  of  Wonder:  How  the  Romantic  Generation  Discovered  the   Beauty  and  Terror  of  Science  describes  this  theory,  as  follows:   This  doctrine,  perhaps  best  translated  as  `science  mysticism,'  defined  the  entire   natural  world  as  a  system  of  invisible  powers  and  energies,  operating  like   electricity  as  a  series  of  `polarities'.    According  to  Schelling's  doctrine,  the  whole   world  was  indeed  replete  with  spiritual  energy  or  soul,  and  all  physical  objects   `aspired'  to  become  something  higher.  There  was  a  `world-soul'  constantly   `evolving'  higher  life  forms  and  `levels  of  consciousness'  in  all  matter,  animate  or   inanimate.  All  nature  had  a  tendency  to  move  towards  a  higher  state.78     

                                                                                                                 74   Richard  Holmes,  The  Age  of  Wonder:  How  the  Romantic  Generation  Discovered   the  Beauty  and  Terror  of  Science  (London:  Harper  Press,  2008),  308.   75   Ibid,  309.   76   Ibid,  314.   77   Ibid,  315.   78   Ibid.      25  

One  notable  follower  of  this  doctrine  at  the  University  of  Jena  was  Novalis,79  a  German   poet  and  philosopher  who  is  often  cited  as  a  mystical  predecessor  and  influence  on   Maeterlinck.80     Maeterlinck  can  therefore  be  linked  to  the  theory  of  Naturphilosophie  through   Novalis,  and  this  doctrine  is  found  throughout  the  pages  of  The  Intelligence  of  the   Flowers.  According  to  Maeterlinck,  "all  [flowers]  have  the  magnificent  ambition  to   overrun  and  conquer  the  surface  of  the  globe  by  endlessly  multiplying  that  form  of   existence  which  they  represent."81  Using  scientific  observation  of  the  pollination  and   fertilization  of  flowers  as  evidence,  Maeterlinck  imbues  the  flowers  he  describes  with  an   intelligence  that  he  compares  to  a  "genius  of  the  earth"  that  governs  all  things,82  even   going  as  far  as  to  attribute  a  soul  to  the  flower.83  In  these  ways,  Maeterlinck  is  following   Schelling's  theory  that  all  things  possess  a  soul  and  energy,  and  are  constantly  aspiring   to  something  greater.  Consequently,  Maeterlinck's  essay  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers   combines  science  and  spirituality,  rather  than  separating  them,  in  order  to  validate  and   explain  his  mystical  theories  to  his  readers.  

                                                                                                                 79   Novalis  was  the  pseudonym  of  Georg  Philipp  Friedrich  Freiherr  von   Hardenberg  (1772  ­  1801),  more  commonly  known  as  Friedrich  von  Hardenberg.  For   more  information  see  Friedrich  Hiebel,  Novalis:  German  Poet,  European  Thinker,  and   Christian  Mystic  (Chapel  Hill:  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1954).   80   See  for  example  Montrose  Jonas  Moses,  Maurice  Maeterlinck:  A  Study  (New   York:  Duffield  &  Company,  1911),  279,  Patrick  Mahony,  The  Magic  of  Maeterlinck   (Hollywood:  House-Warven,  Publishers,  1952),  49  and  Jethro  Bithell,  Life  and  Writings  of   Maurice  Maeterlinck  (New  York  and  Melbourne:  The  Walter  Scott  Publishing  Co.,  Ltd.,   1961),  84.   81   Maeterlinck,  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  8.   82   Ibid,  155.   83   Ibid,  100.      26  

As  is  evidenced  by  its  inclusion  in  Maeterlinck's  essay,  the  debate  between   science  and  spirituality  appeared  regularly  throughout  popular  literature  of  the   nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  centuries.  It  emerges,  for  example,  in  Mary  Shelley's   (1797  ­  1851)  Frankenstein;  or,  The  Modern  Prometheus  as  a  combination  of  science   and  questioning  the  existence  of  the  soul84  and,  to  take  one  further  example,  in  Wells'   novel  The  Time  Machine  as  science  fiction.85  Throughout  his  career,  Coburn  befriended   and  worked  with  several  individuals  concerned  with  this  debate,  such  as  Wells.86       

5.  COBURN'S  SPIRITUALITY,  1900  ­  1907  
As  with  many  antimodern  thinkers,  from  approximately  1915  onwards,  there  is   well-documented  evidence  of  Coburn's  interest  and  activity  in  mysticism  and   comparative  religions.  Coburn's  photographic  career  began  towards  the  end  of  the   debate  between  science  and  spirituality,  at  a  time  when  sides  were  already  formed  and   the  debate  was  highly  visible  in  countless  forms  of  popular  culture.  By  1919,  for  

                                                                                                                 84   Holmes,  325.   85   Chapple,  48.   86   H.G.  Wells,  The  Door  in  the  Wall,  and  Other  Stories  (New  York:  Mitchell   Kennerley,  1911).  From  1906  until  approximately  1910,  Coburn  provided  the  ten   photographs  that  illustrated  Wells'  text  in  the  form  of  photogravures.  According  to   Maarten  van  de  Guchte,  Coburn  received  little  or  no  instruction  from  Wells  in  regards  to   the  book's  illustrations,  as  opposed  to  the  collaborative  effort  between  Coburn  and   Henry  James.  See  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  and  H.G.  Wells:  The  Photographer  and  the   Novelist:  A  Unique  Collection  of  Photographs  and  Letters  from  the  University  Library's   H.G.  Wells  Collection  (Urbana:  Krannert  Art  Museum,  University  of  Illinois  at  Urbana- Champaign,  1997).        27  

example,  Coburn  was  a  fellow  of  the  Theosophical  Society  in  England  and  Wales.87  In   Aperture's  monograph  on  Coburn,88  Weaver  discusses  the  mystical  aspect  of  Coburn's   life  in  great  detail,  explaining  that  in  1923  Coburn's  relentless  experimentation  with   comparative  religion  and  the  occult  slowed  when  he  joined  the  Universal  Order,  "which   dedicated  itself  to  the  study  of  sacred  texts  referred  to  collectively  as  The  Shrine  of   Wisdom."89  One  year  later,  in  Coburn's  1924  article  "Photography  and  the  Quest  of   Beauty,"90  he  had  developed  a  definitively  mystical  vocabulary,  distinguishing  between   "earthly  things"  and  those  that  "transcend  them"  ­  between  reality  and  spirituality  .91  By   the  1950s,  Coburn  was  an  active  Freemason,  being  referred  to,  for  example,  as   Inspector  General  of  North  Wales  in  a  letter  dated  March  15,  1954.92  Clearly,  Coburn   was  deeply  interested  and  invested  in  pursuing  a  spiritual  path,  much  like  Maeterlinck.     Although  there  is  no  irrefutable  evidence  from  the  writing  and  work  created  by   Coburn  prior  to  his  illustration  of  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  the  likelihood  that   Coburn  was,  in  fact,  interested  in  mysticism  from  the  onset  of  his  photographic  career   does  exist,  and  can  be  seen  in  three  areas  of  his  photographic  activities:  first  through   the  vocabulary  used  by  Coburn  in  his  writings,  secondly  in  what  is  conveyed  through  

                                                                                                                 87   Certificate  of  Membership  to  the  Theosophical  Society  in  England  and  Wales   for  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  and  his  wife  Edith  W.  Coburn,  dated  January  17,  1919.  Papers   and  Ephemera  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Box  15.   88   Weaver,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Symbolist  Photographer.   89   Ibid,  51.   90   Coburn,  "Photography  and  the  Quest  of  Beauty,"  The  Photographic  Journal  65,   no.  48  (1924):  159-167.   91   Ibid,  160.   92   Papers  and  Ephemera  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Box  15.      28  

Coburn's  photography,  and  finally  through  Coburn's  collaboration  with  the  author  Henry   James.     In  1902,  only  three  years  after  the  trip  with  his  cousin  F.  Holland  Day  to  England   that  began  his  professional  career  as  a  photographer,93  Coburn  wrote  a  series  of  four   articles  in  which  he  described  and  published  photographs  of  Christian  missions  in   California.  Telling  in  Coburn's  choice  of  subject  matter  alone,  these  articles  also  reveal   the  spiritual  vocabulary  used  by  Coburn  to  describe  the  missions.  Explaining  that  "the   soul  of  the  artist  photographer  will  recognize  a  kindred  spirit  in  these  ruins"94  while   describing  the  mission  of  San  Juan  Capistrano,  Coburn  goes  on  to  explain  in  an  article   about  the  San  Gabriel  mission  that  to  him  "there  is  always  a  certain  air  of  mystery  and   hidden  wisdom  about  an  ancient  building  of  any  sort,  especially  so  in  one  used  for  the   purpose  of  worship."95  Without  addressing  his  personal  mysticism  directly,  Coburn   shows  his  propensity  for  spirituality  through  his  choice  of  words.     The  following  year,  the  photography  critic  Thomas  Harrison  Cummings  wrote  the   article  "Some  Photographs  by  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,"96  attributing  to  Coburn  the  ability   of  conveying  emotion  and  feeling  through  his  photography,  in  particular  his  portraits.  In   1906,  playwright  and  amateur  photographer  George  Bernard  Shaw  (1856  ­  1950)   similarly  praised  Coburn's  portraits  for  their  ability  to  express  something  more  of  the  

                                                                                                                 93   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  14.   94   Coburn,  "The  California  Missions:  San  Juan  Capistrano,"  Photo  Era  9,  no.  6   (1902):  255.   95   Coburn,  "The  California  Missions:  San  Gabriel,"  Photo  Era  9,  no.  5  (1902):  206.   96   Thomas  Harrison  Cummings,  "Some  Photographs  by  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,"   Photo  Era  10,  no.  3  (1903):  87-92.         29  

individual  than  a  mere  likeness,  something  of  the  person's  nature.97  Shaw  went  on  to   explain  Coburn's  impulse  to  "convey  a  mood  and  not  to  impart  local  information,  or  to   supply  pretty  views  and  striking  sunsets."98  Further  still,  in  a  1907  review  of  Coburn's   work,  Sidney  Allan99  explained  that  "I  did  not  merely  see  the  faces  of  three  distinct   personalities,  but  something  beyond;  something  of  their  life,  their  occupation."100  This   sentiment  was  repeated  in  many  reviews  of  Coburn's  work.  In  1914,  Coburn  published   an  article101  in  which  he  agreed  with  the  statement  made  by  his  friend  Shaw  in  1906.  In   this  article,  Coburn  is  beginning  to  differentiate  between  the  earthbound  nature  of  the   mechanical  photographic  process  and  the  otherworldly  character  of  the  moods  and   emotions  he  wishes  to  portray  through  photography.102  By  agreeing  with  Shaw's   statement  of  Coburn's  intention  to  "convey  a  mood"  rather  than  "local  information,"   Coburn  was  emphasizing  the  importance  of  conveying  spirituality  over  material  reality  in   his  work  by  1906.  With  the  additional  analysis  of  Coburn's  mission  articles,  this  interest   can  be  traced  back  as  early  as  1902.                                                                                                                      97   Catalogue  of  an  Exhibition  of  the  Work  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  with  a   preface  by  George  Bernard  Shaw  (Liverpool:  The  Liverpool  Amateur  Photographic   Association,  1906),  3.   98   Ibid,  4.   99   Sidney  Allan  was  one  of  several  pseudonyms  (including  Sadakichi  Hartmann,   Innocent  De  La  Salle  and  A.  Chameleon)  used  by  the  photography  and  art  critic  Carl   Hartmann  (1867  ­  1944).  Hartmann  was  a  "popular  lecturer  on  art"  by  1895,  and  was   frequently  published  in  art  magazines,  including  Alfred  Stieglitz's  Camera  Work.  For   more  information  on  Hartmann,  see  Dictionary  of  Art  Historians,  "Carl  Hartmann,"  In   Association  with  the  Department  of  Art,  Art  History  and  Visual  Studies,  Duke  University,   http://www.dictionaryofarthistorians.org/hartmanns.htm  (accessed  August  13,  2011).   100   Sidney  Allan,  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  ­  Secession  Portraiture,"  Wilson's   Photographic  Magazine,  no.  44  (1907):  252.   101   Coburn,  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  Artist-Photographer,"  Wilson's  Photographic   Magazine  51,  no.  1  (1914):  762.   102   Ibid,  757.      30  

The  final  evidence  of  Coburn's  early  interest  in  mysticism  can  be  observed  in  his   collaboration  with  Henry  James.  Coburn  met  the  author  in  1905  to  take  his  portrait  for   The  Century  magazine.103  Between  1906  and  1907,  Coburn  began  gathering  images  for   the  frontispieces  of  James's  twenty-four  novels  and  short  stories.104  Called  `the  New   York  Edition,'  the  project  was  a  collection  of  James's  complete  works,  with  a  carefully   composed  preface  by  James  and  a  frontispiece  provided  for  each  volume  by  Coburn.105   Although  James  was  known  to  generally  dislike  the  illustration  of  literature  due  to  the   innate  competition  of  the  picture  and  word,106  he  saw  in  Coburn's  work  the  ability  of   photography  to  represent  something  other  than  literal  reality.  Like  Coburn,  James   believed  that  "the  unsayable  is  the  better  half  of  all  that  belongs  to  a  work  of  art."107   With  this  mutual  conviction,  James  and  Coburn  began,  as  James  later  explained,  the   hunt  for  a  series  of  reproducible  subjects  ­  such  moreover  as  might  best  consort   with  photography  ­  the  reference  of  which  to  Novel  or  Tale  should  exactly  be   not  competitive  and  obvious,  should  on  the  contrary  plead  its  case  with  some   shyness,  that  of  images  always  confessing  themselves  mere  optical  symbols  or   echoes,  expressions  of  no  particular  thing  in  the  text,  but  only  the  type  or  idea  of   this  or  that  thing.108    

  

                                                                                                                 103   Weaver,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn:  Symbolist  Photographer,  79.   104   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  52.   105   James's  The  Novels  and  Tales  of  Henry  James  was  published  in  twenty-three   volumes  between  1907  and  1909  by  Macmillan  &  Co.  in  London  and  Charles  Scribner  &   Sons  in  New  York.  For  more  information,  see  Ralph  Franklin  Bogardus,  Pictures  and   Texts:  Henry  James,  A.L.  Coburn,  and  New  Ways  of  Seeing  in  Literary  Culture  (Ann  Arbor,   MI:  UMI  Research  Press,  1984).   106   Bogardus,  73.   107   Henry  James,  The  Painter's  Eye:  Notes  and  Essays  on  the  Pictorial  Arts,  ed.   John  Sweeney  (Cambridge:  Harvard  University  Press,  1956),  118.   108   Henry  James,  The  Golden  Bowl  (New  York:  Charles  Scribner  &  Sons,  1909),  xi.      31  

Working  from  extensive  notes  written  by  James  detailing  exactly  what  to   photograph  for  the  ideal  frontispiece  and  where  that  subject  could  be  found,109  Coburn   was  ultimately  being  taught  how  to  create  symbolist  photography  by  someone  who  fully   understood  the  concept.  On  his  trip  to  Paris  in  October  1906,  for  example,  Coburn  was   asked  to  search  for  a  porte  cochère  (or  carriage  entrance)  that  was  to  "symbolize  the   barrier  between  Madame  de  Cintré  and  Christopher  Newman"  in  James's  The   American,110  a  request  that  came  to  fruition  in  Coburn's  The  Faubourg  St.  Germain   (figure  19).  "Always  an  experimenter  and  always  concerned  with  psychological  aspects   such  as  evolving  consciousness  and  the  subtleties  of  social  relationships,  James   developed  into  a  kind  of  symbolist,"111  passing  his  wealth  of  knowledge  and  way  of   seeing  on  to  Coburn  through  their  collaboration.        While  James  was  often  termed  a  literary  symbolist  by  his  contemporaries,  

Coburn  was  correspondingly  developing  into  a  photographic  symbolist,  using  imagery  to   represent  something  other  than  the  visible  reality  that  it  reflected.  Stemming  from  the   same  desire  to  use  what  photographic  historian  and  University  of  Kansas  Professor  John   Pultz  describes  as  "nonrational  and  intuitive  perception  to  explore  the  elusive  realm  of   hidden  meaning  and  rare  beauty  behind  sensory  appearances,"112  the  use  of  symbolism   in  photography  reached  its  peak  at  the  turn  of  the  century  through  the  artistic   photography  movement  known  as  pictorialism.  Poet,  biographer  and  critic  Edward                                                                                                                    109   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  52.   110   Bogardus,  13.   111   Ibid,  144.   112   John  Pultz,  "Equivalence,  Symbolism,  and  Minor  White's  Way  into  the   Language  of  Photography,"  Record  of  the  Art  Museum,  Princeton  University  39,  no.  1  /  2   (1980):  28.      32  

Lucie-Smith  defines  the  symbol  as  "something  which  exist[s]  in  its  own  right,  diffusing  a   mysterious  influence  around  itself,  and  affecting  the  whole  context  in  which  it  [is]   placed."113  Due  to  these  characteristics,  the  symbol  was  a  device  favored  by  pictorialist   photographers  reacting  against  scientific  naturalism  and  realism  by  deliberately  blurring   or  manipulating  their  photographs.114  In  this  way,  pictorialists  used  symbolism  to  escape   photography's  "inherently  realistic"115  and  materialistic  nature  in  favor  of  an  approach   to  photography  that  in  the  words  of  the  contemporary  critic  Charles  Caffin  (1854  ­   1918)  "evolved  into  the  region  of  the  spiritual,  and  is  concerned  with  the  expression  of   what  in  the  main  is  inexpressible."116  This  idea  is  further  explained  by  Pultz,     while  the  symbolists  rejected  the  tyranny  of  objects,  they  turned  to  nature  and   the  landscape  for  language.  Their  intention  was  not  to  capture  the  sensory   reality  of  the  landscape  for  its  own  sake  but  to  find  images  they  could  lift  out  and   employ  to  suggest  the  ineffable.117    

   Finding  expression  through  symbolism  and  spirituality,  Coburn's  garden  photographs,   used  to  illustrate  Maeterlinck's  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  made  use  of  natural   elements  to  represent  Coburn's  spiritual  ideas.    

As  the  first  major  illustration  project  tackled  by  the  twenty-four  year  old  Coburn   from  1906  through  1907,  the  symbolic  work  created  at  the  request  of  James  was  likely   the  template  on  which  Coburn's  illustration  of  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  was   modeled.  As  such,  the  James  frontispieces  represent  the  final  instance  in  which                                                                                                                    113   Edward  Lucie-Smith,  Symbolist  Art  (New  York:  Thames  and  Hudson  Inc.,   1972),  16-17.   114   Laura  Barrett,  "`Material  Without  Being  Real':  Photography  and  the  End  of   Reality  in  The  Great  Gatsby,"  Studies  in  the  Novel  30,  no.  4  (1998):  543.   115   Pultz,  28.   116   Charles  H.  Caffin,  "Symbolism  and  Allegory,"  Camera  Work,  no.  18  (1907):  17.   117   Pultz,  29.      33  

Coburn's  interest  in  mysticism  is  apparent  prior  to  his  illustration  of  Maeterlinck's  book.   Not  only  was  Coburn  taking  pictures  of  the  people,  places  and  objects  that  surrounded   him,  he  was  looking  within  himself  and  using  the  scientific  medium  of  photography  to   create  symbolic  imagery  from  those  objects.  In  doing  so,  Coburn's  working  method   reflected  the  spiritual  crisis  of  the  nineteenth  century  by  using  photography  to   represent  ideas  beyond  the  natural  objects  themselves,  therefore  escaping  their   material  character.  Using  such  images  to  illustrate  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  with   Maeterlinck's  "fantastic  themes,  use  of  symbols  to  represent  ideas,  and  emphasis  on   inner  feelings  [that]  embodied  the  Symbolist  movement"118  seems  only  fitting.  Coburn's   interests,  however,  did  not  lie  strictly  in  science  and  mysticism;  he  was  also  fascinated   by  the  use  of  flowers  as  a  symbolic  device.     

6.  THE  HISTORY  OF  FLORAL  SYMBOLISM  
While  many  branches  of  thought  and  organizations  developed  out  of  the  division   between  science  and  spirituality  during  the  nineteenth  century,  one  of  those  to  develop   under  the  umbrella  of  science  was  botany.  Just  as  other  organizations  and  belief   systems  could  not  entirely  separate  science  from  spirituality,  neither  could  the  field  of   botany.  Although  botany  had  been  practiced  for  centuries  as  the  study  of  plant  life,  it   began  to  gain  authority  in  the  eighteenth  century  and  popularity  among  laypeople   throughout  the  nineteenth  century.  Botanical  illustration  of  America's  plant  life  quickly                                                                                                                    118   Jennifer  Huget  and  Margaret  Moore,  eds.,  A.L.  Coburn's  Men  of  Mark:   Pioneers  of  Modernism  (Hartford,  CT:  The  Mark  Twain  House  &  Museum,  2004),  23.      34  

became  one  of  the  chief  methods  by  which  botany  reached  and  interested  the  general   public.  As  discussed  by  Ella  M.  Foshay,  member  of  the  Vassar  College  Department  of  Art   and  organizer  of  the  1984  exhibition  Reflections  of  Nature  at  the  Whitney  Museum  of   American  Art,  "the  earliest  images  of  American  flora  were  produced  by  European  artist- explorers  seeking  to  document  the  newly  discovered  natural  products  of  the  New   World."119  Christopher  Looby,  Humanities  Professor  at  UCLA  interested  in  Gay,  Lesbian   and  Queer  Studies,  examines  the  subject  matter  as  well,  explaining  that  the  early  floral   images  were  followed  by  "an  explosion  of  popular  interest  in  flowers,  the  result   principally  of  the  introduction  into  European  countries  and  the  United  States  of  new   exotic  species  like  orchids  following  expeditions  by  explorers  and  natural  historians  into   remote  tropical  locales."120   Adding  to  the  public  interest  in  botany  were  scientific  advancements  that  began   to  shine  a  new  light  on  the  field  of  study.  One  such  development  was  a  new  method  of   taxonomy  developed  by  Swedish  scientist  Carl  Linnaeus  (1707  ­  1778)  in  the  eighteenth   century.  This  method  of  organization  became  known  as  the  `sexual  system,'  classifying   plants  by  their  reproductive  organs.121  Decades  later,  Charles  Darwin  published  several   essays  on  the  subject,122  introducing  new  developments  in  the  natural  sciences  and   expanding  on  the  information  that  was  generally  known  about  particular  species  of                                                                                                                    119   Ella  M.  Foshay,  Reflections  of  Nature:  Flowers  in  American  Art  (New  York:   Weathervane  Books,  1984),  95.   120   Christopher  Looby,  "Flowers  of  Manhood:  Race,  Sex  and  Floriculture  from   Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson  to  Robert  Mapplethorpe,"  Criticism  37,  no.  1  (1995),  6.   121   Foshay,  26-27.   122   See,  for  example,  On  the  Various  Contrivances  by  Which  British  and  Foreign   Orchids  Are  Fertilised  by  Insects  (1862),  The  Movements  and  Habits  of  Climbing  Plants   (1865),  and  The  Effects  of  Cross  and  Self  Fertilization  in  the  Vegetable  Kingdom  (1876).      35  

plants.123  Advancements  in  knowledge  and  the  promulgation  of  articles  such  as  Darwin's   facilitated  the  popularization  of  botany  among  scientists  and  laymen  alike.   Not  strictly  contained  within  the  realm  of  scientific  study,  the  popularity  of   botany  spread  into  general  society  as  well  through  its  infusion  into  visual  art  and   cultural  pursuits.  The  Rococo  period  in  the  eighteenth  century  had  introduced  floral   decoration  in  art  and  architecture,  while  also  fuelling  the  appeal  of  garden  activities.124   Flower  gardens  were  especially  popular  in  England,  America,  and  France  with  an   emphasis  on  flowering  plants;  gardens  became  a  symbol  of  civilization,  associated  with   literature  and  the  arts.125  Due  to  this  association,  it  became  common  for  individuals  to   undertake  botanical  pursuits.  William  Henry  Fox  Talbot  (1800  ­  1877),  for  example,  was   not  only  one  of  the  discoverers  of  photography  but  also  a  distinguished  botanist  and  a   Fellow  of  London's  prestigious  Linnaean  Society.126  Similarly,  Edward  Steichen  (1879  ­   1973),  a  prominent  pictorialist,  was  a  passionate  horticulturalist,  developing  new   varieties  of  oriental  poppies,  a  pure  blue  petunia,  and  a  perennial  delphinium.127  This   group  also  included  Maeterlinck,  who  nurtured  a  lifelong  devotion  to  flowers  and  

                                                                                                                 123   Foshay,  56.   124   Alison  Syme,  A  Touch  of  Blossom:  John  Singer  Sargent  and  the  Queer  Flora  of   Fin-De-Siècle  Art  (University  Park,  PA:  The  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press,  2010),   27.   125   Beverly  Seaton,  The  Language  of  Flowers:  A  History  (Charlottesville  and   London:  University  Press  of  Virginia,  1995),  7.   126   William  A.  Ewing,  Flora  Photographica,  Masterpieces  of  Flower  Photography:   1835  to  the  Present  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1991),  7.   127   Ibid,  19.      36  

gardening128  that  would  eventually  become  immortalized  in  his  numerous  essays  on  the   subject,  most  notably  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.     Although  the  photographs  used  to  illustrate  Maeterlinck's  essay  seem  perfectly   comfortable  in  their  function,  historically,  photography  was  not  employed  for  botanical   illustration.  Throughout  the  nineteenth  century,  many  spiritual  individuals  believed  that   art's  purpose  was  to  illuminate  universal  truths  of  the  world  that  were  part  of  a  divine   plan  through  the  accurate  and  specific  depiction  of  nature.129  Similarly,  early  notions  of   photography  held  that  the  medium  was  able  to  reveal  unbiased  truth,  capturing  only   what  was  there  to  be  captured.130  Although  this  latter  notion  appears  to  couple   photography  and  botanical  illustration  quite  well,  by  the  1890s,  photography  was  still   not  commonly  used  for  the  illustration  of  botanical  texts  and  essays.131  Prominent   English  biology  instructor  Edward  Aveling  (1849  ­  1898),  for  example,  wrote  a  plea  to   authors  of  botanical  books  in  1892,  urging  them  to  use  photography's  ability  to   accurately  represent  plant  life  to  their  advantage.132  The  primary  technical  feature   hindering  botanical  illustrators  from  embracing  the  use  of  photography  in  the  1890s  was   the  medium's  inability  to  reproduce  color.133  In  fact,  the  first  significant  depiction  of   flowers  in  photography  was  a  body  of  work  produced  by  Adolphe  Braun  (1812  ­  1877)  in  

                                                                                                                 128   Moses,  34.   129   Foshay,  35.   130   Francis  Frith,  "The  Art  of  Photography,"  The  Art  Journal  5  (1859):  71.   131   Ewing,  14.   132   Edward  Aveling,  "Botany  and  Photography,"  The  Photographic  News  36,  no.   1751  (1892):  197.   133   James  Mew,  "Photographic  Botany,"  The  Photographic  News  36,  no.1755   (1892):  259.      37  

the  early  1850s.134  A  fabric  designer,  Braun  made  albumen  prints  as  reference  materials   for  consumers  (see  figure  20).     Later  in  the  century,  due  to  their  aptitude  for  symbolism  and  allegory,135  as  well   as  their  popularity  in  nineteenth  century  society,  flowers  became  common  in  pictorial   photography.  Responding  to  the  debate  between  science  and  spirituality  raging  at  the   end  of  the  nineteenth  century,136  pictorialists  endeavored  to  re-position  photography  as   a  legitimate  fine  art,  focusing  on  composition  and  aesthetics.137    According  to  Beverly   Seaton,  Assistant  Professor  of  English  at  the  Ohio  State  University  at  Newark,  literary   floral  symbolism  in  the  nineteenth  century  stemmed  from  a  "biological  base"  in  which   "flowers  [were]  seen  to  represent  persons  in  their  relations  to  nature,  in  their  sexual   roles,  [and]  in  the  place  of  mankind  in  the  cosmos."138  This  type  of  floral  symbolism,   however,  was  not  limited  to  the  written  word.  Among  other  pictorialists,  Coburn  used   photography  to  this  end  in  order  to  express  his  feelings  and  emotions  about  societal  life,   typical  of  the  nineteenth  century's  personification  of  flowers.139     Evidenced  through  his  constant  experimentation  with  photographic  processes   and  comparative  religions,  Coburn  was  an  inquisitive  individual  by  nature  who   subscribed  to  both  modern  and  antimodern  points  of  view.  In  contrast  to  his   antimodern  interest  in  spirituality,  for  example,  his  fascination  with  floral  symbolism                                                                                                                    134   Ewing,  11.   135   Ibid,  18.   136   Ibid,  17.   137   Ibid,  16.   138   Seaton,  "Towards  a  Historical  Semiotics  of  Literary  Flower  Personification,"   Poetics  Today  10,  no.  4  (1989):  681.   139   Ibid,  683.      38  

was  utterly  modern.  As  discussed  by  Lears  in  No  Place  of  Grace,  symbolism  became   extremely  common  during  the  late  nineteenth  century,  reinforcing  modern  "feelings  of   diffuseness  and  disorientation."140  However,  the  popularity  of  symbolism  eventually  led   to  "the  devaluation  of  symbols,"  reducing  "them  to  commodities  in  the  marketplace  of   taste"  and  strengthening  the  feeling  "that  the  urban  environment  was  somehow   artificial  and  unreal."141  Similarly,  several  months  prior  to  the  publication  of  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  a  columnist  described  Maeterlinck's  nature  essays  as  making   "a  deliberate  concession  to  popular  taste."142    While  the  spiritual  component  of   Maeterlinck's  writing  clearly  leans  towards  antimodern  beliefs,  the  existence  of  his   publications  as  forms  of  modern  commodities  cannot  be  denied.  Likewise,  Coburn's   desire  to  escape  materialism  is  certainly  an  antimodern  tenet,  however  his  interest  in   the  quality  of  fine  art  reproductions  and  deluxe  publications  can  also  be  considered  a   modern  strategy.   Throughout  the  nineteenth  century,  botanical  symbolism  increased  in  popularity   among  both  professionals  and  laymen,  becoming  particularly  related  to  romance  and   sexuality.  This  phenomenon  was  strongest  in  Victorian  England;  the  `language  of   flowers'  was  a  veritable  craze  in  which  flowers  and  floral  language  were  used  to  express   ideas  and  feelings  relating  to  courtship,  relationships,  romance,  and  marriage.143  As   explained  by  Seaton,  "in  the  flower  personification  of  the  nineteenth  century  we  see   that  the  culture  is  trying  to  bring  man  back  into  the  realm  of  sentient  nature,  to  fit                                                                                                                    140   Lears,  33.   141   Ibid.   142   A.D.,  "Inspired  Journalism,"  The  Academy  72,  no.  1819  (1907):  271.   143   Seaton,  The  Language  of  Flowers:  A  History,  66.      39  

mankind  into  the  cosmos  by  showing  how  nature  represents  human  emotions  and   situations."144  By  the  second  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  however,  the  language  of   flowers  had  evolved  and  become  far  more  allusive  in  its  symbolism.  With  Linnaeus's   system,  a  new  vocabulary  for  describing  and  illustrating  flora  had  developed,  and  it   focused  on  the  gender  and  reproductive  organs  of  flowers.  Combined  with  the  origin  of   many  botanical  terms145  and  Darwin's  focus  on  pollination  and  fertilization  in  his   botanical  writing,  a  highly  sexualized  use  of  the  language  was  developed.     In  a  recent  publication,  Alison  Syme,  Associate  Professor  of  Art  History  at  the   University  of  Toronto,  discusses  the  use  of  floral  symbolism  as  a  device  to  further  "the   naturalization  of  alternative  sexualities  and  identities"146  during  the  latter  half  of  the   nineteenth  century.  In  her  book,  A  Touch  of  Blossom:  John  Singer  Sargent  and  the  Queer   Flora  of  Fin-de-Siècle  Art,  Syme  discusses  the  countless  references  to  non-reproductive   sexuality  veiled  with  botanical  tropes  in  popular  literature,  art,  and  culture.147  Many   vegetable  or  flower  codes,  and  even  code  words  were  developed  and  used  by,  or  in   relation  to,  the  homosexual  community  such  as  "`pansies',  `buttercups,'  `daisies,'  

                                                                                                                 144   Seaton,  "Towards  a  Historical  Semiotics  of  Literary  Flower  Personification,"   697.   145   "The  names  of  flowers,  such  as  orchid,  from  the  Greek  orkhis  (testicle),  or   vanilla,  from  the  Latin  vagina,  demonstrate  the  antiquity  of  these  associations."  Syme,   26.   146   Syme,  13.   147   One  such  example  discussed  by  Syme  is  Henry  James,  "for  whom  the  artist   was  often  a  flower,  described  his  creative  process  as  beginning  with  a  `single  small   seed,'  `minute  and  wind-blown,'  which  provided  the  `germ  of  a  story.'"  Syme,  7.  It  is   interesting  to  note  that  James  and  Coburn  had  become  close  friends  since  their  meeting   in  1905.      40  

`violets,'  `blossoms,'  and  even  more  generally,  `horticultural  lads.'"148  These  signals  were   also  apparent  in  flowers  worn  by  men  in  their  buttonholes  or  eyelets,  as  they  were   often  taken  for  a  "symbol  of  and  precursor  to  sexual  activity"  as  well  as  a  "sign  of   questionable  masculinity."149    Developed  as  a  means  of  communicating  with  one   another  secretly,  George  Chauncey,  Assistant  Professor  of  U.S.  History  at  the  University   of  Chicago,  explains  that  these  codes  were  necessary  due  to  the  "battery  of  laws  [that]   criminalized  not  only  gay  men's  narrowly  `sexual'  behavior,  but  also  their  association   with  one  another,  their  cultural  styles,  and  their  efforts  to  organize  and  speak  on  their   own  behalf."150  With  this  history  in  mind,  and  the  proliferation  of  flowers  and  floral   symbolism  throughout  the  sciences,  arts,  and  daily  society,  it  comes  as  no  surprise  that   Maeterlinck's  nature  studies  would  be  well  received,  nor  that  the  young  Coburn  would   be  attracted  to  such  work.     

7.  COBURN'S  INTEREST  IN  FLORAL  SYMBOLISM  
There  are  a  number  of  associations  that  exist  between  Coburn  and  the  use  of   floral  symbolism  by  the  homosexual  community  of  the  early  twentieth  century,  most   noticeably  in  the  friends  that  he  kept,  and  the  men  and  mentors  that  were  important  to   him.  In  1904,  for  example,  Coburn  photographed  the  mystic,  writer,  and  literary  critic  

                                                                                                                 148   Ibid,  46.   149   Ibid,  50.   150   George  Chauncey,  Gay  New  York:  Gender,  Urban  Culture,  and  the  Making  of   the  Gay  Male  World,  1890-1940  (New  York:  BasicBooks,  1994),  2.      41  

Andrew  Lang  (1844  ­  1912)  for  his  Men  of  Mark  series151  with  a  carnation  in  his   buttonhole  (see  figure  21),  one  of  the  flowers  with  which  Oscar  Wilde  identified   himself.152  Explaining  his  practice  of  saturating  his  mind  with  the  works  of  the  individual   prior  to  taking  his  or  her  portrait,153  Coburn  was  sure  to  know  aspects  of  his  sitter  quite   well.  It  therefore  seems  plausible  that  such  a  seemingly  fashionable  choice  as  Lang's   wearing  a  flower  in  his  buttonhole  would  have  been  addressed  and  understood  upon   meeting.     The  photographic  magazine  Camera  Work  was  likewise  an  important  tool  for   disseminating  themes  and  trends  in  pictorial  photographic  culture,  and  the  trend  of   floral  symbolism  was  no  exception.  Edited  and  produced  by  Alfred  Stieglitz  between   1903  and  1917,  Camera  Work  was  a  publication  with  which  Coburn  was  familiar  from  at   least  April  of  1904  when  his  photographs  were  first  printed  in  its  pages,154  though  he   was  likely  aware  of  the  publication  upon  opening  his  studio  in  New  York  in  1902.155  In   his  autobiography,  Coburn  stated  that,  in  his  opinion,  Camera  Work  was  "the  most   beautiful  photographic  magazine  ever  produced."156  The  publication  is  replete  with   references  to  both  Maeterlinck,  as  well  as  the  type  of  floral  symbolism  discussed  by                                                                                                                    151   Coburn,  Men  of  Mark  (London:  Duckworth  &  Co.,  1913).  This  publication  is   made  up  of  a  series  of  portraits  taken  by  Coburn  between  1904  and  1913.  The  portraits   included  are  of  artists  and  authors  admired  by  Coburn,  as  stated  in  his  article   "Photographic  Adventures,"  The  Photographic  Journal  102,  no.  5  (1962):  150-158.   152   Syme,  4.   153   Coburn,  "Photographic  Adventures,"  153.   154   Coburn's  photography  appeared  in  three  issues  of  Camera  Work:  No.  6,  April   1904,  No.  15,  July  1906  and  No.  21,  January  1908.  Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,   Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  20.   155   Weaver,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Symbolist  Photographer,  79.   156   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  20.      42  

Syme.  For  example,  Coburn  likely  would  have  read  the  piece  entitled  White   Chrysanthemums  by  Sadakichi  Hartmann157  published  in  the  January  1904  issue  of   Camera  Work.  In  it,  the  author  states:   I  am  also  fond  of  displaying  it  [a  white  chrysanthemum]  in  my  buttonhole;  not   for  effect,  however,  but  simply  because  I  want  other  people  to  know  who  I  am;   for  those  human  beings,  who  are  sensitive  to  the  charms  of  the  chrysanthemum,   must  hail  from  the  same  country  in  which  my  soul  abides,  and  I  should  like  to   meet  them.158      Furthermore,  a  poem  entitled  Dawn-Flowers  was  published  in  the  April  1903  issue  of   Camera  Work.159  This  issue  was  also  prefaced  with  a  letter  from  Maeterlinck  welcoming   photography  to  the  world  of  art.  Taking  its  title  from  Edward  Steichen's  print  by  the   same  name,  the  poem  was  dedicated  to  Maeterlinck  by  its  author  `S.H.,'  forming  a   relationship  between  Maeterlinck,  Coburn's  circle  of  friends  and  colleagues,  and  floral   symbolism.   In  addition  to  Syme's  scholarship  on  the  subject,  Looby  discusses  the  "the  way  in   which  sexuality  was  present  in  floricultural  discourse  (but  in  a  deniable  way,  as  it  were)"   in  many  popular  pieces  of  literature,160  adding  further  evidence  to  its  pervasiveness  in   popular  culture.  Henry  James  (another  of  Coburn's  `men  of  mark'),  who  was  known  to  

                                                                                                                 157   Pseudonym  used  by  Carl  Hartmann.  See  note  99  for  more  details.   158   Sadakichi  Hartmann,  "White  Chrysanthemums,"  Camera  Work,  no.  5  (1904):   19.   159   S.H.,  "Dawn  Flowers,"  Camera  Work,  no.  2  (1903):  29.  This  poem  was   attributed  to  Sadakichi  Hartmann  in  Sadakichi  Hartmann,  The  Valiant  Knights  of   Daguerre:  Selected  Critical  Essays  on  Photography  and  Profiles  of  Photographic  Pioneers,   ed.  Harry  W.  Lawton  and  George  Knox  with  the  collaboration  of  Wistaria  Hartmann   Linton  (Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press,  1978),  351.   160   Looby,  11.      43  

have  had  relationships  with  younger  men,161  made  frequent  use  of  botanical  character   names,  and  went  so  far  as  to  compare  the  act  of  storytelling  to  pollination  in  the  preface   to  his  1908  "New  York  Edition"  of  the  novel  The  Spoils  of  Poynton,162  illustrated  with  a   frontispiece  by  Coburn.  James  and  Coburn  were  good  friends,  entering  into  the   aforementioned  collaboration  that  would  become  the  basis  for  Coburn's  approach  to   the  illustration  of  literature.  It  is  therefore  entirely  possible  that  Coburn  was  aware  of   James's  particular  use  of  floral  symbolism.   Finally,  F.  Holland  Day's  significant  influence  over  Coburn  and  his  photographic   career  reinforces  the  likelihood  that  Coburn  was  aware  of,  and  possibly  sympathetic  to,   the  homosexual  community's  use  of  floral  symbolism.  Although  most  sources  imply  that   Coburn's  relationship  with  Day  began  and  concluded  with  their  trip  to  London  in  1899,  a   comprehensive  analysis  of  Coburn's  early  career  suggests  that  Day  had  an  intrinsic  and   lasting  role  in  Coburn's  development  as  a  photographer.  Though  interested  in   photography  since  his  eighth  birthday,163  Coburn's  career  as  a  professional   photographer  began  at  the  age  of  eighteen  on  his  European  journey  with  Day  who  was,   in  1899,  eighteen  years  Coburn's  senior.  As  one  of  the  first  photography  mentors  in  

                                                                                                                 161   Susan  E.  Gunter  and  Steven  H.  Jobe,  Dearly  Beloved  Friends:  Henry  James's   Letters  to  Younger  Men  (Ann  Arbor:  The  University  of  Michigan  Press,  2001),  1.   162   Henry  James,  The  Novels  and  Tales  of  Henry  James:  New  York  Edition,  vol.  10,   The  Spoils  of  Poynton,  A  London  Life,  The  Chaperon  (New  York:  Scribner,  1908).  Preface   to  The  Spoils  of  Poynton  quoted  in  Syme,  7.   163   "This  began  on  my  eighth  birthday,  when  two  of  my  Californian  uncles  gave   me  a  4"  x  5"  Kodak,  which  had  to  be  loaded  in  a  dark  room  with  a  roll  of  film  for  forty- eight  exposures."  Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  12.      44  

Coburn's  life,164  it  is  likely  that  Day's  influence  and  eminence  as  a  photographer  stayed   with  Coburn,  leading  to  his  emulation  of  Day's  approach  to  life  and  photography.  This   speculation  is  strengthened  by  the  countless  similarities  between  Day  and  Coburn's   professional  lives.     Throughout  their  careers,  Coburn  and  Day  showed  a  strong  predilection  for  the   book  as  a  means  to  present  and  disseminate  their  photography  and  opinions.  Illustrating   seventeen  books  by  the  end  of  his  career,165  a  passion  for  the  illustration  and   publication  of  beautifully  designed  and  produced  books  was  deeply  rooted  in  Coburn,   possibly  influenced  by  his  older  cousin,  Day.  While  Coburn  was  known  to  publish  his   photography  in  books,  Day  founded  and  ran  a  publishing  company  in  Boston  with   Herbert  Copeland166  from  1893  until  1899.167  Among  the  company's  publications  was   Oscar  Wilde's  Salome,  illustrated  by  Aubrey  Beardsley.168  Day  was  a  fervent  admirer  of  

                                                                                                                 164   Although  Day  was  an  experienced  photographer  and  mentor  to  Coburn,  there   were  skills  that  the  young  Coburn  taught  Day  as  well.  Coburn  states:  "Up  to  this  time   Day  had  all  his  developing  and  printing  done  by  others,  but  now  under  my  guidance  he   learned  to  do  it  himself.  In  this  I  became  the  teacher  and  he  the  pupil."  Alvin  Langdon   Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  14.   165   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  143.   166   Copeland  graduated  from  Harvard  University  in  1891,  taking  an  editorial   position  with  the  Youth's  Companion,  "a  popular  periodical  aimed  at  juvenile  readers,"   before  partnering  with  Day  in  their  publishing  firm  of  Copeland  and  Day.  Patricia  J.   Fanning,  Through  an  Uncommon  Lens:  The  Life  and  Photography  of  F.  Holland  Day   (Amherst:  University  of  Massachusetts  Press,  2008),  42.   167   Verna  Posever  Curtis  and  Jane  Van  Nimmen,  eds.,  F.  Holland  Day:  Selected   Texts  and  Bibliography  (New  York:  G.K.  Hall,  1995),  7.   168   Oscar  Wilde,  Salomé,  illust.  Aubrey  Beardsley  (Boston:  Copeland  and  Day,   London:  The  Bodley  Head,  1894).      45  

Wilde's,169  who  was  known  to  wear  a  green  carnation  in  his  buttonhole.170  No  stranger   to  floral  symbolism,  the  motto  for  Copeland  &  Day  stated  "as  a  lily  among  thorns"  and   accompanied  their  publisher's  mark  of  two  lilies  growing  out  of  one  stalk,  wreathed  by  a   rose  garland.171  Whether  or  not  Day's  use  of  floral  symbolism  was  linked  to   homosexuality  is  still  being  debated,  as  "Day  never  documented  his  homosexual   activities"  leading  to  an  "absence  of  firm  evidence,"  however  certain  letters  and  events   suggest  that  Day  was  likely  homosexual.172  Although  this  statement  certainly  cannot  be   made  for  Coburn,  through  his  friendships  with  James  and  Day,  Coburn  was  likely  familiar   with  the  homosexual  community  of  the  early  twentieth  century,  fostering  in  him  an   appreciation  for  the  art  and  expression  of  that  community,  including  its  use  of  floral   symbolism.     Expanding  on  the  comparison  between  the  two  photographers,  Day  was  a   master  portraitist,  and  focused  frequently  on  the  same  celebrities  that  Coburn   photographed  several  years  later,  gaining  Coburn  critical  acclaim.  Moreover,  many   famous  figures  photographed  by  Day  became  the  men  admired  by  Coburn  in  his  Men  of   Mark  series,  such  as  mystic  and  gay  rights  activist  Edward  Carpenter  (1844  ­  1929),  as   well  as  Maeterlinck,  whom  Day  had  photographed  in  1901.173  As  noted  by  Verna   Posever  Curtis  and  Jane  Van  Nimmen,  editors  of  F.  Holland  Day:  Selected  Texts  and                                                                                                                    169   Estelle  Jussim,  Slave  to  Beauty:  The  Eccentric  Life  and  Controversial  Career  of   F.  Holland  Day,  Photographer,  Publisher,  Aesthete  (Boston:  David  R.  Godine,  Publisher,   Inc.,  1981),  76.   170   Syme,  4.   171   Curtis,  7.   172   Jussim,  180.   173   Curtis,  18.      46  

Bibliography,  "in  1899,  critic  Sadakichi  Hartmann  had  already  advanced  Day's  hegemony   in  the  field  as  `the  most  ambitious  and  most  accomplished  of  our  American  portrait   photographers.'"174    The  following  year,  Hartmann  praised  Day's  portraits  for  being   "intensely  alike  [sic]  with  the  inner  life."175  By  1907,  the  same  critic  believed  Coburn's   portraits  to  be  likewise  imbued  with  feeling.   Similarities  between  the  two  photographers  abound,  reinforcing  the  likelihood   of  Day's  considerable  influence  over  Coburn's  career,  as  well  as  his  interest  in   Maeterlinck.  For  example,  Day  was,  according  to  Coburn,  "keen  on  the  writings  of  [...]   Maeterlinck  and  Edward  Carpenter,"176  made  clear  through  Day's  avid  reading  and   photographs  of  the  two  men.  Coburn  later  stated,  in  the  preface  to  More  Men  of  Mark,   that  he  had  been  an  admirer  of  Maeterlinck's  for  sixteen  years  prior  to  photographing   him.177  Having  taken  Maeterlinck's  portrait  in  1915,  Coburn  would  have  been   introduced  to  the  author's  writing  in  1899,  the  same  year  Coburn  traveled  to  London   with  Day.178  Although  it  was  likely  Day  who  originally  introduced  Coburn  to   Maeterlinck's  writing  and  mystical  philosophies,  the  author  was  admired  by  many  other  

                                                                                                                 174   Curtis,  18,  quoted  from  Sadakichi  Hartmann,  "Portrait  Painting  and  Portrait   Photography,"  Camera  Notes  3,  no.  1  (1899):  3-21.   175   Sadakichi  Hartmann,  "A  Decorative  Photographer,  F.H.  Day,"  Photographic   Times  32  (1900):  102-108.   176   Coburn,  "Photographic  Adventures,"  150.   177   Coburn,  More  Men  of  Mark,  17.   178   In  his  autobiography,  Coburn  describes  his  first  meeting  with  Day  in  1898,   explaining  that  the  latter  was  "an  enthusiast  for  the  writings  of  Keats,  Maeterlinck  and   Edward  Carpenter."  It  is  therefore  possible  that  Coburn  was  introduced  to  Maeterlinck's   writing  as  early  as  1898.  Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An   Autobiography,  14.      47  

figures  in  Coburn's  circle,  including  Stieglitz  and  Steichen.179  Furthermore,  Day's  work   was  hung  in  an  exhibition  arranged  by  Baron  A.  de  Meyer  and  Coburn  at  the  Galleries  of   the  New  English  Art  Club  in  London,180  suggesting  that  the  two  men  were  still  in  contact   as  late  as  1907.  As  noted  by  art  historian  and  biographer  Barbara  L.  Michaels,  Day   stayed  in  touch  with  many  photographers,  keeping  "friends  for  decades."181   Abounding  in  popular  culture  and  commonly  used  by  some  of  his  closest  friends,   Coburn  was  surely  aware  of  the  various  functions  of  floral  symbolism  during  the  early   twentieth  century,  providing  a  model  from  which  to  produce  his  own  illustrations  for   Maeterlinck's  essay.  Showing  the  various  points  of  view  from  which  floral  symbolism   can  be  discussed,  Syme  aptly  describes  the  symbolism's  adoption  by  the  homosexual   community  as  a  function  of  modernity,  while  Seaton's  account  of  the  nineteenth   century's  personification  of  the  flower  with  human  emotions  and  experiences  in  order   to  find  a  place  for  mankind  within  the  universe  describes  a  more  Victorian,  antimodern   approach  to  floral  symbolism.  Combining  these  two  approaches  and  applying  the   resulting  function  of  floral  symbolism  to  Coburn's  illustration  of  The  Intelligence  of  the   Flowers,  several  possible  conclusions  arise.  As  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  section,   Coburn  used  the  flowers  in  Maeterlinck's  book  in  order  to  express  his  emotions   regarding  the  state  of  materialism  in  society.  By  expressing  his  experience  of  society                                                                                                                    179   Huget  and  Moore,  10.   180   An  Exhibition  of  Modern  Photography  at  the  Galleries  of  the  New  English  Art   Club  (London:  New  English  Art  Club,  1907).   181   Barbara  L.  Michaels,  "Portraits  of  Friendship:  Fred  Holland  Day,  Gertrude   Käsebier  and  Their  Circle,"  in  New  Perspectives  on  F.  Holland  Day:  Selected  Presentations   from  the  Fred  Holland  Day  In  Context  Symposium  held  at  Stonehill  College,  North  Easton,   Massachusetts  April  19,  1997,  ed.  Patricia  J.  Fanning  (North  Easton,  Mass.:  Stonehill   College,  1998),  25.      48  

through  photographic  floral  symbolism,  Coburn  was  able  to  use  the  science  of   photography  to  ground  him  within  the  universe  through  nature.   Additional  conclusions  may  be  suggested,  however,  if  the  possibility  of  Coburn's   sympathy  toward  the  homosexual  community  is  taken  into  account  while  analyzing  the   images  used  to  illustrate  Maeterlinck's  essay.  In  this  case,  Coburn's  floral  symbolism   could  be  used  to  acknowledge  and  naturalize  non-reproductive  male  sexuality  without   explicitly  stating  its  existence,  using  the  form  of  the  flower  to  reposition  homosexual   individuals  back  into  a  society  that  they  feel  has  rejected  them.  Supporting  this   argument  is  materialism's  natural  association  to  a  conservative,  steadfast  attitude,  while   the  concept  of  spirituality,  associated  with  the  flower,  attracts  ideas  of  freedom  and   lightheartedness  through  its  notions  of  enlightenment.  Although  it  cannot  be  stated   with  certainty  all  of  the  reasons  why  Coburn  chose  to  embrace  the  use  of  floral   symbolism,  the  evidence  discussed  in  this  chapter  supports  the  argument  that  the   photographer  made  use  of  the  flower  as  a  symbolic  device  in  order  to  symbolize  his   attitude  to  life  and  escape  materialism.     

8.  CONCLUSION:  ANALYSIS  OF  PHOTOGRAVURES  
This  essay  has  explored  several  ways  in  which  Coburn  endeavored  to  escape  the   materialism  of  early  twentieth  century  society,  as  revealed  through  his  illustration  of   Maeterlinck's  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.  The  facts  and  subsequent  theories   presented  in  this  thesis  can  be  aptly  summarized  through  a  brief  analysis  of  the  four  

  

49  

photogravures  used  to  illustrate  Maeterlinck's  essay,  for  engrained  within  each  of  them   is  a  notion  of  Coburn  himself,  his  personality,  working  method,  and  belief  system.   Of  primary  importance  in  the  analysis  of  these  images  is  their  function  in  relation   to  the  book  as  a  whole.  For  example,  there  are  several  indications  that  the   photogravures  do  not  simply  illustrate  what  is  described  in  the  book's  pages,  as  was   normally  the  case  with  botanical  illustration.  Chief  among  these  identifiers  is  the  fact   that  flora  depicted  in  the  photogravures  could  not  be  printed  with  the  colors  that  they   reflect  in  reality,  which  is  a  significant  tool  for  flower  identification.  Similarly,  the  images   are  not  detailed  enough  (save  for  figure  11)  for  the  average  layman  to  be  able  to   identify  any  of  the  flowers  within  them.  Nor  do  the  photogravures  exhibit  the  flowers   whose  discussion  accompanies  the  text  facing  them.  Rather,  the  photogravures  were   likely  meant  as  symbolic  representations  of  Coburn's  ideas  and  emotions,  triggered  by   his  reading  of  Maeterlinck's  essay.     Exemplified  in  his  work  with  James,  who  sought  to  use  symbolic  photography  to   represent  a  central  conflict  or  theme  within  his  novels,  Coburn  made  use  of  floral   imagery  in  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  to  represent  Maeterlinck's  main  thesis.  The   author's  argument  was  not  the  importance  of  specific  types  of  flowers,  but  rather  the   intelligence  that  is  made  visible  through  the  actions  and  habits  of  all  flowers,  allowing  a   keen  observer  insight  into  the  "genius  of  the  earth."182  By  representing  this  theory  with   photography  rather  than  with  drawings  of  botanical  specimens,  the  photogravures   symbolize  the  spiritual  crisis  of  the  mid  nineteenth  century  resulting  from  the  division  of                                                                                                                    182   Maeterlinck,  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  165.      50  

science  and  faith.  Coburn  resolves  this  debate  for  himself  by  allowing  his  photographs  to   reveal  more  than  the  scientific  facts  that  they  are  able  to  capture.     The  incorporation  of  a  strong  triangular  component  within  each  photograph's   composition  reinforces  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  photogravures  used  to  illustrate   Maeterlinck's  essay.  Due  to  Coburn's  interest  and  experimentation  with  comparative   religions  such  as  Rosicrucianism  and  Freemasonry  throughout  his  life183,  it  is  possible   that  he  was  aware  of  the  symbolism  used  by  such  societies  early  in  his  career.  As   explained  in  Rosicrucianism  in  America,  "the  right  angle  triangle  has  been  used  from   remote  times  to  symbolize  Spirit  and  Matter  in  their  inclusiveness.  When  shown  with   the  point  downward,  such  an  angle  indicates  Matter  or  Earth;  reversed,  with  the  point   upwards,  the  angle  signifies  Spirit  or  the  Celestial."184  Through  the  use  of  downward   pointing  triangles  in  figures  11  and  12,185  and  upward  pointing  triangles  in  figures  13  and   14,186  Coburn  acknowledges  the  constant  struggle  between  materialism  and  spirituality.   Incorporating  the  upward  pointing  triangle  most  noticeably  in  figure  13,  Coburn  is  

                                                                                                                 183   Weaver,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Symbolist  Photographer,  23.   184   J.  Gordon  Melton,  ed.  Rosicrucianism  in  America  (New  York:  Garland   Publishing,  1990),  268.   185   The  three  water  lilies  form  each  point  of  the  downward  pointing  triangle  in   figure  11.  The  point  of  the  garden's  stone  edging  forms  the  apex  of  the  downward   pointing  triangle  in  figure  12.  Following  both  sides  of  the  stone  edging  out  of  the  image   brings  the  viewer's  eye  to  either  corner  of  the  triangle.     186   The  upward  pointing  triangle  in  figure  13  is  formed  by  two  statues  in  the   image's  foreground,  and  the  large  urn  in  the  center  of  the  image's  background.  The   upward  pointing  triangle  in  figure  14  is  slightly  more  subtle,  formed  by  the  sundial  at  the   peak  of  the  monument  in  the  image's  middleground,  and  the  two  farthest  corners  of  its   base.        51  

perhaps  echoing  Charles  H.  Caffin's  opinion  that  landscape  work  held  the  "vital  principle   of  which  is  the  recognition  of  soul  in  nature."187   Equally  noteworthy  is  the  inclusion  of  Moor  Park's  unassuming  sundial  (figure   14),  cementing  the  duality  between  materialism  and  spirituality.  A  popular  garden   accessory  in  nineteenth  and  twentieth  century  gardens,188  if  positioned  properly,  the   sundial  marks  the  passing  of  time  through  the  use  of  light  and  shadow.  As  explained  in  a   1911  article  on  the  subject,  "the  sun-dial  is  the  interpreter  of  the  garden's  divinity,  the   sun;  or  perhaps  the  embodiment  of  its  active  principle  which  fosters  life  in  the  tiny  seed- germ."189  A  simple  structure  to  the  naked  eye,  the  sundial  is  complex  in  a  number  of   ways,  primarily  in  its  ability  to  represent  both  opposing  forces  of  spirituality  and  science.   With  its  upward  pointing  triangle  used  to  mark  the  passage  of  time  through  the  use  of   the  sun's  light,  the  sundial  is  an  obvious  symbol  of  spirituality.  Combined  with  its   materialistic  functions  as  a  garden  ornament  and  marker  of  time  through  darkness  or   shadow,  however,  the  sundial  reveals  its  divided  nature.  By  photographing  the  sundial,   Coburn  is  therefore  able  to  comment  on  the  need  for  both  opposing  forces  of   spirituality  and  science  in  the  world  in  which  he  lived.   Imbuing  flowers  with  human  emotion  was  a  common  trend  throughout  the   nineteenth  century,  coupled  with  the  onset  of  the  `language  of  flowers'  that  attributed  a   specific  meaning  to  every  type  of  flower.  The  water  lily  was  no  exception,  most  often   likened  to  purity  and  innocence  for  its  white  color.  A  suitable  subject  matter  for  the                                                                                                                    187   Charles  H.  Caffin,  "Symbolism  and  Allegory,"  Camera  Work,  no.  18  (1907):  21.   188   William  A.  Vollmer,  "Sun-dials  and  How  to  Make  Them,"  House  and  Garden   20,  no.  1  (1911):  15.   189   Ibid.        52  

frontispiece  of  Maeterlinck's  essay,  the  image  of  the  water  lilies  opens  a  symbolic   discourse  for  both  subjects  of  mysticism  and  floral  symbolism.  As  described  in  another   of  Maeterlinck's  publications,  the  water  lily  "keeps  itself  always  above  the  water,  and   has  four  green  leaves  between  the  air  and  the  water;  and  it  is  rooted  in  the  earth,  and   above  it  is  opened  out  to  the  sun."190  Yet  another  reference  to  Maeterlinck's  previous   work,  the  image  of  the  water  lily  represents  both  materialism,  through  its  downward   pointing  triangle  and  roots  in  the  earth,  as  well  as  spirituality  that  is  represented  by  the   white  color  of  the  water  lily  and  its  constant  exposure  to  the  sun.  Through  this  symbolic   association,  the  water  lilies  set  the  tone  of  timelessness,  characteristic  of  mysticism,   which  pervades  the  imagery  and  text  of  Maeterlinck's  essay,  especially  apparent  in   figures  13  and  14.   Throughout  his  career,  Coburn  confirmed  his  devotion  to  spiritual  matters  time   and  again.  His  desire  to  pursue  a  spiritual  path  was  recognized  and  acknowledged  in  his   work  as  early  as  1899,  when  he  was  introduced  to  the  words  of  Maeterlinck.  Through   the  expansion  of  his  knowledge  and  interest  in  mysticism,  as  well  as  his  presumed   exposure  to  and  fascination  with  the  use  of  floral  symbolism,  Coburn  was  able  to  use   the  illustration  of  Maeterlinck's  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers  to  reflect  his  desire  to   escape  the  pervasive  materialism  of  early  twentieth  century  society.  Although  the   materiality  of  the  medium  of  photography  appears  to  be  intrinsically  at  odds  with  this   undertaking,  Coburn  was  able  to  harness  his  spirituality  and  talent  for  symbolism  in                                                                                                                    190   Ruysbroeck,  quoted  in  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  Ruysbroeck  and  the  Mystics:   With  Selections  from  Ruysbroeck,  trans.  Jane  T.  Stoddart  (London:  Hodder  &  Stoughton,   1891),  52.      53  

order  to  create  an  object  that  extended  far  beyond  its  palpable  meaning.  As  Coburn   wrote  towards  the  end  of  his  life,  looking  back  on  his  career,  "photography  teaches  its   devotees  how  to  look  lovingly  and  intelligently  at  the  world,  but  religious  mysticism   introduced  the  soul  to  God."191  Coburn  certainly  understood  the  interconnectedness  of   science  with  spirituality,  commenting  "you  may  dream  as  much  as  you  like  before   nature,  but  when  you  come  to  make  an  exposure  you  must  think,  to  a  certain  extent,  in   the  definite  terms  of  science."192  In  his  life,  however,  as  with  his  illustrations  for  The   Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  spirituality  ultimately  prevailed,  rising  above  the  materiality   of  Coburn's  extraordinary  life.    

                                                                                                                 191   Coburn,  "Photographic  Adventures,"  158.   192   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography,  132.      54  

APPENDIX  A:  ILLUSTRATIONS  
Figure  1     

   Figure  2     

                                 Gertrude  Käsebier   [Portrait  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn],  1902  ­  1912     Platinum  print,  20.4  x  15.6  cm   GEH  1967:0099:0036   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House        

                              Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   Maurice  Maeterlinck,  1915   Photogravure  print,  23  x  17  cm   From  More  Men  of  Mark,  by  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay   Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House  

  

55  

Figure  3     

   Figure  4     

                           Maurice  Maeterlinck,  decorated  by  William  Edgar  Fisher   [Cover],  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  1907   New  York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company,  20.9  x  13  x  2.8  cm   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,   George  Eastman  House        

      William  Edgar  Fisher   [Paste-down  endpaper  and  free  endpaper  decoration],  1907   20.4  x  12.5  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House  

  

56  

Figure  5     

              William  Edgar  Fisher   [Title  page  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House  

  

57  

Figure  6     

            William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House

  

58  

Figure  7     

            William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House  

  

59  

   Figure  8     

            William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House

  

60  

   Figure  9     

            William  Edgar  Fisher   [Border  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House

  

61  

Figure  10     

            William  Edgar  Fisher   [Sundial  decoration],  1907   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House  

  

62  

Figure  11     

      Figure  12     

                                 Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Water  lilies],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.5  x  9  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,     by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel   Library,  George  Eastman  House     

                           Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Cascade  of  flowers  in  urn],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.9  x  8.5  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,     by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel   Library,  George  Eastman  House     

  

63  

Figure  13     

      Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Garden  vista],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  8.5  x  13.9  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  George  Eastman  House      Figure  14                                    Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Sundial],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.8  x  8.9  cm   From  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,     by  Maurice  Maeterlinck   Collection  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel   Library,  George  Eastman  House  

  

64  

Figure  15     

      Figure  16  

                           Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   The  Dolphin  Fountain,  ca.  1910   Photogravure  print,  16.2  x  10.2  cm   GEH  1967:0150:0012   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House              

                                 Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Delphiniums],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13  x  9  cm   GEH  1967:0152:0008   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House  

  

65  

Figure  17     

   Figure  18     

                                 Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Rose],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  14.1  x  9.2  cm   GEH  1967:0152:0009   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House                 

                              Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   [Tree  trunk],  1906  or  1907   Photogravure  print,  13.6  x  9.1  cm   GEH  1967:0152:0010   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House  

  

66  

Figure  19     

         Figure  20     

                              Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   The  Faubourg  St.  Germain,  1906   Gelatin  silver  print,  28.3  x  22.6  cm   GEH  1967:0149:0003   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House           

                                    Adolphe  Braun   [Floral  still  life],  1854-57   Albumen  print,  28.4  x  22.7  cm   GEH  1967:0045:0019   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House  

  

67  

Figure  21     

                                          Alvin  Langdon  Coburn   Andrew  Lang,  1904   Photogravure  print,  20.5  x  16.2  cm   GEH  1967:0153:0048   Collection  of  George  Eastman  House  

  

68  

BIBLIOGRAPHY  
A.D.  "Inspired  Journalism."  The  Academy  72,  no.  1819  (1907):  271.   Allan,  Sidney.  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  ­  Secession  Portraiture."  Wilson's  Photographic   Magazine,  no.  44  (1907):  251-252.   ------.  "The  Exhibit  of  Photo-Secession."  The  Photographic  Times-Bulletin  36,  no.  3   (1904):  97-105.   Aveling,  Edward.  "Botany  and  Photography."  The  Photographic  News  36,  no.  1751   (1892):  197-199,  202.   Barrett,  Laura.  "`Material  Without  Being  Real':  Photography  and  the  End  of  Reality  in   The  Great  Gatsby."  Studies  in  the  Novel  30,  no.  4  (1998):  540-557.   Bednarowski,  Mary  Farrell.  New  Religions  and  the  Theoretical  Imagination  in  America.   Bloomington  and  Indianapolis:  Indiana  University  Press,  1989.   Bentley,  A.H.  "Masonic  Education."  Paper  presented  before  the  Masonic  Study  Society,   Surrey,  October  9  1951.   Besant.  Address  to  the  Newly  Admitted  Fellows  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  London:  The   Pelican  Press,  1919.   Bithell,  Jethro.  Life  and  writings  of  Maurice  Maeterlinck.  London,  New  York:  Walter  Scott   Publishing  Company,  1913.   Blake,  A.H.  "The  Man  and  His  Aims  III:  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn."  The  Photographic  News   52,  no.  624  (1907):  577-78.   Blatchford,  Paul.  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn."  In  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  1882  1966:  An   Exhibition  of  Photographs  from  the  International  Museum  of  Photography,   George  Eastman  House,  Rochester,  New  York.  London:  Arts  Council  of  Great   Britain,  1978.  An  exhibition  catalog.   Bogardus,  Ralph  Franklin.  Pictures  and  Texts:  Henry  James,  A.L.  Coburn,  and  New  Ways   of  Seeing  in  Literary  Culture.  Ann  Arbor,  MI:  UMI  Research  Press,  1984.   The  Book  Review  Digest,  Fourth  Annual  Cumulation.  Notes  by  Justina  Leavitt  Wilson.   Minneapolis:  The  H.W.  Wilson  Company,  1908.   Bragdon,  Claude.  "Maeterlinck."  The  Critic  45  (1904):  156-158.     Bridges,  Hal.  American  Mysticism:  From  William  James  to  Zen.  New  York:  Harper  &  Row,   1970.   Burroughs,  John.  "Letters  to  The  Outlook."  The  Outlook  86,  no.  12  (1907):  616-617.     Caffin,  Charles  H.  "Some  Prints  by  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn."  Camera  Work,  no.  2  (April   1904):  17-19.   ------.  "Symbolism  and  Allegory."  Camera  Work,  no.  18  (1907):  17-22.   Carpenter,  Edward.  The  Art  of  Creation.  London:  George  Allen  &  Unwin,  1904.   Carroll,  Bret  E.  Spiritualism  in  Antebellum  America.  Bloomington:  Indiana  University   Press,  1997.   Catalogue  of  an  Exhibition  of  the  Work  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn.  With  a  preface  by   George  Bernard  Shaw.  Liverpool:  The  Liverpool  Amateur  Photographic   Association,  1906.     

  

69  

Chapple,  J.A.V.  Science  and  Literature  in  the  Nineteenth  Century.  London:  Macmillan,   1986.   Coburn,  Alvin  Langdon.  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  Artist-Photographer."  Wilson's   Photographic  Magazine  51,  no.  1  (1914):  19-24.   ------.  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Photographer:  An  Autobiography  with  Over  70   Reproductions  of  His  Works.  Edited  by  Helmut  and  Alison  Gernsheim.  New  York:   Dover  Publications,  Inc.,  1966.   ------.  "American  Photographs  in  London."  Photo  Era  6,  no.  1  (1901):  209-215.   ------.  "Astrological  Portraiture."  The  Photographic  Journal  63  (1923):  50-52.   ------.    The  Book  of  Harlech.  Harlech:  D.H.  Parry,  1922.   ------.  "British  Pictorial  Photography."  Platinum  Print  1,  no.  7  (1915):  7-10.   ------.  "The  California  Missions:  San  Fernando  Rey."  Photo  Era  9,  no.  2  (1902):  51-53.   ------.  "The  California  Missions:  San  Gabriel."  Photo  Era  9,  no.  5  (1902):  204-206.   ------.  "The  California  Missions:  San  Juan  Capistrano."  Photo  Era  9,  no.  6  (1902):  253-   255.   ------.  "The  California  Missions:  Santa  Barbara."  Photo  Era  9,  no.  3  (1902):  116-118.   ------.  Camera  Pictures.  London:  The  Goupil  Gallery,  1913.   ------.  Catalogue  of  an  Exhibition  of  the  Work  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn.  Liverpool:  The   Liverpool  Amateur  Photographic  Association,  1906.   ------.  "The  Future  of  Pictorial  Photography."  Photograms  of  the  Year  (1916):  23-24.   ------.  London.  With  an  introduction  by  Hilaire  Belloc.  London:  Duckworth  &  Co.,  1909.   ------.  Men  of  Mark.  London:  Duckworth  &  Co.,  1913.   ------.  Moor  Park,  Rickmansworth.  With  an  introduction  by  Lady  Ebury.  London:  Elkin   Mathews,  1915.   ------.  More  Men  of  Mark.  London:  Duckworth  &  Co.,  1922.   ------.  "My  Best  Picture."  Photographic  News  51,  No.  579  (1907):  82-84.   ------.  New  York.  With  a  foreword  by  H.G.  Wells.  London:  Duckworth  &  Co.,  1911.   ------.  "Photographic  Adventures."  The  Photographic  Journal  102,  no.  5  (1962):  150-   158.   ------.  "Photography  and  the  Quest  of  Beauty."  The  Photographic  Journal  65,  no.  48   (1924):  159-167.   ------.  "Photogravure."  Platinum  Print  1,  no.  1  (1913):  1-5.   ------.  "The  Relation  of  Time  to  Art."  Camera  Work,  no.  36  (1911):  72-73.   ------.  "Retrospect."  The  Photographic  Journal  98  (1958):  36-40.   Coburn,  F.W.  and  Bunkio  Matsuki.  "How  the  Japanese  Arrange  Flowers."  House  and   Garden  20,  no.  1  (1911):  18-19,  50-51.   Cook,  May  Estelle.  "Nature's  Various  Ways."  The  Dial  43,  no.  516  (1907):  418.   Cummings,  Thomas  Harrison.  "Some  Photographs  by  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn."  Photo  Era   10,  no.3  (1903):  87-92.   Curtis,  Verna  Posever,  and  Jane  Van  Nimmen,  eds.  F.  Holland  Day:  Selected  Texts  and   Bibliography.  New  York:  G.K.  Hall,  1995.   De  Casseres,  Benjamin.  "The  Unconscious  in  Art."  Camera  Work,  no.  36  (1911):  17.   Ebury,  Francis.  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  at  Moor  Park."  History  of  Photography  29,  no.  1   (2005):  35-44.      70  

Edel,  Leon.  Henry  James,  The  Master:  1901-1916.  Philadelphia  and  New  York:  J.B.   Lippincott  Co.,  1972.   Edgerton,  Giles.  "Photography  as  One  of  the  Fine  Arts;  The  Camera  Pictures  of  Alvin   Langdon  Coburn  as  a  Vindication  of  this  Statement."  The  Craftsman  12  (1907):   394-403.   Evans,  Frederick  H.  "The  London  Photographic  Salon  for  1906."  Camera  Work,  no.  17   (1907):  30-33.   Ewing,  William  A.  Flora  Photographica,  Masterpieces  of  Flower  Photography:  1835  to   the  Present.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  1991.   An  Exhibition  of  Modern  Photography  at  the  Galleries  of  the  New  English  Art  Club.   London:  New  English  Art  Club,  1907.   An  Exhibition  of  Photographs  Arranged  by  the  Photo-Secession.  Philadelphia:  The   Pennsylvania  Academy  of  the  Fine  Arts,  1906.   Fanning,  Patricia  J.,  ed.  New  Perspectives  on  F.  Holland  Day:  Selected  Presentations  from   the  Fred  Holland  Day  In  Context  Symposium  Held  at  Stonehill  College  North   Easton,  Massachusetts  April  19,  1997.  North  Easton,  Mass.:  Stonehill  College,   1998.   ------.  Through  an  Uncommon  Lens:  The  Life  and  Photography  of  F.  Holland  Day.   Amherst:  University  of  Massachusetts  Press,  2008.   Firebaugh,  Joseph  J.  "Coburn:  Henry  James's  Photographer."  American  Quarterly  7,  no.  3   (1955):  213-233.   Foshay,  Ella  M.  Reflections  of  Nature:  Flowers  in  American  Art.  New  York:  Weathervane   Books,  1984.   Frothingham,  Paul  Revere.  "The  Mysticism  of  Maeterlinck."  The  Harvard  Theological   Review  5,  no.  2  (1912):  251-268.   Fulton,  Marianne,  ed.  Pictorialism  Into  Modernism:  the  Clarence  H.  White  School  of   Photography.  New  York:  Rizzoli,  1996.   Gager,  C.  Stuart.  "Science  and  Poetry  ­  A  Protest."  Science  N.S.  25,  no.  649  (1907):  908-   909.   The  Goupil  Gallery.  Camera  Pictures.  London:  The  Goupil  Gallery,  1913.   Gunter,  Susan  E.  and  Steven  H.  Jobe.  Dearly  Beloved  Friends:  Henry  James's  Letters  to   Younger  Men.  Ann  Arbor:  The  University  of  Michigan  Press,  2001.   Gurney,  Edmund,  Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  and  Frank  Podmore.  Phantasms  of  the  Living.   London:  Trübner  &  Co.,  1886.   Halls,  W.D.  Maurice  Maeterlinck:  A  Study  of  His  Life  and  Thought.  Oxford:  Clarendon   Press,  1960.   Happold,  F.C.  Mysticism:  A  Study  and  an  Anthology.  Baltimore:  Penguin  Books  Inc.,   1963.     Harry,  Gérard.  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  a  Biographical  Study,  with  Two  Essays  by  M.   Maeterlinck.  Translated  by  Alfred  Allinson.  London:  G.  Allen  &  Sons,  1910.   Hartmann,  Sadakichi.  The  Valiant  Knights  of  Daguerre:  Selected  Critical  Essays  on   Photography  and  Profiles  of  Photographic  Pioneers.  Edited  by  Harry  W.  Lawton   and  George  Knox  with  the  collaboration  of  Wistaria  Hartmann  Linton.  Berkeley:   University  of  California  Press,  1978.      71  

------.  "White  Chrysanthemums."  Camera  Work,  no.  5  (1904):  19-20.   Henderson,  Archibald.  Mark  Twain.  London:  Duckworth,  1911.   Henderson,  Linda  Dalrymple.  "Mysticism  as  the  `Tie  That  Binds':  The  Case  of  Edward   Carpenter  and  Modernism."  Art  Journal  46,  no.  1  (1987):  29-37.   ------.  "Mysticism,  Romanticism,  and  the  Fourth  Dimension."  In  The  Spiritual  in  Art:   Abstract  Painting  1890  ­  1985,  edited  by  Edward  Weisberger,  219-37.  New  York:   Abbeville  Press,  1986.   Hinton,  Horsley  A.  "One  Man  Show  at  the  R.P.S.:  Exhibition  of  Mr.  Alvin  Langdon   Coburn's  Photographs  at  the  Royal  Photographic  Society."  The  Amateur   Photographer  43,  no.  1115  (1906):  135-136.   Holmes,  Richard.  The  Age  of  Wonder:  How  the  Romantic  Generation  Discovered  the   Beauty  and  Terror  of  Science.  New  York:  Pantheon  Books,  2008.   Huget,  Jennifer,  and  Margaret  Moore,  eds.  A.L.  Coburn's  Men  of  Mark:  Pioneers  of   Modernism.  Hartford,  CT:  The  Mark  Twain  House  &  Museum,  2004.   International  Exhibition  of  Pictorial  Photography.  New  York:  The  National  Arts  Club,   1909.   Jablow,  Betsy  L.  "Illustrated  Texts  from  Dickens  to  James."  PhD  diss.,  Stanford   University,  1978.   James,  Henry.  The  Golden  Bowl.  New  York:  Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  1922.   ------.  The  Novels  and  Tales  of  Henry  James.  New  York:  Scribner,  1908.   Jussim,  Estelle.  Slave  to  Beauty:  The  Eccentric  Life  and  Controversial  Career  of  F.  Holland   Day,  Photographer,  Publisher,  Aesthete.  Boston:  David  R.  Godine,  Publisher,  Inc.,   1981.   Katz,  Steven  T.  Mysticism  and  Religious  Traditions.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,   1983.     King,  Amy.  Bloom:  The  Botanical  Vernacular  in  the  English  Novel.  New  York:  Oxford   University  Press,  2003.   Krannert  Art  Museum.  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn  and  H.G.  Wells:  The  Photographer  and  the   Novelist:  A  Unique  Collection  of  Photographs  and  Letters  from  the  University   Library's  H.G.  Wells  Collection.  Urbana:  Krannert  Art  Museum,  University  of   Illinois  at  Urbana-Champaign,  1997.     Lambrechts,  Eric  and  Luc  Salu,  eds.  Photography  and  Literature:  An  International   Bibliography  of  Monographs.  London  and  New  York:  Mansell,  1992.   Lears,  T.J.  Jackson.  No  Place  of  Grace:  Antimodernism  and  the  Transformation  of   American  Culture  1880  ­  1920.  New  York:  Pantheon  Books,  1981.   Leblanc,  Georgette.  Souvenirs:  My  Life  with  Maeterlinck.  Translated  by  Janet  Flanner.   New  York:  E.P.  Dutton  &  Co.  Inc.,  1932.   Looby,  Christopher.  "Flowers  of  Manhood:  Race,  Sex  and  Floriculture  from  Thomas   Wentworth  Higginson  to  Robert  Mapplethorpe."  Criticism  37,  no.  1  (1995):  109- 156.   Lord,  Eleazar.  Lempriere's  Universal  Biography;  Containing  a  Critical  and  Historical   Account  of  the  Lives,  Characters,  and  Labours  of  Eminent  Persons,  In  All  Ages  and   Countries.  New  York:  R.  Lockwood,  1825.   Lucie-Smith,  Edward.  Symbolist  Art.  New  York:  Thames  and  Hudson  Inc.,  1972.      72  

Lyons,  Nathan,  ed.  Photographers  on  Photography:  A  Critical  Anthology.  Englewood   Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall,  1966.   Maeterlinck,  Maurice.  The  Buried  Temple.  Translated  by  Alfred  Sutro.  New  York:  Dodd,   Mead  and  Company,  1911.   ------.  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers.  Translated  by  Alexander  Teixeira  de  Mattos.  New   York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company,  1907.   ------.  Life  and  Flowers.  Translated  by  Alexander  Teixeira  de  Mattos.  London:  Ruskin   House,  1907.   ------.  The  Measure  of  the  Hours.  Translated  by  Alexander  Teixeira  de  Mattos.  New   York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company,  1907.   ------.    News  of  Spring  and  Other  Nature  Studies.  Translated  by  Alexander  Teixeira  de   Mattos.  New  York:  Dodd,  Mead  and  Company,  1913.   ------.  Ruysbroeck  and  the  Mystics.  Translated  by  Jane  T.  Stoddart.  London:  Hodder  &   Stoughton,  1891.   Mahony,  Patrick.  Maurice  Maeterlinck,  Mystic  and  Dramatist:  A  Reminiscent  Biography   of  the  Man  and  His  Ideas.  Washington,  D.C.:  Institute  for  the  Study  of  Man,  1984.   Mew,  James.  "Photographic  Botany."  The  Photographic  News  36,  no.  1755  (1892):  259-   261.   Moore,  Robert  Laurence.  In  Search  of  White  Crows:  Spiritualism,  Parapsychology,  and   American  Culture.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1997.   Moses,  Montrose  Jonas.  Maurice  Maeterlinck:  A  Study.  New  York:  Duffield  &  Company,   1911.   Mosley,  Philip.  "Introduction."  In  The  Intelligence  of  the  Flowers,  by  Maurice   Maeterlinck,  IX-XXVII.  Albany:  State  University  of  New  York  Press,  2008.   Myers,  Frederic  W.H.  Science  and  a  Future  Life:  With  Other  Essays.  New  York:   Macmillan,  1893.   Nordström,  Alison  and  David  Wooters.  "Crafting  the  Art  of  the  Photograph."  In   TruthBeauty:  Pictorialism  and  the  Photograph  as  Art,  1845-1945.  Vancouver:   Douglas  &  McIntyre,  2008.  An  exhibition  catalog.     Oppenheim,  Janet.  The  Other  World:  Spiritualism  and  Psychical  Research  in  England,   1856  ­  1914.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1985.   Papers  and  Ephemera  of  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn.  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,   George  Eastman  House:  International  Museum  of  Photography  and  Film,   Rochester.   Parsons,  Melinda  Boyd.  To  All  the  Believers  ­  The  Art  of  Pamela  Colman  Smith.  Newark:   University  of  Delaware,  1975.  An  exhibition  catalog.   Pound,  Ezra.  Lustra  of  Ezra  Pound.  London:  Elkin  Mathews,  1916.   Pultz,  John.  "Equivalence,  Symbolism,  and  Minor  White's  Way  into  the  Language  of   Photography."  Record  of  the  Art  Museum,  Princeton  University  39,  no.  1  /  2   (1980):  28-39.   Rabb,  Jane  M.  Literature  &  Photography  Interactions,  1840  ­  1990:  A  Critical  Anthology.   Albuquerque:  University  of  New  Mexico  Press,  1995.   Read,  Herbert.  Art  and  Society.  New  York:  Schocken  Books,  1966.         73  

Scott,  Clive.  "Frederick  Evans:  Photography  as  Mediation."  Journal  of  European  Studies   30,  no.  117  (2000):  35-56.   Scott,  Dixon.  "The  Painters'  New  Rival:  An  Interview  with  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn."   American  Photography  2,  no.  1  (1908):  13-19.   Seaton,  Beverly.  The  Language  of  Flowers:  A  History.  Charlottesville  and  London:   University  Press  of  Virginia,  1995.   ------.  "Towards  a  Historical  Semiotics  of  Literary  Flower  Personification."  Poetics   Today  10,  no.  4  (1989):  679-701.   Serres,  Michel.  Hermes:  Literature,  Science,  Philosophy.  Edited  by  Josué  V.  Harari  and   David  F.  Bell.  Baltimore:  The  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  1982.   Silberer,  Herbert.  Problems  of  Mysticism  and  its  Symbolism.  Translated  by  Smith  Ely   Jelliffe.  New  York:  Moffat,  Yard  &  Company,  1917.   Shaw,  George  Bernard.  "Coburn's  Exhibit  at  the  Royal."  Photo-Era  16,  no.  3  (1906):  173-   176.   ------.  "Photographs  by  Mr.  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn:  A  Collection  of  Which  Constitutes   the  Present  One-Man  Show  at  the  Royal  Photographic  Society."  The  Amateur   Photographer  43,  no.  1114  (1906):  111-112.   Shelley,  Percy  Bysshe.  The  Cloud.  Los  Angeles:  C.C.  Parker,  1912.   Shiffman,  Joseph.  "The  Alienation  of  the  Artist:  Alfred  Stieglitz."  American  Quarterly  3,   no.  3  (1951):  244-258.   Sorell,  Tom.  Scientism.  New  York:  Routledge,  1991.   Steiner,  Rudolf.  Spiritualism,  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  Theosophy:  An  Eyewitness  View  of   Occult  History.  Great  Barrington,  MA:  Anthroposophic  Press,  2001.   Steinorth,  Karl,  ed.  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn:  Photographs  1900-1924.  Zürich,  New  York:   Edition  Stemmle,  1998.   Stevenson,  Robert  Louis.  Edinburgh:  Picturesque  Notes.  London:  Rupert  Hart  Davis,   1954.   Stone,  Wilbur  Macey,  ed.  Book-Plates  of  To-Day.  New  York:  Tonnele  &  Company,  1902.   Street,  Oliver  Day.  Symbolism  of  the  Three  Degrees,  Part  One:  The  Entered  Apprentice   Degree.  Washington,  D.C.:  The  Masonic  Service  Association  of  the  United  States,   1924.   Syme,  Alison.  A  Touch  of  Blossom:  John  Singer  Sargent  and  the  Queer  Flora  of  Fin-de-   Siècle  Art.  University  Park,  PA:  The  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press,  2010.   Symons,  Arthur.  "Maeterlinck  As  a  Mystic."  The  Contemporary  Review  72  (1897):  349-   354.   T.  "The  Measure  of  the  Hours."  The  Conservator  19,  no.  10  (1908):  153-154.   Thomas,  Edward.  Maurice  Maeterlinck.  London:  Methuen  &  Co.  Ltd.,  1911.   Thompson,  Herbert.  "Mr.  Coburn's  Work  at  Leeds."  The  Amateur  Photographer  44,  no.   1160  (1906):  571-572.   Turner,  Frank  Miller.  Between  Science  and  Religion:  The  Reaction  to  Scientific  Naturalism   in  Late  Victorian  England.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press,  1974.   Unsigned.  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn's  Exhibition  at  66  Russell  Square."  The  Photographic   News,  no.  50  (1906):  109-110.   ------.  "A  Bit  of  Coburn  ­  Our  Pictures."  Camera  Work,  no.  21  (1907):  30.      74  

------.  "Is  Photography  a  New  Art?"  Camera  Work,  no.  21  (1908):  17-22.   ------.  "M.  Maeterlinck  and  the  Flowers."  Putnam's  Monthly  4,  no.  1  (1908):  112.   ------.  "Pictorial  Photography."  Camera  Notes,  no.  18  (1907):  23-29.   Wakeman,  Geoffrey.  Victorian  Book  Illustration:  The  Technical  Revolution.  Detroit:  Gale   Research  Company,  1973.   Weaver,  Mike.  "Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Man  of  Mark:  A  Centenary  Essay."  In  Alvin   Langdon  Coburn,  Man  of  Mark  1882  1966:  Centenary.  Brighton:  The  Royal   Photographic  Society,  1982.      ------.  Alvin  Langdon  Coburn,  Symbolist  Photographer,  1882-1966:  Beyond  the   Craft.  New  York:  Aperture,  1986.   Weber,  Max.  "The  Fourth  Dimension  from  a  Plastic  Point  of  View."  Camera  Work,  no.  31   (1910):  25.   Wells,  H.G.  The  Door  in  the  Wall,  and  Other  Stories.  New  York:  Mitchell  Kennerley,  1911.        

  

75  


