Tt>\

IS 8000 M ajor Research Paper

Exploring Sikh youth in Toronto and issues o f identity

Jagjeet K aur Gill

MRP Supervisor: Vappu Tyyska

MRP Second Reader: June Ying Yee

The Major Research Paper is submitted in partial fulfillment o f the requirements for the Master o f Arts degree in Immigration and Settlement Studies

Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

© Jagjeet K aur Gill, 2005 PROPmYOF RYERseiK m m s n v l ib r a r v

UMI N um ber; E C 5 3 0 3 3

All rights re s e rv e d INFORMATION TO USERS T he quality of this reproduction is d ependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignm ent can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a com plete m anuscript and there are missing p ages, th e se will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC53033 Copyright 2008 by ProQ uest LLC All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United S tates Code. ProQ uest LLC 789 E ast Eisenhow er Parkway P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Author's Declaration Page

I hereby declare that I am the sole author o f this m ajor research paper.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this paper to other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

-------------------------------------------------Ï /

-O T '

Signature

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this paper by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request o f other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

---------------------- ZTTfT Signature

Exploring Sikh youth in Toronto and issues o f identity
A m ajor research paper presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment o f the requirement for the degree o f M aster o f Arts in Immigration and Settlement Studies. By: Jagjeet Kaur Gill Jl6stract M y paper investigates ten Punjabi-Sikh youth from the ages o f 18 to 25, across Ontario, this study attempts to answer how Sikh youth identify themselves and what external and social influences affect perception and identity. As Punjabi-Sikh youth struggle to find their identity in the m idst o f competing expectations, they may face institutional and structural barriers that may further complicate their identity. While there is extensive literature on the reception o f first generation Sikhs in Canada, there is minimal information on how second-generation Sikhs have integrated within the mainstream culture. There are many important questions to be answered, such as, do W estern euro-centric values and beliefs by the mainstream contradict with traditional and cultural beliefs? How do youth accommodate some cultural and religious values over others? Are there multiple oppressions, which are in conflict with retaining an ethnic and cultural identity? H ow do the values, expectations, and beliefs o f Punjabi-Sikh parents differ from their children's? How do youth negotiate their cultural and religious identity in the face o f conflicting expectations from parents, school, and their community? These are just some o f the questions that will be explored in this study.

Keywords; Punjabi-Sikh youth; identity; racism; Punjabi culture; Sikh religion; Gudwaras

Acknowledgements

The completion o f this Major Research Paper would not be possible without the support and knowledge o f various individuals. First, I am grateful to Vappu Tyyska, my faculty advisor, mentor and role-model. W ithout Professor V appu's support, motivation, insight, knowledge, diligence, patience, encouragement and faith in m e throughout the year, I would not be able to complete my paper, which has undeniably allowed me to succeed. Vappu has gone above and beyond her responsibilities as a faculty advisor and professor. This paper would also not be possible without the ten Sikh-Punjabi youth who took time out o f their busy sum m er schedules to share their experiences and gave me a perspective on my social location. Last but not least, m y thank-you to the first cohort in Immigration and Settlement Studies, for their moral support and countless frustrating emails and late-night frantic calls throughout the academic year.

11

^a6k o f Contents

In tro d u ctio n .................................................................................................................................... 1 Literature Review Canada's Changing D iv ersity ......................................................................................... 3 The Sikh Diasporic E xperience..................................................................................... 5 Institutional Racism & White P riv ileg e....................................................................... 7 Punjabi Culture or Sikhism? --Differentiating the t w o ............................................. 7 Becoming Westernized: Between two w o rld s............................................................. 9 Academic Achievement & Overcoming R a c ism ...................................................... 13 Gender Is s u e s .................................................................................................................. 15 P a ren tin g ........................................................................................................................... 18 Limitations o f L iterature............................................................................................... 19 S tudy/Inquiry................................................................................................................................. 21 P articip an ts...................................................................................................................... 21 M ethodology .................................................................................................................... 23 Research Results Id e n tity .............................................................................................................................. Culture & Religion: "Kaur" v a lu e s.............................................................................. Participation in O rganizations....................................................................................... Gurdwaras- Pivotal and essen tial?............................................................................... Interest in S ikhism ?......................................................................................................... Parental Expectations & V a lu e s.................................................................................... Gender D ifferences.......................................................................................................... School Influence & R a c ism ...........................................................................................

26 29 31 33 35 40 45 46

Sum m ary/D iscussion..................................................................................................................... 48 Limitations o f the s tu d y .................................................................................................... 53 Appendices Appendix A: Definitions & T e rm s ................................................................................ 57 Appendix B: Interview Protocol ..................................................... R eferen ces........................................................................................................................................ 63

111

L ist o f Appendices

A ppendices A ppendix A: Definitions & Term s ................................................................................ 57 A ppendix B: Interview Protocol ....................................... 61

IV

Introduction

-

-

-,

\ L ;.

-

Punjabi -Sikh youth, who are distinctly visible through their m anner o f dress, religious sym bols, and/or the length o f their hair, m ust juggle their cultural and religious identity in the face o f conflicting expectations from parents and school. M any youth, especially those dealing w ith m ultiple oppressions, such as race, ethnicity, class, and gender, find it difficult to find a space for them selves in the context o f their family, friends and the w ider com m unity, including com peting expectations that are imposed on them. Sikh youth specifically m ust m ediate conflicting dem ands from the m ainstream culture, while navigating their ow n culture, ethnicity, religion and com m unity influences. Identity is a socially constructed, fluid concept that is an increasingly com plex phenom enon for children and youth o f immigrants, who are raised in the m ainstream environm ent or Canadian milieu (Nayar, 2004 & D hruvarajan, 2003). Youth, and Sikh youth in particular face conflicting messages o f what it means to belong to the com m unity, religious group, and the school institutions. In the face o f these competing challenges, those who are affected by this conflicted identity and m orale, are the Sikh youth themselves, their parents, and the Punjabi/Sikh com m unity who fear assim ilation, in other words, giving up traditional values and beliefs to W estern values that have been imposed on them. The social context for Punjabi-Sikh youth includes school officials, such as educators and school adm inistrators who may unconsciously im pose their own Euro-centric values (norms o f the mainstream culture) on youth, not realizing that this m ay further cause dissonance and conflict in families. Further to the com m unity and school adm inistrators, broader social and political context is shaped by governm ent officials through the m ulticulturalism policy.

While all youth may struggle to find an identity and become independent, racialized

.

youth are doubly stigmatized as neither belonging completely to one group nor being completely Canadian and accepted by the mainstream. Today's immigrant youth are more culturally and ethnically diverse than older generations, as they represent one-third of the current immigrants entering Canada (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000). While immigrant populations continue to both grow and diversify, many immigrant youth are confused and uncertain between Canadian mainstream culture and their parents' values and traditions (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000). The Canadian Council of Social Development (2000) reports that while there appears to be literature on how immigrants have acculturated, adapted to the new country to which they immigrate to, there is little information on how youth manage (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000). Further to this, there is little work done on second-generation Punjabi-Sikh youth. Compared to Canadian bom youth, immigrant youth are less likely to have social supports and are more likely to be active in religious organizations and their religious faith (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000). As many racialized youth, and more specifically Punjabi-Sikh youth struggle to find their identity in the midst of competing expectations, they may face institutional and structural racism that further complicate their identity. Institutional racism or institutional barriers may be defined as "established policies, rules, and regulations of an organization or institution [that] systemically reflect and produce differential treatment of various groups within that organization or institution and in society generally. These regulation are used to maintain social control and the status quo in favour o f the dominant group" (James, 1999, p. 135). While structural barriers or structural racism is "rooted in inequalities of society [that] operate to justify the allocation o f racial groups to particular categories and class sites" (James, 1999, p. 135).

This problem is also personally m eaningful to me, as a Sikh youth w ho has gone through C anadian elem entary, secondary and post-secondary institutions, where I felt that my culture and religion w ere negated, and rem oved from the curriculum . From m y experiences, m any m em bers o f older generations have also expressed that they feel as though the younger generations are rem oved from their culture and religion, and are becom ing more distant from the traditional values, beliefs, and customs. Through ten individual interviews with Punjabi-Sikh youth across Ontario, and by replicating studies done by previous scholars (Gobin, 1999; Bariana, 1997; & Hall, 1995), this study w ill attem pt to answer how Sikh youth identify them selves and what external and social influences affect perception and identity.
Canada's Cfianging (Diversity

Canada and Toronto are becoming increasingly diverse through rapid im m igration trends. In Canada alone, the foreign bom population (or the im m igrant population) as defined by Statistics Canada (2004), increased from 16.1 % in 1991 to 18.4% in 2001. In Toronto, im m igrants m ade-up 43.7% o f the population in 2001 compared to 1991 where 38% o f T oronto's population consisted o f immigrants (Statistics Canada, 2004). Toronto also accom m odates m ore immigrants than any other m etropolitan area. There also continues to be a dramatic shift in the source countries, to which im m igrants are arriving from, rapidly changing Canada's racial make-up. This influx has been away from "traditional source countries" such as the United Kingdom and European nations and towards new im m igrant groups, such as Asia, Africa, South and Central America, and the Caribbean (CTV, 2005a; Reuters, 2005; & deSilva, 1992). CTV (2005a) reports that the visible m inority population grew 25 percent, six tim es the national growth rate, from the 1996 to the 2001 census, and by 2017, 1 in 3 individuals in Canada will belong to a visible m inority group. Reuters

(2005) further reports that by 2017 visible minorities will outpace traditional white settlers, while more than one million of Toronto's minorities will consist of South Asians, and more than 735,000 will have Chinese origins. Both reports indicate that a highly racialized population exists, and will continue to persist over the coming years. In addition to the changes in the racial make-up, the religions to which Canadians state they are affiliated has also shifted away from the mainstream. While there continues to be a high affiliation with Roman Catholicism and Protestantism, 2001 was marked in increases in Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism and Buddhism as a result of increased immigration trends (Statistics Canada, 2003). While representing one percent of the overall population. Statistics Canada (2003) notes that those who identified themselves as being Sikh, grew from 147,440 in 1991 to 278,400 in 2001, an increase of 89 percent. The Canadian Council of Social Development (2000) further reports that one-third o f the immigrants that arrive are under the age of 25 (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000). This indicates a growing segment o f the immigrant population that may be unaccounted for through school policies and practices and settlement services practices dedicated to immigrants. The Canadian Council o f.. Social Development (2000) argues that compared to adults, the challenges that immigrant children and youth face are unique, specifically in the Canadian school system and balancing the cultural values and behaviour expected of children and youth in their home country with those of their new country (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000, p.3). Accordingly, due to the growing immigrant youth and Sikh population in a metropolis such as Toronto, there is an urgent need to consider how policies and practices infringe on youth's culture^ ethnicity and religion. Those most vulnerable to policies and practices are

' A ll terms listed in A ppendix "A " are italicized through this paper.

youth and adolescents because o f their non-adult status, and their lack o f say in decisions about the curriculum and school content.
S i ^ (Diasporic (Experience

W hile Canada appears liberal in its policies towards im m igrants, there has been m alicious treatm ent o f groups deem ed "different" and because o f the "` 'othering" o f individuals that w ould change C anada's hom ogeneity. Jagpal (1994) notes that, unlike other im m igrant com m unities, relatively few Sikh pioneers considered Canada home. T heir intention was to make m oney and return to India. They came to a cold and hostile environm ent, both literally and figuratively. Besides, language problem s, poor education, lack o f proper housing and health care, and culture shock, they faced racial discrim ination and segregation (Jagpal, 1994, n.p). B ali & Bal (1993) further note that Sikhs were "transient for so long and reluctant to bring their fam ilies to jo in them " (p.80). Johnston (1995) argues that Sikhs rem ained a com paratively small population because o f restrictive policies and "repeated shuttling betw een two hom es...w hile adapt[ing to] one country without com pletely abandoning another" (Bains & Johnston, 1995, xiii). Restrictive policies that restricted im m igration from India, and specifically Sikhs, included the Continuous Journey Act and the Kom agata M aru (Kelley & Trebilcock, 1998). The Continuous Journey Act in 1908 set by the Canadian governm ent required that im m igrants arriving at any Canadian port m ust have a non-stop journey from their country o f origin (M inhas, 1994). In 1914, the Komagata M aru that tried to challenge the Continuous Journey Act, carried 376 passengers, 340 who were Sikhs, was met with extreme hostility from the residents o f Vancouver and was not allowed to disem bark (Kazimi, 2003). Despite a lack o f food and ill passengers, passengers that try to disem bark were shot at, and after two m onths on the coast, the ship was turned back while local citizens cheered (Kazim i, 2003).

Minhas (1994) argues that public opinion in British Columbia in 1907 "strongly opposed" Sikh immigration and other immigration from India (p. 12). In addition, to negative media portrayals of Sikhs as being uncivilized, dirty and diseased, while being unable to adapt to Canada's climate (Singh, 1994), Sikhs were further segregated due to language, culture and the racist sentiments from the host population (Johnston as cited in Jagpal, 1994). Due to restrictive immigration policies that prohibited immigration from India, very few females from India settled in Canada. Despite the lack of Sikh females, many Sikhs retained a strong religious identity, and relatively few Sikhs married outside their ethnic and religious group (Verma, 2002). Yet, to readily assimilate within Canada, the first male Sikh pioneers cut their hair and shaved their beards as a means to minimize their difference (Bains & Johnston, 1995). While, Gurdwaras or Sikh temples, continue to be a "pivotal place in the evolution of the Sikhs from a purely religious group, to an ethnic one" (Singh, 1991, p.l31). While allowing for retention o f the Sikh religion, Singh (1991) further mentions that "Gurdwaras function as a bulwark against assimilative influences exerted by the exotic life of Western culture" (p.131). In addition to religious activities, the Gurdwaras allow children to learn about Sikhism through Sunday language programs and religious instruction. While it is important to note that blatant policies to prohibit Sikh migration are not as evident as they were in the 1900's, The Points System (Kelley & Trebilcock, 1998) and covert forms of institutional racism, such as the case recent case of a Sikh youth from Alberta who was prohibited from playing soccer in British Columbia, because of his turban (CTV, 2005b), policies that maintain the status quo, continue to allow the less than full integration of Sikhs. While there is extensive literature on the less than warm welcome and assimilation o f first generation Sikhs in Canada, there is minimal information on how second-generation Sikhs have

integrated w ithin m ainstream culture, how they choose w hat values and beliefs to associate them selves with, and how they navigate between two worlds.
InstitutionaC It^cism and `Wfiite (Privilege

Racism today in Canada is not as evident, or overt and visible as it was tw enty years ago, however, hidden racism is ju st as dangerous, in term s o f its implications (Dum brill, 2005). In other w ords, while overt or blatant racism can be damaging to a group or individual, covert or hidden racism is ju st as detrimental since it is m asked and not easily identifiable. Institutional racism, policies and practices that maintain the status quo, is one form o f covert racism. D hruvarajan (2003) argues that racism in Canadian society is built into the institutional structures, w hich m anifests itself though social practices, is a result o f colonialism and im perialism practices (p. 174). More so, all other religions, other than Christianity are deem ed deviant by the m ainstream (Dhruvarajan, 2003), which legitim ates the stigm atization associated w ith non Euro-centric values. In D hruvarajan's (2003) interviews with Indo-Canadian youth, interviewees stated that their non-white skin was considered deficient by the m ainstream and that this legitim ated racist and discrim inatory behaviour. One o f interviewees reported the expectations and perceptions from their parents' experiences to do well. M y m om told me before, a long time ago, that we have to try harder because we are discrim inated against. We have to work twice as hard in order to achieve the same sort o f level or to be seen on the same level. I w ould say this is because I am East,Indian and I wished that I was not. I was alm ost em barrassed to be one (Dhruvarajan, 2003, p. 173).
(PunjaSi cuCture orSi^ism ? --(Differentiating tHe two

Sikhism is one o f the youngest world religions, originating five hundred years ago in the region o f Punjab India (Singh, 1993). Singh (1993) notes the fundam ental principle behind Sikhism is "There is only One being and Truth is its N am e," w ithout a physical form that is

beyond space, time, and gender, distinguishing Sikhism from most religions (p.8). Although it may be difficult to define the underlying principles of the Sikh religion in a few words, the Department of National Defence (2004) outlines some significant characteristics of Sikhism that include; being a monotheistic faith; Sikh meaning "disciple" or "learner of truth" in the Punjabi language; and following the teachings of the Sri Guru Granth Sahib (Holy Scriptures). More significant characteristics of Sikhism involve men and women as equals; tolerance of all religions, rejecting idol worship; rejection of the caste system; and religious rituals (Department o f National Defence, 2004). While there remain distinct characteristics of Sikhism, the Punjabi culture has blurred and has further complicated what it means to be Punjabi-Sikh. Furthermore, Western influences and conforming to the mainstream lifestyle and culture, have made it increasingly complex for Sikh youth to identify themselves. They must navigate, not only the pressures of the Western culture, but family, community, cultural and religious demands. Since Sikhs represent 1 to 2 percent of India's population (Singh, 1993), they are overwhelmingly outnumbered by Hindus. Consequently, many Sikhs follow cultural traditions, such as relegating women to the domestic sphere, the caste ideology and rituals that are in accord with the Hindu faith, yet have no basis in Sikhism (Jakobsh, 2003). Culturally, women are oppressed and relegated to the domestic realm, yet these ideals conflict with Sikhism, in which both men and women are equal. Bali & Bal (1993) explain that Sikhism has "comprehensive egalitarian objectives... Raising the status of women forms an essential part of its program. [Yet] the caste ideology of Hinduism has assigned to women, including those of the upper castes, a low status position" (p.228).

Since culture and religion are so intertwined, it is particularly difficult for actual m embers o f the Punjabi-Sikh com m unity to identify w hat is in accordance w ith the faith, and w hat is cultural. Furtherm ore, since culture is fluid, and relative to the geographic location, it m akes it particularly difficult to identify w hat cultural values are. Subordination is particularly prom inent w ithin the South A sian comm unity that restricts females from social activities, im plying that it is their `duty' to learn how to maintain a household, or no m an will m arry a wom an that does not know how to cook. There appear to be double standards, in which fem ales are view ed as the prom iscuous, while m ales are the honour o f the family. Consequentially, the stigma attached to fem ales in the Punjabi culture forms oppression w ithin the domestic sphere, where it is considered a w om an's `duty' to serve a man (Jakobsh, 2003). This subordination is further reflected w ithin the public sphere, where the males in the fam ily are wage earners, and benefit from the unpaid labour perform ed by females. O ther practices that are cultural practice, and not religious, include arranged m arriages, dating, and dowries. There is no specific reference in the Sri Guru Granth Sahib that prohibits dating, yet it's justified as not being in alignm ent with "Sikh values" and inappropriate. W hile the caste ideology is still evident throughout India, caste and hierarchies, throughout w estern countries continue to be a significant practice. However, first generation Sikhs throughout N orth A m erica identify this as a significant practice (Nayar, 2004). Furtherm ore, while justified as a cultural practice, dowries are strictly forbidden under Sikhism as written in the Sri Guru Granth Sahib (Verma, 2002).
(Becoming `Westernized: "(Between two worCds"

The process o f becom ing "Canadian" or "W esternized" has long been studied in m any ethnographies, however, research on Sikh youth in Toronto and identity is not readily available

in academic literature. Accordingly, little is known about Sikh youth in academic institutions and how they manage demands from both worlds. Many of today's Sikhs adapt western cultural values, while assimilating, accommodating (adapting) and acculturating beliefs more consistent with their own socializing group. While culture is fluid, many Canadian Sikhs have adapted multicultural traits and identities (Mahmood & Brady, 1999). Many first generation immigrants view academic achievement as critical to overcoming racism that exists in Canadian society (Dhruvarajan, 2003 & Gobin, 1999) but parents also view Western values as conflicting with their own traditional values (Gobin, 1999 & Nayar, 2004). Biswas, as cited, in Kunz & Hanvey (2000) states that many immigrant parents find western culture too liberal, and many times disrespectful as children question or second-guess their decisions (p.l). Similarly, Dhruvarajan (2003) argues that identity for Indo-Canadian youth is complicated in the private and public realm, as there is a dichotomy between the Indian tradition and the public realm within the Canadian milieu (p.16). Singh (1994) also argues that conflicts between old values and new customs evoke stresses in the family and result in a re-examination of life styles and value systems (p.84). Dating, career choices, education, and marriage are usually individual decisions in the West, yet eastern cultures such as South Asian parents usually make life decisions for their children (Biswas, as cited in Kunz & Hanvey, 2000). Dhruvarajan (2003) argues that Indo-Canadian, second-generation youth in Canada want to be accepted on their own terms, yet they face alienation. While they want to be accepted as "Canadian" and still retain a high afflation with being "Indian", their perceived differences are stigmatized. South Asian youths not only experience problems many teenagers face, such as the generation gap with their parents, but their "Indianness", as marked by religion, caste, and ethnic

and cultural identifiers m arginalizes and oppresses them further to the low er echelons o f society (Dhruvarajan, 2003). G obin's (1999) research on Sikh youth reveals acts o f defiance and guilt about lying to their parents (p.252) about where they are, since parents do not approve o f any socialization outside o f school. D hruvarajan (2003) further argues that South Asian youth feel that parents place "unreasonable dem ands" on them to act in an "ideal m anner" o f being Indian, w hich is in conflict w ith how to "act" outside the home. Dating, m arriage and socializing w ith the opposite sex appear to be significant issues raised by m any youth (Dhruvarajan, 2003 & Gobin, 1999). Hall (1995) also describes the dissonance associated with belonging to two distinct cultures: M arkers o f `A sian' racial and cultural inferiority have been translated into signs o f class inequality. To choose to rem ain "too Indian" has consequences o f its own. To seem "too Indian" (in dress, lifestyle, language or m anner) is to accept the m arkers o f an inferior status, or to choose to be what the denigrating signs o f race and class im ply that "Asians" are, namely "im m igrants" and "Pakis" (Hall, I9 9 5 ,p .2 6 0 ) W hile H all's (1995) research is on Sikh youth in Britain, she notes that ethnicity is a source o f culture conflict as adolescent Sikhs feel that they are being pulled betw een tw o ways o f life: ...I go to school and get W esternized ideas pushed into my brain day in and day out. W hen I get home, I only get it when my mom and dad shout at me or when there's a lecture given to u s ... I m ean ... you get pulled between two ways o f lif e ... I mean the thing is that really bugs me, you can't be religious and be W esternized. You have to b e .. .religious or be W esternized. You can 7 have both o f two worlds... (Emphasis added) (Hall, 1995, pp.246-7) Similarly, D hruvarajan (2003) explains that m any Indo-Canadian parents also have "core and peripheral values" . They will negotiate a balance o f values, yet will not overstep certain perim eters. A m ongst the core values are m arriage and dating that are not negotiable, while peripheral values such as eating habits are open to discussion (D hruvarajan, 2003, p. 16).

Hall (1995) further uses the term "fragmented consciousness" to describe Sikh teenagers iit Britain who are neither completely English nor Indian and adapt to different cultural fields individually. Bhachu (1985b) whose study involved Sikhs from East Africa who settled in Britain, similarly describes youth not having a sense of belonging. Bariana (1997), Gobin (1999), and Hall (1995) also address native language retention. The educational system's incapability to incorporate and legitimize the use o f Punjabi as a mother tongue (Singh, 1994) allows language classes to be ghettoized in the margins of before or after the regular school day. Accordingly, many Punjabi Sikhs are more fluent in the dominant language, English, and less so in Punjabi (Hall, 1995, p.254), creating a distance between the first and second generation Sikhs. Hall (1995), Gobin (1999), and Bariana (1997) also note that the values in Western schools differ from those of the Punjabi and Sikh cultures instilled at home. For instance, Gobin (1999) points out that Sikh youth have a "profound obligation to their parents" (p.290) and familial obligations are valued, while individualistic concerns, regarded as being "Canadian" are looked down upon. At schools certain standards are approved and rewarded over others: those demonstrating independent thinking, confident and assertive self-presentation, self-direction, and individual autonomy are highly regarded (Hall, 1995, pp. 250251). Values of collectivity, the family unit, and showing respect to elders through silence, however, are not values taught in the curriculum. Similarly, Singh (1994) notes that Canadian schools place a high value on liberal education, individual initiative, independent decision making, and privacy which are norms that conflict with the Punjabi concept of "seva"- selfless service (p. 105). Dhruvarajan (2003) also contends that many Indo-Canadian parents "know best.

as attributed to their age and experience" and look dow n on "unbridled individualism o f the west and privilege fam ilistic values o f their own ethnic culture" (p. 169). Singh (1994) also points out that a constant struggle betw een younger and older generations is further perpetuated through a com m unication gap. The general perception by first generation im m igrants, D hruvarajan (2003) argues, is that their culture is considered inferior by m ainstream society, by way o f educational practices, and accordingly they have m aintained a social distance from the dom inant groups. Yet, youth do not view the dom inant culture as corrupting, and w ant to be accepted by the mainstream (Dhruvarajan, 2003, p. 170). Hall (1995), as cited in Ballard (1982), similarly describes youth as dealing w ith two different and conflicting ideologies. C hildren o f South Asian origin in Britain are certainly exposed to, and participate in, two very different cultural worlds. A t home parents expect conform ity to the norm s o f co-operation, respect and familial lo y alty ... At school, however, children are exposed to a wholly contrary set o f values and expectations... As a result o f the very fundamental contradictions betw een these two worlds, m any young Asians feel them selves to be faced with acute dilem m as as to how they should organize their lives. However, m ost have long since learned to cope w ith these contradictions by switching their modes o f behaviour depending on the context in w hich they find them selves (Ballard, 1982, pp. 195-196 as cited in Hall, 1995, p.248). Hall (1995) further notes that Sikh youth have many layers to their social identity that include race, class, and gender and have m ultiple layers o f cultural identity available to them through com m unities and schools, while consistently constructing new ways o f being BritishSikh (p.244).
Acade^mic _^chievement eZi Overcoming ^ cism

The Canadian Council o f Social Developm ent (2000) reports that m any im m igrant youth experience racism , ostracism , and bullying which is further propagated through school adm inistrators and educators who stigmatize racialized youth due to their ethnicity, culture,

and/or accent (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000, p. 13). Rather than being part of the solution, school officials are part of the problem of racism (Kunz & Hanvey, 2000) yet this racism is covert, and youth express little hope of overcoming it. Dhruvarajan's (2003) findings also suggest despair in overcoming racism in Canadian society by youth who found that their best defense is-through educational achievement. Dhruvarajan (2003) reports an increased emphasis on education, by Indo-Canadians at large, as a way of obtaining social and economic mobility. Gobin (1999) also suggests that Punjabi-Sikh families place a high value on education as means of overcoming barriers that may exist in the Canadian milieu. Bhachu (1985a) points out that Sikh families have become highly competitively motivated to succeed, as social mobility and status are linked to educational achievement. While there is a high importance placed on educational achievement, Gobin (1999) points out that Punjabi parents stress the importance of not becoming too Westernized. Dhruvarajan (2003) describes the pressures that many Indo-Canadian youth may face, as their parents have immigrated to Canada in search for better economic conditions. Furthermore, there is a strong belief that in order to protect children from discrimination, they have to be well educated and attain good professions (Dhruvarajan, 2003). Dhruvarajan (2003) further argues that many youth continue to face discrimination and racism throughout their schooling until they find a comfortable space for themselves within a peer group (p. 16). Although Sikh youth cannot disguise their race, class, and ethnicity. Hall (1995) notes that academic success is used as a way of balancing out their inferiority, as high academic success and achievement are linked to social capital and social mobility. Further, Hall (1995) states that Sikh youth feel "the most English" at school when they are not in the "gaze o f their parents" (p.256).

Çender Issues

\

In Canada, sim ilar to India, Indian girls are given less freedom, as fem ales continue to em body tradition and culture (Dhruvarajan, 2003 & M ahm ood & Brady, 1999). D hruvarajan (2003) contends that not only is chastity critical before m arriage, but fam ily honour is tied to the daughters' "im peccable moral conduct" which parents have a duty to protect (p. 169). The Sikh Religious Society (1994) notes that religiously sanctioned gender roles and the "double standard" are increasingly growing problems for Sikh youth in America. The Sikh Religious Society (1994) further notes that the fem ales' role, in the Punjabi culture, consists o f girls that m ust be "protected," subm issive, shy, and quiet, while D hruvarajan (2003) confirm s that parents place a "tighter grip" (p. 175) on females, and a tendency to be more protective and controlling o f females. D hruvarajan (2003) further argues that the sexual double standard has benefited m en who are freed o f dom estic responsibilities, yet a social m ovem ent o f m odernism has led to the gradual erosion o f patriarchal values, toward more egalitarian gender roles (p. 171). However, this m ovem ent has been less pronounced in the South Asian community. The activities and social interactions o f boys do not get questioned, while girls are to assume a dom estic role (Sikh Religious Society, 1994). The Sikh Religious Society (1994) argues that this leads to resentm ent tow ard the parents, while parents feel as though they have their daughter's best interest at heart. Hall (1995) notes that the experiences o f Sikh females and males differ through acculturation in schools, whereby m ales are given more freedom and `equality' than females. Punjabi m ales are given m ore freedom to go out w ith friends and socialize, m eanw hile Punjabi fem ales are restricted in their social activities.

Other issues of gender inequality include the value of education. Dhruvarajan (2003) argues that much like India, expectations for educational achievement in Canada for IndoCanadian males are higher than for females. Similar to Dhruvarajan (2003), Bhachu (1985a) notes that the male's education is far more valued than female's education and achievement. While Bhachu's (1985a) work may be considered specific to the United Kingdom, Bariana's (1997) work in Canada, suggests through interviews with school officials, that male education is still more valued than a female's educational attainment. Bariana (1997) further argues that: .. .gender-based cultural differences determine the freedom, personal worth and academic opportunities allowed Sikh boys and girls, a view which contravenes teachers' middle class values (pp.245-246). Hall (1995) further describes how females are especially restricted in their socialization outside o f the home; yet use school as a tool through which to gain more freedom, often at the expense of their education. Sikh fem ales may be restricted in their education since higher education, particularly post-secondary and schooling away from home is seen as a lack of control from the parents' perspective, but is seen as a "way out" of domestic and familial responsibilities by females (Gobin, 1999). Bariana (1997) through her ethnographic study suggests that mainstream Western cultural beliefs are believed to impede and erode Sikh adolescent values and compliance. Furthermore, Bariana (1997) states that educators are also "torn between their own personal education philosophy and the balance of Punjabi cultural issues through educating students, and must negotiate a neutral role between the home and the school" (p.222). School officials, Bariana (1997) also finds, have to "tread a fine line" in respecting the cultural values, while upholding the administrative and legal responsibilities (p.239). Bhachu (1985a), however, notes that while

teachers m ay recognize that m any parents w ant to m aintain a traditional upbringing, it is the educator's role to instill "Euro-centric" and "Judao-Christian" values (p.225) Since education is seen as a way to achieve higher status and social m obility, B hachu (1985») notes that Sikh fam ilies have become highly com petitively m otivated to succeed, as status through achievem ent is m ost valued (p. 19). Similarly, D hruvarajan (2003) argues that IndoCanadian parents stress the importance o f high academic achievem ent as a means o f overcom ing institutional and structural barriers. Gobin (1999) however, notes that this competitive m otivation is contradictory to many educators' personal philosophy, that students m ust be academ ically and intrinsically motivated to learn. Accordingly, educators feel that Punjabi students are not orientated towards higher learning for the right reasons. Bhachu (1985a) also notes that m any Punjabi families place a high value on "purpose-oriented" education and not on abstract knowledge, such as art and music. G obin's (1999) study similarly recognizes the lack o f participation in classes and activities by Sikh students that are considered "recreational" as opposed to being "professionally oriented". Bariana (1997) notes that Punjabi parents place a heavy em phasis on m ath and science to lead to professional degrees, yet not all students have the capacity to be exceptional in these subjects whereas as aesthetic courses such as a dram a, art, music and physical education and French, are not seen as practical. The biases and lack o f a cultural sensitivity reveal that adm inistrators and m any teachers have their own cultural biases and are unwilling to accomm odate students, irrespective o f the situation they m ay be in, while some teachers recognize the need for an inclusive curriculum (Bariana, 1997, p.258) through an education about diversity. Bhachu (1985a) notes that while there is discrim ination from teachers, m any students are m ade to internalize this, and told by their parents to "behave" in school (p.21).

(Parenting

-

;

y- -

:r;;:r--

V %n- .

Bariana (1997) implies that individuals do not live in a vacuum, apart from the ; ... invasion of dominant, cultural institutions, services and laws which govern our family life. [Accordingly many dilemmas exist, including to] what extent can/should Sikh parents be coerced and shaped by mainstream, institutional values and beliefs? p.217.

Furthermore, Bhachu (1985a) and Bariana (1997) both contend that parents, due to discrimination and isolation, attempt to maintain their own traditional and cultural values, for emotional security. The Sikh Religious Society (1994) reports that parents have become distant from their daughters who want answers as opposed to lectures about the opposite sex, peer pressure and double standards. Bariana (1997) notes that a "culture conflict" occurs, whereby children accept Canadian culture, cultural accommodation, and challenge their parents. Bariana (1997) further argues that Sikhs view education as a "necessary evil, a biased, Canadian curriculum which promotes the internalization of a White socialization experience, thus creating dissonance between the Sikh culture and Canadian culture" (p.216). Singh (1990) also argues that many children are trained to be critical and rational, and are therefore questioning traditions and values to which many religious leaders are not trained to answer. The Sikh Religious Society (1994) has further found that parents have confirmed that unhealthy relationships with their adolescents occur, when the teenager feels that parents will not make an attempt to understand; consequently leading to a "double-life" and distrust. Problems are particularly prevalent amongst teenagers who are facing puberty and trying to find their own identity and "acceptance gained by conforming to certain norms of that society" (Sikh Religious Society, 1994 pp.312-313). Bariana (1997) notes that parents recognize education as equating to social mobility and economic success, yet do not appreciate the push of dominant culture and

values. Yet, teachers do not directly reinforce the dom inant ideology, this is im plicitly suggested through practices such as "anglicizing the student's name to m ake it easier to spell and pronounce" (Bariana, 1997, p.224) and peer pressure to conform with the W esternized lifestyles and values. B ariana (1997) further notes that Sikh parents are overw helm ed w ith pressures since they are m inorities and small numbers cannot compare to the m ajority and mainstream .

Limitations of Rterature
Through an exam ination o f the literature, it appears that there continues to be a lack o f academ ic m aterial dedicated strictly to Sikh and Punjabi youth in particular, within the G reater Toronto A rea and Canada generally. M any questions rem ain unaddressed: H ow and w hy do youth accom m odate some cultural and religious values over others? W hat are the m ultiple oppression w hich are in conflict w ith retaining an ethnic and culturally identity? Do the values, expectations, and beliefs o f Punjabi-Sikh parents differ from their children's? To w hat extent is the school influential to both youth and their parents? Do the youth them selves w ant language, culture and religious support? Are there different educational and familial expectations for sons and daughters? These are all questions that need to be exam ined more diligently. Singh (1994) argues that an understanding o f the Punjabi and Sikh cultural underpinnings, the Sikh hom e, and the Punjabi cultural upbringing, must be recognized, to avoid im posing dom inant ideologies (p. 100) onto m inority groups. A lthough research (Singh, 1990) suggests that there has been a renewed interest by youth in religious activities, there continues to be a critical Punjabi language gap that has not been fully addressed. Singh (1990) argues that "without an adequate knowledge o f Punjabi, the language o f the Guru Granth Sahib, the new generation o f Sikhs is in danger o f being theologically illiterate" (n.p.). Accordingly, there is a lack o f language and cultural services and religious support

available for youth. The minimal language supports that are available are segregated to afterschool or the weekends, signaling that that the Punjabi language is not as important as the English language. Singh (1994) further argues that nothing has been set up within the education system to either understand the Sikh religion or to foster its development. More so, the number of settlement services available to Sikh youth that may help facilitate and foster integration is not known and is limited to the Gurdwaras. The Canadian Council of Social Development (2000) reports that services for family and children, and specifically Ethno-cultural services are essentially non-existent and poorly funded. While Gurdwaras are critical to religious retention, there are no studies to examine their importance to youth. The Gurdwaras have been relegated to supporting first-generation Sikhs, while no information exists on how they support second-generation youth. Hans (2003) contends that the Gurdwara is an overarching cultural site for the diasporic Punjabi community especially [up until] the 1970s when most of the Punjabi immigration in Canada came from the Sikhs (p. 218). While Hans (2003) focuses on the Sikh population in British Columbia, the Gurdwaras across Canada continue to be pivotal in retaining religious, cultural and language identity. Hans (2003) further argues that Gurdwaras allow for cohesion of the diasporic community and in recent times have become not only a place of worship, but have also emerged as a community centre and a cultural space. Hall (2004) states that there is a lack of current literature that has moved beyond assimilation, acculturation, and accommodation. Jhe current literature on the immigrant experience is conceptualized in terms of assimilation and acculturation, while little work has been done "national-identity formation and its relationship to immigrant incorporation and

cultural change" (p. 109). Accordingly, more research is needed to focus on the "host society's" reception o f the im m igrant community (Hall, 2004), issues o f m arginalization, and fostering an inclusive school curriculum and multiculturalism.

Study/Inquiry
Given the gaps and criticism related to the available literature, m y research will exam ine how Punjabi-Sikh identify themselves, their participation in religious organizations, the importance o f Gurdwaras, culture and the religion, parental expectations and values, gender differences, school influence and racism. I will collect and present data that will try to uncover and analyze issues related to how Punjabi-Sikh youth m ediate conflicting demands from the m ainstream culture, while navigating their own culture, ethnicity, religion and com m unity influences. Through ten individual interviews with Punjabi-Sikh youth across Ontario, and by replicating studies done by previous scholars (Gobin, 1999; Bariana, 1997; & Hall, 1995), this study will attem pt to answer how Sikh youth identify them selves and what external and social influences affect perception and identity.
(Participants

Participants were recruited from many census tracts throughout the G reater Toronto Area. To build a rapport with other youth in the community, 1 was involved in m any m eetings as m em ber o f the Guru Gobin Singh Ji Foundation at the Scarborough Gudwara. M em bers o f the Guru G obin Singh Ji Foundation meet monthly to discuss upcom ing events in the com m unity, and the organization allows youth to develop leadership qualities, responsibility, com m itm ent, and em pow erm ent (GGSCF). The meetings are also open to any youth who wishes to volunteer, so there is a consistent flow o f new youth who enter m eetings on a m onthly basis.

' Through the meetings at the Guru Gobin Singh Ji foundation and discussions with other youth, I was able to recruit ten participants. For the purposes of this project, a quota sample (Neuman, 2004) was used to understand the perspectives of males and females, and five males and five females were interviewed. This ensured that the sample was fixed, while allowing for some differences and for an equal representation of both sexes (Neuman, 2004). A purposive sample (Neuman, 2004), in other words, getting all possible individuals that fit the criteria for this study (p. 138) was used as I was interested in the perspectives of Sikh youth and only youth who belonged to the Sikh faith were interviewed. While the original proposal was intended to focus on Sikh youth between the ages of 18 and 24, the scope was widened to include Sikh youth between the ages of 18 to 25. Three of the participants that had been recruited or had been obtained through the "snowball" technique (Bryman, 2001), were 25 years old, and the scope was broadened to include these youth, rather than exclude them. To ensure the confidentiality of all the participants, Singh, which is a name that refers to a lion and a middle name given to all Sikh males, was used to refer to all male participants, while Kaur, which refers to princess and a middle name given to all Sikh females, was used to refer to all female participants. While not intentional, all participants will or are enrolled in post-secondary education through a university. One participant, Singh 4, will be starting university in September, while Singh 2, Singh 5, and Kaur 3, respectively had completed their degrees, within the last year. All other participants were currently completing their degrees at their respective universities. Their programs o f study included Fashion Design, Information Technology Management, Law, Sciences, Engineering, Humanities, and Business and Human Resources.

Participants were from various areas across Ontario. Two participants were from B ram pton while one interviewee was completing his law degree in Ottawa and resided there throughout the school term. Other participants were from Caledon, R ichm ond Hill, Scarborough, M ississauga, N orth York, and Dow ntow n Toronto. Furtherm ore, participants were represented from all three universities in the Greater Toronto Area. W hile the length and style o f hair varies, coincidentally all male participants, Singhs, were visible Sikhs, as evident through their turbans or patka (a type o f headdress m ales, usually younger boys wear) and beards. W hile all males studied had some m arked identity, all fem ales that had participated did not dress in traditional clothes or had not taken amrit (been baptized), as evident through their standard W estern clothing.
MethocCoCogy

The tim eline for the research was as follows: Ryerson Ethics Approval was obtained in early July, interviews were conducted throughout the m onth o f July, transcribing took place in early August, and the analysis and final paper was com pleted by the first week o f September. For the purposes o f this project, qualitative research was used, as the nature o f the topic, identity, is a com plex phenom enon that is constructed individually through various variables that quantitative research cannot answer (Neuman, 2004). Qualitative interviewing, more specifically, was used, as the interviewer requires detailed answers. Qualitative research also allowed for an understanding o f the perceptions o f the participants from their own perspectives (Bryman, 2001). Furtherm ore, qualitative research allows for a follow -up on or clarifying points, ideas, and insights that may not otherwise be evident through quantitative research. R esponses were recorded through audio recordings. Audio recordings were also a critical step to this project, as the researcher was not only interested in what the participants said, but how they

said it (Bryman, 2001). Audio recordings also allowed for ongoing analysis of the information, since the researcher had continuous access to it. The research strategy that was employed for the purposes of this research project was the narrative inquiry (Bryman, 2001). This research method was employed as it allowed for a descriptive analysis and authenticity from the youth, as it was their voices and perspectives. In order words, through the narrative analysis, the researcher can better understand the views of the youth themselves as they recall and identify issues, by giving a voice to those who own it. This method was chosen over ethnographic research (Neuman, 2004), which requires extensive participant observation, and rapport with the interviewees that the interviewer was not be able to build, due to time constraints. Although complex, the narrative perspective has allowed for a descriptive analysis of events, themes, and influences on Sikh youth. Through the ethnographic and narrative approach, the social reality of Sikh youths, as they experience it through their social lens, and how specific details were constructed, came through with interviews, through their points of view. The views of the participants did not necessarily reinforce what was already known and examined through the existing literature and studies. Furthermore, the narrative approach allows for a non-hierarchal relationship, and reciprocal relationship between the interviewee and the participants (Bryman, 2001). More so, the researcher was interested in privileging voices that have been relegated to the margins of society or negated by hegemonic structures, as discussed in the literature review.

Due to tim e and financial constraints, participants chosen were though a convenience sample (Neuman, 2004), as the Guru Gobin Singh Ji Foundation is an organization that has already been established, while both geographical and practical access were taken into consideration. For the purposes o f this project, I conducted ten individual interviews based on sem i structured questions (see Appendix ` A ' for Interview Protocol). 1 also replicated m any interview questions from Denise G obin's (1999) dissertation "The differential incorporation o f racial m inority youth; Indo-Caribbean, Afro-Caribbean and Punjabi Sikh Teens in Toronto and surrounding areas". Since the interviews were conducted in a sem i-structured m anner (Bryman, 2001), it allowed me to probe and clarify answers and help focus the conversation and questions towards the original intended problem. Accordingly, m any participants could clarify term s that were unclear, and gave control to participants who may not have wanted to answer. The sem i structured questions were also used, to allow me to have some guidelines, while perm itting personal opinions, beliefs and values to originate via prompts. Through prom pts and probing, I was allowed to pick up on issues that may elicit significant em otions and elicit the interviewee for more information. As more interviews were conducted, more them es and patterns had em erged that allowed the researcher to ask the rem aining participants about specific ideas that appeared. As a British-Sikh-Indo-Canadian, I constantly longed for a space where I belonged, neither com pleting belonging to one group, and feeling disconnected from my own cultural and religious group, because o f language barriers and the stigm a attached to being "different" . The dem ands from W estern influences, school and peers, while understanding the perspectives and rearing o f m y parents, made it difficult for me to navigate m y own identity. The various layers

o f my roots and identity further complicated who I was and where I belonged. While longing to "fit in", 1 negated my own ethnicity, culture, and religion, for fear o f being segregated amongst my peers. This lead me to further disassociate myself from my roots, while impeding my own understanding of what it meant to be a Punjabi and a Sikh female. I could not explain to my peers why I was different; 1just knew I was different, from the active gaze of others, and my skin colour. Throughout the course of this study, I was both a researcher and a participant. I listened, felt, hurt, related and understood much of the experiences that many of the participants discussed. Punjabi-Sikh youth and the various influences, experiences, and relationships, affected me on a personal basis, and gave me a sympathetic perspective of what the youth narrated to me.

^search ^suCts
Identity While identity is fluid and dependent on the geographic location where an individual resides, it is of particular interest to note that none of the ten participants identify themselves as only Canadian, while 6 of the 10 participants were bom in Canada. Singh 1 for example, identified himself as a Sikh-Canadian, a hyphenated person, in which his religious values were significantly more important. When asked if he had always identified himself as a SikhCanadian, he stated that it had changed over the years. Umm, before I would probably say that Tm Canadian- Sikh-Canadian or an IndoCanadian but, I guess I hadn't gotten more confidence in like- about my religion and learned more about it, and I think that the people around me changed- I've been more confident being a Sikh, as I've grown older. - Singh 1 Accordingly, Kaur 3 and Kaur 4 had also stated, that as they have matured and learned more about the culture and religion, they have identified themselves as being Sikh.

Singh 1 further felt that being Canadian describes the geographical space that he occupies, rather than his identity.

Interviewer: "Are you Sikh before Canadian?" Singh 1: "W ell, not- Well being a Sikh like defines the way I live m y life, like the principles and the m orals I live by everyday, right? Being a Canadian m eans I live in Canada and I'm proud to be Canadian too but, the way I live my day to day life is based on being a Sikh, not on being a Canadian." It is clear that this youth feels that there are values and beliefs attached to being Canadian, to which he does not sense he belongs to. Conversely, Kaur 4 feels that there is no one-w ay o f being Canadian. She attributes this to the influence o f A m erican culture, but further adds, that she does not know w hat Canadian culture is, since there is no typical or one way o f being Canadian. Kaur 5, who had lived in a remote area o f Ontario, where she was the only Sikh in her school, had felt that she was constantly rem inded that she did not belong or fit in, and consequently, not Canadian. I don't know, probably Punjabi-Sikh. 1 don't think I'm ju st Canadian. I don't feel C anadian completely, maybe `cause o f where I was raised. I was rem inded that I w asn't. So, I don't think, it's 1 don't associate m yself that way, say I 'm PunjabiS ik h ... Yeah, like whenever I felt "maybe I do fit in" you're always kind o f rem inded, quickly that, no, you're this. It doesn't really bother me, I kind o f felt it was a good thing. I don't want to forget that.- K aur 5 W hile some youth noted that being Canadian is equated to tolerance and acceptance, m any felt that they were not Canadian, even though they were born and raised in Canada. Others appeared to have a fragmented identity, to which they belonged to several groups, and did not know how to identify themselves. Singh 4: "I guess you can be both there are people that say first I'm Sikh then I'm that. I am Sikh and my background is Indian but I am Canadian. I w as bom in D enm ark... Interviewer: " So if you had to check o f a box or som ething?"

^

`

5wg/2 4; "I'd say Indian if they didn't have Sikh but they are to different things. So Sikh and Indian."

Multiple layers, as identified by Singh 4, may in fact increase the complexity and perplexity, to which a youth, and specifically, immigrant youth identify themselves by. From the language and hesitation in Kaur 4's interview, it appeared that she too was uncertain about what group she belonged to. Kaur 4: To me (pause). I'm not a hyphenated person. Most people say I'm Canadian-Puniabi, Ihn Canadian-Sikh. I say I'm Indian-Sikh. I'm Indian, then I'm Sikh, then I'm Canadian. For me, being Sikh is who I am, and then Canadian is an aspect of me. Interviewer: You said Indian first. Would you say your Indian before you're Sikh? No, I would say I'm Indian... Indian. Yeah, I would say I'm Indian just because if I said Sikh, they wouldn't know immediately, what Sikh is. So, I think Indian would be easier to say. But, if I had the choice, I probably would say Sikh... I think a lot of people in our community here, when people come to the Indian community, and you say Sikh, they understand. But, if you were out in college or something, and somebody asked what's your religion. I'd say Sikh. And then they'd say, where are you from. I'd say I'm Indian. I don't know why I would do that, but I just that's the w ay...

.

Although Kaur 4 had said that she's not a hyphenated person, she said that she was Indian-Sikh, but had later pointed out in the interview that her identity had changed over the years. She stated that when she was asked as a child what group she belonged to, she said Canadian, but that she knew that she was different, and an Indo-Canadian. Furthermore, she stated that her maturity was linked to her knowledge of her culture and religion and realizing that she was Sikh, Indian, and Canadian. It was also found that the way youth identified themselves, signaled the importance and values attributed to that label. If I'm not a Sikh, then I'm Canadian which is like- There's different values, different like teachings. If I'm Sikh, I know what I'm supposed to behave like, I know what I'm supposed to value, I know [what] to be like. - Kaur 1

K aur 3, like m any other youth, identify them selves as being Sikh, but say that they had changed the way they identified them selves over the years. Furtherm ore, the way a youth identified them selves, suggest that while females have few distinguishing characteristics that may categorize them as being Sikh, many of the fem ales stated that they were Sikh first, yet visible Sikh m ales did not necessarily identify them selves as being Sikh first.
CuCture and^Cigion- "Kfiur" ^aCues

A unique phenom enon uncovered throughout the analysis o f the various interviews, was the perplexity and dichotom y o f both the culture and religion. Researchers and ethnographers have also m ade this mistake. For instance, M ahm ood & Brady (1999), who conducted research w ith several Sikh women, were told by the participants that they were m istaking the Punjabi culture w ith Sikhism. W hile some youth noted that there is a "conflicting nature" betw een the two, m any confused culture and religion, and were unclear as to where the division betw een both lay. For instance, when participants in my study were asked w hat the cultural and religious values o f the Punjabi-Sikh community were, many had not recognized, or been clear that this was a tw o-part question. In other words, many youth did not recognize or note that there was a division betw een culture and religion, and did not make this distinction in their response. This confusion is not specific to Sikh youth. For instance, egalitarian fem ale and male roles are essential eomponents o f Sikhism, yet Punjabi cultural values conflict with this ideology (Bali & Bal, 1993). For example, women through the Punjabi culture are relegated to the domestic realm, im plied as their "duty", while this conflicts with Sikhism that believes both m en and wom en are equal. Furthermore, in the Punjabi culture, dowries are still an acceptable practice, yet dowries are strictly forbidden under Sikhism as written in the Sri Guru Granth Sahib (Verma, 2002). A ligned with M ahm ood & Brady (1999) argum ents, Tsolidis (2001) further argues that culture is dynamic and reacting w ith the ethnicities o f the nation.

This confusion was also evident through the interviews conducted. When Singh 1 was asked what he thought the central and cultural religious values were of the Sikh community, he stated that they were "hardworking people, value status and education". However, it should be noted that these are Punjabi, cultural values, not religious values, associated with Sikhism. When Singh 1 was asked about which values, beliefs and customs he choose to adapt, and which he shed, he later noted the distinction. Yeah like, well a lot of people hold on to the caste system, right? That's like a cultural thing. And the way we were brought up was to look at that too, but at the same time I don't agree with it. So, that's one thing that... I wouldn't hold on to, based on the Punjabi culture. And, like, there's more like... Like, Sikhism has equality right? But Punjabi culture doesn't, so that's a conflict in itself. And like in Canada, there's actually equality too, right? - Singh 1 While there is no religious basis for it, caste continues to be associated with Sikh values, while it is a Hindu belief and has no basis in Sikhism (Tatla, 1999). It is through this knowledge and his strong affiliation with the religion and culture, that Singh 1 notes that he consciously has chosen to shed this particular value. Other youth participants frequently had also mistaken Sikhism to be similar with the Punjabi culture. Kaur 3 was also asked about cultural and religious values. Cultural values? Umm, it would b e.. .(pause). 1 can't remember now, there's the three things that are like the foundation of the Sikhism which is like serving the needy, umm, like always sharing your earnings, and there's one last one.- Kaur 3 It is significant to note that the line between culture and religion is so blurred and so well ingrained within the community, many cannot distinguish and differentiate between the two. Other participants, who appeared to be more involved and more conscious of Sikh issues, noted that their culture and religion, while often confused, cannot be "synonymous" like many Punjabi-Sikhs believe it to be. For instance, when Singh 3 was asked how he viewed the Sikh religious and cultural community, he clarified the distinction and stated that cultural values were

specific to the geographic regions where Sikhs lived. I don't think that Sikhs have any culture. I think Punjabi culture is associated w ith Sikhism but there is a difference there. Punjabi culture, in my opinion, is com pletely different. So, you can't equate culture with Sikhism, because there are Sikhs all over the world grow in different environm ents, and environm ents create your culture, right? T hat's not to say Sikhs-Punjabis don't follow the Punjabi culture `cause th at's where most Sikhs come from people believe that Sikhism and Punjabi is synonymous, but I disagree with that. But also, there's a growing Sikh population in Russia, Chili, N ew M exico, California, for cultural values, those states have different cultural norms. 1 w ouldn't say Sikhs have a specific Sikh culture. - Singh 3 Singh 2 also noted that cultural and religious values, are in them selves "contradictory": Um m , religious values promoting- should be about prom oting equality... to share, to donate, right? Culturally, I guess is som ewhat contradictory. [It's] to be a lot m ore egotistical at times. And be a lot more big headed and stand up for your own self. So I think the religious and cultural values are pretty arbitrary to what they should be, and conflicting with each other. --Singh 2 W hile som e youth noted the conflicting nature o f the Punjabi culture and the Sikhism, m any had not draw n attention to the inconsistencies and how they play out in the dom estic and public realm.
(Participation in organizations

In order to have a better understanding o f the experiences o f Punjabi-Sikh youth, youth were interview ed to understand the lived experiences in conjunction w ith the literature available. It w as interesting to note, that all ten participants were involved in some way or another w ith a religious organization, institution and/or group through the com m unity or their university. For instance, youth were involved in a the Sikh Student Associations at their respective universities, Sunday or language classes, taught younger children Gutka (a form o f m artial arts), were involved in Sikh cam ps and/or Sikh retreats for them selves or as an instructor, in com m unity

RYER3fl« CWVIPKTTY

celebrations, or organizations such as the Guru Gobin Singh Ji Foundation. However, the connectedness that youth felt to the religious and cultural community was not directly correlated with their involvement in an organization or group. For instance, while Kaur 5 had been fairly religious growing up and was part of the Sikh Student Association at her university, she had stated that on a scale of 1 to 10, 1 representing not connected, and 10 really connected, she felt that she was a "4". .. .Only because I grew up in a small community where there weren't too many Sikhs, Punjabi youth. So, 1 kind of felt disconnected in that. And so, that kind of carried through. Interviewer: "Okay. And even now when you're in Toronto?" Kaur 5: "It's about the same, `cause when you're brought up a certain way, it's hard to just change. You know what 1 mean? You're so disconnected for so long, that you just can't switch over. `Cause you're so different, in a way, `cause the way you've been brought up."

.

It is interesting to note, that even though she has moved to Toronto on her own, she continues to feel detached, on account of not being able to attend a local Gurdwara, since there is not one near or around campus. Kaur 1 had also stated that she felt that she was a "3" even though she was a member of the Guru Gobin Singh Ji foundation and youth soccer team, where she was a leader. She further stated that the religion and culture does not play a big role in her life right now: Umm, right now in my life, it doesn't have a very big importance. I don't know why. It doesn't play a big role right now. I mean, the teachings do, but not the actual practice of it. - Kaur 1 Conversely, Kaur 2 had felt that before joining the Guru Gobin Singh Ji foundation, she was a " 1" and now she feels more connected to a "7.5". She relates this to the fact that organization is heavily involved in helping other kids overseas and how she was inspired by other youth in the group to strengthen her own commitment.

.. . `Cause I signed up w ith the Sikh organization at York, ju st put my nam e on the email server, I didn't do anything myself, right? And I started talking to her [a friend] and she told me about what they do, they sponsor kids overseas, how they raise m oney, how they do annual runs- that's fantastic! And they had m eetings, and I w ent out for the meeting, you would not believe-1 learned stuff like about Gurbani and our Gurus from 8 year olds, 10 year olds. - K aur 2 Sim ilar to Kaur 2 experiences, Singh 1 and Singh 2 attribute their continuous involvem ent w ith external organizations to being m ore connected w ith the religious and cultural community.
Çurdwaras- (PivotaCandessentiaC?

Throughout the dialogue I had created with the participants, the role o f the G urdw ara's in retaining language and religion was mentioned. Many, youth were considerably frustrated and disappointed w ith the lack of involvement and role that m em bers o f the Gurdw ara com m ittee had taken in educating their youth. As charity and donations are considerably im portant to m aintaining and operating the Gurdw ara's, the G udw ara's are also responsible for up to m illions o f dollars that are donated throughout the year. M any youth felt that this m oney was not being used effectively, and could be allocated differently to accom m odate m any youth. Singh 3 explains some o f the frustration and disappointm ent, when he was asked how im portant he thought G udw ara's were in retaining language and religion. I think the gurdwaras should be very im portant but they've let us down... So, a lot o f them offer Punjabi classes, kirtan classes- w hich is very good, and I 'm not knocking them for that. I'm just saying that they need to step up their role and they need to understand that the mentality that they have now, is that the sungat [congregation] needs the Gurdwara. But the m entality that they should have, is that they Gurdw ara needs the sungat. They should cater to the comm unity. - Singh 3 W hile K aur 4 attended language and religious classes as a child, she noted a m arked difference in the quality and num ber o f programs offered to today's youth, which included her younger brother and sister. However, some youth noted that they w ere not aware o f w hat was

available, since this information is not readily available and disseminated to them. Kaur 3 notes that she does not think the role of the Gudwara's are adequate; Umm- well there was that I disagree with, that go on in the gurdwara and the committee....! read, is a lot of financial things that have gone wrong in the Gurdwara committee. Everyone wants an upper hand, sort of thing. Nobody is really thinking of the youth, how to educate them, how to get them involved. With what Scarborough Gurdwara is doing is excellent, at the GGSCF, but then again I think there a group that is shunned in the comer. Their not- they haven't advertised enough. I think if they did in the Gudwara, they'd get a much larger group. But, I don't think the Gurdwara is helping a lot- in terms of teaching our youth about Sikhism. And language, yeah, I mean they have Gurmukhi classes every now and then, I think they have a camp for that... .Actually, 1 can't really say that, because I've never actually seen it. I haven't heard about, right? So, if 1 haven't heard about it, how many people are they actually reaching out to. Sort of thing, you know? But yeah, I really think they need to sort out their ways. -K a u r 4 Kaur 4 describes that many of the organizations that are meant to accommodate and provide for the youth, are segregated and marginalized (excluded) from the rest of the Gudwara. Singh 2 also notes that much more support is needed to understand the basics o f the religion and the faith: Right now, I don't think they're important as they should be `cause they're not doing the job that they're supposed to be doing. Gurdwaras are supposed to be a central place for them to congregate and come together and go as a community and be able to share as a community as a central living place for knowledge to be dispersed. However, that's not happening all that knowledge and learning is happening outside the Gurdwaras. They're not doing what they should be doing.Singh 2 It should be noted, that since there are minimal language supports for the Punjabi language through the school structures, this learning is expected to occur outside of the normal school instruction and hours. This further marginalizes and trivializes the importance of retaining the Punjabi mother tongue, while school curriculum is based on Euro-Centric values, beliefs and observances. Chassels (2004) further describes multiculturalism within schools, as considerably watered down from its original intent as outlined in the Multiculturalism Act

(1988), and w hile there m ay be recognition o f m ulticulturalism w ithin the education system, it has been very m inim al, and these m inor changes are used to appease groups that question the `n orm '. Chassels (2004) refers to literature that cites m ulticulturalism in schools as "sari's, samosas, and steel bands" ; that is when minorities question the dom inant ideologies, their voices are silenced. Similarly, Dhruvarajan (2003) states that the curriculum needs to be more inclusive o f other histories and cultures, to avoid marginalizing groups. Furthermore, children need to feel m ore integrated within the mainstream community, and parents to be encouraged to attend school activities.
Interest in Si^fiism?

W hile the original intended purposes o f this project were to see how Sikh youth constructed their identity, many youth described their interest in being different from everyone else and in some cases their responsibility in explaining to others about their difference. W hen Kaur 2 was asked how important her culture and religion was to her, she describes how she liked being "unique" . It is, it m akes me unique and different. I'm not ju st Canadian, right? Like, I have the Indian part o f me, which is unique. So, it is im portant to m e ....W e 're distinct, w e're different. I love being different. A lot o f people m ight have issues with that, like I know a couple o f Indian girls that don't like the Indianess. Like, they w ouldn't w ear any o f the Indian stuff, even though it's in, but they refuse to w ear it. But I would love to, `cause I'm so proud o f it. Like, I love i t.. .not to say like our culture and religion is the best- it's ju st that, I ju st the love the traditions that we have, lot o f the culture is fun- the stuff that we have. You know our weddings?- that's the best, in the world. Like, I would never trade those weddings, for like any Gora [White] wedding, ever. - Kaur 2 W hile K aur 2 implies that there are particular values attached to being Canadian, she further notes that she likes sharing her culture with her Gori (W hite) friends, and learning about their traditions.

It is important to note that there are distinct differences in what some of the literature suggests that, and what the youth who were interviewed in this study have stated. The literature suggests (James, 1999 & Dhruvarajan, 2003) that many youth acculturate because of an overwhelming pressure to "fit in". Similar to Kaur 2's experiences, Singh 3 had also stated how he enjoyed being unique: "I like the fact that I'm unique and that 1 stand out, and what not". When he was later asked if he thought that he "fit in", within his environment and school, he stated that he no longer felt the need to try anymore. 1 try my hardest to find out where 1 fit in and then 1 realize that I'm not supposed to fit in. I'm supposed to do my own thing. Like, I don't have that need to fit in, like 1 did before. If I wanted to fit to, 1 could fit .. .but I don't define myself based on other people. - Singh 3 ; Where many youth had suggested that they enjoy being different from other youth,

through the mannerisms, clothes, and behaviours of many females, it appears that they are still heavily influenced by the Western culture. For example, many females who were interviewed choose to cut their hair, do their eyebrows and/or dress in clothing that is not traditional. Perhaps this is attributed to what is acceptable, in terms of norms for females, while the values and appearances to being a male, is not as stringent. In other words, due to peer and media influences, females may feel the need to be accepted amongst other females, while males do not necessarily long for approval. Kaur 4 has also stated that she valued her distinguishing characteristics, when she was asked about the importance of her culture and religion. Your culture, your background, your religion. 1 get those questions more often than 1 did in my first year. I feel more comfortable in my upper years at university. 1 feel comfortable enough that 1 go to school in my traditional dress. In my first year, I didn't feel as comfortable. I just wanted to be like everyone else, but along with the upper years that I've also matured as well. I've realized what it is that makes me. So, I'm acceptable to myself as well as others. ..It's very important [being Indian/Sikh-Canadian] to me because as I've matured. I've

realized that I don't want to be like everyone else. I'm different and being different m akes me unique. We bave traditional dance, we bave traditional m usic, it m akes me realize my culture. - Kaur 4 W hile it is difficult to establish a continuum o f acceptable and unacceptable practices, behaviours and ways o f dressing, there appears to be a hidden hierarchy o f w hat is tolerated by Canadian m ainstream society. Although all but Am ritdhari (baptized) m ales and females have the option o f "being like" everyone else, not all males can conceal their identity. G obin (1999) argues parents discouraged their children not to take am rit (become baptized) until after they were educated, as it may hinder their academic achievements, since Am ritdhari Sikhs are expected to put their religion before all else (p.288). W hile m any youth discussed not "fitting in" or being discrim inated against in elementary school, m any stated that they did not notice any discrim ination at their university. M ost youth attributed this to the maturity levels o f university students, the m ulticultural environm ent and tolerant atm osphere. However, Kaur 5 who had grown up in a small Ontario tow n where she was the only Sikh, pointed out that she had experienced subtle forms o f discrim ination m ore so in high school, but individuals may keep their comments to them selves in larger environm ents and cities: M ore so in high school `cause here I think you can't really get away with it, if you were to say som ething to someone `cause there's so m any people o f different ethnicities, that someone else is going to hear. You have to keep it to yourself. W here I grew up, it was a lot more open [racism]. So you know, it was one person. -Kaur 5 Apparently, "not being able to get away with it" has been noted as discouraging subtle forms o f discrim ination in larger environm ents. While Kaur 5 had been called "O sam a's w hore" in high school after the 9/11 attacks, she attributes this outward racism and discrim ination to the lack o f

understanding and "ignorance" of youth. Kaur 2, who has not directly experienced discrimination and racism, explains that this too may be attributed to ignorance: .. .`Cause I have friends who live in Gora towns, they're really racist people. They don't know even know what Punjabi is. They just think you're Black, `cause you're a different shade.. .They don't even know your brown, you know? A lot of people are ignorant. - Kaur 2 Unlike the teenagers that were interviewed in other studies (Gobin, 1999 & Hall, 1995) the youth interviewed in this project enjoyed their individuality. This may be in part, due to maturity that is linked with the age o f the participants. The Sikh Religious Society (1994) argues that problems of cultural conflict, are particularly prevalent amongst teenagers who are facing puberty and trying to find their own identity and "acceptance gained by conforming to certain norms of that society" (pp.312-313). There may also be a stronger influence to become more affiliated with the faith due to recent events such as 9/11 and the terrorist attacks in London England. These attacks have led more members of the community to make a distinction between Sikhs and those of an Islamic background, who wear similar headgear, which has been confused with a turban. While condemning these events, members of the community have held different vigils throughout North America for those who have been the victims of hate crimes after 9/11, while making the distinction between the Islamic headgear that is worn for cultural reasons, while Sikhs who wear turbans, do so for religious reasons. There is also a stronger and more visible growing Sikh population, within larger metropolis areas, and a visible political representation in Parliament by Sikh leaders, that may have lead to a greater awareness o f Sikhs. Many youth also noted that they were asked by peers or non-Sikhs about Sikhism, and find the faith interesting and walk away with a greater appreciation for the religion and it's values. For instance, Singh 1 explains that he is the second Singh (visible Sikh with a turban and beard), ever to attend Ottawa University.

Although, we [are] like a really big m inority [in Ottawa]. Like, I'm the second person- the second Singh ever in Ottawa Law School. So, a lot o f people don't really know who we are. But, once you explain stuff to them , they're pretty open m inded, I think that's a good thing about Canadians `cause people are really open m in d ed ... when I went to Ottawa, a lot o f people didn't know what Sikhs are. .. .people in my class found out that 1 wear it [a kirpan] and they're ju st talking and they all respect it, like people are shocked they're like "no you don't wear one." But, then if you live like a good lifestyle, people respect it and then, you tell them the reason behind it, like it's alright but it's also `cause I 'm in like law school, people have a higher education, so people are more open-m inded. Like, probably in like lower education people are like more closed- closed m inded, but for me, it's been all right. And 1 think there's a lot o f awareness. --Singh 1 N ot only have participants found that there is an interest expressed from others to learn about Sikhism , but also how they have a responsibility to teach others about the lifestyle and teachings, as to avoid m isconceptions and impede on biases that may exist. W hen Singh 4 was asked if he fit in at school, he discussed how he taught his classm ates and teacher why he was different: Um m , 1 took things differently when it came to school like w hen it was Guru N anak Dev Ji's [the first Guru] birthday 1 brought doughnuts to school, and taught people who Guru Nanak was and why he was different...But 1 mean the education after six or seven years in the same school so pretty m uch everyone knew who I was and why 1 look so different. So, m yself in school never really experienced hate. A lot o f question, yes but my parents had prepared me for that.- Singh 4 Although an interest in the values and beliefs o f Sikhism exists, this attention and curiosity m ust be interpreted carefully. Perhaps peers and outsiders interested in Sikhism are exam ining w hether these practices are acceptable or unacceptable, or safe or unsafe, in com parison to their own values and lifestyles. W hile not apparent in all five males that were interviewed, 1 have noticed through my involvem ent in the Gudwara, that there appears to be an increasing num ber o f turbaned Sikhs that trim or shave their beard. Though this growing trend m ay also signify a need by m ales to w ant to accom m odate W estern influences as well.

These findings reflect the general prevalence of racism, as discussed in the introduction. The fact that these youth struggle with the issues discussed is a sign that they are subjected to pressures to conform to mainstream values and behaviours.
(parentaC` Ejçpectations and %^aCues

Similar to many South Asian and Asian families, parental values and beliefs play a critical role in a young person's life. Youth were asked whether or not their parental values/expectations and beliefs conflicted with their own. Kaur 3 had stated that a few years ago, it would have, but she has come to accept her mother's beliefs. "Few years ago I would have said yes. But now, no". Other participants explained that one parent, many times the father, over the mother, was more tolerant and accepting than the other, while one parent explained the "ways" or lifestyle to the other parent. Communication, especially with one parent explaining "the ways" to another, was also noted as being a frequent response from the participants. For instance, Kaur 2 had explained that her father was more flexible and lenient, while her mother and her are both temperamental. Kaur 4 also explains that her personality sometimes conflicts with her mother, and that she more open with her father and grandmother. While all youth had stated that they felt that they could talk freely and openly with their parents about most things, many had also stated that as they matured, they gained their parents' perspective, and realized where they were coming from. In other words, the youths' values were more align with their parents, as they grew older and learned more about their own culture and religion. For example, Kaur 3 stated that she did not use to listen to her mother, but had gradually come to learn about her values. Cause I was a young teenager (laughs), back then in university and what not, you don't really listen to your parents, right? But, now, as I said, in the past year or so, I started to explore and venture into like our religion and so I sort of understand where they're coming from. - Kaur 3

Conversely, three o f the male respondents Singh 2, Singh 3 and Singh 4, respectively, stated that parents' values and beliefs, both cultural and religious had been instilled at such an early age that, that in m ost cases, they were much in line with their own lifestyles. Singh 1, how ever noted that his parents had given him guidance, rather than enforcing strict rules: .. .parenting style? I don't know, I never got hit, which is surprising to m ost people. (Laughs). But-um m , m y parents usually just talk to us, they're like "we can't tell you what to do, but it's our job to give you advice and it's better if you follow i t .. .and th at's all they d o ... like if I tell them something. I 'm not going to get in trouble, like we can tell them anything and they are just going to give us advice- they w on't talk dow n on us or think that we did something bad. So, it's pretty good- open comm unicating. - Singh 1 One fem ale respondent was particularly distressed about lying to her parents, since her parents w ould not approve o f her dating. The youth was asked how she m anaged and navigated between school, friends, family, religion and culture well, and how she keeps them in check. I guess, it's REALLY, really hard. (Pause). It's like w e're deceiving our parents, like th at's the hardest thing for me, like w e're deceiving our parents and we lie to them too well. Like, okay, with my ex-boyfriend, I would have to, he know s that I have to lie to my parents to go [out] with him, he would use that against me to call m e a liar. You know what I'm trying to say? Like, that hurt. Like, that's crap. So, you have to build strategies. Umm, I don't know. I can't, it's ju st too m u ch ... - Kaur 2 Kaur 2 later started to cry during the interview, explaining that lying to her parents is difficult for her to do. H er experiences are similar to Dhruvarajan (2003) findings with H indu youth and Gobin (1999) study o f Sikh youth. Gobin (1999) explains the defiance and guilt associated w ith youth that have to lie to their parents, while the Sikh Religious Society (1994) refers to the "double-life" m any teenagers lead. O f the ten interviewees, only one talked about leading a double-life and how painful it was for her to lie to her parent about her socializing. Many other participants, however, noted

that they did not tell really discuss their whereabouts with their parents. Singh 3 noted that his parents are annoyed with him if he does not check in with them or does not tell them where he is going. Conversely, Kaur 4 had stated that if there is an outgoing that she knows her father will not approve of, she appeases to him for a year in advance: .. .For example, my ski trip- was dead no. I started asking a year in advance because I know it was going to be a dead no, and then it turned into a maybe and then eventually a yes. So, if I work on them and I explain to them- As a child it was worse, there was a lot more "no's" in high school, than in university. They loosened up a little, they don't question so much what we're doing [now]. - Kaur 4 Similarly, Gobin (1999) found that a relatively small number of Sikh youth lied to their parents. When asked to discuss rebellion and defiance, many Sikh teenagers discussed "white lies" that they would use to stay behind after school, to socialize with their friends, since their parents would not approve of this. It is significant to note that females, not males had discussed lies that they had to tell their parents or how they had to get approval from their parents, regardless of their age, not the males. This points to the dichotomy between males and females, in which a female's image is still regarded as the family's honour (Gobin, 1999). Accordingly, since the Punjabi-Sikh community is so small and close-knit, social activities and the female's image is still viewed as being protected. In contrast, when Singh 1 was asked about Canadian values, such as dating, he described some of the difficulties youth must face: Singh 1: "Well, there's a lot of pressure to like adapt to what everyone else is doing, but you gotta at the end to decide for yourself and I don't really... find that appealing, whereas a lot of friends are caught up in all that stuff. So yeah." Interviewer: "What other stuff!" Singh 1: "Like, uhh chasing girls, going to clubs, like, trying to pick up girls at clubs, drinking like, hollering at girls, that type of stuff."

W hile, som e youth discussed a pressure to conform , a couple o f fem ales had said that they had not tested their parents on things such as dating, while Kaur 2 noted that her parents w ould not allow her to, since they do not understand the logic behind dating. A nother interesting finding is that many youth had described that their parents had become accom m odating- seemingly reluctantly and with hesitance over the years, in order to accom m odate their children. Interviewer: "Do your parental values/expectations/beliefs conflict w ith your ow n?" Singh 1: "N ot really, like I know a lot o f people got conflicts with their parental expectations but m y parents are pretty cool like that. Like they didn't influence me to do what I didn't want to d o ..." Interviewer: " .. .so you've never had a problem w ith going out o r .. Singh I: "Um m , when I first started going out, it was a problem about- they w anted me to come home early and stuff like that, but after a while they understood th at's how it is here. So, I was lucky that they understand, but I know a lot o f people have to hide stuff, but luckily 1 didn't have to go through that." It appears that parents unwillingly tolerate, though not fully accept. W estern influences. This shows in the language that the youth used to describe how their parents had become m ore lenient over the years. Singh 1 said that this his parents realized that "this is how it is here", in other words, it seems as though there is some reluctance to give way. Sim ilar to D hruvarajan (2003) argum ents, it appears that there are core and peripheral values, where inflexibility is applied to the central beliefs, but parents become more accomm odating where non-essential beliefs are concerned. I was lucky like that, like my mom always took my side and she- and like my dad was like "no, you can't go out." Then my mom explained it to him, like if you put them on lockdown, they get older they do their own stuff, they're not going to listen, so luckily my parents never really put any restrictions on me. - Singh 1 M any other youth describe how they "pushed" their curfews and boundaries, so that their parents w ould slowly give way.

Umm, I used to have a lot of restrictions back in high school. Regular curfew, 12 o'clock. Umm, what 1 never used to like. 1 used to try to get out of. But then, we [my brother and I] get home late, and we get yelled at, and we didn't do it again for a couple of weeks. For a while, I had a lot of restrictions, until I hit umversity. And up until my second year at university, I had restrictions. How often my parents would like for me to go out, or how late 1 should stay out, or how late they would like me to stay out. Umm, at times I followed what they said, at times I didn't. - Singh 2 Kaur 2 had also pointed out that she would get in trouble when she did not follow curfew, and would get "shittar" (getting slapped), if she wanted to go to the movies and came home late: And I finally started going to movies, but 1 had to be home like 9 o'clock, right on the dot, or I'd get shittar, like big time. And then slowly, slowly I realized that they weren't budging from 9 o'clock. (Giggles). So, I'd push for the curfew, get into sh- into trouble. So, that was my thing. I'd push further and further. So, I didn't really have a curfew. Like, you know what I'm trying to say? I know it's bad. Because that's the whole thing, I had to always set own rules for myself.Kaur 2 Kaur 2, like other participants, said they had to continuously push the boundaries, despite the consequences, to allow for more freedom and flexibility. Whereas some youth said that parents usually set boundaries based on the youth's maturity, perhaps more parents have succumbed and given up a struggle against Western pressures and influences. Such influences include going out or clubbing, which are seen as inappropriate, regardless of the actual activities that have taken place. In summary, there seems to be some degree of intergenerational conflict, regarding Sikh and Western values. While the youth push the boundaries and parents accommodate them to some degree, it also seems that the youth set a number of boundaries for themselves. In order to be more "out-going" and participate in various social activities, many youth have adapted strategies and must negotiate a fine balance of acceptable and unacceptable behaviour.

Çender (Differences

'

,

·

> :

`

Educational gender expectations were not as pronounced as the current literature suggests. In fact, none o f the respondents had said that there were any differences betw een them selves and a sibling o f the opposite sex, in term s o f expectations tow ards academics. However, some youth noted that while gender differences did not occur in their fam ily, this difference m ay be prevalent amongst other Punjabi-Sikh families, as w itnessed through extended family members. I d o n 't have any sisters, but I know from experience that there is different stuff expected from a son than from a daughter. Like people view the daughter as the pride o f the family. She can't really go out late, she can't really do a lot o f stuff that a guy can do. And like, she's expected to help out at home- help around the kitchen, whereas the guy doesn't have as m any responsibilities. - Singh 1 W hile some participants stated that many parents had higher expectations and dem ands for their daughters as opposed to their sons, they had not experienced this first hand. Accordingly, while unequal expectations may occur in term s o f educational achievem ents, the youth specifically interviewed, did not experience this gender inequality. Singh 2 attributes the inequality to the level o f education that the parents have, and their own upbringing: Depends on the fam ily set-up and depends on how educated your parents are too. I find that the more education that the parents have, the more inclined they are to push sons and daughters to exceed in school, no m atter what gender they are. If the parents aren't as educated, as others, they tend to only push the sons, as opposed to the daughters, `cause that's what they been brought up to. In other words, the parents own experiences and expectations are connected to their ow n rearing and education, and their values will reflect this ideology.

While not all youths experienced gender inequality first hand in their immediate family, they had heard about it, or seen it from extended family members. As youth were asked if pressures for Punjabi females differed from that of Punjabi males, they had made a reference to another member of the family. For instance, since Kaur 3 only has one older sister, she stated that she had not experienced any differences, while she noted that her cousins had preferential treatment, and everything a male did was not reflective of the family: " ...There is a difference, it's visible, and still goes on." Interviewer: "And how do you feel about that?" Kaur 3: "How do I feel about that?! (said in high-pitch tone). (Sighs). Umm, most of the time, I get shittar for debating it, at home. But, I'm not the type to just sit there and say "yeah, okay." I've already told my mom and argued several times, that if 1 were to have a girl. I'd be more than happy. I know me, and I know how I've developed and how far I've come and there's absolutely nothing wrong with me. Right? In comparison to a boy. As far as I think- I'm way better than the boys in my family right now." - Kaur 3
SckoolInfluence andItfidsm

While the current literature (Dhruvarajan, 2003; Bhachu, 1985a; & Bariana, 1997) implies that there are different expectations for male and females in school, I did not find evidence of this. However, one participant stated there was a perception that males are expected to be higher achieves, as there is a still a prevalent notion that males are the breadwinners, while females should still be relegated to the domestic realm. Yeah, I think the guys are expected to study more, `cause it's looked on as if they're the ones who are going to be supporting the family, and the girl is just going to be married off and look- take care of the kids. I think there's more pressure on the guys to do better in school. - Singh 1. While both genders were expected to do equally well as the next, Singh 2 also noted that higher expectations for males, in terms of education, may stem from the parents' own values and expectations. Singh 2 further argues that if the parents are not as educated, they will expect males to do better, as they not believe females need to be as educated.

It also appears that there continues to be a heavy influence on education for PunjabiSikhs, stem m ing from their parental influences. Sim ilar to m any other im m igrant fam ilies, children are expected to do exceptionally well, as this will lead to increased social mobility. Y outh stated that education is more important to them academ ically than socially, as there is lim ited tim e for a social and extra-curricular activities. W hen participants were asked w hat m otivated them to complete school, they suggested that it w ould lead to a "better life". E ducation is important, like you need education to live a com fortable life. Like, if you d on't have an education, you're going to be working, like seven days a week, like 9 to 5 jobs. If you have an education, you can have more freedom to live a life you want to live. - Singh 1 For Singh 1, living "the life that he w anted" was also the reason for choosing a university education, as opposed to entering college. M any youth had stated that there continues to be a pre-convinced notion, from peers, the comm unity and school staff that a university education is m uch m ore highly regarded, than a college education. Furtherm ore, the Punjabi culture places a high value on status and economic success. Accordingly, Gobin (1999) also suggests that through the Sikh culture, Sikh parents and the com m unity regard academic achievements highly, especially university credentials (p.265). Furtherm ore, Gobin (1999) suggests that Sikh comm unity places a strong pressure to achieve well, as failing or doing poorly is looked upon as dishonoring the family. Y outh were also asked, about whether they had thought that they could overcom e racism or racist notions through their academic achievements. The answers varied, yet m any had felt that they could overcome stereotypes and preconceived notions through their achievem ents. Some people in my law school, they were saying that a lot o f firms are trying to like, push m inorities into the firms, `cause like they're not very diverse, they only have one set o f ideas. So, a lot o f people are saying that being different right now, m ight actually work to my advantage. So that's a good thing, but m aybe in the

past, it might have been a problem, but now I think a lot o f people are opening up to people with different views and backgrounds. - Singh 1 Further to these beliefs, some participants believed that education was empowering and allowed for other individuals to become more open-minded and receiving of diversity and differences. .. .but it's also `cause I'm in like law school, people have a higher education, so people are more open-minded. Like, probably in like lower education people are like more closed- closed minded, but for me, it's been all right. And I think there's a lot of awareness. - Singh 1 Singh 1 implies, as with many participants, that university education with a higher level o f is acceptance of ethnic and racial minorities.

Summary/OEHscussion
While the research conducted may not be applicabb to all Punjabi-Sikh youth throughout Ontario, my research conducted on the ten participants throughout Ontario are indicative of trends and patterns. The results of the study need to be interpreted with consideration o f (1) the context of racism in Canadian society; and (2) the internal practices and pressures in the SikhPunjabi community. Racism was evident through the responses that were given by the participants. This included why they did not want to be identified as "Canadian", their education and how they attributed overcoming racism and racist notions through their academic achievements. The interviews indicate, that while many of the participants were born in Canada none of these youth identified themselves as exclusively being Canadian. As one participant, Kaur 5, pointed out, whenever she felt like she belonged, she was reminded by her peers that she was not Canadian, did not belong, but was different. These differences were noted through the way her classmates used racist and derogatory comments about her ethnicity and religious affiliation, which further

isolated her. Consequently, because o f her experiences, she still feels that she does not "fit in", even am ongst her com m unity and within the Sikh faith. W hile Punjabi-Sikh youth did not use "Canadian" to identify them selves, they described the various layers that made up their identity, which included their nationality, citizenship, religion, culture, ancestral roots, ethnicity, and/or their skin colour. Some youth had com m ented that being Canadian was attributed to their geographic location, rather than the beliefs and values they held. Some youth also noted that being Canadian was attributed to particular values, to which they did not w ant to be associated with. For instance, one youth described high divorce rates, and prom iscuity as "Canadian", and could not identify with that. Furthermore, while they could not describe w hy they shed particular values, youth further did not acknowledge which W estern values they had adapted. Instead, it appears that youth are constantly influenced by their peers and outside influences, and adapt principles and parts o f the lifestyle that allows them to easily assimilate. Accordingly, Punjabi-Sikh youth's identity is very m uch fluid, and dependent on various factors. In term s o f Sikh youth and identity, my study reveals that m uch more m ust be learned about how and why Punjabi-Sikh youth perceive themselves, and the various layers and influences. Two youth had discussed the recent terrorist attacks, and their shock, yet w hether this im pedes and hinders their identity, or allows them to want to become more connected and affiliated to their faith, is another area that needs to be examined. Many Sikhs, including those in London, have been the victim s of hate crimes, as Sikhs are m istaken for individuals belonging to the Islamic faith. This distinction is another area that also needs to be m ade clear. Through the analysis, it was also noted that there is an interest, or perhaps renewed attention or concerns about the Sikh faith, and the values, customs, observances, and religious

symbols, associated with Sikhism. It is not clear, however, whether individuals question Sikhism to have a greater understanding or awareness of it's foundation, or whether they inquiry about the faith, in comparison to their own lifestyle and deem it acceptable or unacceptable. Youth also had expectations of themselves, in terms of education. All ten participants that were interviewed were attending or had attended post-secondary education through a university. This may stem from their immigrant parents beliefs and values that higher education will lead to increased social mobility. Furthermore, many immigrant parents may not have had their credentials recognized from abroad and were relegated to lower paying, lower skilled sectors, such as the manufacturing and industrial industry. The parents experiences may also indicate the importance placed on education. Similarly, to my findings, Gobin's (1999) study on Sikh and racialized youth in Toronto, notes that Sikh youth have higher educational aspirations and achievements than other racialized youth. Gobin (1999) also attributes the high academic performance of Punjabi-Sikh youth, to their immigrant parent's hard work ethic. Many youth also described that they felt that they could over come racism and/or racist notions through their academic achievement, regardless of their appearances. Attributing ignorance and ignorant people as continually perpetuating hate and misconceptions, not all youth felt that racism could be overcome. Yet, many youth still believed that their university education and credentials would afford them better opportunities. There are also many policy implications to this study. It appears that the school curriculum and the Multiculturalism Act have not gone far enough to create a greater understanding of diversity and acceptance. The current Multiculturalism Act is seen as a form of tokenism that has done the bare minimum to address the large influx of immigrants, and the

changing racial and religious make-up o f Canada. Accordingly, m any m ore inclusive program s and funding is required for m inority groups, to allow for the retention o f the Punjabi language. The internal practices and pressures in the Sikh-Punjabi com m unity m ust also be described here. Through the interviews with Sikh youth, it appears that there continues to be confusion between the Punjabi culture and the Sikh religion, which may have further com plicated the identity o f these youth. W hile it was not the originally intended purpose o f my study to determine the distinction between culture and religion, it appears that m any o f the youth that were interviewed, similarly to the Punjabi-Sikh community, could not differentiate betw een cultural expectations and religious values. The Punjabi culture and Sikh religion has been too intertwined w ith one another, that many Sikhs, who cannot make the distinction betw een the two, have gravely misunderstood Sikhism as being part o f the Punjabi culture. 1 too have m isinterpreted Sikh values and the Punjabi culture, yet it is only through the course o f my research that I have uncovered this confusion. Accordingly, this distinction m ust be m ade by families and the community, to avoid further relegating wom en to the m argins, and preventing other m isconceptions to perpetuate. Perhaps this confusion has further complicated Sikh youth's identity, since the distinction and blurring o f both the culture and religion, has led many females and males to assim ilate with parts o f the W estern culture, while retaining parts o f their own cultural and ethnic background. W hile m any youth interviewed discussed how they unconsciously shed particular values, beliefs and custom s, it was not determined what factors contribute to a youth's identity, and why he or she chooses the traits and values they do. In other words, there appears to be m any contributing factors in which youth assimilate and accommodate, however they did not point it out or recognize it.

Punjabi-Sikh youth also noted the current role of the Gudwaras and their disappointment in the programs and services offered. While youth described that there were programs and services available to them, they also noted that they did not know about what was offered, or felt that the group that they belonged to, was shunned by the Gudwara. Youth also described the lack of coimection Gudwara committees had to children and youth. Some youth argued that the funds collected by the Gudwaras were being misused, and not allocated appropriately. This made some participants feel as though the Gudwara committee could not relate to them and their experiences, which further segregated their involvement. In terms of parental expectations, many youth believed that parental values did not contradict or conflict with their own beliefs, and could understand where their parents were coming from. Some youth described dating as being taboo, while one youth explained that her parents disapproved of dating because of teenage pregnancies, and the promiscuity surrounding it. However, there also appears to be intergenerational conflict between parents and youth, as some youth, particularly females, described how they had to lie to their parents about what they were doing and who they were with, as they would otherwise, not approve of it. The implications for this study also mean a great deal to the community, since youth appear to be marginalized and segregated from any involvement in the Gudwaras. Consequently, as Kaur 2 and Kaur 3 have noted, their parents silence their voices, as females and youth, discussed inequality or differences. There appears to be a growing need to accommodate youth to learn more about their roots, religion and the language, since the public sector, such as schools, has further immobilized Punjabi-Sikh from learning about their history through the curriculum. Accordingly, since there is little hope of incorporating and integrating diversity

through the curriculum and into the m ainstream institutions, it is the role o f the com m unity and the G udw ara com m ittees to educate children and youth. For future studies conducted on Sikh youth, it may be interesting to exam ine the experiences o f Punjabi-Sikh youth who are not affiliated with religious organizations or groups. This m ay reveal m any differences in parental expectations, issues o f identity, "fitting in" and gender differences. It m ay also be helpful to interview turbaned youth who cut or have trim m ed their beards, and their m otivation and reasons behind this. Youth who trim their beards m ay do so to reduce their differences within the m ainstream culture. Another area that w ould be useful to exam ine, is m ales who are not visible Sikhs, and their reasons for not retaining or upholding any religious identifiers. O ther areas that could be further exam ined include the gender perspective. W hile inequality was noted, it would be helpful to examine the breath and depth o f this phenom enon. W hile three o f the five females had noted a frustration and disparity betw een the preferential treatm ent that their brothers or cousins received, it would be helpful to exam ine the im pact this has on fem ales, and where these difference stems from. Furtherm ore, it would be helpful to further exam ine intergenerational conflict, as these issues are not readily discusses w ith PunjabiSikh fam ilies and the community.

Limitations o f the study
W hile this project attempts to be as rich as possible through the available sources, there were significant lim itations. One o f these was the sample size and population. Since all o f the participants were involved in some way or another w ith a religious organization, institution and/or group through the comm unity or their university, this may have lead to a sam ple that is not representative o f m any Sikh youth. O ff the record, one participant had told the researcher

that to recruit individuals that may have "conflicts" with their parents, the researcher should go to bars and clubs and interview Sikh youth who attended such establishments. Another limitation to the research was the implied conflict that parents and youth may have. To ensure that there is no implication of an implied conflict, the researcher could have used a more neutral word, such as "contrasting values" or "do your values differ from your parents?" Furthermore, like many immigrant families, the Punjabi-Sikh community is a tight-knit group with strong community and religious ties. Accordingly, through religious or community ties, youth involved in organizations are well-known by many, if not all members of the community. Consequently, while being an "insider" may be as a beneficial as a researcher, in some respects, it has many pitfalls. One such limitation is a hesitance and resistance to answer all questions truthfully. Accordingly, many participants may have censored their responses, without the researcher's knowledge. Another limitation is allowing for the researchers own assumptions, experiences and attitudes to come through, the questions that may be asked and presumptions made. While not intentional, it may also be possible that preconceptions may creep through the way questions are worded, allowing for the interviewers' opinions to affect the results. In addition, audio recording may also lead to participants being conscious of being recorded, as they may censor themselves. Another limitation was the use of the narrative and qualitative interview approach. While "going o ff' on a tangent is encouraged through the qualitative approach, it creates a lot of data. Furthermore, transcribing is very time consuming and makes it difficult to sort through emerging themes. There were several limitations to the methodology. One such limitation is that recalling or reconstructing events and ideas that may have not happened within the last couple of months.

m ay allow for biases or an incorrect interpretation o f w hat had actually happened. For instance, participants w ere asked why they choose university over college education. W hile one participant was entering university in the fall and seemingly decided w ithin the last year, other participants w ould have had to think about four or five years back, to describe the events that lead to this. W hile there is no way the interviewer can control this lim itation, it is an unfortunate aspect o f the qualitative research. Due to the lim ited interaction with the participants, the researcher w as not able to build a mutual rapport w ith all the interviewees. Accordingly, there was a m arked hesitation from at least four participants, Singh 1, Singh 2, Kaur 3, and Kaur 5 respectively, who actively gazed at the recording device throughout the interview, and made com m ents like "tell me when it's on" . Furtherm ore, K aur 3 had teased and asked whether the recorded had to be visible and further cross-referenced to ensure that what she would rem ain confidential, when recalling her own experiences. To w hat extent and whether or not the recording device impeded the participants' answers, cannot be m easured or assessed, but it gives an indication o f the participants state o f mind. Time constraints did not allow for the building a non-hierarchical, and reciprocal relationship w ith all the participants. Accordingly, some participants felt uncom fortable or at unease as evident through their body language or short answers. W hile a shorter interview is not necessarily an indication o f an inferior interview (Bryman, 2001), Kaur 1 was hesitant and anxious throughout the interview, while the entire interview lasted 17 minutes. In hindsight, perhaps the interview er should have asked her whether she wanted to continue on, and w hether she was comfortable. K aur 2, on the other hand, was extremely com fortable and occasionally swore, while her interview was 69 minutes.

The gender of the researcher was another determinate of the research. One youth was not aware that the researcher was a female and was initially surprised and possibly at unease with being interviewed by a female interviewer. Since communication was established via email and since Punjabi-Sikh names are often interchangeable for both genders, and the male participant was shocked that the researcher had approached him and knew his name. Consequently, this may have affected his comfort level and responses. Another barrier was, due to re-construction of the Scarborough Gudwara, there was limited space in which to conduct the interviews that occurred in the faculty. As a result, there were instances where interviews were interrupted by background noises and kirtans going on in other areas of the Gurdwara. The limited availability of both the participants and the researcher was also a barrier to access. Therefore, many interviews were conducted at late or early hours throughout the month of July. To control some of the limitations, another researcher may be able to build a more sustainable and long-term relationship with all such participants. In other words, if participants were recruited up to six months in advance, they may have felt more at ease with the researcher and built a trusting relationship. Accordingly, youth may have been more comfortable and recall other experiences through a long-term friendship with the researcher. To limit background noises and other distractions, future studies could have been conducted in a less distracting room, within the existing gurdwara, and booked ahead of time.

A ^ e n d v c 'A `

'

(Definitions andOEems

For the purposes o f this study, several concepts will be defined to better understand the com plexity o f identity and the multiple layers o f oppression that may hinder integration and inclusion. Acculturation as defined by Sodowsky et al (1991), as cited in James (1999) is the "response o f m inority groups and immigrants to overt or system ic pressures from the dom inant group to adapt, conform or adjust to dom inant values, customs, behaviours and psychological characteristics" (p. 198). Difference in acculturation rates can magnify conflict and cause increased alienation betw een youth and families as children take a year to integrate, w hile their parents can take three years or more to acculturate (Biswas, as cited, in Kunz & Hanvey, 2000). D hruvarajan (2003) however, states that acculturation "implies the idea o f encouraging cultural diversity, but w ithin the context o f a strong comm itm ent to national goals and institutions, thus expressing the idea o f belonging to two cultures at the same tim e" (p.4). Through the process o f acculturation, whereby individuals incorporate elem ents o f the dom inant ethnic group, assimilation implies that many racialized ethnic or racial subculture is given up for the sake o f fitting in (James, 1999, p. 198). Culture as defined by Fieras & Elliot (1992) is an "abstraction derived from the corpus o f shared m eanings (beliefs, values, and symbols) that accounts for patterns o f interpersonal/intergroup behaviour within a specific com m unity" (p.314). Fieras & Elliot (1992) further explain that culture is crucial to the "adaptation and survival o f the com m unity, in large part because o f the rules and codes ("blueprint") by which individuals define, plan, assess, and jointly link appropriate lines o f behaviour" (p.314).

Fieras & Elliot (1992) define ethnicity as an "organizing principle where individuals sort themselves into "groups" and claim entitlement to certain resources by virtue of a shared commitment to select aspects of their cultural past" (p.49). which include a shared "common language, culture and identity" (p.315). Ethnic identity is another multifaceted layer needed to understand how Punjabi-Sikh youth identify themselves. Nayar (2004) argues that the majority group defines ethnic identity, rather than how the groups themselves may characterize their ethnic identity. Since identity is a socially constructed term, that differs for each ethnic group and is constructed by the majority group, and deeply rooted in euro-centric values this study will attempt to unpack the competing messages of identity from a Punjabi and Sikh perspective and Western, euro-centric stance. The aforementioned descriptions of identity have been used as a starting point to which to begin an analysis. Identity is a vague, ambiguous, socially constructed, fluid concept that is constructed by multiple, complex layers. Nayar (2004) defines identity as an association with a "particular group, ideology, religion, social role, or career" (p. 13) that reflects mainstream identity, and differs from how identity is constructed by traditional cultures. Indeed, in "traditional society, one's identity is ordinarily `collective,' largely dependent on one's familial relations... and central dimensions of one's identity is the family (or clan), within which roles diffuse, status is ascriptive, and there is a collectivity orientation" (Nayar, 2004, p.14). Institutional racism is another key component in understanding barriers that exist to prevent less than full integration. Also referred to as systemic racism, James (1999) states that institutional racism exists "where the established policies, rules, and regulations of an organization or institution systemically reflect and produce differential treatment of various

groups w ithin that organization or institution and in society generally. These regulation are used to m aintain social control and the status quo in favour o f the dom inant group" (p. 135). Religious identity is another important component in understanding the constraints that Sikhism m ay place on an individual's identity. Religious identity m ay be defined as "rooted in tradition whereby the emphasis is on community and its role in social control" (Nayar, 2004, p. 14) Othering, as defined by Carty (1999) may be referred to as a historical process, in which one groups has been excluded based on a "system o f stratification based on skin colour" (pp.3637). Social capital, for the purposes o f this paper, will be defined as "cohesive and supportive family relations and norms and values which encourage academ ic achievem ent" (Gobin, 1999, ii). Social mobility will be used to refer to G obin's (1999) definition o f increased econom ic success, attributed to a high level o f education and educational aspirations. Structural racism as defined by James (1999) is also referred to as cultural racism, whereby the "rooted inequalities o f society operate to justify the allocation o f racial groups to particular categories and class sites. It explains how the ideas o f inferiority and superiority, based on socially selected physical characteristics, and which are found in society's norm s and values, operate to exclude racial minority group members from accessing and participating in m ajor social and cultural institutions" (p. 135). For the purposes o f this paper first, second, and third generation Sikhs will need to be defined as their perceptions, levels o f acculturation, imm igration status, education, and levels types o f

socialization differ immensely and have a large role in identity and perspectives on issues and values differ immensely. Nayar (2004) defines first generation Sikhs as grandparents or great-grandparents, who are fifty-six or older, and who have spent their formative years in India, immigrating to Canada as adults. Second-generation consists of adults from the age of thirty-one to fifty-five that, and vary from the country to which they had originally immigrated from (e.g. Britain or East Africa), but had immigrated to Canada as adults in their late teens or early twenties (Nayar, 2004). Nayar (2004) further defines third-generation Sikhs who range from ages eighteen to thirty, having spent their formal schooling years in Canada and who are either studying or in pursuit o f careers (p.22). Youth is yet another socially constructed and fluid term, that varies in perception and interpretation (Tyyska, 2001). For the purposes of this paper, youth will be defined as young adults between the ages of 18 to 25, as obtaining both parental and individual consent is a time consuming process.

A p p e n d v (,`^ '

Interview (Protocol

**These are open-ended questions and the interviewer w ill probe and follow up on any them es or ideas that emerge from each question.** Background Information 1) H ow old are y o u ? ____ 2) M ale or Female 3) W hich city do you reside in ? __________________ Questions about culture & religion 4) W hat do you think the central cultural and religious values are o f the Sikh com m unity? H ow do you view the Sikh religious and cultural community? 5) H ow important is your culture and religion to you? 6) On a scale o f 1 to 10, how connected do you feel to other Sikhs and the com m unity? (1 representing not connected and 10 really connected). Explain your answer. 7) H ow involved are you in community and religious celebrations? 8) Do you follow the Guru Granth Sahib (Holy Scriptures) or the kirtans, paath, and cerem onies (sermons)? Explain. Questions pertaining to parental influence 9) Do your parental values/expectations/beliefs conflict w ith your own? Can your provide some examples? Probe for detail and follow-up on any them e or idea that emerges. 10) Could you tell me a little about your parents' style o f parenting? For instance, tell me w hen you're expected to be home, what are some o f the restrictions you have? Do you and your parent(s) get along well? For instance, can you talk freely and openly about anything with them? 11) Do you think that parents are most often right? If not when do you think that they are wrong? Ask for examples and explanations. 12) Have you ever disobeyed your parents? If yes, when and for what reason? Do you m ake most o f your decisions on your own or do you consult with your parents first? 13) At home, how, if any, are pressures for Punjabi females different from Punjabi males?

Questions pertaining to school influence 14) H ow im portant is school for you? Academically and socially? 15) W hat m otivates you to complete school? W hy did you go on to college or university? 16) H ow do you feel that you fit in at school, in relation to others? 17) Do you think it's harder for Punjabi/Sikh girls than for boys to "fit in"? It w hat respects?

18) Are there different pressures at school for both females and males? 19) How have you adjusted to school? 20) Do you think Punjabi values are different from school values? How does this relate to you and how you identify yourself? 21) Have you ever felt discriminated against because of your skin colour, religion, culture, or ethnicity at school? Please provide details of when and how. Additional Questions Is there anything you would like to say or add that is personally meaningful or an area that I may have neglected that should be considered in my research?

<R^fsrences
Bains, T.S. & Johnston, H. (1995). The fo u r quarters o f the night: The life-journey o f an emigrant Sikh. Montreal: M cGill-Q ueen's U niversity Press. Bali, J. & M. Bal. (1993). Sikhs in Ontario. Toronto; Ontario Council o f Sikhs. Bariana, A. K. (1997). "Broken covenant: Punjabi Sikh Narratives." Ph.D. thesis. U niversity o f Toronto: Curriculum- Teaching and Learning OISE/UT. Bhachu, P. (1985a). Parental educational strategies: The case o f Punjabi Sikhs in Britain. W arwick, Coventry: Centre for Research in Ethnic Relations. Bhachu, P. (1985b). Twice Migrants. New York: Tavistock Publications. Brym an, A. (2001). Social Research Methods. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Carty, L. (1999). "The discourse o f the empire and the social construction o f gender" in Scratching the surface: Canadian anti-racist fem in ist thought. E. Dua & A. Robertson (Eds.). Toronto: W om en's Press. Chassels, C. (2004, N ovem ber 24). Teacher certification policies in Ontario: M echanism s o f exclusion, privilege and dominance. Guest Speaker at Ryerson University, Toronto. CTV (2005a). B.C. tourney bars Sikh soccer player over turban. Retrieved Septem ber 5, 2005 from http://w ww.ctv.ca CTV (2005b). Visible m inorities to surpass 50 percent in big cities. Retrieved M arch 22, 2005 from http://w ww.ctv.ca D epartm ent o f N ational Defence. Religions in Canada- Sikhism. Retrieved Novem ber 30, 2004 from http://w ww.forces.gc.ca/hr/religions/engraph/religions31_e.asp deSilva, A. (1992). Earnings o f immigrants- a comparative analysis. Ottawa: Econom ic Council o f Canada. Dhruvarajan, V. (2003). "Second-Generation Indo-Canadians: Change, resistance, and adaptation" in Fractured Identity- The Indian D iasporic in Canada by V arm a and Seshan. N ew Delhi : Rawat Publications. Dum brill, G.C. (2005, February 4). Theories o f race and racism and resistance strategies to process o f racialization. Guest Speaker at Ryerson University, Toronto. Fieras, A. & Elliot, J.L. (1992). The challenges o f diversity: M ulticulturalism in Canada. Scarborough: N elson Canada.

References

(Poÿe 2

Gobin, D. (1999). "The differential incorporation of racial minority youth: IndoCaribbean, Afro-Caribbean and Punjabi Sikh Teens in Toronto and surrounding areas." Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto: Department of Sociology. Guru Gobind Singh Children's Foundation (GGSCF). (2005). GGSCF Monthly Meetings. Retrieved April 18, 2005 from http://www.ggscf.com Hall, K.D. (1995). `" There's a time to act English and a time to act Indian': The politics of identity among British-Sikh teenagers" in Children and the politics o f culture, edited by S. Stephens. New Jersey: Princeton University Press. Hall, K.D. (2004). "The ethnography of imagined communities: the cultural production o f Sikh ethnicity in Britain" in Being here and being there: Fieldwork encounters and ethnographic discoveries, edited by E. Anderson- American Academy o f Political and Social Science. California: SAGE Publications. Hans, R.J. (2003). "Gurdwara as a cultural site of Punjabi Community in British Columbia, 1905-1965" in Fractured identity- The Indian diasporic in Canada edited by Varma, S.J. & Seshan, R. New Delhi: Rawat Publications. Jagpal, S.S. (1994). Becoming Canadian: Pioneer Sikhs in their own words. Retrieved December 10, 2004 from http://collections.ic.gc.ca/sikh/index.html Jakobsh, D.R. (2003). Relocating gender in Sikh history: transformation, meaning and identity. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. James, C.E. (1999). Seeing ourselves: Exploring race, ethnicity and culture. Toronto: Thompson Educational Publishing. Kazimi, A. (Producer & Director). (2003). Komagata Maru [Videotape]. Toronto: TVO: A view from here. Kelley, N. & Trebilcock, M. (1998). The making o f the mosaic: A history o f Canadian immigration policy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Kunz, J.L. & Hanvey, L. (2000). Immigrant youth in Canada- A research report from the Canadian Council on Social Development. Ottawa: Canadian Council on Social Development. Mahmood, C.K. & Brady, S. (2000). The G uru' s Gift: An ethnography exploring gender equality with North American Sikh women. California: Mayfield Publishing Company.

^ fü r e n c e s M inhas, M .S. (1994). The Sikh Canadians. Edmonton; Reidm ore Books Inc. Nayar, K.E. (2004). The Sikh Diaspora in Vancouver- Three generations am id tradition, modernity, and multiculturalism. Toronto: University o f Toronto Press. Neum an, W .L. (2004). Basics o f social research: Qualitative and quantitative approaches. Boston: Pearson Education.

(Page 3

Reuters. (2005). Canada's M inority Populations Expected to Soar. Retrieved M arch 22, 2005 from http://www.reuters.com Sikh Religious Society. (1994). Things that make you ask `kion?' Kesri Pages 15-18. in Asian religions in American: A documentary history, edited by T.A. Tw eed & S. Prothero. N ew York: Oxford University Press. Singh, N. (1994). Canadian Sikhs-History, religion, and culture o f Sikhs in North America. Ottawa: Canadian Sikhs' Studies Institute. Singh, N.G .K. (1993). Sikhism. New York: Brown Publishing Network, Inc. Singh, P. (1990). Sikh traditions in Ontario. Polyphony, 12, 130-136. Retrieved A pril 5, 2005 from http://collections.ic.gc.ca/m agic/m t36.htm i Singh, P. (1991). "Sikh traditions in Ontario" in Polyphony: The bulletin o f the multicultural history society o f Ontario editors IsraeLM. & W agle, N .K . Toronto: M ulticultural History Society o f Ontario. Statistics Canada. (2003). 2001 census: Analysis Series- Religions in Canada (catalogue no. 96F0030XIE2001015), 1-33. Retrieved April 20, 2005 from http://w w w l2.statcan.ca/english/census01/Products/A nalytic/com panion/rel/pdf/96F0030 X IE 2001015.pdf Statistics Canada. (2004). Proportion o f foreign-born population, by census m etropolitan areas, 2001 Census. Retrieved M arch 1, 2005 from http://w ww.statcan.ca/english/Pgdb/dem o46a.htm Tatla, D. S. (1999). The Sikh diaspora: the search fo r statehood. Seattle: U niversity o f W ashington Press. Tsolidis, G. (2001). The role o f the maternal in diasporic cultural reproduction- Australia, Canada, and Greece. Social Semiotics, 7/(2), 193-208. Tyyska, V. (2001). L ong and winding road: Adolescents and youth in Canada today. Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press Inc.

(R^erences Verma, A. B. (2002). The making o f Little Punjab in Canada: Patterns o f immigration. New Delhi: Sage

<Page 4


