IN FO R M A TIO N A N D COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES IN NETWORKS OF NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS by Eli Malinsky B.A. York University, 1999

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillm ent o f the requirements for the degree o f Master o f Arts in the Program o f Communication and Culture

Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2005 © Eli Malinsky 2005

PROPERTY OF

ryerson university library

UMI Number: EC53046

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI'
UMI Microform EC53046 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLO All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.

ProQuest LLC 789 East Eisenhower Parkway P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Abstract
This thesis explores the recursive interaction among technology, human action and institutional properties in three networks o f nonprofit organizations. The aims o f the research are two-fold; to make a theoretical contribution to literature on organizations and technology by applying concepts o f institutionalism and the structurational model o f technology to a unique organizational form; and, to make a practical contribution to the nonprofit sector by improving knowledge o f how networks o f nonprofit organizations interact with information and communication technologies. The research process involved 13 interviews, 44 qualitative surveys and copious document and website analysis. The findings indicate that technology is not institutionalized uniform ly within the network structures but instead comes to assume different roles within different parts o f the networks. This leads to an extension o f the structurational model o f technology and also highlights the importance o f flexible technologies that can be adapted to the variable circumstances o f a single network structure.

1 1

Acknowledgements
W ith thanks to my advisory committee for all o f their support, and to the research participants for making this possible and for teaching me so much.

Ill

To my parents.

IV

Table of Contents
A b stra ct............................................................................................................................... A cknow ledgem ents............................................................................................................ i Table of C o n tents.............................................................................................................. List o f T a b le s .......................................................................................................................v List o f F ig u re s ................................................................................................................... vii Introduction............................................................................................................................ 1 The Canadian C ontext..................................................................................................... 7 Theoretical Perspectives...................................................................................................11 Institutionalism ................................................................................................................. 11 The Structurational Model of Technology................................................................... 13 Blending Lenses: Institutionalism & The Structurational Model of Technology 16 Research Q u e stio n s.......................................................................................................... 18 Defining the T e rm s.......................................................................................................... 18 Research M ethod olog y.................................................................................................... 20 Selecting the C ase s....................................................................................................... 21 Data S o u rc e s ...................................................................................................................22 Data A n a ly s is ...................................................................................................................27 Research F in d in g s ............................................................................................................ 30 Case D escriptions.......................................................................................................... 30 Case #1 : Ontario Association of Youth Em ploym ent Centres (G A Y E C )............ 32 Case #2: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Imm igrants (O C A S I)..................50 Case #3: O ntario Association of C hildren's Aid Societies (O A C A S )...................71 D iscussion........................................................................................................................... 90 Limitations of the R esearch............................................................................................105 Recom m endations for Further R e se a rch .................................................................... 108 C onclusion......................................................................................................................... 111 Appendix A - Data Source: D ocum ents...................................................................... 112 A ppendix B - Data Source: W ebsite s.......................................................................... 118 A ppendix C - Data Source: R e sp o n d e n ts.................................................................. 126 A ppendix D - Research Instrument: Interview Questions (S ta ff)...........................130 A ppendix E - Research Instrument: Survey Questions (M e m b e rs)......................139 Appendix F - Research Instrument: Email Surveys (M em bers).............................148 Appendix G - Code B o o k ...............................................................................................150 Appendix H - Sample Letter to Network M e m b e rs .................................................. 154 R eferences........................................................................................................................ ^ List of A bbreviations.........................................................................................................162

VI

List of Tables

Table 1. Summ ary of Data Sources by Case Table 2. Overview of Network Characteristics Table 3. GAYEC Network Technology Table 4. OCASI Network Technology Table 5. OACAS Network Technology Table 6. Structurational Model of Technology, Extended

26 30 34 53 73 97

V ll

List of Figures

Figure 1. Structurational Model of Technology Figure 2. OAYEC Technology Strategy Figure 3. OAYEC Network Figure 4. OCASI Network Figure 5. OACAS Network Figure 6. S tructurational Model of Technology, Extended

14 32 44 61 82 96

V lll

Introduction
Over the past two decades there has been increasing attention to network organizational forms (Knoke 2001; Nohria 1992; Podolny and Page 1998; Powell 1990; Thompson 2003). The mounting interest in network structures is reflected in civil society and recent years have witnessed a dramatic surge in the number and types o f interconnections among nonprofit organizations (Anheier et al. 2001; Anheier and Themudo 2002; Keck and Sikkink 1998; Surman 2003; Tarrow 1998). Nonetheless, there is a meager body o f work that critically assesses the interaction o f technology and networks o f nonprofit organizations. Armed with insights from two bodies o f literature - theories o f institutionalism and a structurational model o f technology - this thesis explores the institutionalization o f information and communication technologies (ICTs) in three networks of nonprofit organizations. The research has two principal aims. The first is to provide insight into the deployment, use and impact o f technology w ithin networks o f nonprofit organizations. The nonprofit sector is unique for its array o f hybrid organizational structures and for the willingness o f organizations to collaborate with one another. In light o f the prevalence o f network structures and the increasing reliance on ICTs to facilitate communication and collaboration, research that reveals the experiences o f networks o f nonprofit organizations can contribute to better deployment and use o f technology. This is especially valuable given the sector' s formidable capacity challenges. The second aim o f the research is to contribute to theories o f institutionalism and to the structurational model o f technology by applying these concepts to a hitherto un-studied organizational form. Networks o f nonprofit organizations are organizational structures that merit specific attention and can extend our understanding o f the recursive relationship among technology, human action and organizational properties.

Three research questions guide the thesis:

,

1. How are information & communication technologies institutionalized in the network? a. What are the roles and experiences o f coordinating agencies? b. What are the roles and experiences o f netw'ork members? 2. How do network characteristics shape the use o f information & communication technologies? 3. How do information am i, , unmunication technologies shape tiePAwkcharacteristics?
These questions arc put on an array o f data source-, under review. Thirteen
aiul

through a collective case studies methodology that relies qualitative methods to probe the experiences o f the networks been conducted with representatives o f the three

im c : \ icw - h a \ e

participating agencies aiui a r -i.,! , a 44 telephone surveys have been completed by their members. Buttressed b\
dct.nlcJ

J.'cument and website analysis, as well as two short focus

groups and 27 email siir\ c\ > completed by staff at member agencies, this thesis provides a comprehensive assessment of the participating networks and their experiences in attempting to institutionalize new techtiologies. This report begins u ith a literature review that examines the various domains o f study germane to the investigatioti. including literature on network organizations, civil society networks, the Canadian nonprofit sector and the two principal theoretical lenses. This review is followed by a methodology section that outlines how the cases were selected, the data sources and collection methods used, and the processes o f data analysis. Each o f the cases is reviewed in turn according to the three research questions and a general discussion provides a cross-case analysis and situates the findings among the extant literature. Limitations of the research and suggestions for further study are followed by a conclusion that summarizes the salient findings and reiterates the theoretical and practical contributions o f this thesis.

Background
Over the past three decades there has been increasing attention to network organizational forms (Knoke 2001; Nohria 1992; Podolny and Page 1998; Powell 1990; Thompson 2003). Although initially interpreted as a hybrid o f hierarchies and markets (Williamson 1975), subsequent research and a mushrooming body o f literature have found network arrangements to be sufficiently unique to warrant their own position as a distinct type o f organizational structure (Lipnack and Stamps 1994; Nohria 1992; Powell 1990; Thompson 2003). Indeed, some students o f organizational theory have argued that networks represent the next epoch o f organizational form (Anheier and Themudo 2002; Castells 2001; Lipnack and Stamps 1994). Nonetheless, there is no consensually agreed upon definition o f " network structure" and the term is applied to an astonishing array o f organizational arrangements. Perhaps the single most common feature o f the literature is each author' s lament o f the lack o f a coherent framework and each author' s attempt to resolve this impasse by adducing their own definition. A careful reading, however, does reveal some consistency across the literature. Most generally, networks are considered to be a mode o f coordination characterized by integration across vertical, horizontal and spatial boundaries. They are decentralized, flexible, and selfadaptive structures that feature multi-directional relationships and rely on norms o f trust and reciprocity. Constituent units retain their individual autonomy but participate in processes that affect the network as a whole. The increasing prevalence o f network arrangements has largely been attributed to the processes o f economic globalization (Ching, Holsapple and Whinston 1996; Knoke 2001; Nohria 1992; Symon 2000). The rapid growth o f global markets and the fast paced changes

associated with the new operational environment have required flexible structures that are capable o f succeeding in variable conditions and contexts. Networks have developed as a means to contend with these conditions and a substantial body of empirical studies has supported this conclusion by charting the rise o f organizational networks in a variety of industrial sectors. Several authors have focused their attention on the relationship between information and communication technology (ICT)' and the emerging forms of network organization. In

The Rise o f the Netw'ork Societ)\ Castells (2001) argues that ICTs, although not entirely
responsible, are facilitating the primacy o f the network as the dominant organizational form o f the Information Age, permitting the material implementation o f network logic in organizations and processes. Others, however, are less sanguine, questioning the assumed relationship between technology and the rise of network organizations (see, for example, Symon 2000). Still, it is generally conceded that new technologies, i f not drivers, are at minimum enablers o f this development. ICTs, characterized by their flexible, multi-directional and both synchronous and asynchronous communication processes permit the coordination of employees, departments, and organizations across space and time with unprecedented ease. Not only do these technologies permit organizations to communicate more easily, but developments in collaborative technologies have also enabled new forms o f cooperative work across geographic distances (Bradner and Mark 2002; Munkvold 1999; Pendergast and Hayne 1999). The increasing interest in and prevalence o f network structures is reflected in civil society - that arena outside o f the market and government in which NGOs, activists and

' Information and communication technologies include any devices that will store, retrieve, manipulate, transm it or receive information electronically in digital form.

voluntary groups operate. Recent years have witnessed a dramatic surge in the number and types o f interconnections within civil society (Anheier et ai. 2001 ; Anheier and Themudo 2002; Keck and Sikkink 1998; Tarrow 1998), allowing otherwise impoverished or isolated civ il society organizations to access additional resources and multiply their influence (Bartling 1998; Pace and Panganiban 2002). Indeed, it has been claimed that the network stiucture is the signature organizational form o f global civil society (Anheier and Themudo 2002). The reasons for this are varied. The global environment is characterized by change and diversity, and civil society actors, like for-profit institutions, benefit fi'om adaptive structures capable o f accommodating varying political and cultural contexts. Further, individual organizations operating in m ultiple environments incur high transaction costs; these costs are mitigated when the resources and expertise o f other organizations are accessed through jo in t initiatives. C ivil society organizations, which are typically under-resourced, stand to gain particular benefit from such arrangements. , Although c ivil society networks existed well before the advent o f ICT, the introduction o f these technologies have enhanced the ease with which such networks have been established by facilitating coordination among geographically disparate organizations (Castells 2004; O ' Brien 2002). The use o f ICT has permitted greater fluidity and diversity in collaborative initiatives and recent years have seen the adoption, evolution and disbandment o f new organizational forms at an increasing pace (Anheier et al. 2001 ; Anheier and Themudo 2002; Clarke & Dopp 2001; Garrido 2003; Surman 2003). These technologies enable civil society actors to share information, maintain communicative ties, and reach new members across spatial and temporal distances w ith unprecedented ease (Diani 2000; Hajnal 2002; Keck and Sikkink 1998; Naughton 2001), and offer new opportunities for otherwise isolated social

actors to join forces and assert a stronger role in political decision-making (Anheier et al. 2001; Frederick 1992; Holland and Lockett 1997; Pace and Panganiban 2002). Some authors posit a natural symmetry between civil society networks and ICT. Bach and Stark (2004) propose an affinity between the flexibility and adaptability o f civil society organizational structures and the network properties o f ICT. Warkentin (2001) further argues that the inherent qualities o f the internet facilitate the development o f global civil society's network relations and that the historical development o f the internet is paralleled in the growth o f global civil society. Both authors see ICT and civil society organizations as co-evolving agents, reinforcing and shaping each other' s growth. The proliferation o f connections among civil society actors in recent years is thus seen in part as a result o f new technologies, which have facilitated a movement from isolation to increasing collaboration. Nonetheless, the bulk of research investigating this topic is concerned with sensational but unrepresentative examples of ICT use among a few prominent international advocacy networks (Malinsky 2004). Cases such as Jubilee 2000, the NGO Coalition for an International Criminal Court, the International Campaign to Ban Landmines, and the Zapatistas movement have consumed a disproportionate amount o f academic attention. While these examples o f ICT use for international campaigning are most certainly noteworthy, there has been insufficient attention to the role of technology in supporting networks o f civil society organizations in their everyday work. Only a handful of studies address this topic. Warkentin (2001) documents the use of technology among several networks of civil society organizations, including Greenpeace, Rainforest Action Network and Oxfam. Lebert (2002, 2003) looks specifically at the challenges faced by Amnesty International as it incorporates new technology into existing practices and Burt and Taylor (2000,2003) explore the impact of

technology on the internal and external relationships o f Friends o f the Earth U K and the Samaritans. But the interaction o f technology and organizational networks w ithin civil society merits far greater and far more critical study; the rich variety o f network relationships among c ivil society organizations has barely been explored.

The Canadian Context
The Canadian context presents an interesting backdrop to this investigation. Since the launch o f the Connecting Canadians Program in 1998 the federal government has introduced several initiatives to support the adoption o f communication technologies w ithin Canada' s nonprofit and voluntary sector". A central plank o f the Connecting Canadians initiative, the Voluntary Network Support Program, was intended to build the technological capacity o f the voluntary sector and successfully connected 10,000 voluntary organizations to the internet before its end in 2002 (Connecting Canadians Website 2004). In 2000 the Government o f Canada launched the Voluntary Sector Initiative, comprising seven Joint Tables o f representatives o f the government and voluntary sector. One o f these, the Information Management and Information Technology Joint Table, was established to investigate and respond to the technology needs o f the voluntary sector. The IM /IT Joint Table examined previous studies and reports on the needs o f the sector, conducted its own needs analysis study in 2001, and set up working groups to examine issues and solutions related to successful implementation o f technology (Voluntary Sector Initiative Website 2004). Finally, the Community Learning Networks Initiative, a program o f Human Resources and Skills Development Canada' s Office o f Learning Technology, supports community-based pilot projects " which demonstrate innovative and sustainable uses o f existing network technologies

 The labels nonprofit sector and/or voluntaiy sector are preferred to "civil society in the Canadian context.

to upgrade skills and knowledge o f adult learners in Canadian communities" (Office o f Learning Technologies Website 2005). This program funneled financial support to nonprofit and community organizations across Canada to create such learning opportunities in their communities. In Ontario, the Ministry o f Citizenship and Immigration' s Volunteer @ction.Online program is the lone provincial government initiative investing in technology and technology support for the voluntary sector. Launched in 1999, Volunteer @ction.Online (V@ 0) was a four-year funding initiative that aimed to improve the technological capacity and effectiveness o f Ontario' s voluntary sector. Over the course o f its operations the V@ 0 has granted over $11.5 m illion in funding to 110 voluntary sector projects comprising over 975 partners. Volunteer @ction.Online has created thousands of information resources and tools, trained over 3,000 volunteers and staff in use o f technology, and has supported the online recraitment o f over 85,000 volunteers (Volunteer @ction.Online Website 2005). These initiatives have contributed to the adoption o f ICTs among Canada' s nonprofit and voluntary organizations, and a growing body o f accompanying studies has revealed a sector that has recently become " online" and is beginning to explore ways to make better use o f new technologies (Ludgate and Suirnan 2004). By and large, this research has taken the form of quantitative studies documenting the adoption rates and uses of internet technology among nonprofit organizations (Levems 2002) and professional associations (O'Connell 2005). Although no research has specifically addressed technology as a means to support networks o f organizations in Canada, Surman (2001) reports that early pioneers o f ICT use in Ontario's voluntary sector have demonstrated that " through smart, thoughtful, collaborative

online w ork, nonprofits can better face challenges such as dwindling resources, the duplication o f efforts and the need for coordinated delivery o f services" (pp. 3). This finding is particularly relevant given the current operational environment of Canadian nonprofit organizations. Since the mid-1990s the Canadian voluntary sector has shouldered increasing responsibility for the delivery o f social services as a result o f financial retrenchment within the federal and provincial governments (Hall and Reed 1998). As governments have withdrawn from the provision o f social programs citizens have increasingly relied on Canada' s nonprofit and voluntary sector to fill the resulting gap (Evans and Shields 1998; Meinhard and Foster 2003). The sector' s ability to meet the needs o f Canadian citizens and communities, however, has been constrained by changes in the funding practices o f governments and foundations. In recent years there has been an increasing trend toward targeted grant-making in which funders pay for the delivery o f prescribed projects (Hall etaL 2003; Scott 2003). Moreover, core funding for administration and infrastructure has become increasingly difficult to secure, wreaking havoc on long-teim planning and hampering the ability o f nonprofit organizations to pursue their missions. These changing conditions suggest the ground may be ripe for increasing collaboration w ithin the sector. As nonprofit and voluntary organizations contend with new economic realities they may be seeking to share resources and facilitate collaboration through territorial and subsectoral networks. Although no existing research has conclusively demonstrated that the number o f networks is increasing within the Canadian nonprofit sector, there is some anecdotal evidence that this is the case (see Canadian Federation o f Voluntary Sector Networks Website 2005; Hatton 2002). Scott (2003) notes that funders are increasingly seeking evidence o f collaboration and Hall et al. (2003) report that members o f the voluntary

sector cite an increasing trend toward mandated collaboration. Indeed, both the Community Learning Networks initiative and the Volunteer @ction.Online program required some form o f inter-organizational collaboration as a condition of receiving funds. Further, one can speculate that in the face o f competition for scarce funding collaboration is more likely within the nonprofit and voluntary sector than in the private sector given the primacy of social goals over goals o f profit maximization. In their study o f the impact o f changing social, political and economic conditions on Ontario women' s voluntary organizations, Meinhard and Foster (2003) discovered that these groups were more likely to embrace a strategy o f collaboration over one of competition. Similarly, in their 2005 research on Ontario' s rural voluntary sector, Barr and Stowe discovered that rural nonprofit organizations look to collaboration as a means to contend with their capacity challenges and cite the value o f technology in facilitating contact with other organizations across geographic distances. I f the sector is moving toward increasing collaboration and ICT has a role in facilitating this process, then research on this topic is not only timely but instinctive, providing direction to networks of nonprofit organizations that seek to use ICTs in pursuit o f their missions. This research project intends to fill an existing gap by tapping into a rich field o f Canadian networks to learn about their experiences in using ICTs, revealing the real impact of technology as grounded in existing practice. In relying on and extending established theories o f organizations and technology use, this research further intends to contribute to notions o f institutionalism and structuration by probing into the unique case o f nonprofit networks.

10

Theoretical Perspectives
Two theoretical perspectives w ill help to frame the investigation. The first, institutionalism, is a theoretical perspective that has emerged from organizational theory. The second, a structurational model o f technology, focuses attention on the recursive relationship among, technology, human action and organizational characteristics. The combination o f these two lenses create^ a p>>u criul instrument with which to investigate the interaction o f technology and networks ,<i n.nipii'lit organizations.

Institutionalism
Organizational tin i \ i' i".4cd in both rational and non-rational traditions. Most early organizational theoiy wa^ r.m 'n.iL .i>suming that organizational anangements and activities were the conscious resiili ,'i citicicncy concerns. For decades, all organizational characteristics were inierpicicd in this light. Since the 1960s, however, organizational theorists have discovered that not all organizational action is driven by rational concerns. Instead, they found that organizations engage in activities and evolve structures that are determined more by the demands o f institutional players and other environmental conditions than by the exigencies o f efficiency. Institutionalism arises out o f this non-rational tradition. Institutional theorists claim that organizational action and structure are a response to the institutional environment in which they operate, as organizations strive to gain legitimacy through one o f several routes. When pioneering a new organizational form or introducing new practices, organizations w ill adopt and institutionalize those forms and practices that are accepted, and thus legitimized, by the environmental actors on whom they are dependent (Hannan and Freeman 1977; Meyer & Rowan 1977; Stinchcombe 1965). Most organizations

11

however, adopt established structures and procedures in order to gain legitimacy. As a result, organizations working in a common environment come to resemble one another in structure and activity. DiMaggio and Powell (1991) identify three distinct processes at the root o f such organizational isomorphism: 1) Coercive processes refers to the formation o f stmctures and practices in response to the requirements o f actors on which organizations depend; 2) Normative processes are those that stem from the expectations or rules established by members o f that community; and, 3) Mimetic processes refers to the modeling o f practices o f successful organizations within the organizational field. The more an organization adheres to such institutionalized practices the greater that organization's chance o f success (Meyer and Rowan 1977). These practices are themselves the outcome of the processes of institutionalization - the means by which " social processes, obligations or actualities come to take on rule-like status in social thought and action" (Meyer and Rowan 1977: 342). Organizational form and activity are institutionalized as actors adhere to recognized processes and configurations. Over time, these practices become ossified and persist as patterns o f behaviour and organization that prescribe certain actions and lim it others. Organizational characteristics are therefore not determined solely by workplace efficiency, but are also a result o f the adoption of established and approved patterns o f behaviour. The processes o f institutionalization do not exclusively apply to organizational structures. For institutional theorists an institution can be any social pattern that has attained a certain state o f permanency or formality. Institutions act as " socially constructed templates for action, generated and maintained through ongoing interactions" (Barley and Tolbert 1997). In this regard, " templates" for behaviour include such institutions as marriage, academic tenure

12

and the business handshake. A ll institutions facilitate certain types o f action while constraining others (Jepperson 1991 ; Tolbert and Zucker 1996; Zucker 1987)! Technological innovations are themselves structures which undergo processes o f institutionalization. Understanding the institutionalization o f technology within a given organization, or network o f organizations, helps us to uncover the means by which the technology becomes embedded in organizational processes and by which it prescribes and limits certain behaviours and organizational properties. However, the application o f concepts o f institutionalism to the role and impact o f technology in organizations requires a particular refinement o f theories o f institutionalism; institutionalism inadequately attends to the processes o f institutionalization and to the interdependence o f action and structure, generally focussing instead on the diffusion o f particular practices (Tolbert and Barley 1997). In order to investigate the institutionalization o f technology more closely, therefore, it is helpful to borrow insights from models o f technology that focus specifically on this domain. The structurational model o f technology, as a lens for interpreting the role and influence o f technology w ithin organizations, helps us to understand the dynamic process of institutionalization.

The Structurational Model of Technology
The structurational model o f technology was first proposed by Orlikowski and Robey (1991) and has been subsequently modified, extended and adapted though the contributions o f other scholars (e.g. DeSanctis and Fulk 1999; DeSanctis and Poole 1994; Roberts and Grabowski 1996). The structurational model o f technology synthesizes two dominant perspectives o f the relationship between technology and organizations. The first, termed the technological imperative perspective, is a deterministic view which posits that technology

13

shapes human action and organizational properties. The second, called the strategic choice perspective, claims that technology is shaped by organizational activities and properties. The structurational model o f technology instead leverages Gidden' s (1984) theory o f structuration to posit a recursive interaction wherein technology and organizational form, and technology and organizational activity, are mutually informative. In other words, technology influences the form and activities of an organization, and the form and activities of an organization influence the use o f technolog\ Orlikowski ( 19`)2,i, identities three elements that are part o f the processes o f the structuration o f techncilog\ hum.m agents, technology and institutional properties. These three elements interact m tan diticicnt ways. First, technology is the product o f human action, shaped by both i I n deognei \ and subsequent users (a). Second, technology is the medium o f human action, taciluaimg and constraining particular types o f activity (b). Third, institutional characteristics condition the interaction of individuals with technology (c). Fourth, technology influences an organization's institutional properties by reinforcing or transforming existing structures (d ). This process is captured in the following figure: Figure 1. Structurational Model of Technology (from Orlikowski 1992a: 410)

Institutional Properties

Technology

Fluman Agents

14

The structurational model o f technology emphasizes the duality o f structure', the notion that " structural properties o f social systems are both the medium and outcome o f practice that constitute those systems" (Giddens 1979: 69). As Barley (1986) notes. Structure can be viewed simultaneously as a flow o f ongoing action and as a set o f institutionalized traditions or forms that reflect and constrain that action. More important than either realm, however, is the interplay that takes place between the two over time. Through this interplay, called the process o f structuring, institutional practices shape human actions which, in turn, reaffirm or m odify the institutional structure. Thus, the study o f stmcturing involves investigating how the institutional realm and the realm o f action configure each other, (pp. 80) Technology as structure, therefore, is both the product o f human action and the medium for human action. This is particularly true in the case o f information and communication technologies, given their inherently modifiable characteristics (O rlikowski and Robey 1991; Roberts and Grabowski 1996). While a given software program or website feature may prescribe certain uses, these technologies can be appropriated and modified by users to a far greater degree than a more stable technology, such as a drill. W ithin an organizational context, ICT is employed as a tool to serve certain organizational interests but subsequently influences and is influenced by the organization through the process o f its institutionalization. In the words o f O rlikowski, Technology is the product o f human action, while it also assumes structural properties. That is, technology is physically constructed by actors working in a given social context, and technology is socially constructed by actors through

15

the different meaning they attach to it and the various features they emphasize and use. However, it is also the case that once developed and deployed, technology tends to become reified and institutionalized, losing its connection with the human agents that constructed it or gave it meaning, and appears to be part of the objective, structural properties o f the organization. (Orlikowski 1992a; 406) A structurational model is particularly valuable for studying technology and organizations because it " sensitizes the observer to look for ongoing redefinition among structure, action, and technology'' (Weick 1990: 18); the institutionalization o f technology within an organization is an outcome o f the interplay among these variables. This lends to institutionalism a more process-oriented perspective that allows us to consider the dynamics of institutions-in-formation and re-formation.

Blending Lenses: Institutionalism & The Structurational Model of Technology
Clearly, there is a natural confluence between theories o f institutionalization and structuration. Both address the ways in which certain social practices are routinized and both emphasize the facilitating and constraining features o f these routines. Indeed, Barley and Tolbert (1997) have argued for further exploration into the connection between these two theories. Unfortunately, these theories are seldom applied in concert to the analysis of organizations and technology. Scholars employing the structurational model o f technology have neglected non-hierarchical forms o f organization and researchers focusing on institutionalism have paid scant attention to the role o f technology.

16

But this combination has the potential to reveal a great deal about the mutual influence o f technology and organizational characteristics. Since Barley's 1986 work on the introduction o f CT scanners in the radiology departments o f two distinctly different hospitals it has become evident that use o f technology is shaped by institutional characteristics and that technology itself can " occasion different organizational structures by altering institutionalized roles and patterns o f interaction" (pp. 78). As Barley discovered, identical technologies can lead to different sti uctural outcomes and this variability is a function o f how the technology interacts with the social system rather than an attribute o f the technology itself. Given the variety o f organizational contexts in which a given technology may be introduced, even identical technologies can be institutionalized in radically different ways or may have disparate impacts on different organizations or units. Unfortunately, there are a limited number o f studies exploring this topic. Moreover, there is no work exploring the institutionalization o f technology w ithin networks o f organizations, nor within the nonprofit sector. This is a unique avenue that merits specific study. This thesis w ill blend insights from these two perspectives to explore a hitherto unstudied area. The combination of ideas from institutionalism and structuration forms a trenchant instrument w ith which to explore the interaction among technology, human action, and organizational properties. Technology, as both an instrument and product of organizational activity and organizational form, w ill be investigated through an exploration o f the recursive relationship among these variables in networks o f nonprofit organizations, permitting a more nuanced understanding o f how different networks o f nonprofit organizations engage with, and are subsequently shaped by, information and communication technologies.

17

Research Questions
The following three research questions are guiding this project: 1. How are information and communication technologies institutionalized in the network? a. What are the roles and experiences of coordinating agencies? b. What are the roles and experiences of network members? 2. How do network characteristics shape the use o f information and communication technologies? 3. How do information and communication technologies shape network characteristics?

Defining the Terms
Information and communication technologies: As noted above, information and
communication technologies are understood to include any devices that w ill store, retrieve, manipulate, transmit or receive information electronically in digital form. Within this broad category this research project concenti'ates on internet-based technologies and software (e.g., email, websites, listservs, discussion boards, shared document editors, chat rooms, instant messaging, etc.). The focus is on the means by which these technologies are used by the coordinating agency to support and engage with their membership.

Netw' ork: A network is understood to be any association of independent nonprofit
organizations working in a common subsector (e.g.. Health, Arts, Sports and Recreation, etc.) that is served by a coordinating agency - i.e., a third party "hub'" or convening organization whose mission is to advance the interests of the network members. Although these organizational structures go by many names - alliances, coalitions, councils, partnerships, associations, etc. - they are all types o f network structure, comprising independent units that

18

have voluntarily entered into collaborative relationships for their mutual benefit.

Network characteristics: This term is intended to capture the wide array o f factors that
characterize and influence organizational structure and behaviour. This includes, but is not lim ited to, operational environment, funding, history, structural arrangements, policies, goals, activities, and organizational culture.

19

Research Methodology
The case studies approach is particularly well suited to the intentions o f this project, which are exploratory and descriptive. Case studies are used in circumstances " where the investigator has little control over events, and when the focus is on a contemporary phenomenon within some real-life context" (Yin 1989; 13). As such, the case study approach is appropriate to a study of networks o f nonprofit organizations. Nonetheless, there is a common instinct among case study researchers to justify their choice o f methodology. As a qualitative technique, case studies have been criticized for their inherent subjectivity, lack of rigour, and an inability to generalize beyond the cases at hand. While these arguments have some merit, there are circumstances in which case studies are not only justified but necessary. The study o f emerging phenomena requires a flexible research tool capable o f probing into contextual circumstances to produce the detailed data necessary for holistic understanding. Moreover, when conducted properly, case study research adheres to specified procedures which ameliorate accusations of inordinate flexibility or subjectivity (Yin 1989). Broadly, " qualitative research is aimed at the description o f individual cases and the discovery, formulation and typification of characteristics with a view to theory building" (Van den Bulck 2002: 68). Although case studies inevitably involve some trade-offs w ith respect to generalizability, they do produce inroads into theory development and help to define an agenda and direction for further research. This is particularly so when a collective case studies approach is adopted. The decision to study multiple cases relies on the belief that " understanding them w ill lead to better understanding, perhaps better theorizing, about a still larger collection o f cases" (Stake 1994: 137). As such, it is the explicit purpose o f this research project to produce a " thick description" of the cases at hand with the aims o f

20

contributing to theories o f technology and organizations and identifying avenues for further exploration and exposition.

Selecting the Cases
A lengthy list o f potential case study candidates was created through three main sources: The Ontario M inistry o f Citizenship and Immigration' s Volunteer @ction.Online listing o f funding recipients; contact with personal acquaintances in the nonprofit sector; and, the investigator' s own collected lists o f nonprofit organizations. Based on the research interests o f the investigator, the following criteria were applied to the initial list o f candidates; · Coordinating agencies must have a specific mandate to support independent nonprofit and voluntary organizations Member agencies must be autonomous - i.e., no legal or contractual obligations to the coordinating agencies Coordinating agency websites must show evidence o f ICT use to support network members Advocacy (i.e., goal- or policy-oriented) networks are excluded Single organizations with subunits in multiple geographic regions (i.e., a federative model) are excluded Coordinating agencies must be w illing to endorse the project and facilitate access to network members For the purpose o f parity, three networks covering the same geographic region are preferred Coordinating agencies located in Toronto are preferred so that on-site interviews can be arranged Case study candidates should represent three different nonprofit subsectors

·

·

· ·

·

·

·

·

Five cases were identified as suitable for the research study based on the application o f the above criteria to the initial list o f potential candidates. Two o f these coordinating agencies operated in the employment sector and it was decided that only one should be involved in the

21

study. After further investigation, another candidate was found to have an insufficient number of members to ensure that adequate data could be collected. This further refinement identified the following three candidates, which have participated in the study: · · · Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres (GAYEC) Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants (OCASI) Ontario Association o f Children' s A id Societies (OACAS)

Data Sources
This thesis includes a mix o f qualitative research methods, striving for a holistic interpretation of the cases under review. Resting on the assumption that " case studies are likely to be much more convincing and accurate i f they are based on several different sources of information, following a corroborating mode" (Yin, 1999: 98), the following data sources were used in the research project:

Documents: A ll available documentation from the organization websites was downloaded
and reviewed. Representatives o f the coordinating agencies were also asked to provide as much documentation as possible about the organization, including annual reports, operating budgets, organizational charts, membership policies, extant research, and communication and meeting records. The investigator also conducted a library search to identify any third-party documentation about the networks, although this process revealed only press releases and references to policy positions. A complete list o f documents reviewed for each case is available in Appendix A.

Websites: Each of the participating networks had at least one website. The websites were
reviewed for content, structure and features. The content o f public access discussion boards

22

were analyzed and member-only discussion boards were reviewed where access was granted by the coordinating agencies. Statistics o f website usage were also reviewed where available. Appendix B contains the site maps o f each o f the participating agencies main websites.

Interview s with representatives o f coordinating agencies: Thirteen in-person, semi
structured interviews have been conducted with representatives o f the coordinating agencies. In all cases, the Executi\ c Dncenns were interviewed along with three to four other staff members who were in a p^'sn i, t,> comment on member relations or technology deployment

and impact (see AppenJiv ( i. i ,i list o f participants). The interviews varied from one to two hours in length and were .ill .mJi. iccorded. A basic interview template was used across the three cases and the diltcicni xt.O! p. "unions but was partially modified for each interview (see sample in Appendix D
i.

Ml

tcpic^cniatives o f the coordinating agencies consented to using

their real names in this report

Surveys o f representatives of network members: Semi-structured telephone surveys have
been conducted w ith members o f each o f the participating networks. An endorsement letter apprising network members o f the research project was sent by the coordinating agencies to the principal contact in their member agencies; in two cases by post and in one case by emaiP (see sample in Appendix H ). The investigator called w ithin two weeks o f receipt o f the endorsement letter to airange thiny-minute telephone surveys. Efforts were made or ensure as adequate as possible representation o f the membership, seeking variety in region and agency size, and other key variables specific to each case as identified through the coordinating agency interviews and document review. An electronic file

^ The Executive Director o f OAYEC suggested that email would be a more appropriate and effective medium for contacting O.^YEC's members.

23

containing member contact information was provided by each o f the coordinating agencies. This file was sorted by region and the investigator began calling the members, in the order they were sorted (alphabetically by agency name) within each region. Initially, no messages were left; members were called in order until at least one member per region had consented to the survey. At that time, the representation was reassessed and more targeted calls were made (for example, in the case o f OCASI both region and participation in the Immigrant Settlement and Adaptation Program (ISA?) were key variances. Therefore, once one member from each region had consented to the survey, the investigator determined whether these agencies were ISA? funded and then endeavoured to contact another agency in the same region with the opposite ISA? designation). Finally, as the member surveys progressed and other variances became evident, or certain comments required further investigation, the investigator made targeted calls to probe these issues and characteristics more deeply. Given the size o f the membership and the number of staff working at the member agencies (varying from four to 400) it was realized quite early in the research process that the investigator would be constrained in his ability to solicit the perspectives o f staff at multiple levels within the agency. It was therefore decided that the Executive Directors would be the principal contact but that they would be asked about staff use of technology. As part o f the email confirming the survey appointments, respondents were asked the following; " I f you have the opportunity, it would be helpful i f you could speak with your staff to get an idea o f who is using the [name o f network] website(s) and the reasons why they are doing so." This issue was then probed as part o f the survey. In the initial contact with OACAS Executive Directors, four o f the respondents inquired about inviting another senior level staff member to participate

24

in the survey. This request was approved and four o f the OACAS surveys were conducted w ith the Executive Directors and a second staff member. A dditionally, in two o f the cases - OCASI and OACAS - a follow-up email was sent to the respondents to solicit additional staff reactions (See Appendix F). This was done based on an existing infrastructure to support front-line staff in these two cases (this was not the situation for O AYEC). Therefore, in the case of OACAS, Executive Directors were sent an email survey w ith the request that it be forwarded to supervisors o f OACAS front-line staff. This email surveyed the Front-Line Staff Supervisors on their own use o f the OACAS Member' s website and inquired about use o f the website among their staff. Twenty-four responses were received, 19 o f which were from a single agency. Similarly, Executive Directors o f OCASLs member agencies were sent an email survey with the instruction to forward the questions directly to their front-line staff. These questions inquired about front line staff use o f the OCASI Settlement.Org at Work website and four responses were received. Approximately fourteen members of each network participated in the interviews and all but a few o f the calls were audio recorded (see Appendix C for a complete list o f member respondents by case). As with the interview questions for representatives o f the coordinating agencies, a basic interview template was modified to suit each o f the three cases (see sample interview questions in Appendix E).

E th n o g ra p h y /F o c u s groups with network m em bers: A t the outset o f the project a
request was made to the Executive Directors o f each o f the coordinating agencies to moderate a focus group w ith members. Due to the expense o f hosting focus groups, the d ifficu lty o f getting adequate participation for student research, and the challenge o f reaching members across the province, the investigator requested that, i f possible, a focus group be added to an

25

existing membership meeting. Two opportunities arose to observe and participate in member meetings. The first was a meeting o f O AYEC' s Central Region Executive Directors. The investigator observed the entirety o f this meeting and was given the opportunity to conduct a brief 30-minute focus group with the nine attendees. Attendees were also given a short paper survey that repeated some of the scale questions used in the member telephone survey. The second opponuiiii \ w as a meeting o f the OACAS Inter-Agency Human Resource Committee, comprising Dircci.'is and Managers o f Human Resources from 25 o f OACAS' 52 member agencies from a c t" " die pro\ ince. The investigator observed the portion o f the meeting relating to the I ium.ii; uirces Electronic Forum and was given the opportunity to

ask a few questions o filie .mcndee^ Detailed notes were taken during both meetings and a tour of the member ageiu \ . w d.i c die meeting was held, was provided. Table 1. Summary of Data
S m it

ces bv Case
OAYEC 25 OCASI 18 OACAS 21

Data Source Number of Documents (See Appendix A for complete list of documents) Number of Websites (See Appendix B for site maps) Number of interviews with Staff at Coordinating Agencies (See Appendix C for list of respondents) Number of Telephone Surveys with Principals of Network Member Organizations (See Appendix C for list of respondents) Number of Email Surveys Completed by Staff of Network Member Organizations (See Appendix 0 for list of respondents) Number of Meetings Attended / Focus Groups Held

1

2

2

4

5

4

14

16

14

N/A

4

23

1

N/A

1

26

Data Analysis -

, v. -

A ll the documents gathered were diligently read and detailed notes were taken. For each case, an electronic file was created and illustrative or important text was excised from the documentation and added to the file. Website statistics were accessed in two of the three cases and key findings from this data source (e.g., most visited web pages, most downloaded documents, etc.) were also added to the file, as was website content and a description of the website features and structure. Following this process each case had a 25-30 page file containing excerpts gathered through the documentation and website review. This file was coded as part o f the analysis process. Notes were made during each o f the interviews. A ll interviews with representatives o f the coordinating agency were audio recorded and transcribed by the investigator. Additional notes were made in the margins o f the transcripts during this process. No transcripts were made o f the member interviews but detailed notes were taken and the audio recordings were used to verify statements o f the participants. A ll transcripts and handwritten notes were content analyzed. Twenty-three codes were used in this process and were prim arily grouped into three categories: Network Characteristics (statements describing the coordinating agencies, members, their relationship and the operational environment); Technology Deployment and Use (statements on the experiences o f implementing technology, including intended benefits, challenges and changes in use); and. Technology impact (statements addressing the impact o f technology on the coordinating agency and network members). The codes were based on the research questions and also emerged from the interviews and the coding process itself (see Code Book in Appendix G). Member responses were colour coded

27

by major defining variables (e.g., region) so that the impact o f these factors could be more easily assessed. Once all o f the material, notes and transcripts were coded, each case had an electronic file o f 100-130 single-spaced pages. The cases were analyzed separately to ensure that the findings were not influenced by those o f the other cases. The data within each code was grouped and reviewed for emergent themes and patterns. Because the code book was developed out of the research questions the grouped responses within each code could be easily assigned to the questions. However, given the abundance of data only the most salient themes, corroborated by multiple sources, were introduced to the discussion below. Originally, the research project considered the role of technology rather broadly. As the analysis proceeded, however, it became apparent that it was not possible to discuss and analyze technology in this way. The research required a separate focus on each of the specific technologies employed in the network as they were institutionalized differently and to varying degrees. It was also originally intended that the findings reported below would be organized by research question to enable greater comparison among the three cases. However, the investigator felt this interfered with the ability to appreciate each case holistically before drawing conclusions about the findings. Moreover, while the abbreviations and circumstances o f each case are of intimate familiarity to the researcher, the reader might have trouble appropriately differentiating among the cases if they were to be interspersed. The following section summarize the research findings. An initial table provides an overview o f the network characteristics and is followed by separate findings for each case, organized by research question. The research findings are enlivened with descriptive or representative quotes from the research participants (see Appendix C for a list o f symbols used

28

fo r respondents). These sections are followed by a discussion that enables cross-case comparison and situates the findings among relevant literature.

29

Research Findings
Case Descriptions
The following table provides an overview o f the key characteristics and technology strategies o f the three participating networks;

Table 2. Overview of Network Characteristics
OAYEC OCASI
Im m ig ra n t and R e fu ge e S e ttle m e n t 1978

O A C AS

S ector Founded

Youth E m ploym e nt

C h ild re n 's Aid

1988

1920 O A C A S , in s u p p o rt o f its m em bers, is the v o ic e o f ch ild w e lfa re in O n ta rio , d e d ic a te d to p ro vid in g le a d e rsh ip fo r th e a c h ie v e m e n t of e x c e lle n c e in th e p ro te c tio n of c h ild re n and in th e p ro m o tio n of th e ir w e ll-b e in g w ith in th e ir fam ilies and c o m m u n itie s .

Mission

O A Y E C sup po rts and a d vo ca te s fo r a susta ina ble yo u th em p lo ym e nt delivery netw ork.

T h e m is s io n o f O C A S I is to a ch ie ve e q u a lity , access and fu ll p a rtic ip a tio n fo r im m igran ts and re fu g e e s in e ve ry a sp e ct o f C a n a d ia n life.

K no w ledg e T ransfe r; Public

Core Activities

P olicy; P rofe ssion al D e velo pm e nt; S trateg ic C o m m unicatio ns

A d v o c a c y ; T e ch n o lo g y; P u b lic E du catio n; P o licy and R e se a rch ; T ra in in g an d P ro fe s s io n a l D e v e lo p m e n t $ 2 .4 m illion

K n o w le d g e and In fo rm a tio n S e rvice s; A c c re d ita tio n ; P ro fe s s io n a l D e v e lo p m e n t; A dvocacy

2003-4 Operating B udget N um ber of Permanent E m ployees N um ber of Mem ber O rganizations

$1.7 m illion

$2 .5 m illio n

5

15

32

70

170

52

D iversity of Mem ber O rganizations

M o d e ra te ly heterogeneous. All m em b ers provide youth e m p lo ym e n t services but m an y are m ulti-service a g en cies tha t provide a d ditiona l services to youth o r to oth er populations.

E x tre m e ly h e te ro g e n e o u s. M e m b e r o rg a n iz a tio n s o ffe r d iv e rs e s e rv ic e s to im m igran ts and re fu g e e s , such as legal se rvice s, fa m ily co u n se llin g and la n g u a g e training.

E x tre m e ly h o m o g e n o u s . Ail m e m b e rs a re O h iid re n 's A id S o c ie tie s o r F a m ily a n d C h ild S e rv ic e s A g e n c ie s le g is la te d by the p ro v in c ia l g o v e rn m e n t.

M em bership Fees

$ 7 50 Full M em b ersh ip; $ 6 50 A u xilia ry M em b ersh ip

S lid in g s c a le fe e s from $0 - $ 7 5 0

B ase d on p e rc e n ta g e o f m e m b e r o p e ra tin g b u d g e ts ; "h e fty"

30

M em b ersh ip S tru ctu re

Members are divided into four geographic regions: Central, Southwest, Eastern and Northern.

Members are divided into seven geographic regions: Toronto, Centrai East, Centrai W est, South, Eastern, North, and W est.

Members are divided into six geographic regions ("Zones"): Central, Eastern, Northeast, Northern, Southwest, and Grand River. Members are aiso divided on the basis of staff role (e.g. Human Resources professionals. Directors of Training, etc.).

Y e a r th a t T e ch n o lo g y S tra te g y w as Initiated D eg ree o f D ep e n d en cy on G o v e rn m e n t F unding fo r T ech n o lo g y D evelo p m en t D egree o f M em ber In vo lvem en t in T e c h n o lo g y S trateg y D egree o f T e ch n o lo g y T ra in in g and S u p p o rt D eg ree o f Te ch n o lo g y P ro m o tio n

2001

1997

2001

High

High

Low

High

High

Low

Moderate

Low

Moderate

Moderate

Low

High

31

Case #1: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres (OAYEC)
Research Question #1
How are information and communication technologies institutionalized in the network? A. What are the roles and experiences o f coordinating agencies? B. What are the roles and experiences o f network members?

O AYEC' s movement toward an electronic platform to communicate with and support its membership began with a grant from the Volunteer @ction.Online (V@ 0) program in 2001. In that proposal, OAYEC explicitly indicates the intent of the new site: " By using dynamic self-publishing tools that are interactive, OAYEC's website content w ill become decentralized and member-driven, allowing OAYEC to shift its role from one of project coordination to information facilitator. The shift is illustrated by the diagram below." Figure 2. OAYEC Technology Strategy

Before

After

This model was not the brainchild o f OAYEC staff but of a consultant group hired to assist in the development o f the V@ 0 application. The goal was to move away from a hub model to

32

one in which OAYEC assumed a facilitative role, building and supporting an infrastructure that fostered bilateral communication and exchange among the membership. However, none o f the staff currently at OAYEC were involved in the development o f the proposal, the previous Executive Director having retired in the intervening years. A new hire, DY, assumed responsibility for leading the project after inheriting the vision from the consultants and former staff:

So when I stepped in there was this map o f what particular pieces were supposed to be part of the website and the internet strateg\K But when I came ifj I found that there wasn't enough work done around researching what the needs really were, like enough assessments around talking to members themselves, really analyzing what the organization itself needs and figuring out what pieces would really be helpful for the organization at that point. (DY. Research and Communications)
W hile in some respects constrained by the vision laid out in the proposal, DY began by soliciting member input into site design and development. In line with OAYEC' s philosophy o f member-driven activities, an invitation was extended to all members to Join an Electronic A dvisory Committee that would guide the site development. Composed o f diverse members from all four regions as well as representatives o f OAYEC and the consultant group, the aims o f the Advisory Committee were both to ensure that the project would meet the needs o f O A Y E C 's members and to help secure buy-in to the goals o f the project. Through telephone interviews and paper surveys D Y also solicited feedback from the broader membership to get a sense o f their technological facility and interests. A key component o f the proposal was training and support for the membership. DY gave presentations at the regional managers meetings and at conferences, and convened eleven training workshops in regions across the province to train staff at member agencies in how to use the tools OAYEC had developed and to assist them in integrating the internet in their work

33

with youth (Volunteer @ction.Oniine Final Report 2002). The current uses o f the revamped site, however, do not necessarily match their original intent. The following Table outlines the different technologies employed within the OAYEC network, indicating their initial purpose and subsequent use or modification by members.

Table 3. OAYEC Network Technology

Technology

Description

Original Intent of Coordinating Agency

Modification and/or Use by Mem bers

Shared Resources Database

A dynam ic da taba se o f youth em ploym ent resources

A ctive contribution of content and ongoing use by m e m b e r agencies.

M e m b e r a g e n c ie s do not co n trib u te to the da ta b a se , p rim a rily due to lack o f reso urce s. T h is sectio n o f the site is s ta tic and m in im a lly used. M e m b e rs do not c o n trib u te to th e se fe a tu re s o f the w e b site . T h e w e b s ite is ra re ly a cce sse d by m e m b e rs and is p rim a rily used to o b ta in c o n ta c t in fo rm a tio n o f o th e r m e m b e r ag e n cie s. T o p ic -s p e c ific b o a rd s are co m p le te ly un use d. D iscussio n bo ard s w e re re co n ce ive d as W o rksp a ce s to e n ab le g e o g ra p h ic a lly d is p e rs e d gro up s w o rkin g in a co m m o n area to co m m u n ica te . T h e S o u th w e st M a n a g e rs W o rksp a ce and N o rth ern M a n a g e rs W o rk s p a c e have seen tre m e n d o u s s u cce ss and are use d to d iscu ss a v a rie ty o f o p e ra tio n a l, s e c to r and p ro je c t-s p e c ific issues. O rig in a l e-b u lle tin s w e re re la u n ch e d as Q u a rte rly P o lic y U p da te s and Q u a rte rly K n o w le d g e T ra n s fe r U p da te in re sp o n se to m e m b e r's pre fe ren ces. M e m b e rs g e n e ra lly v a lu e the U p d a te s and in dica te it o c c a s io n a lly links th e m to th e w e bsite . T h e n e tw o rk uses e m a il fo r p o licy p a rticip a tio n as it w a s in te nd ed . T h e E aste rn region has in stitu tio n a lize d e m a il as a m ea ns fo r in te r-a g e n c y co m m u n ica tio n .

W ebsite

C o ntains events, new s and jobs listing features

A ctive contribution of content and ongoing use of these fe a tu re s by m em b er agencies.

W orkspaces

D iscussion Boards w ith varying levels o f access

T o p ic-sp e cific them es to fa cilita te exchange am ong m em bers.

Updates

Q ua rte rly em ail bulletin

T o provide ongoing secto r and O A Y E C spe cific inform ation to m em bers, and to drive m em bers b a ck to the site.

Email

Ele ctro nic mail

To fa cilita te m em ber involve m en t in the de velopm e nt of policy positions.

Two primary findings concerning the institutionalization of technology emerge from the experiences o f the OAYEC network. The first is the high degree o f influence that members have on the institutionalization o f technology in the network. For example, the

34

original V @ 0 proposal envisioned the Shared Resources Database as an opportunity for member agencies to share news, events and resources using same application as the Content Sharing Constellation [a shared database o f employment-related information to which several provincial associations contribute]" (Volunteer (Action.online Program Application 2001). However, OAYEC quickly ran into problems when it encountered the challenge o f finding ten member agencies w ith tiic imci cM and financial resources to join the partnership. The Content Sharing Constellation pannctN were each umbrella organizations serving Ontario' s employment agencies, w h i l e ( ) The fit was simply inappn'pii.u. IC 's member agencies directly provided services to youth. In hopes o f salvaging the basic concept o f a shared database

O A Y EC decided to coneenn.ii, <'itl\ on the resources aspect o f the initiative and an invitation was made to all o f O A V 1 t
m e in b e rs

to participate in the reconceived resource database.

Ten w illin g agencies were n'uiul .iiul agreed to share responsibility for populating the database w ith resources. Unfortunately, the projeet's initial success faded over time. Although the database was conceived as an opportunit\ for members to submit content, that content still required vetting and input by staff at O.AYEC as members were unable to access the back-end o f the database. Because the initiative was sustained on project funding,

once the project was over and / dicin 7 have access to the same financial resources it M'asn't as cas\' to continue to entice folks to use it. And we talked about possibly a monthly fee. which all organizations were at least willing to consider... but uv couldn 7 recover our costs, and it Ju.st ended up petering out (DY, Research and Communications).
W hile the idea was conceptually a good one, the initial submission o f resources has ended and the database has become a static feature of the site. In the interviews with members no respondents mentioned the resource library as a reason for visiting the site.

35

Similarly, the OAYEC website has not been used by members as originally intended. According to the original proposal, OAYEC envisioned that the news, jobs and events features of the website would be actively used by members who would contribute their own resources and information. However, the content o f these features is primarily driven by the Content Sharing Constellation. Although members are able to contribute their own content to these resources, such member supplied content is negligible. As with the rest o f the site, the news, jobs and events listed are targeted toward staff at member agencies, but these features haven't garnered the response anticipated at the proposal stage. According to the website statistics, jobs, news and events receive fewer visits than the Workspaces and resources sections o f the website. Member respondents identified the Workspaces as their primary reason for visiting the site, with only two indicating they visit for news and no respondents indicating they access the jobs or events features. The overwhelmingly most common response by members regarding their use of the site is to search for contact information o f other agencies to provide referrals to clients or to contact their colleagues. This use o f the site was not anticipated by OAYEC. According to the V@ 0 proposal the Workspaces were originally envisioned as topicspecific discussion boards. Based on her observations o f other discussion boards in Ontario's employment sector - which she referred to as " virtual dust bunnies" - DY realized that this feature needed to be reconsidered in order to have any positive effect on the OAYEC network:

1 realized that the only way they were going to he used is i f there are these groups geographically dispersed that have w'ork that needs to be done, and so we decided to reconceive them as workspaces so that it already sort o f suggests that it's not about, sort o f in your spare time "c 'mon, let's talk about youth issues. " but instead it is set up for veiy particular purposes - fo r small groups to get work done. That was the idea behind them, which I think kept them more alive than they would have otherwise. (DY, Research and Communications)

36

OAYEC s Executive Director was fully behind this modification and the Northern region presented the first opportunity for OAYEC to test D Y ' s hypothesis regarded geographically disperse workgroups. This region, which contains the most geographically dispersed membership in the network, was unable to meet in person as fi equently as other regions due to the time and expense o f traveling, a particularly salient issue following funding cutbacks. When OAYEC learned that representatives o f the Northern region had been in discussion with a technology company to solve their dilemma. DY and M W conceived o f the Workspaces as a member benefit and offered the Northern region' s members free use o f a private forum in which they could control access and use. The Northern Managers' Workspace has been actively used since that time and more recently a Southwest Managers' Workspace has seen similar success. Finally, OAYEC has modified the format o f its e-Bulletin in response to the preferences o f members, transforming it into a Policy Update and Knowledge Transfer Update, each o f which is distributed quarterly. In this case, as with the examples above, we may observe that member' s own needs, interests and capacities have had a role in determining how technology is institutionalized in the network. Unlike solitary organizations in which a hierarchical structure enables decision-makers to enforce certain practices upon staff and departments, the autonomy o f network members resists such efforts. Thus, the proposal's original vision o f an intewoven network model in which OAYEC assumed only a facilitative role met the stubborn reality o f member' s own interests and capacity limitations. The second major finding to emerge from O A Y EC ' s experience is that technology is not uniform ly institutionalized in the network but finds different roles in different `pockets o f the network. This can be most readily observed with the OAYEC Workspaces. O nly the

37

Southwest Managers' Workspace and the Northern Managers' Workspace are being used to any extent. In both cases, managers from these regions have come to rely heavily on the Workspaces as a means o f inter-agency exchange and support. Interestingly, representatives o f both the Northern and Southwestern regions indicate that they have independently formulated protocols concerning use of the Workspaces. In particular, the Northern Managers committed to avoiding reduiuiani replies (" I agree" ) and the Southwestern Managers agreed to use the notification feature aiul \ i\ii the Workspace whenever a notification was received. The Workspace has taken such
.1

h.frl m the Southwestern region that one respondent reports the

region " no longer realK U'C' em.nl" iSW-5). Members from the 1 limited familiarity with
ilie le.ituie

legion have never requested a Workspace and indicate Instead, they have established an email distribution list for

the principals at all mcmhci .igencKs in the region, using this medium to exchange information, concerns, and hcNi practices. When asked why they haven't considered using the Workspaces, respondents generally indicated that email seemed much easier as it was immediately accessible from their inbox and did not require any additional effort. The Eastern region has institutionalized email in much the same way as the Northern and Southwestern regional managers have institutionalized the Workspaces, using the technology for ongoing exchange concerning issues relevant to organizational management and service delivery. The Central region, on the other hand, does not make much use o f email and has never made any use of the Workspaces. .Although a Toronto JobConnect'' Workspace was created in response to a request from a member, there wasn't a single posting " because no one was interested in it at all" (SD, Senior Research Analyst). And, as one member indicates, " I once

 ' JobConnect is a provincial employment program delivered by approximately 80% of O A Y E C 's member agencies.

38

sent an email to all members o f the Central region to get feedback on an issue.. .but the Central region doesn't really use email to share or collaborate" (C-1). Thus, technology has been firm ly institutionalized in the Northern, Southwest and Eastern regions as a means o f inter agency communication, while the Central region has not made use o f any technology for this purpose. The varying degrees to which the different regions adopt and adapt to the technologies o f the OAYEC network appear to be a reflection o f the network characteristics. This issue is addressed in the follow ing section.

Research Question #2
How do network characteristics shape the use o f information and communication technologies?

The characteristics o f the OAYEC network have substantially influenced the ways in which technology is deployed and used. ICTs have been integrated into the goals o f the Association, supporting O A Y E C 's mission statement and four core functions. Beginning w ith O A Y E C ' s advocacy role, technology is used within the network to collaborate with members in the development o f policy positions. This use o f ICTs not only supports one o f the core functions and strategic goals o f OAYEC, but also reflects O.A.YEC' s value o f an active and influential membership. The core functions o f knowledge transfer and strategic communications are also supported through technology as OAYEC has used its communication platform to conduct research and disseminate the findings and other inform ation o f relevance to the sector. Indeed, it is only the core function o f professional development in which technology has been minimally integrated. Although providing conference registration on the website and some information regarding professional

39

development opportunities via the events calendar, these functions are minimal and OAYEC has not yet investigated e-training or other uses o f technology to directly support the professional development of its members. OAYEC' s focus on senior level staff at its member agencies also explains the lack o f support given to front-line counsellors through the electronic communication infrastructure.

/ 'd like to do a lot more for front-line workers. That's tough though. I don Y laww that we 11 ever he able to achieve that unless we start offering a lot tnore for them. Like I said, a lot o f what we offer is geared to managers and a lot o f the work we do is done through managers. (SD. Senior Research Analyst)
Because OAYEC serves its network via the principals at its member agencies there has been little opportunity or effort to use technology to directly support front-line counsellors. Deployment of technology within the Association is also a reflection o f the internal leadership and structure of OAYEC. SD, Senior Research Analyst, works closely with JB, Technical Support, to develop OAYEC's technology plans, with SD creating the conceptual plan and .IB developing the appropriate technological strategy to support that vision. Within the leadership of OAYEC, however, there has been variable support for technological innovation and implementation. Commitment to technology by OAYEC' s Board and Executive Director has been described as " patchy," and in particular senior staff have been accused o f being slow to realize that technology requires an ongoing investment o f time and resources.

I don Yhave nearly enough time to devote to [technology]. It's like the last thing on my priority' list. And that's what I In taking about when I talk about leadership. Tm not criticizing the leadership o f this organization at all. I'm just saying that in order to lead an organization you have to identify areas that have the biggest return on their investment in staff time, so i f technology atid online communication is not necessarily way up there on the list, there's really not a whole lot I can do. I can try and push it as much as I can at an organ izatiotial level, that it should be a priority^ but at the end o f the day. sometimes its just not, often it sjust not. So I really have to focus on my communication and

40

niaJdng a strong case. And i f it's already at the bottom o f my priority lost, then taldng the time to make that case is also veiy difficult. So that s been a huge frustration and a huge struggle for me. (SD, Senior Re.search Analyst)
D Y sim ilarly complained that the lack o f organizational support was a major source o f frustration, which she illustrated with the following anecdote:

So we set up an OA YEC member's discussion and the idea was that all communication for all membership would be funneled through this particular Workspace. So here's an example o f how OA YEC as an organization didn 't quite support the project. Because in order for that to work it means we have to funnel all of our communication there so that OA YEC's members get in the habit o f logging on to get the information that they need. But the problem is that several of the staff would say. "well, they ' re not going to check it. so 1 m Just going to email eveiybody so that way I know that they get the information. " so they go out and email the con ference proposal or the Ministry announcement, and so it basically says to the members that they don Y need to log in because they 'reJust going to get emailed the information. So it ended up flopping. (DY. Research and Communications)
D Y reports that it was difficult to convince O A Y EC 's leadership that technology was not something separate from the organization' s day to day activities but a tool to be integrated w ith and to augment the work o f the Association. Part o f O AYEC ' s inability to engage in more long-term technology planning and investment is a result o f the organizations' dependency on project funding. Like most other nonprofit organizations in Ontario OAYEC does not have discretionary funds with which to pursue such core activities. As noted above, once the funding for the Shared Resources Database ran out the project basically ran into the ground. In a similar vein, OAYEC has used its project funding for the new youth website to hire an expert web developer. Although there is a strong desire to involve this expert in developing a strategy for the organization s website as a whole, commitments to the project leave little time for involvement beyond the task at hand. Such organizational constraints bear upon OAYEC s ability to freely develop and deploy communication technology.

41

More generally, the varying operating cultures o f the different regions o f OAYEC' s membership have shaped the deployment and use of technology within the network. In particular, the Central region, covering the Greater Toronto Area, is the least cohesive o f the regions, with members seldom engaging with one another outside of the regional meetings, which generally show the lowest attendance o f all the regional meetings'. Both OAYEC's Executive Director and Senior Research Analyst identify competition for resources and clients as the principal reasons behind the lack of camaraderie and cohesion in the Central region. This observation is corroborated by the fact that the Greater Toronto Area has the greatest density o f agencies. This situation does not recur in other regions,

because in the rest o f the province you have usually one major youth employment provider per major commun it}', so there's no sense of turf, there' s no sense o f competition. ..they 're not sharing clients, they 're not sharing employers. And so they share very easily with each other. They share information easily. They' re always calling each other saying "how do you handle this issue " They share policies veiy easily back andforth, that kind o f thing. So they do mutual surveys from time to time, they 7/ send an ad hoc survey around, like to check on staff salaries. So. yeah, a lot o f sharing, on fairly intensive operational issues in the rest o f the province, but not in Toronto. (MW. Executive Director)
This willingness to collaborate with colleagues among OAYEC' s other regions is bome out by the comments o f the members themselves. When asked to rate themselves on a scale from one to five in response to the question: " How important is it for your organization to be able to communicate and collaborate with other members of OAYEC?" the Northern region averages a perfect 5. the Southwest region 4.7. the Eastern region 4.63, and the Central region 3.63. The emphasis of the Northern regions' members on communication and collaboration with other agencies may stem in part from their extreme isolation, in which there are few

Interestingly, during the Central Region meeting that 1 attended, six of nine attendees were from outlying areas o f the G TA, and only three were from Toronto proper, despite the fact that 16 o f 22 central region members operate within city limits.

42

opportunities to share advice and information. Members outside o f the Central Region report frequent contact w ith one another in between meetings, primarily by telephone and email. The content o f their exchanges generally concerns discussions around Ministry guidelines, project delivery, and internal operations and problem solving. In all cases, members tend to speak primarily with agencies within their own region and, w ith the exception o f the Central Region, report high degrees o f collegiality and camaraderie. " Most o f my relationships are within the region. We face similar issues and the mechanisms are in place for us to build relationships (N-2)." Interestingly, however, those members w ho have been in the sector for a long time and in particular have attended several Conferences or participated on the Board, indicate they have formed personal relationships w ith members from across the province and as a result tend to exchange more frequently with members outside o f their region. The four clusters o f members in Figure 3 depict the four regions o f OAYEC, three o f which are deeply interconnected and one o f which (the Central region) is not. The Central region is also depicted as somewhat further from the coordinating agency than the other members o f the network, reflecting the relatively lower degree o f importance that this region places on its membership in OAYEC. There are some interconnections among the other three regions and all members are relatively closely connected to the coordinating agency.

43

Figure 3. OAYEC Network

Central Région

\

OAYEC

These organizational characteristics clearly shape the institutionalization o f technology. The Northern and Southwestern regions, with their high degree o f cohesion and strong existing interconnections, have institutionalized the Workspaces as a means o f inter-agency communication. The new technology has been of particular benefit in the Northern region where members are geographically separated by significant distances. The Eastern region' s use o f email also reflects the high degree of cohesion within this region. Eastern region principals have institutionalized email as their prefened means of exchange and have used this technology to buttress their pre-existing relationships. The Central region, on the other hand, makes no use o f technology to facilitate regional communication, a reflection o f its lack of cohesion and camaraderie. Broadly, the familiarity of all network members with the technology offered by OAYEC reflects the relative closeness between the coordinating agency and its members. Clearly, the characteristics of the OAYEC network have shaped technology use within the Association. The primary goals and functions o f OAYEC are reflected, for the most part, in the technological infrastructure that has been developed. OAYEC' s main point o f contact in

44

its member agencies has been the focus o f OAYEC' s technology strategy, as is evident from the preponderance o f material directed at senior staff. Variable internal support for communication technology has made it difficult to develop long term strategic plans, as has O A Y E C ' s reliance on project funding. Finally, O A Y EC 's regional structure has influenced the take-up o f technology across the network and use o f these communication vehicles is a reflection o f their geographic distances and respective operating cultures.

Research Question #3
H ow do information and communication technologies shape network characteristics?

The last few years have seen an increasing reliance on technology in the OAYEC network. This has had some impact on the activities o f OAYEC and its members and has affected the relationships they share with one another. With respect to technology's influence on what OAYEC does, this impact can be most readily seen in changes to the ways in which O AYEC conducts its research.

One big way we 're using the internet is through online surveys. We use Survey Motikey so we have changed our inemhership surveys to he all online, and we've done another bunch o f larger suireys. and there's a whole new program called Higher Prospects and that is based on a study o f five hundred young people and m'c 've done a pilot .study o f over five hundred young people, so that has made a huge difference. We would have never done that scale o f surveying without Siarey Monkey. (MW, Executive Director)
In addition to increasing the efficiency and reach o f its data collection methods, the internet has also helped OAYEC to distribute and disseminate the findings more fully, not only to its membership but to all its target audiences, including government and others working in the employment sector.

45

Technology itself has also become an area o f interest to OAYEC. As technology has become more prevalent in the youth employment sector OAYEC finds itself supporting and advising its members with regards to technology adoption and use. As indicated above, OAYEC has delivered several technology training workshops to its members and has endeavoured to keep members apprised o f how technology could be used to support their work, primarily through the dissemination of original research on the topic. Members report little impact on their own activities as a result o f OAYEC' s technological platform. Several members did indicate that the Workspaces and website have improved their access to information, but by and large members were silent when asked how their own agency had changed as a result o f technology. Far more considerable has been the impact o f technology on their relationships with one another. Again, we see some variance among the different regions, most notably a discrepancy between the Central region members and all others. The Central region had little to say about the influence o f technology on their relationship with other members, but representatives fi'om the other regions were overwhelmingly positive in their assessments. In a sampling fi'om each o f these regions:

My relationship with other members has been strengthened as a result o f electronic communication. I interact more as a result o f the Workspace and email. Some postings are strictly business but it also has a sense o f friendliness and contributes to increased camaraderie. At our meetings we usually refer back to postings or emails that have been exchanged. (SW-1) Email has really helped maintain the Eastern region. It has made a dramatic impact on the sense o f cohesion and rate o f exchange within the region (E-4) [The Workspace] has allowed me to keep in touch with other OAYEC members, tnainly in the North. You may have one or two members that you call but now with the alternative tnedium there is more access to tnore members. (N-4)

46

This increased sense o f cohesion was echoed frequently. In addition to binding the regions together more closely, ICYTS have also increased the number o f members with whom they are in contact.

The Southwest Workspace is new and it has already has widened my network. I used to call a few favourites but now I get feedback from a broader audience

The Workspaces are much better than the phone. I can reach more people and get multiple perspectives at once (SW-3)
Both communication vehicles have allowed members to be in more frequent contact outside o f scheduled regional meetings, allowing them to more easily solicit the advice and perspectives o f their colleagues.

All o f us in the Southwest have a Ministiy consultant. Now' instead o f having to call that consultant I am able to ask other OA YEC members my question. We're also able to problem solve w'ithin the membership and find solutions that may not have been found in the past (SW-3) The impact has been positive. For example, our organization had funding for a new^federal program and I heard that another agency had done something similar. I put out a request on the Workspace and as a result we .started woiidng together. I couldn V have accessed this other individual without the Workspace. (SW-2)
Similarly, both O AYEC staff and several members report a change to their relationship with one another as a result o f technology. Some respondents indicate that they are in more frequent communication with OAYEC staff as a result o f email, whereas previously they engaged w ith O AYEC only at regional meetings and the annual conference. Members also report greater satisfaction with OAYEC as a result o f the communication vehicles that the agency has provided:

Prior to technology the only access I had to OA YEC was at the Conference. Now with email bulletins and the website, you laiow that OA YEC is doing stuff fo r you. It reminds you that OA YEC is doing something and tells you you 're

47

getting more than a Conference out o f membership. It s important for an isolated community to be drawn into something bigger (N-4). Ae/g/zfe» rA c/r 0^4 XEC û /Agf g)ô/' ///gm Ag/.y.

The Workspace is a good reminder that OA YEC exists. Without the Workspaces it's possible we won Idn 't remember OA YEC (SW-4)
These comments are perfectly echoed by OAYEC staff who indicate the Workspaces have built goodwill within the membership and have felt like a " gift' from OAYEC to its members, reminding them that OAYEC is " more than a conference planner." Indeed, investment in technology stems mainly from a desire to better serve their members and is employed as an incentive for members to become more engaged in the network. This is particularly observable through use o f email to involve members in the Association's position taking.

[Technology has] played a huge role, a huge role. And it has the ability to play an even bigger role. Especially in the area o f policy. Because I see it as a feedback loop. We are identifnng issues from our membership, we 're acting upon them and developing messages that can work for the entire netw^ork and feeding them back to the nePtvork so they are the messages they can convey back to their communities and at a regional level, or even a provincial lex'el too. (SD. Senior Research Analyst)
For all o f its positive impact, there have been some negative outcomes of technology use within the OAYEC' s network. The most frequently cited concern raised by both members and OAYEC staff is a reduction in face to face meetings as a result of the increasing reliance on email. This was a particularly salient issue for members in the Northern, Eastern and Southwestern regions, who indicated that there is now " less urgency" to meet and that electronic communication is " displacing" face to face contact. The loss of face to face contact was seen to impede relationship building and one member from the Northern region indicated that the Ministry has been using electronic communication as a justification for cutting

48

meeting budgets. Overall, members are meeting in person less frequently as a result o f communication technology. The OAYEC network has been somewhat influenced by communication technology. Although its impact on the activities o f members has been minimal, OAYEC has benefited from improved efficiencies in data collection and research dissemination. Most importantly, however, email and the Work>paees have had a dramatic influence on three o f O A Y EC ' s four regions, binding them elcs^-i i >j.Mher and improving their ability to find solutions and support for their challenges. 1 lie rel.iii 'n^lup between OAYEC and its members has also improved as members report an inci eased \ I >seness and greater satisfaction with O AYEC as a result o f the newly developed teclmoK'eu.d pi.iitonn.

PRO PERTY O F ryerson university library

Case #2: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants (OCASI)
Research Question #1
How are information and communication technologies institutionalized in the network? A. What are the roles and experiences o f coordinating agencies? B. What are the roles and experiences o f network members?

Today, OCASI is a leader in technology use and promotion within Ontario's immigrant and refugee settlement sector. OCASI began assuming this role in 1997 when it recognized the disparity in technological infrastructure and computer literacy among its members. Believing that improved access to computers would lead to gieater efficiencies, improved service delivery and increased communication within the network, OCASI began advocating for an increase in the technological capacity of the sector. OCASI' s advocacy efforts helped launch Citizenship and Immigration Canada's (CIC) Ontario Administration of Settlement and Integration Services (OASIS) computerization project, which saw an investment o f $12.5 million in technology and technology support for the immigrant serving sector in Ontario. The intent of the initiative was to build the capacity o f agencies delivering the federal government' s Immigrant Settlement and Adaptation program (ISAP), Host, and Language Instruction for Newcomers (LINC) programs. According to an independent review o f the program,

CIC's iiivestmenr in technolog)! for the settlement sector has radically transformed the capacities oflSAP/Host-funded agencies and enhanced LINC latiguage trainmg. Without such a significant contribution and commitment$12.5 million over four years - the agencies would not have been able to make these technolog)! investments. The OASIS Computerization Project provided not only a technolog)! infrastructure for the settlement sector, but the essential tools and supports that encouraged its integration into the agencies (i.e.. training, technical support, and specialized information via Settlement.org Internet and Extranet sites). (Kerr, Simard and Powers 2002; 12)

50

The OASIS Computerization Project helped ClC-funded agencies achieve a degree o f technological capacity that would have otherwise been impossible. However, those agencies that were not funded through the ISAP, Host, or LIN C programs were unable to benefit from this initiative and had to seek support for technology investments from other sources. For many, this was impossible and they continue struggling with inadequate technological infrastructure and training;

We have veiy minimal funding. Two thirds comes from fundraising and membership. We cannot afford any capital purchases. We are a very veiy small agency. Our computers are a real mess. They are all donated. Some have internet access, and the bilingual softM'are we put on really seems to mess them up. We are tiying to get money for new computers. (T-2-NJ) Our internet access is often down. We have really bad seirers (N-2-NI)
O f course, even for those agencies that benefited from the computerization project, adopting and adapting to a computerized environment was no easy task. OCASI staff note the challenge o f convincing members that technology was a sound investment and commented on the degree o f " hand holding'' necessary to build the sector's comfort level with technology. This hesitation seemed to stem from two main factors: The older age o f many leaders in OCASFs member agencies and the sector's emphasis on direct person to person contact in the provision o f social services.

There was real resistance fto technolog)'] at the beginning. And it was a comfort level. So there was a real sense o f "where are we going with this? Why is computerization a priority^fo r OCASI and now fo r the membership? We seem to be fine using the one computer that sits in the Executive Director's office and the work is getting done. " (DO. Executive Director)
And later, / think the ongoing piece we need to do as a provincial umbrella organization,

and with our leaders within our membership, is to continue to change our culture. We need to create a culture where ftechnology] is part and parcel o f

51

the work w'e do; that settlement work is really not about sitting behind a desk with your client in front o f you So for us this is all part o f looldng at. what are other ways o f delivering senhces? Should we have services available in libraries, or comniunit)> centres, or in malls where we know there are large immigrant populations? How do we get information out to immigrants and refugees themselves, and how do we make them aware that this social sendee sector exists that they can access and can help them with their settlement and integration? So 1 think all o f those things are tied in together. (DD. Executive Director)
The OASIS Computerization Project created two key resources which are managed by OCASI and continue to be used to this day. The first is Settlement.Org for Newcomers (www.settlement.org), a public website designed to provide settlement information to the general public, media, prospective immigrants, newcomers to Ontario, and other government and social service agencies. The second, the Settlement.Org Extranet, was established for the exclusive use of CIC-funded organizations and contained information for settlement workers and other agency staff to improve the delivei-y of services to immigrants. This resource has recently been relaunched as a publicly accessible website under the name Settlement.Org at Work (http://atwork.settlement.org/). The Settlement.Org websites benefit fiom advice and direction provided by the Settlement.Org Steering Committee, a broad advisory group of representatives from across the sector who are familiar with technology and online service delivery, including representatives from the Ontario Ministry o f Citizenship and from CIC who are able to communicate the government's priorities and identify emerging trends. Initially, the Steering Committee set the strategic direction and planning for Settlement.Org, but as OCASI has developed its internal capacity the group has receded into an advisory body, acting as a sounding board for OCASFs own ideas and providing support and advice on how best to serve OCASFs stated objectives.

52

OCASI has also solicited input from its members when developing and deploying technology w ithin the network, acknowledging that the perspectives o f the Settlement.Org Steering Committee cannot sufficiently account for the diverse views and desires o f the membership. Two technology-specific conferences were convened in the sector and provided OCASI w ith the opportunity to engage members and to receive feedback on the technology needs and interests o f the sector. OCASI also conducted focus groups, surveys and interviews w ith staff at m ultiple levels within the member agencies to determine the information architecture and content needs o f the two Settlement.Org websites. However, despite their efforts, there is considerable disparity in the relative uses o f the two sites, with the Settlement.Org for Newcomers website achieving far greater penetration than its A t W ork counterpart. The follow ing Table provides an overview o f the OCASI network' s key technologies, including the two Settlement.Org websites, comparing their original intent and subsequent modification or use by members. Table 4. O C A S I Network Technology

T e c h n o lo g y

D e s c rip tio n

O rig in al In ten t of C oordinating A gency
T o p ro v id e p ro sp e ctive a n d n e w ly a rriv e d im m ig ra n ts to O n ta rio w itti th e In fo rm a tio n th e y ne ed to s e ttle Into th e p ro vin ce .

M odification and/or U se by M em bers

S ettlem en t.O rg fo r N e w c o m ers

A p u b lic ly a c c e s s ib le w e b s ite

T h e site Is a c tiv e ly used b y n e w c o m e rs a n d by s e ttle m e n t s ta ff a t O C A S I m e m b e r a g e n c ie s to a ssist th e ir clie n ts. O rig in a lly b e g a n as a p a s s w o rd -p ro te c te d E xtra n e t. W a s s e v e re ly u n d e r u tiliz e d and a d e cisio n w a s m ad e to re la u n c h as a p u b lic ly a c ce ssib le site in h o p e s o f in cre a sin g use. T h e n e w site re m a in s u n d e r u tilize d w ith o n ly m in im a l tra ffic fro m m e m b e r a g e n cie s. A p p ro x im a te ly o n e th ird o f re s p o n d e n ts c o u ld not c o rre c tly Ide ntify th e site .

S ettlem en t.O rg a t W o rk

A p u b lic ly a c c e s s ib le w e b s ite

T o p ro v id e on lin e c o m m u n ity , p ro fe s s io n a l d e v e lo p m e n t and a g e n c y m a n a g e m e n t re s o u rc e s fo r im m ig ra n t-s e rv in g a g e n c ie s

53

Settlement.Org at W o rk Discussion Boards

Discussion
Board

Intended to provide a forum of exctia ng e fo r staff in O ntario's settiem ent sector.

A im ost w h o lly un use d. T h is la ck of m em b er in te re s t w a s a n ticip a te d by OCASI based on th e ir e x p e rie n c e w ith the E xtra n e t. M em bers g e n e ra lly rea d th e bu lle tin and circulate it a m o ng a g e n c y s ta ff w hen received. S o m e re s p o n d e n ts no ted that the B ulletin w ill lead th e m to th e A t W o rk site. R espondents in d ica te d th e Issue s List is a v a lua ble re so u rc e th a t ke e p s th e m con ne cte d w ith O C A S I and o th e r m em bers. A ll e x c h a n g e s are in itia te d by O CASI and the List h a s not b e co m e the free flow ing d is c u s s io n it w a s hoped.

Settlement.Org at W o rk Bulletin

Bi-w eekly em ail bulletin

Em ailed to staff at m em ber agencies to provide ongoing sector and O G A S I-specific inform ation, and to drive traffic to the At W ork website.

OCASI Issues List

em ail listserv

T o com m unicate with and con sult all principals at O CASI m em ber agencies at one tim e. Som e hope the Issues List would evolve into an ongoing venue of discussion.

Again, we may observe that the institutionalization of technology is not simply a matter o f members adopting the communicative practices projected and encouraged by the coordinating agency. Members add a complicating layer to the processes o f technology institutionalization and have by and large resisted many of the coordinating agencies efforts to institutionalize certain technologies. OCASI has had a particularly difficult time encouraging its members to make ongoing use of the Settlement.Org at Work website. The new site was officially launched in 2004 and hopes were high that it would achieve the goals the Extranet was unable to fulfill, better encouraging OCASI' s membership to share information and form a more cohesive community of agencies. The Settlement.Org at Work website was intended to become the information and community-building portal for the entire sector in Ontario, providing the resources, support, and mechanisms for exchange that would allow agencies to better deliver services to their clients. The results o f surveys of network members indicate that the Settlement.Org at Work website is not being used as intended. Of all respondents, 31% could not identify Settlement at Work (i.e., had never heard o f the site or confused it with Settlement.Org for Newcomers), another 14/6 had never been to the site or were unable to recall if they had ever visited, and

54

another 17% indicated they access the site less than once per month. Among those who were knowledgeable about the site, the majority visited only when prompted by the Settlement at W ork newsletter. Indeed, it is clear that the site is o f limited use to the majority o f respondents. When those who were familiar with the site were asked why they do not use it more frequently, respondents cited a lack o f time, the priority o f other matters, and the fact that the inform ation is not immediately relevant to their day to day activities. Clearly, the site has not found a firm role within the network. When those who correctly identified the A t Work website were asked about staff use of the site, there was a fairly even split between those who were aware o f staff use o f the site and those who were not. H a lf o f the respondents indicated that their staff make no use o f the website w hile the other half indicated that their staff occasionally use the site to access information, resources and job postings. This is in marked contrast to use o f the Settlement.Org website for newcomers, as member respondent unanimously cited its value to all levels o f agency staff. When asked specifically about the discussion boards only one o f sixteen member respondents had ever used this feature o f the website (and that individual was on the Settlement.Org Strategic Advisory Committee!). The vast majority o f other respondents were unaware o f the discussion boards or were unable to answer the question because they were unfam iliar w ith the entire Settlement.Org at Work website. O f those who did comment on the discussion boards, there was general accord that the purpose o f the boards was to provide a venue o f exchange for staff at settlement agencies in Ontario. This perception perfectly matches O C A S I' s intended purpose o f the forums, but the fact remains that the boards are completely unused by respondents:

55

I simply don 7 have the time. There's always a crisis and we don 7 have time for this sort o f thing. (T-3-I) I' ve never used them. That takes too much time. (CW-2-I) I've nex'er used them. I like to sit face to face and see people, not stare at a computer screen. (CW-l-NI) I have never used discussion hoards to exchange information and view sentiment o f other staff. Partly because if there was any issue that warranted discussion I would prefer to use email. That's a sufficient and effective means for exchange (E-2-I) I don 7 think they 're a good fit for Executive Directors. They 're too busy. They 're also a lot older, so maybe in ten years as younger people start taking over (E-l-I)
When asked about use o f the discussion boards among front-line staff at their agencies respondents indicated that they did not believe their staff was making any use o f this feature. This claim was buttressed by settlement counsellors who responded to the email survey. A ll four o f these respondents indicated they had never used the forums, primarily due to time constraints or lack of familiarity with the feature. OCASI has had mixed success institutionalizing the OCASFs Issues List, a moderated listserv that circulates among all of the principals at OCASFs member agencies. The Issues List began informally in 2001 as OCASI sought a mechanism by which to communicate with and consult its entire membership at once. Typically, OCASI w ill initiate a discussion on the list by posing a question to its members about a " hot topic'' or by inviting input into the development of a policy position. Use of the list is relatively inh equent and some o f the requests for feedback fall flat, garnering only a minimal response from members. However, in some cases the OCASI Issues List has spurred substantial discussion, most recently around the professional development funding cuts that saw the cancellation of the 2005 OCASI Conference. When seeking advice from its members on how to address this issue, OCASI

56

received unprecedented support from its members who rallied behind its lobbying efforts to reinstate the funding. As a feedback mechanism the OCASI Issues List permits OCASI to more easily communicate w ith its members and to involve them in its decision-making processes. The Issues List has helped ameliorate some o f the disappointment felt by OCASI regarding the lack o f use o f the Extranet and A t Work discussion boards, but there is still general consensus among OCASI staff that the Issues List could be used to greater effect. As it exists, the Issues List is a forum for soliciting feedback on specific questions, but has not evolved into a mechanism for sustained communication. OCASI staff remain hopeful that the Issues List can be used as a more general venue for debate and discussion, fostering an increased sense o f community and sharing within the sector. Technology is deployed in various forms within the OCASI network but in all cases is intended to improve the delivery o f services among its member agencies. OCASI pursues this goal by deploying technology as an information resource for its members and as a means by which to facilitate exchange with and among members. Still, members have not responded to technology in the precise ways it has been intended, particularly in regard to its role as a venue for inter-agency communication. Despite the sector' s commonalities and willingness to work together and collaborate at events such as the annual conference, OCASI has had tremendous d ifficu lty translating this into an ongoing culture o f communication. The frustration, and ongoing hope for improvements, is reflected among OCASI staff.

I 'd like to see something used [for exchange among members], I don t know that it has to be our discussion area, but I would like to see more discussion. And part o f it is use tiying to figure out - are we even trying to put the right tool up? Is this the right tool? (MC. Policy Analyst & Communications Coordinator) I'd rather it [the OCASI Issues List] he full. I 'd rather people were using it all the time. A nd I don't know i f i t ' s an audience thing. Y 'know, you 're going to

57

get some people who prefer discussion lists and some people who prefer discussion area on websites, or whether particular discussions are better suited for one or the other. But I d be happy to see the discussion list take o ff and just Idll the discussion area and say. y 'know what, it doesn t work, let it die. And that s fine. Ifw'e need to just choose one. then I'm okay with that. We may not have enough people to support two concurrent systems... whatex'er system we gave them, if they were using it. I would be happy. (CW. Information Technology Transition Coordinator) I M'ould like to see [members] using [technolog}] in an interactive manner. Where there will be a combination o f personal and electronic contact. But use it in an interactive manner in areas of professional development, policy development. I think we should devise a way that in certain areas we work with certain groups o f people. We haven't found the right way. (PM. Manager. Policy and Programs)

Despite their best efforts, technologies for inter-agency exchange have not been institutionalized within the OCASI network. The OCASI Issues List, while occasionally prompting a strong response and helping network members to feel more intimately connected with OCASI and with one another, has not generated the hee flowing and self-sustaining discussion that OCASI staff had intended. The discussion boards have seen even less success and sit mostly unused on the At Work website. Use of the Settlement.Org at Work website varies among its members but most do not have a clear sense of its purpose and indicate that they rarely visit the site, almost exclusively when they are drawn in through the Newsletter. There is no evidence that the relative institutionalization of different technologies is dependent on region or other variables. While the institutionalization of technology is not uniform within the network, with some members making more frequent use of the Settlement.Org at Work website and OCASI Issues List than others, there is no clear pattern that suggests particular types o f members are making more use of technology than others.

58

Research Question #2
H ow do network characteristics shape the use o f information and communication technologies?

The characteristics o f the OCASI network have varying influence over the deployment and subsequent use o f information and communication technologies. Beginning w ith its core functions we see only a moderate relationship between O C ASl' s use o f technology and these activities. This relationship is most apparent in the use o f the OCASI Issues List to support the netw ork' s advocacy work, which respondents identify as their primary motivation for and benefit o f membership. Nonetheless, use of technology for this purpose remains unsystematic w ith no formal provisions in place to guide the use o f the Issues List. Professional development, the second most commonly cited reason for joining OCASI, does not seem to influence the deployment or use o f technology in any substantial way. Although OCASI does offer notification o f professional development opportunities on the events calendar o f the A t W ork website, no respondents mentioned this feature as a reason for visiting the site. Still, OCASI has indicated an interest in providing e-training for its members across the province and is currently beginning an online pilot project to teach settlement workers about Ontario s health care system. Other key activities have not had any influence on the use o f technology. The goals o f public education and research do not manifest in the use o f technology other than the simple fact that information is disseminated through OCASI s websites. The deployment o f technology within the network is also a reflection o f the human resources o f the coordinating agency. Within OCASI a high proportion o f staff occupy roles connected to technology. Among these staff are three people - CW, Settlement.Org Content

59

Coordinator; DM, Web Coordinator; and, CM, Policy Analyst and Information Coordinator who lead the organization in the strategic visioning o f technology use. These three individuals have played a pivotal role in the development and deployment of technology, leading the network with innovative ideas of how to facilitate communication and improve OCASFs support of its member agencies. Generally, the deployment of specific technologies and website features within OCASI is not the result of elaborate planning but the outcome of the collaborative sharing and " playing'' among these three technology experts. They w ill frequently develop and test ideas to determine their worth and w ill bring the most promising innovations to the attention of managerial staff who w ill make the final determination of whether an idea should be supported and pursued. Representatives of OCASFs technology team indicate that their technology initiatives are usually supported by all levels o f staff at the organization, but do comment that leadership within the organization is not strongly committed to the personal use of technology and therefore does not always model the behaviour that OCASI hopes to see from its members. This failure to wholly embrace and exploit technology is acknowledged by the Executive Director herself. Perhaps the characteristic with the greatest influence over the institutionalization of technology within the OCASI network is the pivotal role of government funding. Citizenship and Immigration Canada has made a tremendous investment in the immigrant serving sector, outfitting all CIC-funded agencies with internal technological capacity and funding the development of both the Settlement.Org for Newcomers and Settlement.Org at Work websites. Without these initiatives the sector's technological capacity would be far more limited and there is no certainty that any online destinations would have been created. Moreover, OCASI s dominant position as technology leader within the sector has been completely

60

determined by C IC ' s allocation o f funding to the organization. Indeed, O C ASI's dependence on CIC funding for its technology initiatives is reflected in the relative development and promotion o f the two Settlement.Org website. Dependent on CIC for 80% o f its funding, and w ith very meagre discretionary core funding with which to pursue its own interests, OCASI is at the mercy o f the priorities o f its funder. Thus, Settlement.Org for Newcomers has been actively promoted throughoui the province while the Extranet and Settlement.Org at Work website have received o n l \ r c l . i i n c l y modest financial and promotional support. This discrepancy in emphasis on piomouon is reflected in the awareness o f the two sites among O C ASI' s members. The overall struct m . i additional clues as to the
I on

f ig u r a t i o n

and culture o f the OCASI network provides some

diitivul;\

( )C .ASI has had in institutionalizing certain technologies.

As depicted in Figure 4. the ( )( \ S I network is large and diffuse. Members are relatively distant from OCASI and li.i\ c o n l \ limited connections with one another.

Figure 4. O C A SI Network

O C ASI

61

This conclusion is derived directly from the comments o f OCASI staff respondents and representatives of member agencies. As MC indicates,

[Our relationship with members is] not as good as it could be. I think we do a lot o f things without consulting them as well as we should. We assume we Imow what their perspective is some times and v>e don't really tap into as much what their real positions might be. or how to best express those. And it's a diverse sector of members so not everyone will agree, but 1 think there's a sense from some o f the membership that OCASI' s communication is not even just one-way. its no-way. They 're not informed enough about what we do and we don'tpull enough out o f them about what they want us to do on their behalf. So we go ahead on a lot o f things assuming it's the position that the sector should take in some ways...and we need to drive the sector in some ways. I think that's important, but we also need to be driven by our members. (MC. Policy Analyst & Communications Coordinator)
This perceived weakness is buttressed by the comments of members themselves. Although some members indicated a close and important relationship with OCASI, a significant number indicated a more arms-length relationship in which their involvement in the network was negligible;

We speak with OCASI every once in a while, w'hen an issue comes up. Otherwise we don't really speak with them (T-5-I) We don't really see much benefit o f our membership. We are a small ageticy with a tight budget. We've never sent anyone to [the Annual Conference]. In the past membership renewal was done automatically, but we didn't renew it this year. I really have no contact with OCASI. I once asked for assistance in getting ISAP funding but it never went anyv'here. I rely on my own support netM'ork o f local individuals and agencies (CE-I-NI) We are a member, nothing beyond. There's no formal collaboration or agencyagency interaction. It's .strictly an umbrella body/member relationship (E-2-I) My lack o f CIC funding makes me feel a little disconnectedfrom the network. I can't attend the meetings that are just for ISAP recipients and we don't have a budget to attend the conference (W-I-NI) We have a limited relationship with OCASI. We attend the Western region's meetings occasionally but. other than that, we don't have much contact. (W-2-I)

62

In general, relationships among OCASI members were relatively few and relatively weak. Three principle reasons account for this. First is the significant variation o f network members, w ith organizations offering such disparate services as language training, legal assistance, health services, and personal and fam ily counselling. Second, OCASI members are in competition for ever-decreasing pots o f funding, causing a strain on member relationships. Third, OCASI has demonstrated only a lukewarm commitment to its own regional structure. OCASI has divided its membership into seven regions but does little to support their interaction as it is incumbent upon the regional representative to convene regional meetings. As a result, regional meetings are irregularly held, with some regions barely meeting at all in a given year. Because this infrastructure is lacking, member respondents generally cite the conference as their key mechanism for interacting with one another. However, this conference is held only once per year and therefore does not foster sustained interaction. Unsurprisingly, most members report that their relations with other agencies in the immigrant and refugee settlement sector have been forged independently o f OCASI. The fact that OCASI is unable to consistently support and develop strong and positive offline relationships with and among its members is reflected in the technology:

A nd as well, the reality at the time [of the Extranet] is that it wasn't an online expression o f what was happening offline, we weren 7 a cohesive community offline. Again, in person there was lot of sharing in face to face, but as an entity offline, it wasn 7 really happening. And so the idea that it would just be create online --M'ell. I'm sure you know schools of thought, when you build an online environment you don 7 just build it and they all arrive. In .some cases it happens organically but it hadn t already happened and this wasn t organic, it was kind o f a forced structure. So it never took off. (CW. Information Technology Transition Coordinator)
Use o f OCASTs technological vehicles reflects the low degree o f cohesion in the network. The lim ited use o f the Issues List for ongoing exchange stems from the absence o f a pre-existing

63

culture o f exchange and the lack o f institutionalized mechanisms for face to face

·

communication. The arms-length relation between OCASI and many of its members partially explains members' lack o f familiarity with the Settlement.Org at Work website, which is not as essential to their work as the Settement.Org for Newcomers website. Overall, the institutional i/ation of technology within the OCASI network is the result o f several organizational charaetci istics. The networks' collective emphasis on advocacy manifests in the OC.ASI Umu-' I i\t. a device used to circulate information on sector-wide issues and solicit feedback . m i p. .Iic\ positions from its members. However, other organizational characten^n, - d- n i scem to have much o f an influence over technology deployment; OCASTs c. mc .u ii. ^ .>f professional development, research, and public

education are not reflected m icv Im d.'gy use. Still, this may be a result of a lack o f funding that specifically enable^ ( )( \s | i.. pursue these activities. OCASFs funding sources have an obvious influence on the dcpK>\ mem and development o f technology in the network, precluding OCASI's opportunité to freely employ technology as it envisions. The relative lack of cohesion within the netw ork, evidenced by OCASI 's inconsistent commitment to communication with its tuembers, the low priority placed on inter-agency communication by members, and considerable \ ariation among the members themselves, is reflected by the network's under-utilization of technology for collaboration and exchange. Several technologies, most particularly the Settlement.Org at Work website, have the potential for significant impact on the sector but have not yet been institutionalized, a reflection o f both the operating culture and relative lack of resources to promote this feature.

64

Research Question #J
How do information and communication technologies shape network characteristics?

The most significant impact o f technology on the OCASI network has been the change in O C A SI' s role w ithin Ontario' s immigrant and refugee settlement sector. OCASI is increasingly regarded not only as an advocacy and professional development organization but as a leader in and champion o f technology to support the delivery o f seiwices to immigrants and refugees. As indicated by its members,

OCASI's use oftechnolog}! is a model for my agency. The way they manage and present the information. I like that OCASI is caught up with technolog)' and is helping other organizations to get caught up. (T-4-NI) OCASI has helped us quite a bit with computerization. (T-3-I)
OCASI has received a massive infusion o f funding from the federal government to support its technology initiatives. The most visible manifestation o f this support is the Settlement.Org for Newcomers website, which itself points toward another impact o f technology on the network. Previously, OCASI existed only to serve its members: suddenly, with the development o f Settlement.Org for Newcomers, OCASI is providing services directly to immigrants and refugees. As noted by one staff respondent, this has the potential to create a conflict with its members whose responsibility is direct provision services. Nonetheless, none o f the member respondents mentioned this as a concern, suggesting that OC ASl has successfully positioned the website as a resource for members to better serve their clients. Settlement.Org for Newcomers has also helped to raise the profile o f OCASI within the sector and in many ways the website has become the public face o f OCASI. But this is not

65

without its drawbacks. OCASI provides much more value than the Settlement.Org for Newcomers website alone but some of its additional ser\'ices and roles have faded into the background.

Because Settlement.Org for Newcomers was so successful people also wondered - at heart it was a technological thing - but "are they competing with us more? " Because suddenly we were serving newcomers whereas our mandate is to seire agencies, which is a bit o f a different thing. So some o f the positioning o f what OCASI was to members and again what our mission was started to come into question by some people, and because we didn't have as many successes on the otherfronts - we were being shut out of some o f the policy discussions and things like that - that became enhanced because all o f a sudden "all I hear from them is technolog}'. ''At the same time, because we weren't as an entit)' really really taking advantage o f the technology' and because we don' t communicate well with our membership, but the Settlement. Org team does, that was another rift. Because they 're not hearing about all the other stuff that OCASI's doing. In spite o f being shut out ofpolicy we 're doing all these other things, but those messages never got out even though we had the technology' to do it. Whereas Settlement. Org [for newcomers] was eveiy two weeks 'w e 're doing this, and we 'd like your input. " it's a very different perception sometimes, whereas OCASI has been extremely active in other things, but we get perceived o f technology quite heavily because we've branded it well, its veil funded, we 're consistently messaging stuff out there. We 're communicating veiy actively with members about that. So they see that but they don't see this other stuff. (MC. Policy Analyst & Communications Coordinator)
More generally, technology has increased OCASI's access to information, allowing staff to be more informed about the ongoings of the sector and the broader political and legislative environment. As a result, OCASI is managing more information on behalf o f its members than it had ever previously done. Members similarly report increased access to information and the improved efficiencies that result.

Technology! has had a v&y positive impact on our organization. I t ' s much easier to get information from fSettlement.Org] website. (T-l-I) The websites have had an impact on my agency. They have all o f the current information my staff needs. It s easy to get information and to get referrals. It's veiy handy. (N-l-I)

66

Absolutely. OCASI s electronic conununicution tools have hud u strong inipuct. They Ve really streamlined our access to information. Eveiyone now knows where to go. how to direct clients, what to expect. (CW-2-I) It has enhanced the work o f front-line staff by providing more access to information via Settlement.Org. It's also informed them o f training opportunities. (S-2-I)
This last comment was confirmed by three o f the four member agency staff who responded to the email survey. Members generally report an increased sense o f intimacy between OCASI and its member agencies as a result o f technology.

The electronic vehicles have influenced our relationship with OCASI in a positive way. We feel more informed, part o f the club, instead o f being detached. Wefeel more attached to the group. Before, you woiddn 'tfind out about things except at the Conference or by mail. Now we instantly receive the information. (T-5-I) We felt more isolated from OCASI before the technology. It has allowed us to feel more included. (CW-2-I) Before. OCASI was a big. huge, distant organization. Now w'e have a better sense o f who they are. The technolog)> improves the service that OCASI provides. It's now much easier to know what's going on at OCASI. I can more easily stay apprised o f their issues and positions (for example their I'ecent meeting with the Ministry). (T-4-NI) Technology! has made communication with OCASI easier and fd.ster. OCASI is more responsive now and we get more feedback. It s easier to share concerns with OCASI. (T-l-I) As a result o f technology contact with OCASI is more effective, expeditious, and cost effective and I can address immediate and ad hoc issues. (E-2-I) Settlement.Org has brought OCASI closer to front-line staff as they access resources and information frotn the site. It has helped OCASI becotne a bigget part o f our organization. They re mot'e relexwit now as I am more easily able to circulate the information I receive. (S-2-I)

67

OCASI staff report similar changes to their relationship with members, indicating it is much easier and faster to receive feedback and share information with members than ever before. When asked how OCASI previously solicited feedback from its members, PM responded;

We used to do it by mail. We would send the questionnaire and ask them to return it. and then M'e'd keep phoning. We'd each get about 20 agencies to phone - each o f the different staff. And you'd take aform and fill it out. (PM, Manager. Policy and Programs)
We may thus observe that new digital forms o f communication are superseding older analog methods, with improved results. Members report minor impact o f technology to their relationship with one another. Several respondents mentioned that they are in more frequent contact with other settlement agencies in their own regions and across the province, but most o f these members indicated that this impact is a result of email in general and not a particular technology of the OCASI network. Still, a few members did mention that the OCASI Issues List does give them an opportunity to see the comments of their colleagues and to feel more closely connected with them, a perception that is shared by OCASI staff.

So in fact the relationship between OCASI and the members hasn V only gotten better with technolog)' but the relationship amongst the members themselves. Because I can send out one note, everybody gets the same information at the same time, they are seeing each other' s responses which help inform their own responses to how they think OCASI should move fomvard with it. (DD. Executive Director)
The most frequently cited concerns regarding the negative impacts of technology on the network were related to a reduction in face to face contact and the occasionally overwhelming glut o f information that seems to consume inordinate amounts o f time. Regarding the latter, members were concerned that the increasing reliance on technology seemed to be a doubleedged sword.

68

Technology has probably added efficiency but it does consume a lot o f time. We 're on computers all the time. (E-l-I) I receive so many emails i t ' s ovenvhe lining. It's too much to process-you might lose something. Although it's much faster, you are bombarded with information. It's an effort to save time, but it's time consuming as well. That's why I don'tparticipate in discussion boards. (T-5-I) A ll this electronic communication takes people awav from their routines. (T-31 )
In an effort to compensate for this challenge OCASI has instituted a policy whereby the m ajority o f member-directed emails are now sent by a single individual who can control for frequency and guard against the threat o f communication overload. Less successful have been attempts to continue w ith in-person contact among members and between members and OCASI. This was seen as a significant loss by members.

The internet does not replace the dynamics o f human contact. You lose something on the keyboard - it depersonalizes issues. Technology is good but it is not a substitute. You still need face to face contact for dynamism and the sense o f communityK (N-2-NI) Electronic communication has taken over. We don't see each other as much any more. There's less social interaction and I miss the contact o f seeing others. (N-l-I) Our region meets less frequently now and uses more email. Regional meetings are not as frequent. (E-l-I) You need balance. OCASI must be careful not to rely too heavily on electronic communication. It shouldn V be only one way. The lack o f personal communication can be a problem; you need the personal touch. (S-I-NI)
Among the more sober assessments by one particular staff member at OCASI,

In many ways the technology has been the downfall o f our relationship with our members. The creation o f these technologies to share information has led to us not talking to them as much directly. We 're not calling them on the phone, we 're not .seeing them, we 're not really talking to them at meetings. Wefeel like that responsibility has been shifted to the technology. So in some wmys I think the technology^ has been a disappointed or a fru.stration to improvement. (CW, Information Technology Transition Coordinator)

69

It is difficult to determine, however, whether technology has contributed to a decline in the budgets for face to face meetings or if a decline in the budgets for face to face meetings has contributed to increasing reliance on electronic communication. Nonetheless, it remains clear that OCASI does not visit its members as frequently as before and would likely be advocating for additional funding to support such personal contact i f the technology did not exist as an alternative medium. As a final drawback to the reliance on technology it is worth conveying the observation o f OCASl's Executive Director who indicates that

some members have said that because we are not physically presetit in the regions, the relationship tends to be between OCASI and the other EDs. When we were coming out into the j-egions. front-line workers, new people comitig into the sector, had a better sense o f who OCASI was and what OCASI does. So in fact in some agencies there may be settlement counselors who have no idea what OCASI is or that such a thing exists, or even that the agency they are working for is a member. So I think the lack o f a presence or the absence o f us being in the region they see that as a negative in terms o f the profile o f OCASI in terms of the various levels of the sector. (DD. Executive Director)
Clearly, technology has had some influence over the characteristics of the OCASI network. OCASI has become increasingly active in the area of technology development over the past ten years and its flagship website has become the most obvious manifestation o f OCASl's work, superseding many of its other activities in the eyes of members and the sector as a whole. Access to information has increased throughout the network, resulting in improved efficiencies and greater understanding of the sector but potentially leading to a sense o f being overwhelmed. Members and OCASI staff generally report a moderate increase in their sense o f closeness with one another as a result o f technology, but lament the overall reduction in personal contact and agency visits.

70

Case #3: Ontario Association of C hildren's Aid Societies (GACAS)
Research Question # /
How are information and communication technologies institutionalized in the network? A. What are the roles and experiences o f coordinating agencies? B. What are the roles and experiences o f network members?

Five years ago, OACAS had a single static public website and no electronic communication vehicles specifically geared to its members. Today. OACAS has five websites and an intranet. The sudden growth o f investment and emphasis on technology is prim arily the result o f several newly hired staff members who were determined to employ technology as a vehicle to support and lead OACAS member societies - a new Executive Director, Director o f Information Seiwices, Director o f Communications and Quality Assurance, and Webmaster. Beginning with a revamp o f the public site that allowed OACAS to easily update content using internal resources, OACAS then turned its attention to the creation o f a member' s only site that would provide all member Children' s A id Societies (CASs) with the information and support they needed to pursue their missions. The emphasis on technology was a deliberate decision, made in recognition that OACAS' audience comprises over 7,500 staff at its member agencies.

I f you really want to have people to have a voice about what s going in chilti welfare, [and if] we want everybody to have access to information about child welfare, then it seems to me that technology is the only way to go. We can V accomplish it any other way. (GL, Director, Information Sendees)
Nonetheless, OACAS has had a challenging time convincing its members that technology is in fact " the only way to go."

71

Ami iî has been an uphill battle with some o f our members, particularly some o f
- our influential members, around technology. Some o f it is generational, some

o f it is just time, some o f it I think is an innate resistance among human seiwice professionals. Because this is one of the last kinds of. human services part o f the whole environment, was one o f the last groups to really get on board technology with any real commitment. (JL. Executive Director)
OACAS was frustrated by the inability of its members to make effective use o f the platform it had created, while members were frustrated that OACAS has done an inadequate job preparing members for the drastic transition to electronic communication. In the words of one member:

When OACAS moved to electronic communication eveiyone was supportive in principle but OACAS was not .sufficiently sensitive to member needs. They made too many assumptions. They should have done a needs assessment and taken things slowly. We had great difficulty convincing OACAS staff that we had a problem and OACAS kept insisting the problem was ours. (C-2)
OACAS has acknowledged this weakness in its deployment of technology:

I spent hours saying [to members] " go there to x ory. " .so 1 think where we might have messed up a bit at the beginning is thinking everybody is as enthusiastic as we were, which wasn't true, and I think we didn Y do enough training or explanation... So again. I think that if we had thought about it more, we might have taken more time to disseminate the idea o f moving to electronic communications a bit more and maybe done a bit more training about how to use it. (GV. Director. Communications and Qualit}' Assurance)
In an effort to better engage its members and instruct them on the value and use of OACAS technological resources, OACAS has since actively worked to promote the website and its features to its members. A t its Consultations, Zone meetings and other face to face encounters, OACAS staff have provided demonstrations of the site to its members. OACAS also places ads promoting the member' s only website in The Journal, a quarterly publication that is disseminated throughout the member agencies. On the suggestion o f the Webmaster OACAS has gone even further and employed technological tools to train its members. A series o f CD-ROMs, online tutorials and short Flash movies have been created to assist members with the site or its specific features. In fact, little pop-up messages from the

72

Webmaster appear on the site when completing forms or clicking on menu options, assisting the user by providing ongoing support:

Again, with this portal website I just created fo r the OnLAC group I \ 'e created little tutorials like "click here for a little flash movie on how to register, " "click here fo r how to make forum post" ' or "click here on how to enter a chat room. '' So it really becomes that you have to hold their hand. And i f that's what we have to do. dun a what we 11 do. (KK. Web Coordinator)
The follo w in g Table offers a hit'ad overview o f OACAS and member experiences in regard to three o f O A C A S ' major ci'inmiimoation vehicles; the Weekly Index, OACAS Member' s website and discussion hoards I ho e examples provide the opportunity to explore the

institutionalization o f d iik ran; u \ hiu'logies within the OACAS network.

Table 5. O A C A S N e iu u i k 1ichiudogy

T e c h n o lo g y

D e s c rip tio n

O rig in al In ten t of C oo rd in atin g A gency

M odification a n d /o r Use by M em bers

W e e k ly In d ex

W e e k ly m a ilin g o f index o f re c e n t n e w s ite m s a n d o th e r re le v a n t m a te ria ls o f in te re s t

T 0 p ro v id e o n g o in g s e c to r and O A C A S -s p e c ific in fo rm a tio n to m e m b e rs , a n d to d rive m e m b e rs b a c k to th e site

T h e W e e k ly In d e x w a s o rig in a lly d is trib u te d w ith pd fs o f m a te ria ls . A b a ckla sh fro m m e m b e rs ca u s e d OA C A S to c irc u la te an In d e x ra th e r th a n th e a rtic le s th e m s e lv e s . M ost re s p o n d e n ts re ly h e a v ily on the Ind ex, w h ic h w a s a n e x te n s io n o f a p a p e r-b a s e d w e e k ly m a ilo u t ca lle d the "T h u rs d a y M a ll," In itia l re s is ta n c e to e le c tro n ic d is s e m in a tio n a p p e a rs to ha ve su b s id e d .

M e m b e r's W e b s ite

P a s s w o rd p ro te c te d w e b s ite

A n in fo rm a tio n re p o s ito ry and, m o re re c e n tly , a p la tfo rm fo r in te r-a g e n c y c o m m u n ic a tio n .

No m o d ific a tio n . O n a v e ra g e , m e m b e rs a p p e a r to be u sin g the site w ith re la tiv e fre q u e n c y and ha ve a c le a r s e n s e o f its fu n c tio n . U se o f th e site is m o re fre q u e n t at h ig h e r s ta ff le vels.

D is c u s s io n F o ru m s

P a s s w o rd p ro te c te d d is c u s s io n b o a rd s , o rg a n iz e d b y s ta ff ro le (e .g ., H u m a n R e s o u rc e s , F in a n c e s )

T o fa c ilita te e x c h a n g e a m o n g s ta ff in s p e c ific roles acro ss th e p ro v in c e .

T h e H u m a n R e s o u rc e s d is c u s s io n fo ru m ha s b e c o m e fu lly in s titu tio n a liz e d w h ile th e F in a n c e s d is c u s s io n fo ru m re m a in s u n u s e d . D iffe re n c e s a ttrib u te d to th e le a d e rs, o p e ra tin g c u ltu re a n d n a tu re o f w o rk a m o n g th e tw o g ro u p s .

73

The influence o f member's interests and capacities on the institutionalization o f technology in the OACAS network can be most readily observed in the Weekly Index. OACAS members had been long accustomed to " the Thursday M ail," a decades-long practice by which OACAS distributed a weekly compendium of hard copy reports, discussion papers, newspaper clippings and other information of relevance to each o f its member EDs. The distribution of this material was a well institutionalized practice in the network and members would look forward to receiving their weekly supply of sector-related information. In 2001, OACAS decided that as a cost-saving and efficiency measure, and as a means improve the circulation of the contents among different staff at member agencies, the Thursday mail would instead be delivered electronically with scanned copies of all of the documents emailed directly to the inboxes of the EDs of its member agencies. It was at that time that OACAS first got a sense of the technical capacity and facility of its member agencies. There was an immediate backlash among members who were having enonuous difficulty opening the material, did not have the capacity to accept and store such large attachments, or who were resentful o f the fact that OACAS had shifted the burden of printing onto its member agencies. Members were well accustomed to the paper version and mostly resisted the new electronic means of delivery. OACAS did not anticipate such a reaction. In response, as the chorus o f complaints grew louder, OACAS changed the format once again so that the material was emailed as an index of links - the Weekly Index - which linked users directly to the documents housed on the member' s website. Again, the decision was made without forewarning to the network members, who were once again taken aback by the sudden change.

Well I think the tvcinsition I ve described with the Thursday Mail from emailing PDFs, to hosting on the website, were different milestones that people reacted to. Probably .stronger reactions in the beginning. I don't think we anticipated veiy well what those reactions were going to be and how negative they were

74

going to be. Somebody accused us o f assuming that " if we build it. they will come, " and in fact I think they were right. I think that's what we did assume: "This is ju st so logical, why would anybody reject it. right? " And so we were a little bit surprised when lots o f them were quite annoyed and they said "I'm used to having the Thursday mail in my hand. I don't like the idea that I have to depend on the computer now. and I don 't like the ideas that we have to .store it and that we have to print it. " and then going and moving to the links and that was something I was here for. when we moved from mailing the files to mailing the links, and we didn't do any preparation o f the people out there that we were going to do that, because to me. we weren't doing anything. All Me were doing was instead o f attaching the file to the email. M'as giving them a link to as document on one o f our seirers. but I misjudged again. I learned a lot about implementation planning since wt? 've been in a f c m o f these projects, and we 're being much more cautious now to change a few things about implementation planning. (GL, Director. Infoimation Seirices)
-

The experiences with the Thursday mail left a lasting impression on OACAS. The launch o f the W eekly Index taught OACAS staff that the needs o f members had to be more deeply considered and that member agencies should be forewarned and involved in changes to O A C A S ' communication strategy. For some time, OACAS made an effort to accommodate those agencies who were reluctant to adapt to the electronic method and continued to provide hard copies o f the documents to this recalcitrant population. In 2002, however, OACAS decided that these members would be forced to adjust to the new means o f delivery and stopped sending hard copies to anyone in the network. Members have also had limited influence on the development o f the Member' s website, which has been similarly directed by OACAS s internal team without consultation o f the members. Nonetheless, member' s impression o f the website map perfectly onto the intent for the site indicated by OACAS staff. The most frequently cited responses regarding the role o f the member' s only site were " information," " education,' and " communication." Respondents generally found the site to be quite valuable, and a few in particular indicated that they had come to rely on the resource and didn't know " what we d do without it. The

75

majority o f the respondents were usually drawn into the site by the Weekly Index but most had visited the site on their own instigation to find a piece o f information they were seeking or to ensure that they were up to date on current issues. As in the case o f OAYEC. use o f OACAS' technologies varies across the network. While the Weekly Index is read b\ most o f the Executive Directors who participated in the survey, they use the Index in dilterent ways. Some Executive Directors circulate the Index throughout their agencies w hile .ahers keep the information to themselves or forward the Index only to senior stall W nlim the member agencies some staff who receive the Index read

the material thoroughly w hd, . tlu i x delete it immediately upon receipt. Varying access to OACAS supplied inform.m a h\ ^i.itl' level can also be observed in the relative use o f the website. Although the cnicn'. i die member's site is mostly targeted toward staff at senior levels, OACAS staff ha\ e mdu .iied that it is their goal to make the site a more valuable resource to other staff le\el>. opeeially front-line social workers. Interestingly, however, they find that EDs o f the member C .ASs can pose a barrier to this goal;

And the thing that stnnk me [about the comments o f the front-line workers in the Communications Audit] was, "oh. 1 didn 7 know you had a website. "And the problem is that nc were afraid to promote the website because we didn 7 want to step on the ED's toes, because they are their own individual organizations and whether or not they granted their employees access to the website was up to them. .So we never actively promoted it. We never put out posters at the agencies, we never emailed the 7.000 front-line workers with an invitation to take a look. So that's another challenge M 'e 'refacing. We have this resource - this is mv full time job - and yet we 're not promoting it as much as M 'e could be. (KK. II eb Coordinator) It's interesting because part o f the resistance M ' e 've had to overcome is that some o f the agencies out there are not giving all their staff access to the internet, and if you can 7 have access to the internet you can 7 have access to the website. So what vi e 've done is encouraged the EDs to come into to the modern age and that their staff need access, not only because they need access to our website, but because there's lots o f good research out there. But now lots o f them are starting to learn that. See, if there' s any left at all there's

76

probably one or îmv agencies that cion't give their staff internet access, and that sort o f indirectly helps spread the opportunity? to have access to our own website. (GL. Director. Information Senices)
When asked about the use o f the site by other staff, and when considering the emailed responses received directly from these workers, it became quite clear that use o f the site differed radically among agencies. In some agencies use o f the site was quite common for most staff levels w hile in other agencies no staff were making use o f the site, often a reflection o f the leadership o f that agency. In general, the site appears to be used most frequently by senior level staff with only a few respondents indicating that front-line child care workers were using the site to any real effect. This is corroborated by the 2005 OACAS Communication A udit, which confirms that the most frequent users are senior managers (96% log on at least m onthly) and middle managers (71% log on at least monthly), and the least frequent users are Board members (59% never log on) and front-line staff (56% never log on). Clearly, the site is institutionalized differently among the different agencies and among different staff and departments w ithin the same agency. OACAS has expressed interest in using portal technology and other mechanisms to facilitate the exchange o f communication and information among members and their initial foray into such technology has begun with the recent launch o f two password-protected discussion boards on the member's website: one for Human Resources professionals and one for senior staff w orking in Finance. The Human Resources discussion board is being used extensively by Human Resources professionals throughout the province. The Finance discussion board, on the other hand, is languishing on the site with only a single comment that was posted during the forums' initial launch. Again, we can observe a lack o f uniform ity in the institutionalization o f technology w ithin the network.

77

We see in OACAS an interesting pattern o f technology deployment and use. Confident that technology was a necessary and improved means to support its membership, OACAS has created several technological vehicles to serve the goals of the Association. In a few cases, most notably the transition from the Thursday Mail to the Weekly Index, it was apparent that members were not ready for the changes that OACAS assumed would be minor disruptions and major improvements to the information services it provides. OACAS has since learned the value o f more deeply considering the needs and capacity of its members. The Weekly Index, after several format changes, has appeared to find its place among member agencies. The Index has been institutionalized differently among different agencies, with some users barely reading the contents and others actively disseminating throughout their agencies. Within the agencies, some staff make active use of the Index when received and others barely review the material at all. The member's website has been institutionalized as an information resource for all members and has become an integral tool for many agencies. Senior staff make predominant use of the site while only a few Ifont-line workers visit and a significant number appear never to have heard about the site. The discussion boards, OACAS' first attempt to use the member' s site as a vehicle for inter-agency communication, have had variable success. The Human Resources discussion board has been institutionalized as an essential element o f this group's communicative practices while the finance group's forum sits on the site entirely unused.

Research Question #2
How do network characteristics shape the use of information and communication technologies?

78

The deployment and use of technology within the OACAS network is a reflection of the characteristics o f the Association. This is most obvious in the member' s website, which serves as an information repository for Children's A id Societies from across the province. Since the 1940s, OACAS has identified itself as an " information clearinghouse" for its member agencies and its knowledge and infoimation services represent the most substantial piece o f O A C A S ' core work. This role has assumed enormous proportions as a result o f electronic communication. The OACAS member' s website is a massive archive, supplying its member agencies with the information resources required to effectively pursue their missions. Both OACAS staff and members agree that the central purpose o f the site is to provide this information, reflecting the Association' s long-standing tradition o f serving its members in this capacity. OACAS' other main activity is its advocacy work. Here, we see only minimal

use o f technology for this purpose. There is no evidence that OACAS uses technology to involve its members in the development o f policy positions; however, in line with its use o f technology as a vehicle for information dissemination, all o f OACAS s policy and discussion papers, as w ell as its media releases and documentation o f its lobbying activities, are housed on the site and are easily accessible to its members. More importantly, perhaps, OACAS has found itse lf more easily able to support the advocacy o f its members through subsections on its site that provide " key messages" and an " MPP visit kit." Electronic distribution o f such materials has made it easier to apply ongoing pressure to government officials throughout the entire province, and for all CASs to ensure they are giving consistent messages to the media, public and government decision-makers.

One o f the EDs. I think I was his first or second day on the Job. he was called by the media on Section 43 advocacy - the repeal o f the criminal code, and he phoned here. Our Director o f Communication said 'just go to the website, to the Facts and the Q & A 's, " and we had our backgrounder there fo r him and he

79

was able to do the media call with very littJe orientation. (JL, Executive Director')
The use of technology to support OACAS core activities can also been seen through OACAS' recent foray into e-training. Accreditation and training support for child care workers across the province have long been cornerstones o f OACAS' member services, and the Association is beginning to use technology to more efficiently reach and educate CAS staff from across the province. OACAS's commitment to original research can also be observed by its use of technology, as the member's only website now houses electronic versions o f surveys that were at one time paper-based. It is worth noting how OACAS' internal culture has shaped the use of technology in the network. Since 2000, OACAS has hired four individual with a keen interest in technology and who have collectively committed to a vision o f technology use for the child welfare sector. The effort of these individuals is primarily responsible not only for OACAS' increasing reliance on technology, but for leading the entire Association in technology adoption.

About ten years ago Geoi'ge Leek told me that computers would have a dramatic impact on the child welfare sector if we allowed it. I myself had absolutely no vision o f that at the time, but I was willing to listen. (E-l)
As noted above, OACAS faced an uphill battle in encouraging its members to adapt to technology. Interestingly, however, it is not only the resistance of its member agency staff that OACAS has to contend with. Within OACAS it has been difficult for the four technology " visionaries" to convince the Board and all staff that use of technology was going to enable the Association to better support its members.

The OACAS itself has struggled w' ith making the move from har'd copy to electr'onic. so 1 don't think we 'r'e fully there fr'orn a cultw'al point o f view wher'e's ther'e's Just a natur'al acceptance o f the fact that the way you communicate with the wor'ld is electr'onically. And so it's har'd when you don Y have it totally inside. So it's not just resources, it's a cultural issue, and then

m

those resources issues 'would be addressed more readily i f the cultural issues were dealt with and the values were such that they see electronic communication as the key' to the whole thing. (GL. Director. Information Senices)
Indeed, many staff have been reluctant to adopt technology in the way the OACAS visionaries have been hoping. These staff, according to the Webmaster, create a barrier to effective use o f technology by members and frustrate OACAS' attempts to develop mechanisms to track and archive internal communication. The organizational culture o f the OACAS network has also significantly influenced the institutionalization o f technology. OACAS works with its members in multiple ways and many respondents indicated that the child welfare sector in Ontario has become increasingly collaborative and cohesive in the past few decades in large part due to the work o f the Association. OACAS hosts a conference every other year and meets with the Executive Directors, Boards and senior management staff o f CASs three times a year at its consultations in Toronto. OACAS also convenes a complex web o f committees, task forces, working groups and networks to address various issues and to ensure that members are playing an active role in the activities o f the Association. In general, respondents report that membership in OACAS is extremely important to their agency and indicate that the relationship is a close one:

It' s a veiy positive relationship. We are in frecjuent communication and we really appreciate what Jeanette Lewis has done since she came on hoard. There is a lot o f information flowing from 0.4CAS to our CAS. and we always get a positive respottse from 0AC.4S staff when we contact them. The consultations are also veiy useful. (GR-J) We have a very close relationship with OA CAS. We have a number o f people on our sta ff who are doing project work with OA CAS. I would say it's a good worldng relationship - a valuable and important relationship (E-2) Our relationship with OACAS is very positive. OACAS is truly an expert in communication, and effectively engage their members and determine what

81

information from government is o f relevance and should be conveyed to the sector (E-l)
Relationships among members themselves also appear to be quite positive throughout the network. Unlike the other cases, OACAS network members each operate in a geographically defined territory and are therefore not in competition with one another. Moreover, OACAS members are relatively homogenous, pursuing an identical mandate in different parts o f the province. The value placed on member-member relationships is evident by the number of collaborations and frequency of communication among member agencies. Members meet with one another regularly during the Zone meetings, at the Consultations in Toronto, and through the Ministry of Children and Youth Services' own regional meetings. A ll in all, members report strong and collegial relationships with one another, working together on various projects and communicating regularly even outside o f OACAS' s formal structures. Figure 5 depicts the OACAS network. As the smallest and most cohesive o f the three networks, members are close to the coordinating agency and to one another. Members have several interconnections, based primarily on region and staff role.

Figure 5. OACAS Network

OACAS

The structure and culture of the OACAS network is reflected in the institutionalization o f technology. Members are close to the coordinating agency and have depended on OACAS for

82

their inform ation needs for over eight decades. This is reflected in member' s clear sense o f the purpose o f the site and their increasing acceptance o f technology as their primary means for communication w ith OACAS. Its Zone networks, despite being well entrenched as an inperson mechanism for communication among members, have not shaped the use o f technology w ith in the network; there are no Zone-specific email lists or discussion boards, and the website is not used to house the minutes or agendas o f the different Zone meetings. Its web o f network groups and committees, on the other hand, have manifested on the member' s only site. OACAS has established 23 separate forums for these groups, variously offering meeting agendas and minutes, news updates, information resources and other announcements. In two o f these forums OACAS has built discussion boards that enable members to pose questions and respond to one another. One, the Finance discussion board, remains untouched; the other, the Human Resources discussion board, is actively used and has become an indispensable resource for members o f that group. The difference in usage among the two forums can be attributed to several factors. Most prominent among these are the differences in the working culture and leadership o f the two groups. A member o f the finance group made a request to have the forum hosted on the O ACAS member website. However, staff respondents at OACAS indicate that the leader o f that group - an OACAS staff member - is not particularly computer literate and has been dragged " kicking and screaming" into the information age. As such, use o f the forum immediately fizzled in this group as the leadership did not make any effort to move away from previous practices o f inter-agency communication. The Human Resources group s experience, on the other hand, has been radically different.

It' s leadership in the group itself. One o f the reasons why the HR forum has taken o ff so well is because some o f the people on the Executive are really

83

enr/nisiasric about electronic communication and have sort o f taken some sort
(// .S //ye 0 / 7/) //7777g 7/7(7/ .S g 07/7g /O 777(/^e /AoJeyô/"7//77^ W O / t 07- 770/

work. It really is leadership from Agency people, it' s leadership from those network groups. (GL. Director. Information Services) I build it, but I can '/ make it go. And so people have to take responsibility. So with OnLAC [a recently launched portal website]. I sent an email yesterday to Gail and Jane and Susan saying, 'this is really your website and the members aren't going to use it unless you guys help them along and post articles, post discussion topics and stuff. There has to be some ownership there. (KK, Web Coordinator)
One o f the Executives of the Human Resources network group tells the following story:

Ch'er the past twent}>years the HR group would meet about five times a year in Toronto. We also used to have an annual OACAS survey, but we felt that wasn '/ helpful enough because it would be out o f date. We had also been surveyitig each other over the past five years via email. We thought, "we need a way to connect. I want a holding place for all of the information we need, and a way to reduce the number of emails I was receiving. "And that's where it started. (HR1 )
Devoted to the idea that agencies should be sharing information and working with one another, this individual enlisted the support of two other Executives who were w illing to lead the transition to an electronic platform of exchange. Sti'ongly supported by the OACAS webmaster, who was thrilled to see members considering such progressive use o f new technology, the discussion board was established in late 2004. Using a regular meeting as the launch pad for the forum the Executives of the Human Resources network group insisted that network members use the fomm to get the meeting minutes and agendas. In her words, " I gave them a carrot." While it took some time for members to adapt to the new system, the Executives consistently prodded the members and insisted that they rely on the new technology. Although some members were hesitant at first, the discussion board has since become a fundamental means of exchange among the Human Resources network group and currently has over 380 posts in twenty forums. The Human Resources group has been buoyed

84

by the tremendous support o f the OACAS Webmaster and the promise o f additional functionality in the coming years. When asked why their forum had become such a tremendous success while the Finance group' s forum remained w holly unused, representatives o f the Human Resources network group point to their leadership and to a long history o f collaboration and consultation \\ ith one another, factors which they perceived to be lacking in the Finance group. The characteristic-' lU the ( ).ACAS network are reflected in its approach to and use o f technology. OACAS c m -'I' i support its member agencies and this support is most prominent through its information-pi iJme .md advocacy role. W ith regard to the former, OACAS has

used technology as a incaii' i .n J n \c and disseminate information throughout the network w ith unprecedented ea-sc \ ' ic j.iu l' the latter, OACAS has used technology to more efficiently apprise metnbci ' > u it' .k 1\ ocacy work and to supply them with the resources they need to effectively lobh\ at a h>cai level and respond to media and public with consistent and powerful messaging. O.AC AS has begun using technology to support its training and research w ork and has built mechanisms to facilitate inter-agency exchange. This has manifested in the development o f forums for its \ arious network committees and working groups, and in the building o f discussion boards, one o f which has seen significant success owing to its leadership and dynamic collaborative culture. The overall cohesion o f the network is reflected in members' clear sense o f the purpose o f OACAS' electronic communication vehicles and their collective reliance on technology as the primary means o f communication.

Research Question #3
H ow do information and communication technologies shape network characteristics?

85

As an umbrella organization OACAS has assumed a leadership role when it comes to the adoption of technology in Ontario's child welfare sector. OACAS staff feel a responsibility to model effective technology use so that member agencies can learn to use technology to increase their capacity to pursue their missions. This has created a new role for the Association, which must now invest in the training and infrastructure necessary to effectively lead CASs throughout the province. Technology has also had a substantial impact on OACAS' core function of information dissemination. OACAS has transitioned from a hard copy method of distribution to an electronic one, enabling the Association to circulate information resources among its members with far greater efficiency, speed and reach than ever before.

I think one o f the things that [technology^ has] done is engendered a feeling that as soon as we know it they should know it. Instead of sending it on Thursday, if M 'e know it on Monday Me tell them on Monday. So it's engendered a just-intime mentality'. (GV. Director. Communications and Quality Assurance) I'm not sure it's had any impact on our organization. But it has impacted my work. I have a much faster and easier understanding o f provincial issues. When I need the information. I know it's right there and I don Y need to make ten phone calls. The information is much more accessible. (E-2) We have quick access to late-breaking news. This week an announcement regarding a new piece o f legislation came down. In 24-36 hours we can communicate OACAS ' summaiy among all o f our staff. (SW-3J We have much more access to information as a result o f email and the website. In the past we would have waited weeks or months for reports that now arrive immediately. (SW-I)
Not only is the information reaching its members more quickly than ever before, but the member's only website makes this information available at all times o f the day and to all levels o f staff. Whereas at one time the Thursday Mail was reaching only 52 EDs who would or would not distribute this material depending on their own practices, the website now makes

86

information potentially accessible to OACAS' entire audience o f over 7,500 staff. This was a key motivation o f O ACAS deployment o f technology, as staff respondents indicated they sought to " level the playing field and perceived the internet as a " more democratic" means o f information dissemination. Based on the responses o f members this goal is being achieved. Members report that their boards and staff at levels have much improved access to information, supplying them with the tools they need to more effectively conduct their work. A s indicated above, the fast adoption o f technology by OACAS led to an initial rift between the Association and some o f its members. W hile the legacy o f this rift is still apparent in the comments o f some o f the interview subjects, the initial challenges seem to have been addressed and OACAS is now working more effectively with its members to ensure they are comfortable w ith the transition to electronic modes o f communication. On the whole, OACAS staff report that communication technology has improved their relationship with members, drawing members closer to the work o f the Association. Members themselves had mixed assessments o f the impact o f technology on their relationship with OACAS. For some members, technology had a clear positive impact;

[Technolog)' ] has increased the level o f comnnmication in both directions. I'm more in touch with what OACAS is doing. ! find it's much easier to turn on a computer and connect with information than it is with a paper envelope. (E-I) The good work that OACAS is doing is now more accessible to agencies such as ours. Now it's available to us at the flick o f a finger. So ! would say it's enhanced the relationship, and I think it has highlighted the importance o f OACAS to a remote agency such as ours. (N-2) I would say [technology has] strengthened our relationship with OA CAS. We are in such frequent communication now. A question is posed and we get a response immediately, so the turnaround time has really improved. We also seem to rely on OACAS more often now that they re only an email away.

87

It s definitely changed our relationship with OACAS. I think that as a result o f technolog)> the network has become more cohesive. It's like the geography has collapsed and we are more closely knit. Email and the website have both been factors in this. (SW-l)
A few members, however, report challenges to their relationship with OACAS as a result of technology. In particular, these individual find they have less personal contact with OACAS staff and indicate that, while the quantity of information circulating among the network has increased, there is often lew eiig.igement around what that material means to the child welfare sector With respect to then iel.ith'i)>hip with one another, members again provide mixed reports on the impact ol leJm. h f-'or most, the impact has been negligible; their

relationships with each ,<thei h.i\ e u.x been altered and technology has played no role in increasing frequency ol'ù'ULiu .> i the number of colleagues with whom they are in touch. For others, technology has in t.iei inipi ov ed their ability to communicate with other CASs:

I communicate m a r c uml an a broader base with other members as a result o f email. We 're on the computer far more than we are on the telephone. (GR-2) Email has probably increased comnnmication among members. It used to be face to face or by telephone, but now email allows for more immediate contact. It goes in waves. Sometimes thei'e's a lot o f emails exchanged around a given issue. (N-3) Email has made ati impact, providing instant contact. I t' s been very positive for the Northern regioti. li e can pose questions to each other. I 'd say I have quite frequent email contact with 2-3 other agencies that are similar to mv own.

rfv -y ;

It has changed our relationship with other members. There's more immediacy o f answers, conversation. Sometimes EDs have ongoing email conversation this would be a subset o f the member EDs. Our zone will use email to discuss issues as a group. (SW-3)
Unsurprisingly, members of the Human Resources network group report considerable improvement to the quality o f their exchanges as a result of their use o f the discussion boards.

88

The most frequently cited complaints around the impact o f technology concerned the sense o f information overload and the decrease in personal contact. Member respondents felt frequently overwhelmed by the amount o f information that they now had to contend w ith and indicate that it is an ongoing challenge to prioritize the information that is received. One respondent went so far as too indicate that he barely ever checks the website out o f the feeling o f guilt he experiences when he sees how much information he is missing. Those respondents who identified the decrease in face-to-face interaction as a negative result o f technology stated that technology has had a depersonalizing effect on the network and threatens to erode existing relationships unless the Association makes an active effort to supplement technology use with opportunities for personal contact. The OACAS network has been somewhat influenced by the introduction o f communication technologies. As one may have expected, this is predominantly seen in the improved circulation o f information, which not only reaches its members more quickly but has allowed O ACAS to communicate directly with multiple levels o f staff at its member organizations. Some members report an improved relationship with OACAS as a result o f technology, which allows them to more easily interact with the Association and access the resources necessary to their work. Others are concerned about the depersonalizing effects o f technology and note that they are engaging less with staff at the Association. Members offer mixed assessments o f the impact o f technology on their relationships with one another, and the most frequently cited detriments o f technology have been the loss o f personal contact and the sense o f inform ation overload.

89

Discussion
The structurât!onal model of technology posits a recursive relationship among technology, human activity and institutional properties. Technology is considered both the product and medium of human action, and organizational properties are understood to influence, and be influenced by, the institutionalization of technology. Unfortunately, there is a limited pool of research that uses the structurational model of technology to probe the experiences of different organizations. Existing studies have applied the model to the implementation of Lotus Notes in services fiiTns (Orlikowski 1992b; Orlikowski 2000), the implementation of enterprise resource planning software in the manufacturing industry (Volkoff 1999), the introduction of computer-aided design systems in industrial design companies (Brooks 1997). and to groupware use and impact in local government structures (Josefsson and Nilsson 1999). However, no existing studies consider the unique case of networks of organizations. As evident from the findings above, this structural form displays several unique characteristics that amplify and extend the existing model. Most significantly, we observe that technology does not come to assume a uniform role within the network as a whole but assumes different roles within different " pockets'" o f the network, depending on the institutional properties and behaviours of actors therein. As Orlikowski writes, " technology is interpretively flexible, hence the interaction o f technology and organizations is a function o f the different actors and socio-historical contexts implicated in its development and use" (Orlikowski 1992a: 405). This conclusion, however, is based on the study o f independent organizations and is therefore an insight into how a given technology may be institutionalized differently in different organizations. But within the flexible configuration of network organizations we see " different actors and socio-historical contexts"

90

w ithin the same network structure. We therefore extend the structuraticnal model by forcing it to contend w ith a variable structure in which technology is institutionalized differently within the same network. Indeed, we see as much variation in the institutionalization o f technology within each case study as we do across the networks. Within OAYEC, differences in the organizational cultures among the regions are reflected in the adoption of technology. The Southwest and Northwest regions, w ith a tradition o f working collaboratively, have institutionalized the Workspaces as a means for ongoing communication between regular face-to-face meetings. The East, finding email easier than the Workspaces, have institutionalized email as a means for collective communication among the principals o f member agencies in that region. The Central region, lacking a spirit of camaraderie and in competition with each other for funding and for clients, has not institutionalized any technology as a means for inter-agency communication. W ithin the OCASI network we may observe more evenly institutionalized adoption o f the Issues List and the Settlement.Org for Newcomers website. W ith Settlement.Org at Work, however, there are considerable discrepancies in use, with the majority o f respondents never visiting the site or even being aware o f its existence and a minority accessing the site on at least a weekly basis to support their work. Moreover, there are differences in the institutionalization o f the A t Work website among the staff at member agencies. Some respondents report that settlement counsellors make active use o f the site while others indicate that their front-line staff have never used the site. The responses received directly from staff at this level validate these comments.

91

In the OACAS network, variations among the operating cultures of different role-based working groups manifest in the discrepancy of the institutionalization o f discussion boards. The Human Resource inter-agency group, with a strong tradition o f collaboration and exchange, and led by an Executive with a keen interest in technology, has institutionalized the discussion boards as an indispensable means to support their communication. The Finances group, lacking any commitment to technology by its Executive and by all accounts a less dynamic group with a limited history of inter-agency communication, has ignored its discussion board which now sits unused on the website. As with OCASI, we also see in OACAS the variable institutionalization of technology as a reflection o f the internal operating culture o f its member agencies. Some members actively distribute the Weekly Index throughout their organization and encourage staff access to the site, while others do not promote such resources and the website and Index remain tools for the exclusive use o f senior staff. In all three cases we may also observe one other unique characteristic of network organizations that has implications for the structurational model o f technology. According to existing studies the institutionalization of technology results in part from the ways in which staff of an organization interact with, appropriate, and adopt the features of technology. But within networks of nonprofit organizations another layer is added - the motivations, circumstances and capacity of members. Thus, we can observe that the institutionalization

o f technology within the three networks is not simply a matter of members adopting the communicative practices projected and encouraged by the coordinating agencies. Members frequently modified, or necessitated the modification of, the originally intended uses o f the technology. In the case of OAYEC, members' organizational focus necessitated a

92

reconfiguration o f the Shared Resources Database from a partnership w ith the existing Content Sharing Constellation to an OAYEC-specific resource. Members' own capacity limitations precluded adequate contribution to the database and the feature was left largely unused. The O A Y EC website, originally intended to be a platform o f information provision and exchange, is used predominantly by members as a means to search for the contact information o f other agencies to provide referrals to their own clients. The Workspaces, originally envisioned to facilitate ongoing exchange among members across the network, were reconfigured and institutionalized as a series o f regional discussion boards in response to the interests o f member agencies. W ithin the OCASI network, members have consistently thwarted efforts to institutionalize technology as a mode o f inter-agency exchange. Neither the Issues List nor discussion boards have been self-sustaining as members have refused to actively use these media to communicate w ith their colleagues. The Settlement.Org at Work site, intended to provide information resources so that managerial and front-line staff can more effectively perform their work, remains unused by many members. OACAS has been more successful in integrating its technological platform into member' s work processes although this appears to vary by agency, staff level and staff role. The discussion board has become an indispensable resource for the Human Resources network group while it is completely untouched by members o f the Finance group. The member' s only website is accessed with varying frequency and for various purposes among the different agencies and staff. The Weekly Index is read and appreciated by the majority o f Executive Directors in member agencies, who have their own institutionalized systems for disseminating the information w ithin their agencies.

93

Finally, it is worth recalling that the format o f the Weekly Index itself is a result o f negotiation between the coordinating agency and the network members. These modifications of the originally intended uses o f technology are anticipated by the structurational model o f technology. The structurational model sees artifacts as potentially modifiable throughout their existence; designers embed technologies with certain predispositions which are subsequently appropriated by users during their use o f technology. In networks of organizations, however, it is not only one set of users that modify the technology but two: coordinating agencies and their members. Therefore, while coordinating agencies may implement certain technologies with prescribed uses, and subsequently modify the technology to serve the particular needs of their network, it is the members themselves who are the final arbiters of its use. Certainly, this is similar to solitary organizations in which end-users (i.e., staff) may appropriate technology in a manner that was not anticipated by the designers. However, within networks of organizations this appropriation is multiplied. First, members of a network structure are more likely to possess disparate characteristics than units within a single firm. Second, within the member organizations there may be a variety o f units and staff levels that possess their own distinct characteristics; technology is appropriated at each o f these levels. Finally, network members possess more autonomy than staff o f an organization and are therefore less compliant to the directives or desires of those leading the implementation of technology. We may thus conclude that technology is not institutionalized uniformly within these three network structures and that this appears to be a reflection of the inherent variability of network configuration and the ways in which this variability manifests in the different operating cultures, practices and behaviours o f members in different pockets o f the network.

94

This conclusion is supported by the structurational model o f technology, which sees technology in part as the product o f human action and the reflection o f institutional properties. Through its application to networks o f nonprofit organizations, this thesis extends the structurational model o f technology by demonstrating that the diverse institutional properties and m ultiplicity o f human activity that exist within a single organizational network influence the institutionalization o f technology. However, the structurational model also predicts that technology w ill influence human action and the institutional properties o f an organization. And indeed, we do see evidence o f this process as well. W ithin the OAYEC network, regions already experiencing positive inter agency relations were further supported by the implementation o f technology. Similar findings emerge from OACAS, where the Human Resources network group' s long history o f collaboration was buttressed by the introduction o f discussion boards. Technology appears to have the additional benefit o f drawing the networks closer together, as the majority o f respondents in all three cases report increased communication with other members and with the coordinating agency. In a few examples we can observe more substantial impact o f technology on institutional properties and human activity. In the Northern region o f the OAYEC network member agencies were challenged by the vast geographic distances between them and the declining funding available to support in-person meetings. Despite their positive relations members reported that they were meeting with decreasing frequency each year. The introduction o f the OAYEC Workspaces had dramatic influence on inter-agency communication, allowing them to exchange with one another at no cost and on an ongoing basis. Similarly, the Human Resources network group o f the OACAS network experienced

95

significant gains to their work processes. Despite a tradition of collaboration, existing methods o f communication were proving cumbersome and, in the eyes of the Executive, inefficient. The introduction o f a discussion forum that could house documents and archive an ongoing discussion allowed this group to work together with greater ease than ever before. Technology has also influenced the institutional properties of member organizations to varying degrees across the three cases. In all three cases, members report an increase in information access and circulation as a result of new technology. These respondents indicate that this material has enabled them to better pursue their missions, but also note the threat of information overload as a result of more frequent communication. As regards the coordinating agencies, technology reinforced most of their main roles and activities, such as research, information provision, and advocacy. In light of the discussion above, the unique case of networks of nonprofit organizations merits an extension of the structurational model o f technology, depicted in Figure 6. Figure 6. Structurational Model of Technology, Extended

Institutional Properties

\ c3

\ \ \ c2\ \ cI

A
d l\ Technology

I U ///A
Human Agents
96

Here, we see a revision o f O rlikow ski' s original depiction (see page 15). The solid lines, indicated by their respective letter and the digit 1, are identical to the original model. In this revised figure, however, this solid line refers specifically to the coordinating agency. The dotted lines, indicated by their respective letter and the digit 2. refer specifically to the network members. Finally, the dashed lines, indicated by their respective letter and the digit 3, refer to the network as a whole, which has institutional properties distinct from those o f the member organizations and the coordinating agency. As in the original model there are four principal effects; however, these effects are m ultiplied by the complexity o f the network configuration. This modification is explicated in the follow ing table: Table 6. Structurational Model of Technology, Extended
Arrow a1 Technology as a Product of Human Action Type of Influence Nature of Influence a1) Technology is an outcome of its intended and subsequent use by staff at the coordinating agency. a2) Technology is an outcome of its modification or use by staff at the member organizations.

82

b1 Technology as a Medium of Human Action

b1) Technology shapes the activities of staff at the coordinating agency. b1) Technology shapes the activities of staff at the member organizations. c1) The institutional properties of the coordinating agency influence how staff members interact with technology. Institutional Conditions of Interaction with Technology c2) The institutional properties of the member organizations influence how staff members interact with technology. c3) The institutional properties of the network as a whole influence how staff at the coordinating agency and member organizations interact with technology.

b2

o1

c2

c3

97

d1 d2 d3 Institutional Consequences of Interaction with Technology

d1) Interaction with technology influences the institutional properties of the coordinating agency. d2) Interaction with technology influences the institutional properties of the member organizations. d3) Interaction with technology influences the institutional properties of the network as a whole.

Thus, the structurational model is extended through its application to networks of nonprofit organizations. The three cases outlined above provide ample support for this extension, demonstrating the additional complexity o f the institutionalization of technology in networks of organizations, where essentially three loci o f influence exist: the coordinating agency' s institutional properties and staff activity; the member organizations' institutional properties and staff activity; and, the institutional properties of the network structure as a whole. In fact, it is reasonable to speculate that this extension would apply to networks o f forprofit organizations. It is not the unique orientation of nonprofit organizations that extends the structurational model of technology but the particular network configuration of the cases under review. Thus, we can assume that the processes of the institutionalization of technology would be similar within any organizational network based on a hub-member model. Theories of institutionalism further help to illuminate the findings of the three cases. As indicated in the above literature review, organizations establish practices and structures that suit the demands of institutional players and other environmental conditions. The same can be said o f organizational networks. However, an organizational network is itself the institutionalized environment of its member organizations. As such, the variable institutionalization of technology within the three cases is reflective of the member agencies' response to the properties and culture of the network, including the coordinating agency and

98

other network members. Technology is institutionalized through one o f several routes as members respond to their institutional environment. For example, we see instances where technology is institutionalized in response to efficiency concerns. In the Northern region of the OAYEC network, members were experiencing a decline in funding which was reducing their ability to meet in person with one another. Seeking a solution to their dilemma, members o f this region began exploring potential inform ation and communication technologies. The coordinating agency offered the Workspaces to this region at no cost and the technology was subsequently adopted and institutionalized, proving to be an effective mechanism to address their geographic distances and capacity limitations. W ithin the OACAS network the Executives o f the Human Resources network group institutionalized technology in a similar fashion. Concerned about the low frequency o f communication among members and the inefficiencies o f circulating documents by email without an archived history o f communication, these Executives approached OACAS w ith a request fo r a private forum. This forum was created and institutionalized among the netw ork' s human resources professionals as an essential element o f their communicative practices. The experiences o f OACAS' s Human Resources network group also demonstrate the role o f coercive processes o f institutionalization. Powell and DiMaggio ( 1991 ) note the existence o f formal and informal pressures that influence the behaviour o f organizations within the institutional setting. These pressures took the shape o f forceful coercion in OACAS human resources discussion forum, as the Executives o f that group insisted that members began using the new technology; a failure o f members to do so would mean alienation from the communication and activities o f the Human Resources network group. As a result, it was

99

only a short time before even the most reluctant members adopted the technology. Similarly, the distribution of the Weekly Index provides another example of coercion in the case of OACAS. Long used to the distribution of the hard copy Thursday Mail, many members had a difficult time adjusting to the new electronic format and requested to continue receiving paper copies of the documents, O.AC AS insisted in turn that its members accept the new delivery format, refusing to circulate hat J copies and forcing members to adapt to the ernail and website versions, whicii ha\ c 'uh'cquently been institutionalized throughout the network. This thesis also ic \ e.iL e %thence of the influence o f normative processes on the institutionalization ofteehn > 1 Northern regional manaeet ' I his can be most readily seen in both the Southwest and a iheir respective Workspaces. In both instances, members

established their own pi i'U . 'U ' u>e. outlining the expectations they had of one another when communicating via the new leJm. T 'g \. Indeed, it is only the mimetic processes o f institutionalization which ate ira apparent in the three networks. There is no indication that any members adopted use ol a particular technology as a result of modeling the example of other network members. The processes ol the institutionalization of technology within the three networks are a response to the institutional en\ ironment - i.e., the characteristics of the network- in which members operate. The diffusion of technologies throughout the network is not a uniform process as the individual members and member organizations exert more autonomy and display more disparate characteristics than is typical in a solitary organizational setting and therefore institutionalize technology to varying degrees. Importantly, institutionalization of technology within networks of organizations is not an " all-or-nothing" experience, but is better understood as happening along a continuum, occurring at differing rates and to varying

100

degrees in different pockets o f the network. Studies o f the diffusion o f technology in organizations have usually focussed on top-down hierarchical structures in which the issue is more one o f implementation than diffusion - i.e., key decision makers w ithin the organizations make the determination to implement a technology and then instigate this process across the organization (Frank, Zhao and Borman 2004). But in network structures members have more independence than in their hierarchical counterparts. The diffusion and subsequent institutionalization o f technology is therefore a far more variable process. Collectively, the findings discussed above offer several valuable lessons for networks o f nonprofit organizations seeking to employ ICTs to support their work. First, the fact that technology is not institutionalized consistently within the network should be acknowledged and embraced. Coordinating agencies would be wise to accept this reality and not seek to impose a uniform technological solution across the network. Instead, staff at these agencies should find ways to map technologies onto the pre-existing characteristics or structural elements o f the network, for example creating role-based or regionally-based technologies. Further, coordinating agencies should introduce technologies that are flexible enough to accommodate the varying conditions o f these groups. Rather than deploy rigid technologies that can be used only in a prescribed way, coordinating agencies should empower their network with technology that can be modified to suit the unique circumstances o f member organizations and member groups. The variable institutionalization o f technology is, o f course, a reflection o f the different operational contexts into which a given technology is deployed. This point must be emphasized. Technology appears much more likely to reflect and reinforce existing organizational characteristics than it is to radically change them. The Southwest and Northern

101

regions o f OAYEC had a strong pre-existing tradition of inter-agency communication and collaboration. The Human Resources network group of OACAS displayed similar characteristics. On the other hand, OAYEC's Central region and the OACAS Finances group lacked such camaraderie and both groups ignored technology that was meant to stimulate and support their communication. Thus, organizations seeking to deploy technology within a network structure must recognize the limitations of technology and find ways to use technology to augment existing characteristics; technologies w ill have the most success in situations where they are appropriately matched to the circumstances to which they are introduced. The notion that technology reflects institutional properties occurs not only at the micro level o f member organizations and their groupings, but also at the macro- or network-wide level. OACAS, the tightest network among the three cases, has had the greatest success in institutionalizing technology, most notably its website, within the network. OCASI, a far more diffuse network in which members report only moderate ties with the coordinating agency, has not been able to institutionalize its member's website or discussion boards. Coordinating organizations must therefore carefully consider the institutional properties of the network before deciding on their technology investment. Again, technology is unlikely to solve existing problems or radically alter existing conditions. Instead, a frank appraisal of institutional properties should inform expectations and identify areas in which technology can be of most assistance. Most particularly; What is the need for the technology and in what ways w ill it assist the network in general and member organizations in particular? The pre-eminent role of members must also be deeply considered by networks o f organizations seeking to implement ICTs. Not only do members operate in different contexts

102

than the coordinating agencies, but members themselves differ in their capacity, motivations and needs. It is o f critical importance that these considerations are addressed and that coordinating agencies work to include members in their technology strategy. This last point is most dramatically illustrated in the OACAS network, in which members were not apprised in advance o f the transition to technology and responded with a negativity that has taken several years to subside. Members should not only be informed in advance o f such plans but should be involved in their formulation. Through research that carefully assesses the needs and capacities o f member organizations, coordinating agencies can better ensure that their technology plans are well grounded in the network and w ill subsequently stand a greater chance o f success. Additionally, sufficient resources should be allocated to technology training and promotion. Building a technology platform does not necessitate its use and efforts must be made to assist the adoption o f technology among the network members. Involvement o f members is an ongoing and informative process, involving strategy development, design, testing, training, promotion, and subsequent modification. More generally, the experiences o f the three cases reflect existing literature on the deployment o f technology in network organizations and in the nonprofit sector. Leadership is critical to the successful institutionalization o f technology and buy-in from internal staff and member organizations are o f utmost importance. Resource and capacity limitations must be carefully considered, especially for a sector in which funding can be erratic and infrastructure under developed. This is particularly important when considering the sustainability o f a project, w hich must outlast its initial funding and exist to provide ongoing support to the network. Finally, networks o f nonprofit organizations would be wise to tread carefully, slowly

103

deploying and testing technology before making a costly investment that may drain valuable resources and ultimately prove a poor fit for the network.

104

Limitations of the Research
The investigator is obliged to identify a few o f the inherent limitations o f this research project. First and foremost is the investigator s inability to fully explore the experiences o f different network members and the different staff w ithin the member agencies. The researcher was unable to speak with all members o f a given network and it is therefore impossible to conclude with confidence that the research findings accurately assess the totality o f member experiences within the networks. Indeed, only a fraction o f the total number o f member agencies participated in the interviews: 10% o f OCASI members. 20% o f O AYEC members, and 27% o f OACAS members. It is possible that the experiences o f other members would be different and this presents a potential challenge to the validity o f the findings. Resource limitations also prevented a thorough exploration o f the different staff levels w ithin member agencies. It is quite apparent that technology is institutionalized differently among different staff at member agencies and that this is a critical intervening variable in an overall assessment o f the institutionalization o f technology within the network. This thesis relied in part on the Executive Directors to convey the experiences o f their staff, which implies a potential challenge to the accuracy o f those comments. Additionally, those staff members who did respond directly to the email surveys had opted-in to the research project and this bias may have influenced the results. It must be mentioned, however, that an increase o f scope o f this nature would necessitate alternate research methods as one would be challenged to assess the experiences o f over 7,500 staff, as is the case in the OACAS network. A second challenge to the research is the duration o f the study. This thesis provides only a snapshot o f the processes o f institutionalization o f technology, which had already begun before the investigator arrived and w ill no doubt continue long after he has departed. A

105

longer-term assessment o f the experiences of the network would certainly produce additional fruitful findings. The investigator has been forced to rely on document analysis and respondent accounts to get a sense of what the organizational environment was like before the introduction o f new technologies. This carries an inherent weakness and the investigation would have been better served by a diachronic analysis that directly considered changes over time. Finally, it is worth directly addressing the charge that the results of case study research are not generalizable to other cases. This thesis has examined three cases of networks of nonprofit organizations; the applicability of these findings to any other case cannot be ascertained. Case studies are frequently criticized for their focus on the specific situation and an inherent inability to apply the findings to other cases. However, it is unjust to apply measures o f quantitative research to a qualitative mode of inquiry that was never intended to achieve the same goals. As Merriam asserts, " rather than transplanting statistical, quantitative notions of general izability and thus finding qualitative research inadequate, it makes more sense to develop an understanding of generalization that is congiment with the basic characteristics o f qualitative inquiry" (Merriam 1985: 2012). Yin (1999) offers the basis for such an understanding by remarking that case studies " are generalizable to theoretical propositions and not to populations or universes" (pp. 31). So while these findings may not be generalizable to all networks of nonprofit organizations, they do produce inroads into theory that can be further refined through the investigation of other cases. Despite the limitations described above the investigator remains confident that the thesis has achieved its goals of description and exploration. The decision to sacrifice comprehensiveness o f a single case for a comparative approach of three cases remains a valuable one, as preliminary findings indicate that there are strong similarities among the

106

experiences of networks of nonprofit organizations. While it may be difficult to generalize beyond the cases at hand, this research has identified the initial threads of a theory of the institutionalization of technology in networks of nonprofit organizations and has helped define an agenda for further exploration.

107

Recommendations for Further Research
This section identifies three primary areas for future research. While there are numerous avenues of potential exploration, the investigator finds that the following three w ill be most fruitful in contributing to the body of knowledge on the institutionalism o f technology and to the practical application of those findings.

Increasing Comprehensiveness - Multiple Levels and Longitudinal Analysis
Flowing out of the limitations of this research there is clear benefit to additional and more comprehensive case studies on this topic. The more cases which are explored the better the opportunity to comprehend the institutionalization of technology in networks o f nonprofit organizations and to contribute to theories of institutionalism and to structurational models of technology. In particular, future researchers should bear two considerations in mind. First should be efforts to increase the comprehensiveness of the research by ascertaining the experiences of different types of members and of different staff within the member agencies. Within the networks described above it is clear that the institutionalization o f technology varies across these factors. Future research should endeavour to identify the different variables that influence the institutionalization of technology and assess the impact o f these characteristics on the institutionalization of technology. Second is the need for a diachronic perspective. Structurational theorists emphasize the need for such analysis, arguing that the structuration of technology is a process that occurs over time, most particularly with ICTs which are by nature modifiable throughout their existence. Fortunately the pace o f change in communication technology provides ample opportunity to study the introduction, adoption, and subsequent modifications of new technologies in a network setting. Researchers should be prepared to observe the processes of

108

institutionalization over time, paying particular attention to the recursive relationsihp between technology and the characteristics o f the network.

Different Network Configurations
This thesis explored a particular network type --a model in which network members were served by a central hub unit. However, networks are multifarious and one can presume that the processes o f institutionalization o f technology would differ among these configurations. What o f network models in which there is no centralized coordinating agency, or in which multiple agencies collectively assume a leadership role? What o f networks operating in a common geographic area instead o f a common sector'.^ Such radically different structures w ill have varied experiences o f technology implementation and use; scholars should use the theoretical tools o f institutionalism and structuration to explore the implications o f such differences. Additionally, the three cases that participated in this study were each formed prior to the advent o f the internet. They were subsequently forced to adapt to changes in technology and this has permitted an assessment o f the impact o f the internet on the operations o f the network. But networks o f nonprofit organizations are forming all the time and those created in the past ten years have used the internet as part o f their communicative resources since their inception. What is the experience o f networks that have relied on the internet as part, or central to, their operation? Potential differences in activities and structural arrangements merit additional attention and w ill increase our understanding o f the recursive relationship between organizational structure and technology. Further, distinctions between networks o f nonprofit organizations and networks o f forp ro fit organizations merit attention. The bulk o f existing research on institutionalism and on

109

structurational models o f technology concentrates on the for-profit sector. However, differences in network structure and purpose, and differences in the motivations and roles o f network actors, in for-profit and nonprofit organizational networks would likely have substantial impact on the institutionalization of technology. Comparative investigation of these differences would yield additional insight into the processes o f technology institutionalization.

Action Research
Finally, this topic is aptly suited for action research. The research process revealed several opportunities for improved implementation o f technology gleaned from critical observation of the case at hand and from the experiences of the other cases. Given the typically limited resources of nonprofit organizations and the good work they aspire to perform, outside analysis and support can be a great boon to the successful deployment and adoption of technology. Future researchers should explore this topic not only to contribute to our theoretical understanding o f technology and organizations, but with an eye toward making a contribution to the performance of the networks under review. The practical application of findings not only returns some benefit to the participating cases, but opens up additional avenues for research as the results of such efforts are evaluated for their practical and theoretical consequences.

110

Conclusion

?^

This thesis has applied concepts o f institutionalism and the structurational model o f technology to three networks o f nonprofit organizations. The aim o f the research has been to contribute to theory on technology and organizations and to contribute to the improved use o f technology w ithin networks ol organizations in the nonprofit sector. Clearly, the experiences

o f the three cases under rc\ leu lia\ c been illuminated by the theoretical lenses and have themselves contributed to ilu- inofaiiue on these theories. In particular, this thesis has extended the structuratioii.il m recursive relationship am"n;_ organizational network.^ I ,>t technology by demonstrating the complexity o f the iui 'i.igy, human action, and institutional properties within
i m T <g \

. it is discovered, has not found a uniform role within the

three networks but is in.->iead uiNiiuiiionalized differently in different parts o f the network - a reflection o f network stnieuiie m general and organizational characteristics in particular. W hile this finding makes a contrihiition to theories o f the interaction between technology and organizations, it is also o f practical benefit to the nonprofit sector. Nonprofit organizations can make more effective use o f ICTs by accepting and leveraging the variable roles o f technology w ithin their organizational networks. This is an area o f research that merits greater attention. Networks o f nonprofit organizations provide ideal ground for the confluence o f theoretical and practical study, and future researchers should continue to explore this unique organizational form with an aim o f contributing not only to the development o f theoretical constructs, but to improving the way in which these networks employ technology in pursuit o f their missions.

Ill

Appendix A - Data Source: Documents i nr D
OAYEC
2003 Annual Members Satisfaction and Research Siin-ey (2003). Toronto: Ontario
Association o f Youth Employment Centres

Annual Report 2003-4 (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres Annual Report 2002-3 (2003). Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres Annual Report 2001-2 (2002). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres Doing it on Purpose: Strategic Plan. 2004-8 (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth
Employment Centres Donaldson, Stephanie and Jesse Boyd (2005). Technology Review'. Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres Donaldson, Stephanie (2004). OAYEC 2004 Annual Member Siurey. Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres

e-Bulletin (May 2002) Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres e-Bulletin (.Tune 2002) Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres
McCool, Fiona (2004). E-Learning: Eour Case Studies with Youth. Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres

Network Members Profde (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment
Centres

Network Member Profile - Synthesis (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth
Employment Centres

OAYEC' s e-Strateg' Project Overview' (2002). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth
Employment Centres

Organizational Chart (2002). Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres Organizational Chart (2005). Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres Promotional Brochure (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres Quarterly Policy Update (2005). Toronto: Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres Quarterly Knowledge Transfer (2005). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth

112

Wood, M att (2005). Letter to Minister ofHRSDC regarding changes to the call fo r proposals process. Toronto; Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres

Volunteer @ction.Online Program Application (2001). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth
Employment Centres

Volunteer @ction.online Final Report (2002). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth
Employment Centres Wansborough, Paula (2004). E-Business Internet-based Tool Inventory. Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres Wansborough, Paula (2004). Environmental Scan o f Employment Sector e-Senices. Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres Wansborough, Paula (2004). Providing Effective e-Semnces fo r Job Connect Clients and their Potential Employers. Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres

Youth Website Proposal (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Youth Employment Centres

113

OCASI
Annual Report 2003-4 (2004). Toronto: Ontario Council o f Agencies Serving Immigrants Annual Report 2002-3 (2003). Toronto: Ontario Council o f Agencies Serving Immigrants Annual Report 2001-2 (2002). Toronto: Ontario Council o f Agencies Serving Immigrants Annual Report 2000-1 (2001). Toronto: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants Annual Report 1999-2000 Comments on the 2005
Immigrants
t

I oronto: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants :(Ki3 ). Toronto: Ontario Council o f Agencies Serving

Computer Training Opiimh

( onario '.v ISAP/HOST Program Funded Agencies (1998).

Toronto: Ontario ( oun.ii .> i \gencies Serving Immigrants

Computerization of ISA P A I h Management Tciim tO
Immigrants

I

Pnigram Funded Agencies in Ontario - Project |ooQ). Toronto: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving

ISAPProgram revie}v: l-iiiiil lù /mri tind recommendations (2003). Toronto: Real World
Systems Kerr, Gillian, Anne Simard and fo ri Powers (2002). Evaluation of the OASIS Computerization Project- Final Rqum. I oronto: Real World Systems

Managing in a Computerized Environment (MlCE-2) - Final Report (2002). Toronto: Ontario
Council of Agencies Ser\ ing Immigrants

Notes from Settlement.Org focus groups (July 2003). Toronto: Ontario Council o f Agencies
Serving Immigrants

Promotional Brochure (2004). Toronto: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants Proposal to Undertake a Computerization Needs Assessment and Feasibilit)! Study (1997).
Toronto: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants

Report on Activities Conducted April 20U1 -March 2002: Computerization o f ISAP & HOST Program Funded Agencies in Ontario (2002). Toronto: Ontario Council o f Agencies
Serving Immigrants on Compiffenzotmo Toronto: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants m Onrono ( 1998).

114

Settlement.Org Annual Report (2004). Toronto; Ontario Council of Agencies Serving
Immigrants Simeone, John B. and Michael MilofF (1998). Options fo r Providing ISAP Funded agencies with Internet Access. Toronto: Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants

115

OACAS
Achieving a Better Balance - Response from OACAS Member Agencies to Accountability Discussion Paper: Finding the Right Balance (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of
Children's A id Societies.

Adopting a Child (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Children's Aid Societies. Annual Report 2004-5 (2005). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies. Annual Report 2003-4 (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies. Annual Report 2002-3 (2003). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies. Annual Report 2001-2 (2002). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies. Becvming a Foster Family (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies. Board to Board Newsletter (November 2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children' s Aid
Societies.

Board to Board Newsletter (January 2005). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid
Societies.

Children's Aid Society Facts. April 2003 - September 2003 (2004). Toronto: Ontario
Association of Children's Aid Societies.

Communication/Information Senices: Audit Report (2005). Toronto: Ontario Association of
Children' s Aid Societies.

Conference Program (2004 ). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies. e-Biisiness Readiness Assessment (2005). Toronto: The Braegan Group I f your Child is in our Care (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies.
Kofoed, Kristine (2005). HR OnLine: OACAS HR Forum Development. Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies.

Minutes o f the meeting o f the Inter-Agency Human Resource Committee. (2005). Toronto:
Ontario Association of Children' s Aid Societies.

OACAS Factsheet (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association o f Children's Aid Societies. OACAS Journal (Spring 2004). Vol 48, No 1. Toronto: Ontario Association of Children' s Aid
Societies.

116

OACAS Journal (Spring 2004). Vol 48, No 2. Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid
Societies.

Sendee Plan 2004-5. Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies. Supporting Children and Families (2004). Toronto: Ontario Association of Children's Aid
Societies.

117

Appendix B - Data Source: Websites
OAYEC
OAYEC has one website (www.oayec.org), with password protected access to the OAYEC Workspaces (discussion boards). There are approximately seventeen Workspaces and the principal researcher was given access to eleven Workspaces. O f these, six had no postings, three had a few postings, one had twelve postings and the final Workspace (the Southwest Managers Workspace) had over one hundred postings. The postings were read for a sense of the frequency and type of communication, and to compare against the comments o f the interviewees. The researcher did not have access to the Northern Managers Workspace Website usage statistics for a random one week period (February 28 - March 6,2005) were also reviewed.

www.oayec.org - Site Map
Home Page OAYEC Members · · · Member Listing Become an OAYEC Member o Application Form Member Profiles

Professional Development · · OAYEC Annual Conference PD Opportunities and Resources

Research · · · Current Projects Just Released Complete Research Listing

Programs · Current Programs o EVIDENCE o OAYEC Website for Youth Past Programs

·

118

News · · · News OAYEC Bulletin - Knowledge Transfer and Policy Updates OAYEC e-Bulletin Archives

Events & Jobs · · Events Job Listings

Resource Library · · Resource Library Database H R Management Tool-kit

Youth Services Directory · · · · Central Region Eastern Region Northern Region South West Region

W o rk Space About O A Y E C · · · · Vision and Values Partnerships Board of Directors Reports

Contact Us Search Terms of Use W eb site Credits

119

OCASI
OCASI has three websites. The main OCASI website (www.ocasi.org) was thoroughly reviewed for content, structure and features. The Settlement.Org for Newcomers website (http://www.settlement.org/index.asp) was briefly reviewed for content and features, and the Settlement.Org at Work website (http://atwork.settlement.org/atwork/home.asp) was thoroughly reviewed for content, structure and features. There are a total of thirteen discussion forums containing 44 posts on the Settlement.Org at Work website. A ll o f the discussion boards on the Settlement.org at Work website are publicly accessible, and the contents therein were reviewed as part of the research.

www.ocasi.org - Site Map
Home Page About OCASI · · · A Message from the President and Executive Director Statement of Principles and Objectives Annual Report

Advocacy · · ·
·

Public Education Policy and Research Training and Professional Development
Technology

· ·

Media Room (Press Releases) o Press Release Archive Membership o OCASl's Members o Membership Benefits o How to Become an OCASI Member

OCASI Monthly Reports Publications · · Settlement Worker Training Guide Splash and Ripple: Outcome Measurement Manual

Staff Directory Board of Directors

120

Contact Us Privacy Statement Terms and Conditions

http://atwork.settlement.org/ - Site Map
Home Page Headlines Events Jobs News Research W eb Tools Assisting Clients · · · · · Access and Equity Community Development and Networking Counselling and Case Management Information and Referral Serving Specific Groups

Assisting Staff Administration Agency Management Funding and RFPs Professional Training and Development Program-Specific Information and Resources Sector Issues Self-care, Self-knowledge Settlement.Org for Newcomers Submit a Resource

121

Feedback About this Site Contact Us Search Discuss

122

OACAS
OACAS has two websites. The OACAS public website (http://www.oacas.org/) was reviewed for content and features. The OACAS password protected Member' s Website (http://www2.oacas.org/) was reviewed for content, features and structure. OACAS has three discussion forums for members, o f which only one (the HR Forum) is active. Access to this forum could not be granted sc'i an interview was conducted with one o f the Executives o f the HR Fom m to learn more about the experiences in using this feature (see below). OACAS Member' s Website statistie> t/>i the period January 1. 2005 - March 31, 2005 were also reviewed.

wn w.oacas.org - Site Map
O A CA S Home About OACAS Mission Board o f Directs a ^ OACAS Manage: > H istory o f O A ( ,\S Annual Report

Programs Accreditation Foster Care Information and Technology Looking A fter Children Project Looking A fter Children F.A.Q Ontario Child Protection Training Program Services en français Youth in Care Connections .Across Ontario C h ild W elfare Resources H istory o f Child Welfare in Ontario What is a CAS? H ow and when to report child abuse Risk Assessment Model for Child Protection in Ontario Ontario C hild Welfare E ligibility Spectrum CASs in Ontario C hild Welfare Links

123

· · · ·

Child Welfare Statistics OACAS Journal Online Positive Parenting Package Purple Ribbon Campaign

What's new? · · Child welfare issues in the news OACAS Announcements

Careers in Child Welfare Search Contact Us

http://www2.oacas.org/ - Site Map
Home Help Calendar Site Map Contact Us Training Announcements Trainer Application Package A ID Memos Attachments Course Descriptions Meeting Agendas & Minutes OCPTP Online Registration P.R.I.D.E. Training Schedule; New Worker Training Schedules: Authorized Worker & Manager/Supervisor Training Schedules: Train the Trainer Trainer's Forum Training Staff Resources · · · · Archived Announcements Awareness Resource Kit Calendar CAS Facts

124

Contact Lists Contracts Discussion & Policy Papers Forums Frontline Resources Inquest Updates Job Postings Journal Online Key Messages Links MPP Visit Kit OnLAC P.R.I.D.E. Section 43 Surveys Training Opportunities

Databases · · · · Annual Awards Contracts Inquest Recommendations Provincial Projects

Special Events Consultation Foster Family Week LD/DOS Conference Purple Ribbon Campaign

OACAS About OACAS Annual Report Board Members Our Members Our Managers Our Staff Contact Us Surveys

125

Appendix C - Data Source: Respondents
OAYEC
Interviews with representatives of the Coordinating Agencies Four 90-minute in-person interviews were held with OAYEC staff;
· M att Wood, Executive Director (M W )

· · ·

Stephanie Donaldson.

S e n io r

Research Analyst (SD)

Jesse Boyd, Technical Supp'Ui (.IB) Deanna Yerichuck. Ke\e.neli and Communications* (DY)

· Deanna had left her pnMii, m jr () IYEC in 2004 but agreed to an interxiew.

Interviews with Menihirs A total o f fourteen 30-minute telephone interviews were conducted with GAYEC' s principal contacts at their member ,ieeneie\ · · · · Central Region:
1

inter\ le u

Eastern Region: 4 inter\ lew s Northern Region: 4 inter\ iew s Southwest Region: 5 inter\ iews

Approximately 80% of O.AYEC members deliver JobConnect. Twelve of fourteen interviewees represented JobConnect deliverers and two did not.

OA YEC Member respondents are referred to in the report by their region and a randomly assigned number. For example. SlV-2. E-4. etc.

Ethnography/Focus group I observed a meeting of the Central region representatives. At the end, I conducted a brief thirty minute focus group with the six participants.

126

OCASI
Interviews with representatives of the Coordinating Agencies Five interviews were held with OCASI staff. The Executive Director was interviewed by telephone for 60 minutes and the remaining staff were interviewed in person, from 90 to 120 minutes. · · · · · Debbie Douglas, Executive Director (DD) Paulina Maciulis, Manager. Policy and Programs (PM) Martha Orellana, Membership Coordinator (MO) Marco Campana, Policy Analyst & Communications Coordinator (M C) Christopher W ulff, Information Technology Transition Coordinator (CW)

Interviews with Members A total o f sixteen telephone interviews were conducted with OCASl' s principal contacts at their member agencies; · · · · · · · Central East Region: 1 Central West Region: 2 Toronto Region: 5 North Region: 2 South Region: 2 East Region: 2 West Region: 2

Approxim ately 50% o f O C A Sl' s membership delivers the ISAP program. Nine o f the 16 interviewees represented agencies that deliver this program.

OCASI Member respondents are referred to in the report by their region, a randomly assigned number, and a letter for their ISAP designation. For example, E-2-1 represents eastern region agency number two, M 'hich is an ISAP deliverer. T-3-NI represents Toronto region ageticy number three, which is Not an ISAP deliverer.

127

OACAS
Interviews with representatives of the Coordinating Agencies

1'

Four 60- to 90-minute in-person interviews were conducted with staff of OACAS; · · · · Jeanette Lewis, Executive Director (JL) George Leek, Director, Information Services (GL) Gail Vandermeulen, Director, Communications and Quality Assurance (GV) Kristine Kofoed, Web Coordinator (KK)

Interviews with Members A total of fourteen 30-minute telephone interviews were held with the principals at OACAS member agencies: · · · · · · Central Zone: 2 Eastern Zone: 2 Northeast Zone: 1 Northern Zone: 3 Southwest Zone: 3 Grand River Zone: 3

Approximately 20% of OACAS agencies are multi-service agencies, providing services in addition to child welfare. Three of these multi-service agencies were interviewed.

OCASI Member respondents are referred to in the report by their region and a randomly assigned number. For example. SW-2, GR-1. etc. A second staff member participated on four o f the telephone interviews. In addition, four
managers of front-line workers responded to an email survey that had been forwarded by their Executive Director following the teleconference. One member respondent took it upon himself to email his staff with a mini survey about the use o f the Weekly Index. Nineteen responses were received and considered into the analysis. Finally, a separate telephone interview was conducted with the Director o f Human Resources at the Catholic Children s Aid Society in Toronto. This interview was conducted based on this individual s key role in the HR discussion forum, aiming to better understand that particular technology. This individual is refened to in the report as HR-1.

Participation in Meeting of HR Directors o f Service

128

The investigator also attended a meeting of the HR Directors of Service to observe their interaction and discussion and to ask a few questions of the group. There were approximately 25 attendees at this meeting.

129

Appendix D - Research Instrument: Interview Questions (Staff)
OAYEC
1. In your own words, please describe the purpose of OAYEC o Probe; Why does the sector need OAYEC? 2. Why do members join OAYEC? 3. How would you describe: o The Youth Employment subsector in Ontario (how is it distinct from other sectors)? o The culture of the association?  The relationship among OAYEC members?  The relationship between members and OAYEC? 4. How do you see communication technology fitting in the association - what is its role? 5. Can you describe how you see the website serving your members? o Probe: Why do they visit the website? o Probe: How have members and member's needs influenced the features or information offered in the network website? 6. How have you encouraged your members to make use of new technology? o Probe; Technical training & support o Probe: Eleven workshops o Probe: How have you encouraged member use of the website? 7. What is your vision for the website - what it could be? o Probe: What need/gap could the website intended fill? 8. I 'd like to discuss a little bit about how communication technology has affected what OAYEC does. What has been the most significant impact of the internet on OAYEC? o Probe specifically for the impact of the website on:  the roles of OAYEC within the network  decision-making processes, strategic or policy direction (do members have more input?)  information circulation  network culture / building a sense of community · relations with members · relations among members

Value: Active and influential membership Core fiinction: Public Policy Corefunction: Professional developtnent

130

Probe specifically for any perceived negative effects of the website, or constraints on pre-existing practices and processes. 9. Can you provide some examples o f what the internet has allowed you or your members to do that would have otherwise been impossible?
E
v o l u t io n o f

o

W

e b s it e

F

e a tu r e s

" I ' d like to speak a little bit more specifically about the implementation o f different website features." 10. How have decisions been made about the implementation and development o f the website? o Probe: Which staff have been primarily responsible for directing the development o f the website'? o Probe: What has been the role o f technology vendors? o Probe: Can you tell me a bit about the e-strateg}' advisory conwiittee'i What role has this committee played in the development of your internet strategy? 11. On the public side o f the website, you have an events calendar and job listings; o D id OAYEC offer these services before the Web? o W hy are these services offered? o Are they being used? o A ny changes to its use over time?  Probe for description o f changes and perceptions o f why these changes have occurred, and to what benefit. 12. On the member' s access site you have the OAYEC Workspace, which is comprised of various discussion boards. o How was the decision made to offer discussion boards? o What was the intended pui*pose behind offering the discussion boards? o Have the discussion boards been achieving their intended purpose? Why or why not? o In what ways has the use o f thediscussion boards changed over time?  Probe for descriptiono f changes andperceptions o f why these changes have occurred, and to what benefit. 13.1 notice that some o f the discussion boards seem heavily used, while others have no postings. How do you explain variation in discussion board activity? o //ovi' have you encouraged lueinher activity/use o f the discussion hoards! o What are some o f the reasons why members do not use the website, or do not use it more often? o Southwest managers 14. D id you ever try/have you considered any other features in the Workspace? o Probe; Listservs o Probe: Chatrooms?

131

Why not? Please describe the experience. Why are these no longer offered? 15. Can you tell me a little bit about the Shared Resource Library Pilot project? o What was this project intended to do? o In what ways has the Shared Resource Library Pilot project changed over time? o How successful has it been?  Probe for description of changes and perceptions of why these changes have occun ed. and to what benefit. 16. Can you tell me a little bit about the Contact management database? I get the sense this has evolved over time. What was the original intent and where does it stand now? Why has it changed? 17. Has your participation in the content sharing network affected your membership/ relationship with your membership? 18. What about other communication technologies, like teleconferences, videoconferences, webconferences or shared document editing? Have you ever considered these? Why or why not? 19. How have your perceptions of the Web as an instrument to serve your members changed over time? o Probe 20. What has frustrated/disappointed you about the deployment of technology in the network? 21. What has surprised you about the deployment of technology in the network? 22. What lessons have you learned about the implementation of information and communication technologies within your network? 23. What plans do you have for implementation of new features or for changes to the use o f the current website? Why? 24. Is there anything you would like to mention that we haven't had the opportunity to discuss? 25. The Volunteer @ction Online funding really allowed you to build your website. How critical was this funding to the development o f an internet platform with your members? Where would you be otherwise?

OCASI

132

1. In your own words, please describe the purpose of Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants. o Probe: W hy does the immigrant-serving sector need OCASI? 2. W hy do members jo in the network? What does OCASI offer its members? 3. H ow w ould you describe: o The culture o f the network?  The relationship among network members?  The relationship between members and the coordinating agency? 4. How do you see technology fitting in the association - what is its role? o What has tech allowed you to do for members that would have otherwise been impossible? 5. How have decisions been made about deploying technology at OCASI and w ith members? o Probe: Which staff have been primarily responsible for directing the development o f the website? o Probe: What is your role? 6. I ' d like to talk a little bit about the two websites - Settlement.org for newcomers and Settlement.org @ work. o Probe: Who are the audiences for the two sites? o Who is the audience o f @ work? Managers vs. front-line? 7. Focus on Settlement.org @ work. o How did it start? What was impetus behind? (OASIS computerization project) o H ow did OCASI get funding for settlement and extranet via OASIS - through RFP? o Who owns Settlement.Org - government or OCASI? Where was funding? (contracted by OASIS) o What is the role o f the Settlement.org steering committee? o H ow did they decide what content to offer? Design?  a) assisting clients; b) assisting staff o What do they do to modify content, design etc. what is this process like?  Do they solicit member feedback?

8. From Extranet to @ Work o W hy did this begin as an extranet? o W hy change?

133

o What did you want the settlement@Work site to do that the extranet didn't? o Did they engage members in the transition? 9. Discussion Boards o Why offer discussion boards? o What were discussions like on the extranet? o What have you done to stimulate?  Moderating? Does it work? o Why did they open the discussion up to the public? o Has anyone set up a private discussion forum on the new @ work site?  Why did they offer private and how promote? o Who' s using the Discussion Boards? o What are they using the discussion boards for? o Do you see fluctuating levels of activity? Why? 10. Can you describe how you see the website serving your members? o How do you envision the site fitting into the day to day activities of members? o Probe: Why do they visit the website? o Probe: Which features have been of most value to your members? Why? 11. Have you ever consulted members about the implementation and development o f the website? o Probe: How have members influenced the content of the website? o Who else influences the development o f the sites (what was role of OASIS report by Kerr)? 12. What has been member reaction, or " take-up," to the website? o Probe: Do different regions use tech differently? o Probe: Does OCASI facilitate regional use of technology? o Probe: Have they used tech for subsector issues - women' s, elderly, refugees 13. How have you promoted use of OCASl' s websites among members? o Probe: Have you done any training? o Probe: Whut has workecH 14. How have you introduced the website or new features to your members? 15. What is your own vision for the (a\ Work website? a. Probe: What need/gap was the website intended to fill? b. What barriers have prevented you from implementing your vision? 16.1 understand you have done a listserv for information alerts. How did that come about? o Probe: They have a listserv (info alters) -explore  Any other listservs? (probe experience) o Probe: Instant Messaging? o Chat?

134

17. Have you ever done any: o Videoconferencing? o Webcasting? o Teleconferences? o E-Training? 18. OCASI has a relationship with its members which predates the internet. I 'd like you think a little b it about the impact o f technology on the network. o What has been the most significant impact o f technology on OCASI? o How has technolog) clianged your relationship with members? o Probe specillealk lot tiie impact o f the website on: i. the role> ol ( )( \S1 within the network ii. deci>ioii-m.ikiiig processes, strategic or policy direction (do members have more input ' > iii. inform.Ill 'll ^iieulation iv. netwoik ^ iiliure building a sense o f community 1 tel.Ill 'It' with members 2 tei.Ill 'II'.im ong members o How has it >lt.iped V. Polie\ & Ke'e.iieh: vi. Publie I JiK.iiion. vii. Trainine aiiJ I'lol'essional development; viii. A d\ oeae\. o Probe specilicall\ tor any perceived negative effects o f the website, or constraints on pre-existing practices and processes. 19. Can you provide some examples o f what the internet has allowed you to do that would have otherwise been impossible? 20. How have your perceptions o f the Web as an instrument to serve your members changed over time? c. Probe 21. What has frustrated/disappointed you about the deployment o f technology in the network? 22. What has surprised you about the deployment o f technology in the network? 23. What lessons have you learned about the implementation o f information and communication technologies w ithin your network? 24. What plans do you have for implementation o f new features or for changes to the use of the current website? Why? 25. Is there anything you would like to mention that we haven't had the opportunity to discuss?

135

OACAS

^:

'

1. In your own words, please describe the purpose o f Ontario Association o f Children s A id Societies. 2. Why do members join the network? 3. How would you describe: o The culture of the network?  The relationship among network members?  The relationship between members and the coordinatingagency?
Q u e s tio n s A b o u t t h e D e p lo y m e n t o f IC T s

4. How do you see technology fitting in your relationship with members - what is its role? o What do you rely on the technology for? 5. Can you describe how you see the website serving your members? o Probe: Why do they visit the website? o Probe: Hom^did you envision the site fitting into the dayto day activities o f

members? o
Probe: Which features have been of most value to your members? Why?

6. What has member reaction or take-up of the website been like? o Probe: Do you ever wori-y about alienation some of your less technically savvy members? 7. I notice you have put ads out in the Journal and had a booth at your most recent conference promoting the member website. Are there any other ways you have tried to stimulate member use of the website'.^ 8. Wliat is your vision for the website? o Probe: What harriers are preventing you from achieving that vision? 9. How have decisions been made about the implementation and development o f the website? o Probe: Which staff have been primarily responsible for directing the development of the website? o Probe: What has been the role of technology vendors? o Probe: Rely on planning, strategic plans? 10. OACAS has a long-standing relationship with Children' s Aid Societies which predates the internet. I d like you think a little bit about the impact of website on the operations o f the network. What has been the most significant impact of the internet on OAYEC? o Probe specifically for the impact of the website on:

136

' , : y  PHtgtif'

 the roles ofOACAS within the network " decision-making processes, strategic or policy direction (do members have more input?)  information circulation  network culture / building a sense o f community · relations with members · relations among members

How has it changed how you perceive/interact/service your members? Intimacy with members? o Probe specifically for any perceived negative effects o f the website, or constraints
on pre-existing practices and processes.

11. Can you provide some examples ofM'hat the internet has allowed you to do for members that would have otherwise been impossible?
Q u e s t io n s A
bou

r

h ie

E v o l u t io n

of

W

e b s it e

F e a t u r I':s

12. I 'd like to talk a little bit about some o f the features on the member' s website. There is just a ton o f information on there. How did you decide what belonged on the member website? 13. Have you ever consulted members over what they would like to see on the website? 14. I 'd like to probe a bit around a few specific features to understand why they were offered, how they've been received, and how they've evolved overtime. · Job listings · Events calendar o Did you offer these services before? o What was the intended purpose behind offering X? Why did you think it would be a good fit for your members? o Has X been achieving its intended purpose? Why or why not? o In what ways has the use o f X changed over time? 15. Much o f content on the member' s site is driven by OACAS. Have you ever considered using more interactive features such as...

Probe with:
o o o Listservs? Chatrooms? Discussion Boards?

W hy not? o o What has prevented you from offering X? What is the intended purpose o f offering X? What do you think it will achieve?

16. How important is interactivity to the member's website?

137

17. The Braegan report made some mention of moving to portal technology... o Probe: Braegan indicated that OACAS wants to build a culture that encourages a dynamic collaborative environment - probe o Probe: What direction is OACAS going in the next couple of years with the member's site? 18.1 also notice that you use the member' s website for information collection and analysis (i.e., member surveys). Can you tell me a bit about why and how you use the web for this purpose? 19.1 notice you also do e-training. Can you tell me a little bit about that experience? 20.1 noticed a few reference^ tr >nmething called a " Common Information System" or a " Comprehensive Child Wel tare Information System." Are these the same - can you describe this initiative I'U me and explain its current status. o Probe
R e f l e c t io n s
on

mi i

m

<n l(

21. How have your pereepirai' .n the Web as an instrument to serve your members changed over time? o Probe 22. What plans do you ha\ e tot implementation of new features or for changes to the use o f the current website? W h y 23. What has frustrated disappointed you about the deployment of technology in the network? 24. What has suiprised you about the deployment o f technology in the network? 25. What lessons have you learned about the implementation o f information and communication technologies within your network? 26. Is there anything you would like to mention that we haven't had the opportunity to discuss?

138

Appendix E - Research Instrument: Survey Questions (Members)
OAYEC
1. How would you describe your relationship with OAYEC? 2. I d like you to late the importance o f membership in OAYEC to your organization, using a scale o f one to five, where one is "Not at all important" and five is " Extremely important." 3. W hy is your organization part o f OAYEC - What are the primary benefits your organization receives from its membership in OAYEC? 4. How would you describe your relationship with other members o f OAYEC? o When and why do you communicate with other members? o Probe for regional differences 5. I 'd like you to rate how important is it for your organization to be able to communicate and collaborate w ith other members o f OAYEC. using a scale o f one to five where one is "N ot at all important" and five is " Extremely important"? Website Use 6. I 'd like you to rate your comfort level navigating the internet (Web) on a scale o f one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five is perfectly comfortable? 7. On a scale o f one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five is perfectly comfortable, how would you rate your comfort level navigating the OAYEC website? 8. What is the purpose o f the OAYEC Website? o Probe: Who is the OAYEC website directed toward? 9. How frequently do you access the OAYEC website?

Daily

A couple o f times a week

Weekly A couple o f times per month

Once a month or less

10. For what reasons do you usually access the OAYEC website? o What is the main reason you access the OAYEC website.) o W hy don't you access the website more often? o Are there other websites you access to assist you with your work? 11. Who in your organization has access to the OAYEC website? 12. Who in your organization accesses the website? a. W hy do they use it?

139

b. Do you encourage use o f the website? o Do your front-line workers/ counselors access any other websites to assist them in their o work? Do you think a website could support your front-line workers?

Workspaces 13. Do you know about the OAYEC Workspaces? 14. What is the purpose o f the OAYEC Workspaces? 15. Do you ever access the Workspaces?

I f no:
16. Why not? 17. Which Workspaces? 18. Why do use the Workspaces? 19. On a scale of one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five is perfectly comfortable, how would you rate your comfort level using the OAYEC Workspace? Impact 20. What impact have the OAYEC website and Workspaces had on your organization?

Probe
a. Have they affected your organizations' ability to pursue its mission? b. Have they affected your access to information? 21. What impact have the OAYEC website and Workspaces had on your relationship with OAYEC?

Probe
a. Have they had any impact on your satisfaction with OAYEC? b. Have they increased the sense of participation or intimacy you have with OAYEC? 22. What impact have the OAYEC website and Workspaces had on your relationship with other OAYEC members?

Probe
a. Have they increased your ability to communicate and collaborate with other OAYEC members? 23. How has email impacted your... a. Relationship with OAYEC (probe e-bulletins and requests for feedback on policy statements) b. Relationship with other members? 24. Have there been any negative impacts, or constraints on previous ways of doing things, that have come out o f OAYEC's increasing reliance on communication technology?

140

25. W hat could O AYEC do to make the website and Workspaces better for you?

141

OCASI

1. How would you describe your relationship with OCASI? 2. Why is your organization part of OCASI - What are the primary benefits your organization receives from its membership in OCASI? 3. I 'd like you to rate the importance of membership in OCASI to your organization, using a scale of one to five, where one is '`Not at all important" and five is " Extremely important. 4. How would you describe your relationship with other members of OCASI? o When and why do you communicate with other members? o Probe for regional differences (do they speak with members from other regions?) 5. I'd like you to rate how important is it for your organization to be able to communicate and collaborate with other members of OCASI, using a scale of one to five where one is " Not at all important'' and five is " Extremely important" ? 6. ,\re you part of the OCASI Issues List? a. What is the purpose of the OCASI Issues List? b. Is the Issues List valuable? Why or why not? 7. Do you receive the OCASI Settlement(fr'W'ork email newsletter? c. WTiat is the purpose of the Settlement@Work email newsletter? d. Is the email newsletter valuable? Why or why not? 8. I'd like you to rate your comfort level using the internet to search for information and communicate with others on a scale of one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five is perfectly comfortable? 9. Do you know about the Settlement.Org website? 10. What is the purpose of the Settlement.Org website? 11. Have you ever been to the Settlement@Work website? 12. What is the purpose of the Settlement@Work website? o Who is the intended audience of @Work? 13. For what reasons do you access the Settlement(i'Work website? 14. How frequently do you access the Settlement@Work website?

142

Daily

A couple qf times a week

Weekly A couple o f times per month

Once a month or less

15. On a scale o f one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five is perfectly comfortable, how would you rate your comfort level navigating the Settlement@Work website? 16. .Axe there other websites you access to assist you with your work? Why do you visit them? 17. What are some o f the reasons you don't you access the website more often? 18. Who in your organization has access to the internet? e. Do you feel you have enough computers for your staff? 19. Does anyone in your organization access the Settlement.Org website? f. W hy do they use it? g. Do you encourage use o f the website? 20. Does anyone in your organization access the Settlement@Work website? h. W hy do they use it? i. Do you encourage use o f the website? Discussion Boards 21. Do you know about the Settlement@Work Discussion Boards? 22. What is the purpose o f the Settleraent@Work Discussion Boards? 23. Do you ever access the Settlement@Work Discussion Boards?

I f no:
24. 'Why not? W hy do use the Discussion Boards?

I f yes:
25.

26. On a scale o f one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five is perfectly comfortable, how would you rate your comfort level using the OCASI Workspace? 27. Do any o f your staff use the (g-Work discussion boards? 28. Do you use any other Discussion Boards? Why? Impact 29. What impact have the OCASI websites. Discussion Boards, SettlementiSjWork newsletter and Issues List had on: j. Your organization?

Prohe
o Have they affected your organizations' ability to pursue its mission?

143

o

Have they affected your access to information?

k. Your relationship with OCASI?

Prohe o Have they had any impact on your satisfaction with OCASI?
o 1 . o Have they increased the sense of participation or intimacy you have with OCASI? Your relationship with other OCASI members? Have they increased your ability to communicate and collaborate with other OCASI members?

Prohe

30. Have there been any negative impacts, or constraints on previous ways of doing things, that have come out of OCASFs increasing reliance on communication technology? Closing Question: 31. What could OCASI do to make the OCASI websites, Discussion Boards, Settlement@Work newsletter and Issues List a better resource or tool for you?

144

OACAS
1. How long have you been ED at CAS? m. In your CAS? 2. How many staff do you have at your organization? 3. H ow would you describe your relationship with OACAS? 4. W hy is your organization part o f OACAS - What are the primary benefits your organization receives from its membership in OACAS? 5. I ' d like you to rate the importance o f membership in OACAS to your organization, using a scale o f one to five, where one is "N ot at all important" and five is " Extremely important.'' 6. How would you describe your relationship with other members o f OACAS? o When and why do you communicate with other members? i. Probe Zone meetings o Probe for regional differences ( do you speak with members from other regions?) 7. I 'd like you to rate how important is it for your organization to be able to communicate and collaborate with other members o f OACAS. using a scale o f one to five where one is "Not at all important" and five is " Extremely important"? Technology Use 8. I 'd like you to rate your comfort level using the internet to search for information and communicate with others on a scale o f one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five i> perfectly comfortable? 9. Do you receive the " weekly index" from OACAS - the list o f articles that used to go out as Thursday mail? n. Is the weekly index valuable? Why or why not? 0 . What was the transition like from the paper mail to email'.' 10. Have you ever been to the Member's website'.' 11. What is the purpose o f the Member's website? 12. On a scale o f one to five, where one is not at all comfortable and five is perfectly comfortable, how would you rate your comfort level navigating the Member's website? 13. How frequently do you access the Member's website?

Daily

A couple o f times a week

Weekly A couple o f times per month

Once a month or less

145

14. For what reasons do you access the Member's website? 15. Are there other websites you access to assist you with your work? Why do you visit them? 16. What are some of the reasons you don't you access the website more often? 17. Do you ever access any o f the other OACAS websites? 18. Who in your organization has access to computers and to the internet? o Do you feel your agency has sufficient number of computers for our staff? 19. Does anyone in your organization access the Member's website? p. Why do they use it? q. Do you encourage use of the website? Discussion Forums 20. Do you know about the OACAS Executive Director Forum? 21. What is the purpose of the OACAS Executive Director Forum? 22. Do you ever access the OACAS Executive Director Forum?

I f no:
23. Why not?

I f yes:
24. Why do you access the OACAS Executive Director Forum? Impact OACAS has a long-standing relationship with its members that pre-dates the internet and in recent years OACAS has increasingly relied on electronic communication.

25. What impact has the increasing reliance on electronic communication had on your relationship
with 0AC.4S?

Prohe o WehsUe o Email o Has it had any impact on your satisfaction with OACAS?
o Has it increased the sense of participation or intimacy you have with OACAS?

26. What impact has the increasing reliance on electronic communication had on your relationship with other O.A.CAS members?

Prohe o Wehsite o Email

146

o

Has it increased your ability to communicate and collaborate with other OACAS members?

27. What impact has the increasing reliance on electronic communication had on your organization?

Probe o Website o Email o Has it affected your organizations' ability to pursue its mission?
o Has it they affected your access to information?

28. Have there been any negative impacts, or constraints on previous ways of doing things, that have come out of OACAS's increasing reliance on communication technology? 29. What could OACAS do to make the Member's website a better tool or resource for you?

147

Appendix F - Research Instrument: Email Surveys (Members)
OCASI

1. What is your title/role in the organization?

2. OCASI has two primary websites for staff at settlement agencies: " Settlement.Org' and " Settlement at Work." ( If your answer is "no", please go to question #3) a. Have you ever heard of the " Settlement at Work" website? b. What is the purpose of the " Settlement at Work" website? c. Have you ever been to the " Settlement at Work" website? d. Why do you go the " Settlement at Work" website? e. Has access to the " Settlement at Work" had any impact on your work? Please explain. f. Have you ever used the " Settlement at Work" Discussion Boards? i. Why do use the " Settlement at Work" Discussion Boards?

OR
ii. What are some of the reasons why you don't use the " Settlement at Work" Discussion Boards? 3. Do you think an electronic discussion board or message board that allowed you to share information and experiences with staff at other settlement agencies would be helpful to you and your work? Please explain.

148

OACAS

1. What is your title/role in the organization?

2. How frequently do you access the OACAS Member' s Website?

Daily

A couple o f times a week

Weekly A couple o f times per month

Once a month or less

3. What is the purpose o f the OACAS Member' s Website?

4. What are some o f the reasons that you access the OACAS Member' s Website?

The following questions speak specifically to use of the OACAS Member's Website among front-line staff at your agency. It would be greatly appreciated if you could solicit their input to provide answers to the following questions: 5. Do any o f your front-line staff access the OACAS Member' s Website? a. W hy do they access the website'? b. How helpful is the OACAS Member' s Website to their work? c. What are some o f the reasons why they are not using OACAS Member' s Website more frequently?

d. What could be done to rnake the OACAS Member' s Website abetter tool/resource for front-line workers?

pro perty of

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
149

Appendix G - Code Book
NC-CD Network Characteristics: CAS Description

TJiese segments are intended to provide the basic information about the CAS that will form the Case Description and Description o f the coordinating agency and offer insight into "organizational characteristics. " its actirities.
Network Characteristics: Member Description Description of the member agencies and their activities.

NC-MD

These segments are intended to provide the basic information about members that will form the Case Description and offer insight into "organizational characteristics. " These segments are intended to provide the basic information about the subsector that will form the Case Description and offer insight into "organizational characteristics. "

NC-S

Network Characteristics: Sector Description of the subsector and the general operating culture.

NC-ST

Network Characteristics: Sector Technology

Dtese segments are intended to provide the basic information about technology that will form the Case Description and Description of the subsector, as it relates to offer insight into "organizational technology capacity, take-up, etc. characteristics. " It does not attend specifically to technolog-' within the netsvork. but rather technolog' within the sector writ large.
Network Characteristics: Sector Government

NC-SG

These segments are intended to provide the basic information about the role of government and relation with Description of the government's role in the government that will form the Case subsector, govemment-network relations. Descrii.uion and off er insight into "organizaiionai characteristics. " These segments describe the technolog' that is in use within the network. It is intended to be exhaustive, dealing with the technologies and their functional^ rather than perceptions or use.

NC-T

Network Characteristics: Technology Description of the technologies that are deployed in the network.

150

N C -M C R

Network Characteristics: Member-CAS Relations Description o f the relationship between members and the coordinating agency.

These segmems are intended to provide basic information about the relationship bet^veen the CAS and members that will form the Case Description and offer insight into "organizational characteristics. " These segments are intended to provide basic information about the relationship among members, including regional differences, that will form the Case Description and offer insight into "organizational chaj'acteristics. " These segments specifically address the CAS' internal processes o f technology deployment.

N C -M M R

Network Characteristics: MemberMember Relations Description o f the relationship between members.

T D -C

Technology Deployment: CAS The processes o f deploying technology in the network - which staff are involved, how decisions are made, how consultants are involved, barriers, etc.

T In -C

Dying to capture agency plans and intentions...hopes in how technology The anticipated and intended benefits and will be used and .strategic reasons uses o f technology, from the perspective of behind its deployment.
Technology Intent: CAS the coordinating agency, including broad visions o f technology use and value.

T D -M

Technology Deployment: Members

These segments specifically address the ways in which members are involved in technology strateg' and deployment. It The ways in which members are involved in the deployment o f technology, including includes efforts on behalf o f the CAS to consulting over needs and testing, requests promote tcchnolog' use. hut does not address member reaction to technology. made by members, and any training or
promotion.

T D -E U

Technology Deployment: Effective Lse Strategies, ideas on how to better deploy and make better use o f technology.

A broad categoiy that captures lessons learned: successes, strategies and failures that provide insight fo r improved use and deployment o f techno log-. CAS .staffperspectives on the function that technolog setwes within the network.

T R -C

Technology Role: CAS The actual uses and value o f technology as it is being used, from the perspective o f the

coordinating agency. TR -M Technology Role: Members The actual uses and value of technology as it is being used, from the perspective o f the members. TU-C Technology Use: CAS The ways in which CAS staff are using technology, staff reaction to technologies, and factors that affect staff use of technology.

Member perspectives on the function that technology serves -within the network.

An attempt to understand the ways in which staff'at the CAS have responded to technolog}', hinting at possible elements of a structuration process.

TU-M

Technology Use: Members The ways in which members are using technology, member reaction to technologies, and factors that affect member use of technology.

An attempt to understand the ways in which members have responded to the implementation o f technology within the net^vork. hinting at possible elements of a structuration process.

TE

Technology Evolution Changes in technologies over time, or changes in technology use over time.

An attempt to understand the ways in which teclmolog}' use have change over time, hinting at possible elements o f a structuration process.

TC

Technology Challenges

Segments which address the challenges o f technology implementation. These Challenges to deploying and implementing segments speak primarily to technical technology as the coordinating agency and resource capacity, and not to would like. Problems encountered in member or staff reactions.
deploying technology, weaknesses in current arrangements (technical and resource capacity).

Tl-CA

Technology Impact: C.\S activities The impact of technology on the activities of the coordinating agencies.

Segments which ex'ince a change in CAS role and activities as a result o f use o f technology.

TI-IVLA

Technolog} Impact: Member .Activities The impact of technology on the activities o f the network members.

Segments which exnnce a change in member activities as a result o f use o f technology.

152

T I- IF

Technology Impact: Information Flows The impact o f technology on the flow of information, and communication exchange, within the network.

Segments which evince a change in the flow o f information with and among members as a result o f use o f technology. Will be some overlap with IT-CA. TI-MCR and TI-MMR Segments which e\ince a change in the relations between members and the CAS as a result o f use o f technology.

T I-M C R

Technology' Impact: Member-C,4S Relations The impact o f technology on the relationship between members and the coordinating agency.

T I- M M R

Technology Impact: Member-Mem ber Relations The impact o f technology on the relationship betw'een members.

Segments which evince a change in the relations among members as a result o f use o f technology.

T I-C

Technology Impact: Constraints Negative outcomes o f increasing reliance on/use o f communication technologies.

Segments that address negative outcomes or constraints imposed by the use o f technology.

153

Appendix H - Sample Letter to Network Members
Dear [member], I am writing to inform you of a research project in which [name of network] is participating. The study is being completed by Eli Mai insky. a graduate student at Ryerson University, and is being sponsored by Ryerson University's Centre for Voluntary Sector Studies. The purpose o f the study is to learn about how associations of nonprofit organizations in Ontario are using communication technologies such as the internet. As part of this research you may be contacted to participate in a telephone interview. The interview will take approximately 30 minutes to complete and is primarily intended to leam about your relationship with [name ofnework] and the value and impact of the [name o f network] websites. This study will be the first systematic investigation of how associations of nonprofit organizations in Ontario are using communication technologies and w ill compare [name o f netv^'ork] experience against that of two other associations. It is hoped that the findings of this research project w ill help [name ofnetv^'ork] and other associations of nonprofit organizations to use communication technologies more effectively. Participation in this study is entirely voluntary. Your choice of whether or not to participate w ill not influence your relations with [name ofnetw'ork] or with Ryerson University. Staff at [name oj network] w ill not be aware of who has participated and w ill not have the opportunity to review the results or comments of individual member interviews. More details about the interview and the research project w ill be provided when you are contacted by the investigator. I f you have any specific questions about the research study, please feel free to contact: Eli Malinsky, MA Candidate Ryerson University emalinsk@ryerson.ca We hope you w ill consider participating in this research project. Sincerely,

[Executive Director]

154

References
Anheier, Helmut and Nuno Themudo (2002). Organizational Forms o f Global C ivil Society: Implications o f Going Global. In Global Civil Socien- Yearbook 2002. London: The Centre for the Study o f Global Governance. Accessed July 18. 2004: http://www.lse.ac.uk'Depts global Yearbook outline2002.htm Anheier, Helmut. Marlies Lasius and Mary Kaldor (2001). Introducing Global C ivil Society. In .Anheier et al (eds.) Global Civil Society 2001. London; London School o f Economics. Accessed July 18. 2004: http://www.lse.ac.uk'Depts,global Yearbook/GCS2001.htm Bach, Jonathan and David Stark (2004). Link. Search. Interact: The Co-evolution o f NGOs and Interactive Technology. Theoiy. Culture & Society. Vol. 21(3): 101-117. Barley, S.R. and P.S. Tolbert ( 1997). Institutionalization and structuration: Studying the Links between action and structure. Organization Studies. 18( 10), 93-117. Barley, S. (1986). Technology as an occasion for structuring: Evidence from observations o f CT scanners and the social order o f radiology departments. Administrative Science Quarterly. 31: 78-108. Barr and Stowe (2005). The Rural charitable Sector Initiative Pha.se Two: The

Capacity: Challenges o f Rural and Nonprofit Organizations in Rural Ontario.
Toronto: Imagine Canada. Battling, Charles E. ( 1998). Strategic .Alliances fo r Nonprofit Organizations. Washington: .American Society o f Association Executives. Bradner. Erin and Gloria Mark (2002). Why distance matters: effects on cooperation, persuasion and deception. Proceedings o f the 2002 .ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work. pp. 226 - 235. Brooks, Laurence (1997). Structuration theory and new technology: Analysing organizationally situated computer-aided design. Information .Sy.stems Journal. Volume 7,Issue 2. 133-151. Burt, Eleanor and John A. Taylor (2000). Information and Communication Technologies: Reshaping Voluntary Organizations'.' Nonprofit Management and Leadership. Vol. 11, No. 2 p p .l3 1 -1 4 . Burt. Eleanor and John Taylor (2003). New Technologies. Embedded Values, and Strategic Change: Evidence from the U.K. Voluntary Sector. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Ouarterlv. Vol. 32. no. 1.

155

Canadian Federation o f Voluntary Sector Networks Website (2005). Centre for Voluntary Sector Research and Development. Accessed March 14,2005: http://www.cvsrd.org/eng/federation/ Castells, Manuel (2004) The Power o f IdentiryK 2""' Edition. Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing. Castells, Manuel (2001). The Rise o f the Network Society. 2nd Edition. Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing. Ching, Chee. Clyde W. Holsapple and .Andrew B. Whinston (1996). Toward IT support for coordination in network organizations. Information and Management. Vol. 30 No. 4 (July): 179-199. Clarke, Tony and Sarah Dopp (2001) Challenging McWorld. Ottawa: Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives. Connecting Canadians Website (2004). Industry'Canada. Accessed February 15,2005: http:, /WWW.connect.gc.caindex.htm DeSanctis, G. & Fulk, J. (1999). Shaping organizational form: communication, connection, and community. Newbury Park, CA: Sage DeSanctis, Gerardine and M.S. Poole (1994). Capturing the Complexity in Advanced Technology Use: .Adaptive Structuration Theory. Organization Science, Vol. 5, No. 2,121-147. Diani, Mario (2000). Social Movement Networks Virtual and Real. Information. Communication and Society. Vol.3 Iss. ? 386-401. DiMaggio, Paul J. and W.W. Powell (1991). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality. In W.W. Powell and P. J. DiMaggio (Eds.) The New Institutionalism in Organizational .Analysis. (pp. 63-82). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Evans, B. Mitchell and John Shields (1908). 'Reinventing' the Third Sector: .Alternative Service Deliver): Partnerships and the New Public Administration of the Canadian Post-Welfare State. CK515 Working Paper Series, Number 9. Frank, Kenneth A., Yong Zhao and Kathiyn Borman (2004). Social Capital and the Diffusion of Innovations Within Organizations: The Case of Computer Technology in Schools. Sociology^ o f Education, Vol. 77 (.April): 148-171.

156

Frederick. Howard H. (1992). Computer communications in cross-border coalition-building North American NGO networking against N.AFTA. Gazerte: The InternaTional Journal for Mass Communication Studies. Vol. 50. No. 2-3. 217-241. Garrido. Maria and Alexander Halavais (2003). Mapping Networks o f Support for the Zapatista Movement; Applying Social-Network .Analysis to Study Contemporary Social movements. In M. McCaughey and M. D. Ayers. (Eds). CyberActivism : Online Activism in Theoiy and Practice, (pp. 165-184) New York: Routledge. Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution o f society': Outline o f a th eon' of structuration. Berkeley: University o f California Press. Giddens, A. (1979). Central problems in social theoiy: action, stnicture and contradiction in social analysis. London: Macmillan press Hajnal, Peter (2002), Introduction: Definitions and Background. In P. Hajnal (Ed.), Civil Society in the Information Age. (pp. 1-15). Vermont: .Ashgate. Hall, M .H . and P.B. Reed (1998). Shifting the burden: How much can government download to the nonprofit pector. Canadian Public Administration. Vol. 4. No. I, pp. 1-20. H all, Michael et al. (2003). The Capacity to Serve: .V Qualitative Study o f the Challenges facing Canada's Nonprofit and Voluntary Organizations. Ottawa: Statistics Canada. Hannan, M.T. and J.H Freeman (1977). The population ecology o f organizations. The .American Journal o f Sociology'. Vol. 82, 929-964. Hatton, A1 (2002). The importance o f building civil society. In K..L, Brock (Ed.) Improving

Connections beVA'een governments and nonprofit and voluntaiy organizations: Public Policy and the Third Sector, (pp. 39-44). Kingston; Queen's University.
Holland, C. P.. and A. G. Lockett. 1997. Mixed Mode Network Structures: The Strategic Use o f Electionic Communication by Organizations. Organization Science. Vol. 8 No. 5 (September-October): 475-488. Jepperson. Ronald L. (1991). Institutions, institutional effects, and institutionalism. In W.W. Powell and P. .1 . DiMaggio (Eds.) The Sew In.stiturinnali.an in Organizational Analysis. (pp. 143-163). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. .losefsson, U. & Nilsson. A. (1999) The Progress o f Groupware Use in Local Government. In Proceeding o f 6"' European Conference o f Information Technology Evaluation, (pp 159-166). M C IL: London. Keck. Margaret E. and Kathryn Sikkink ( 1998). .Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in International Politics. London: Cornell University Press.

157

Knoke, David (2001). Networks and Organizations. In Judith R. Blau (ed.). The Blackwell Companion to Sociology, (pp. 327-341). Malden, Mass.; Blackwell. Lebert (2003). Information and Communication Technologies and Human Rights Advocacy: The Case of .Mnnesty International. In P. Hajnal (Ed.). Civil Society in the Information Age. (pp. 19-36). Vermont: Ashgate. Lebert, Joanne (2002). Information and Communication Technologies and Human Rights Advocacy: The Case of .Amnesty International. In P. Hajnal (Ed.), Civil Society in the Information Age. (pp. 19-36). Vermont: Ashgate. Leverus Annual Internet Survey for Associations and Not-for-profit Organizations: 2002 (2003). Toronto: Leverus. Lipnack, Jessica and J. Stamps (1994). The Age o f the Network: Organizing Principles for the 2P' Century. Toronto: John Wiley & Sons. Ludgate, Catherine and M. Surman (2004). Beyond the Box - Thinking strategically about technology grant-making in Canada' s voluntaiy sector. A background paper for the Voluntary Sector Initiative Changing Technology Funding Practices project. Accessed October 2004: http://www.vsi-isbc.ca/eng,dmit/pdf/beyond_the_box.pdf Malinsky, Eli (2004). Connecting for a Cause: Civil Society Networks and Information & Communication Technologies. Unpublished Paper: Ryerson University, Toronto Meinhard, Agnes G. and Mary K. Foster (2003). Differences in the Response o f Women's Voluntary Organizations to Shifts in Canadian Public Policy. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, Vol. 32: 366-396. Merriam, S. B. (1985). The Case Study in Educational Research: Literature. Tourna/ o f Educational Thought. 19.3. 204-17. Review of Selected

Meyer, John W. and B. Rowan (1977). Institutional organizations: Formal structure as myth and ceremony The American Journal o f Sociology), Vol. 83, 340-363. Munkvold, B. E. (1999). Challenges of IT implementation for supporting collaboration in distributed organizations. European Journal of Information Svstems, v.8 n.4, pp 260272. Naughton, John (2001). Contested Space: The Internet and Global Civil Society. In Global Civil Society' Yearbook 2001. London: The Centre for the Study of Global Governance. Accessed July 22. 2004: http:.7www.lse.ac.uk/Depts/global/Yearbook/outline.htm

158

Nohria. N i tin. (1992). Is a network perspective a useful way o f studying organizations? In N. Nohria and R.G. Eccles. (eds.) Nerworks and Organizations: Stnicture. form and action, (pp. 4-16) Boston; Harv ard University' Press. O B rien, R. (2002). Global C ivil Society Networks Online: Zapatistas, the M A I, and Landmines. In Lauren Langman (Chair ). Internet Research 2.0:

INTERconnections the Second Internationa! Conference oj the Association o f Internet Researchers. University' o f Minnesota. Minneapolis-St. Paul:
Association o f Internet Researchers. .Accessed June 4. 2004: http://www.web.net/~robrien/papers.civsocnets.html O ' Connell, Kevin (2005). Association Technology- Swx'ey. Unpublished Paper: British Columbia Institute o f Technology, O ffice o f Learning Technologies Website (2005). Human Resources and Skills Development Canada. Accessed March 14.2005: http ://wvvw .hrsdc .gc.ca/ en/ gateway s/nav/top_nav.'program/'o It. shtml O rlikow ski, Wanda J. (1992a). The duality o f technology: Rethinking the concept o f technology in organizations. Organization Science. Vol. 3. No. 3, 398-427. O rlikow ski, Wanda J. (1992b). Learning from Notes: organizational issues in groupware implementation. CSCW: Proceedings o f the 1992 ACM conference on Computersupported cooperative work. Toronto. Canada: 362 - 369 O rlikow ski, Wanda J.. & Barley. S. R. (2001). Technology and Institutions: What Can Research on Information Technology and Research on Organizations Leam from Each Other? Management Information Systems Quarterly. 25(2). 145-165. O rlikow ski, Wanda J. and D. Robey (1991). Information technology and the structuring o f organizations. Information Systems Research. Vol. 2. No. 2. 143-166. Pace, W illia m R. and R ik Panganiban (2002). The Power o f Global .Activist Networks: The Campaign for an International Criminal Court. In P. Hajnal (Ed.), Civil Society in the In fo rm a tio n Age. (pp. 109-125). Vermont: .Ashgate. Pendergast. Mark and Stephen Hayne (1999. .April 25). Groupware and social networks: W ill life ever be the same again? Information and Software Technology (Amsterdam) Vol.41, Iss. 6, pp. 311-319. Podolny, Joel M. and Karen L. Page (1998). Network forms o f organization. Annual Review o f Sociolog)'. Vol. 24. pp. 57-76. Powell. Walter W. (1990). Neither market nor hierarchy: Network forms o f organization. Research in organizational Behavior. Vol. 12, pp 295-336,

159

Roberts, Karlene H. and M. Grabowski (1996). Organizations, technology and structuring. In S. Clegg.. C. Hardy. And W.R. Nord, (Eds). Handbook o f organization studies. (409423) London and Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. Scott. Katherine (2003). Funding Matters: The Impact of Canada's New Funding Regime on Nonprofit and Voluntary Organizations. Ottawa: Canadian Council for Social Development. Stake. Robert (1994). Case Studies. In Norma Denzin and Yvonna Lincoln (eds.) Handbook o f Qualitative Research. (236-247). California: Thousand Oaks, Sage Publications. Stinchcombe, .A ,. (1965). Social Strucmre and Organizations. In J. March (Ed.), Handbook o f Organizations, (pp. 153-193). Chicago: Rand McNally Surman, Mark and Katherine Reilly (2003). Appropriating the Internet for Social Change:

Towards the strategic use of netw'orked technologies by transnational civil society organizations. New York: Social Sciences Research Council.
Surman, Mark (2001). From Access to Applications: How Ontario Non-Profits Are Using the Internet. Toronto: The Commons Group. Accessed August 2004: http://commonsgroup.com/docs/accesstoapps.pdf Symon, Gillian (2000). Information and communication technologies and network organization: A critical analysis. Journal o f Occupational and Organizational Psycholog\\ Vol.73, Part 4. pp. 389-415. Tarrow, Sidney (1998) Power in Movement: Social Movements and Contentious Politics, 2 ^ ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Thompson, Grahame F. (2003). Betv^een Hierarchies and Markets: The Logic and limits o f networkforms of organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Tolbert. Pamela S. and L.G. Zucker (1996). The institutionalization of institutional theory. In S. Clegg,. C. Hardy. And W.R. Nord. (Eds). Handbook o f organization studies. (175190) London and Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. Van den Bulck. Hilde (2002). Tools for Studying the Media. In Chris Newbold, Oliver BoydBarrett and Hilde Van den Bulck (eds.) The Media Book. Oxford University Press Inc. New York. NY. Volkoff, 0. (1999). Using the Structurational Model of Technology to Analyze an ERP Implementation. Conference paper delivered s l X.4mericas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS). Milwaukee. WI. Voluntary Sector Initiative Website (2004). Government of Canada. Accessed October 25, 2004: http://www.vsi-isbc.ca/ene/index.cfna

160

Volunteer (ai.ction Online Website (2005). Ontario M inistry o f Immigration and Citizenship. Accessed February 16. 2005: http:/Vwwu'.gov.on.ca/MCZCRyenglish/citdiv/voluntar/vao-brochure.htm W arkentin. Craig (2001). Reshaping World Politics: NGOs. the Internet, and Global Civil Society. Oxford: Rowan & Littlefield. W eick, K.E. (1990). Technology as equivoque: Sense-making in new technologies. In P.S. Goodman and L. Sproull (eds) Technology and Organizations (pp. 1-44). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. W illiam son, O.E. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and anti-trust implications. New York: Free Press. Y in , Robert K . (2003). Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Research Methods Series. Sage Publications: Newbury Park.

edition. Applied Social

Zucker , Lynne G. (1987). Institutional Theories o f Organization. Annual Review o f Sociologv Vol. 13, 443-464.

161

List of Abbreviations
CAS CIC HRSDC
ICT Children' s Aid Society Citizenship and Immigration Canada Human Resources Skills Development Canada Information and Communication Technology Immigrant Settlement and Adaptation Program Language Instruction for Newcomers Ministry of Children and Youth Services Ministry of Training Colleges and Universities Non-Govemmental Organization Ontario Association of Children's Aid Societies Ontario Administration of Settlement and Integration Services Ontario Association of Youth Employment Centres Ontario Council of Agencies Serving Immigrants Ontario's Looking After Children program Volunteer @ction.Online program

ISAP
LING MCYS MTCU NGO OACAS OASIS OAYEC OCASI OnLAC

v@ o

7

1'

4 .

1 dK

162

