CONVECTION IN SUPERPOSED LIQUID AND POROUS LAYERS WITH HEAT AND MASS TRANSFER AT THE FREE SURFACE

by

Rita Kozak, B.Eng. Ryerson University, Toronto, 2003

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment o f the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the program o f Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada e Rita Kozak 2005 PROPERTYOF RYERSONUMtV&SlTY LIBRARY

U M I Number; E C 5 3 0 3 6

All rights reserved

INFORMATION TO USERS The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, th e se will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC53036 Copyright 2008 by ProQ uest LLC All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United S tates Code. ProQ uest LLC 789 E ast Eisenhower Parkway P.O. Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I herby declare that I am the sole author o f this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

1 further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request o f other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

ABSTRACT

CONVECTION IN SUPERPOSED LIQUID AND POROUS LAYERS WITH HEAT AND MASS TRANSFER AT THE FREE SURFACE

Rita Kozak

Master o f Applied Science in the program o f Mechanical Engineering, 2005 School o f Graduate Studies, Ryerson University, Toronto

In the present study, the onset of thermal convection in a liquid layer overlying a porous layer in the presence o f a free surface with evaporation is investigated. The Navier-

Stokes equations are solved for the liquid layer, while the Brinkman model describes the porous layer. Two and three-dimensional geometrical models are considered, with

bottom heating and lateral heating. Buoyancy convection, thermocapillary convection and combined convection are studied in detail for different aspect ratios. For the

evaporation analysis, two conditions are treated simultaneously at the free surface. In the first, surface tension is assumed to vary linearly with temperature. In the second, a linear saturation temperature is imposed at the free surface to allow evaporation. Different

aspect ratios, thickness ratios as well as Marangoni numbers are studied in detail. Results reveal the significant effect evaporation in the liquid layer has on convective flow patterns.

Ill

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to sincerely thank Dr. Ziad Saghir o f Ryerson University for his helpful assistance, guidance and encouragement throughout the completion o f this thesis. The author would also like to express her appreciation to Artur Chaber and both her parents Bozena Spencer and Adam Kozak for their support. The author also

acknowledges the support and useful suggestions o f her colleagues Omar Gaber, Leily Abidi and Theo Makriyannis.

IV

TABLE OF CONTENTS
A uthor's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table o f Contents List o f Tables List o f Figures Nomenclature

ii iii iv
V

viii ix xii

CHAPTER 1 --Introduction and Literature Review

1

1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4

Introduction Onset o f Convection in Liquid and Porous Cavity Evaporation in Liquid Research Objectives

1 2 8 10

CHAPTER 2 - Governing Equations and Numerical Solution

13

2.1 Model Description 2.2 Liquid Layer Governing Equations 2.2.1 Continuity Equation

13 15 15 15 16 16 17 17 18 19 19

2.2.2 Momentum Balance Equation 2.2.3 Energy Balance Equation

2.3 Porous Layer Governing Equations 2.3.1 2.3.2 2.3.3 Continuity Equation Momentum Balance Equation Energy Balance Equation

2.4 Non-Dimensional Analysis 2.5 Non-Dimensional Liquid Layer Governing Equations

2.5.1 2.5.2 2.5.3

Continuity Equation Momentum Balance Equation Energy Balance Equation 19 20 20 20 20 21 23 23 24 25 27 28 29

2.6 Non-Dimensional Porous Layer Governing Equations 2.6.1 2.6.2 2.6.3 Continuity Equation Momentum Balance Equation Energy Balance Equation

2.7 Model Boundary Conditions 2.7.1 2.7.2 2.7.3 Bottom Heating Boundary Condition Lateral Heating Boundary Condition Evaporation Boundary Condition

2.8 Numerical Solution Technique 2.8.1 2.8.2 Finite Element Analysis Mesh Sensitivity Analysis

CHAPTER 3 - Superposed Liquid and Porous Layer with Adiabatic Free Surface

33

3.1 Two-Dimensional Modeling 3.1.1 3.1.2 3.1.3 3.1.4 3.1.5 Bottom Heating Buoyancy Convection Bottom Heating Marangoni Convection Lateral Heating Buoyancy Convection Lateral Heating Marangoni Convection Lateral Heating Combined Buoyancy and Marangoni Convection 3.2 Three-Dimensional Modeling 3.2.1 3.2.2 Lateral Heating Bottom Heating

33 33 37 40 42 47

49 49 57

CHAPTER 4 - Superposed Liquid and Porous Layer with Evaporation at Free Surface

61

VI

4.1 Introduction 4.2 Lateral Heating

61 61

CHAPTER 5 - Conclusion

69

APPENDIX A --Non-Dimensional Analysis of Governing Equations

71

B .l B.2

Bottom Heating Lateral Heating

71 79

APPENDIX B - Input Files

83

C.l C.2

Marangoni Convection Lateral Heating Evaporation Lateral Heating

83 85

REFERENCES

89

VH

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 Calculated Nusselt numbers for mesh sensitivity 31

Vlll

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Figure 5 Figure 6 Geometrical model o f cavity Bottom heating boundary condition Lateral heating boundary condition Evaporation boundary condition Node numbers for key-points Finite element mesh for model defined as X-axis by Y-axis elements Figure 7 Buoyancy convection in the cavity for different Biot numbers (A R = l,P r= 7) Figure 8 Streamlines and temperature variation in the cavity for different aspect ratios (Rat^lOO, Rap=75, di=0.03, d2=0.97, B i-1, Pr=7) Figure 9 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios and Biot numbers (Ma=60000, Rat^O.l, Rap=0.075, d]-0.03, d2=0.97, Pr=7) Figure 10 Streamlines and temperature variation in the cavity for different aspect ratios (Ma=60000, RaL=0.1, Rap-0.0055, di=d2=0.5, B i=l, Pr=7) Figure 11 Buoyancy convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios (RaL^lOOO, M a=l, B i=l, Pr=7) Figure 12 Figure 13 Buoyancy convection in the cavity (M a ^ l, AR=2, B i= l, Pr=7) Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios (Ma=60000, RaL=l, B i=l, Pr=7) Figure 14 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different Marangoni numbers (RaL=l, d,=d2-0.5, AR=2, B i=l, Pr=7) Figure 15 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios (RaL=l, di=d2=0.5, B i=l, Pr=7) Figure 16 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different thickness d, and dz (Rat= 1, AR=4, Bi= 1, Pr=7) 46 46 45 41 43 39 39 38 36 35 14 24 25 27 29 31

IX

Figure 17

Combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection in the cavity (Ma=60000,
R 3 l= 1 0 0 0 ,

47

B i=l, Pr=7) 48

Figure 18

Combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection in the cavity (RaL=1000, AR=2, B i= l, Pr=7)

Figure 19

Buoyancy convection velocity plot with a cut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (Rat=1000, M a=l, di=d2=0.5, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7)

50

Figure 20

Comparison o f two and three-dimensional buoyancy convection (RaL=1000, M a=l, AR=4, B i= l, Pr=7)

51

Figure 21

Thermocapillary convection velocity plot with a cut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (Ma=60000, RaL=l, di-d2=0.5, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7)

52

Figure 22

Comparison

o f two

and

three-dimensional

thermo capillary

54

convection (Ma=60000, di-dz-0.5, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7) Figure 23 Combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection velocity plot with a cut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (Ma=60000, RaL=1000, di=di=0.5, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7) Figure 24 Comparison o f two and three-dimensional combined buoyancy and thermocapillary convection (Ma=60000, RaL=1000, 56 55

di=d2=0.5, AR=4, B i= l, Pr=7) Figure 25 Thermocapillary convection velocity plot with a cut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (Ma=60000, Rat^O .l, Rap=0.0055, d,=d2=0.5, AR=2, B i=l, P r-7) Figure 26 Comparison o f two and three-dimensional thermocapillary 59 58

convection (Ma=60000, Rat=0.1, Rap=0.0055, di=d2=0.5, AR=2, B i= l,P r= 7) Figure 27 Thermocapillary convection with evaporation in the liquid layer (Ma=60000, RaL=l, Pr=7) Figure 28 Comparison o f thermocapillary convection with and without evaporation in the liquid layer (Ma=60000, RaL=l, di=d2=0.5, Pi=7) 64 62

Figure 29

Comparison o f U component o f velocity on vertical median o f cavity for thermocapillary convection with and without

65

evaporation (Ma=60000, R at= l, di=d2=0.5, Pr=7) Figure 30 Thermocapillary convection with evaporation in the liquid layer for different Marangoni numbers (RaL=l, d|=d2-0.5, AR=2, Pr=7) Figure 31 Thermoeapillary convection with evaporation in the liquid layer for different Marangoni numbers (RapO, di=d2=0.5, AR=2, Pr=7) Figure 32 Comparison o f U component of velocity on vertical median o f cavity for thermoeapillary convection with evaporation (RaL=l, di=d2=0.5, AR=2, Pr=7) 68 67 66

XI

NOMENCLATURE
AR Bi Ca Cp di d2 Da g G H hiv i kf ks L Ma Aspect ratio = ^ Biot number Capillary number Specific heat at constant pressure Liquid layer thickness Porous layer thickness Darcy number Gravitational acceleration Non-dimensional overall thermal conductivity Length o f cavity in horizontal X-direction Latent heat o f vapourization Liquid-vapour interface surface Conductivity o f the fluid Conductivity o f the solid glass beads Characteristic length o f cavity in Y-direction = di + d2 Marangoni number _ \ y \ - { T « - Tc ) - L a-jLL h -L K

Nu p P

Average Nusselt number Pressure

Non-dimensional pressure = ^ ^ y Prandtl number = -- a Heat flux Liquid layer Rayleigh number Porous layer Rayleigh number

Pr q Rau Rap

XU

Re T AT u U U o V V V w W

Reynolds number = P Temperature

^

Temperature difference between lateralwalls equal to unity = T,, Velocity component in the x direction Non-dimensional velocity component in the X direction = -- u,, Reference velocity =  p j - AT ·L

Velocity component in the y direction Non-dimensional velocity component in the Y direction = -- Volume Velocity component in the z direction w Non-dimensional velocity component in the Z direction = --
V

G reek symbols

a Pt y 0 A0 K p. V p C T

kf Thermal diffusivity = -- , \ P \ ^p}f Thermal volume expansion Surface tension gradient T -T c Non-dimensional temperature = -- ------- Temperature difference between two plot contours Permeability Dynamic viscosity Kinematic viscosity Density Stress

X lll

Gm (j) A'P

Non-dimensional surface tension Porosity Streamline difference between two plot contours

Subscripts

s C e / H I I n o t V

Solid glass beads Cold effective Fluid Hot Liquid-porous interface Liquid phase Normal direction to liquid-vapour interface Reference Tangential direction to the liquid-vapour interface Vapour phase

XIV

I

CHAPTER 1 Introduction and Literature Review
1.1 Introduction

The study o f thermal convection of fluids in porous media is important and has many applications. Many processes in nature involve transport in porous media. An important example is the world's supply of oil, which formed and is stored in porous rock formations. The movement o f fluids through porous media is also common in many

industrial processes. As an example, distillation and absorption columns are often filled with beads in a variety o f shapes that serve to form a porous matrix. The related problem o f a liquid layer overlying a porous layer is also found in many environmental and engineering applications. This configuration is evident in water reservoirs, underground storage tanks, and solid matrix heat exchangers to name a few. An extensive collection o f work devoted to the area of convection in porous media is documented in the book by Nield et al. [1]. They define a porous medium as a material consisting o f a solid matrix

with an interconnected void. The void allows the flow of a fluid through the material. Examples o f porous media are beach sand, rye bread or glass beads. The porosity ^ is defined as the fraction o f the total volume of the medium that is occupied by void space, or the liquid in this case, (p = . V is the total volume defined by V = V^- + , where

the subscript / denotes the liquid and 5 the solid beads. fraction that is occupied by the solid beads.

This would make \-(p the

It is important to note that the volume

average is applied to the mass, momentum and energy conservation equations solved in the porous medium. Nield et al.[\] also point out that for natural media the porosity does not normally exceed 0.6. For solid spheres, such as glass beads, the porosity can vary between 0.2545 and 0.4764.

For the onset o f thermal convection in fluids, it is well known that two mechanisms are responsible. The buoyancy (Rayleigh-Benard) effect is the principal mechanism in

problems where gravity is taken into consideration. The variation of mass density with temperature is the process that drives the flow. However, in micro-gravity the

predominant mechanism responsible for convective motion is the thermoeapillary Marangoni effect, which is caused by surface tensions. As is noted by Carey [2], the surface tension at the interface between a liquid and a vapour phase varies with temperature in the liquid. Consequently, if the temperature varies over the interface, the interfacial tension will be non-unifonn. This results in the liquid near the interface in regions o f low surface tension being pulled towards regions o f higher surface tension. If the temperature variation is maintained, a steady flow pattern may be established. As

defined, in order for Marangoni convection to begin, there has to be an applied temperature gradient. This can either be applied at the bottom o f a cavity or at the side, in which case it would be called a laterally heated cavity.

Due to the occurrence of liquid evaporation in experiments, the effect o f evaporation on thermoeapillary convection becomes very important for a more complete understanding o f these processes. Evaporation is the process in which a substance undergoes a state change from liquid to gas, as molecules leave the surface o f the liquid and go into the vapour phase. Liquid-vapour phase change processes, such as evaporation, play a vital role in many technological applications. These processes are encountered in power and refrigeration cycles, in petroleum and chemical processing, liquefaction o f nitrogen and during evaporation or precipitation o f water in the earth's atmosphere to name a few. Carey [2], also points out the application for thermal control in spacecraft environments via a compact evaporator.

Following is the literature review that shows the developments in recent years in the area o f the onset o f thermo-convection in fluid and porous layers and the effects o f evaporation.

1.2

Onset o f Convection in Liquid and Porous Cavity

Nearly four decades ago, Beavers and Joseph [3] studied by experiment the boundary

conditions at a naturally permeable wall. The experiment was designed to examine the nature of tangential flow in the boundary region of a fluid-porous interface. A two-

dimensional Poi seuil le flow above a fluid saturated porous block was used to demonstrate the value o f the velocity at the interface. It was postulated that the slip velocity at the fluid-porous interface differs from the mean filter velocity within the penneable material, that shear effects are transmitted into the body of the material through a boundary-layer region and that the slip velocity for the free fluid is proportional to the shear rate at the permeable boundary. They found that the slip coefficient was dependent on the structure o f the material at the interface. Their experiments have also shown that the flow o f a viscous fluid over a porous material induced a boundary layer region within the material. The effect o f the boundary layer can be successfully replaced with a slip velocity proportional to the exterior velocity gradient. This is the adopted condition for the

interface boundary in many experiments that followed at future dates.

It is known that, when a porous layer is underlying a fluid layer, the critical condition for the onset o f convection when the system is being heated from below is considerably different from that o f the porous layer alone. The onset o f convection in a fluid layer overlying a porous medium was first theoretically treated and published by Nield [4]. Up to that point, convection in a single fluid layer or porous layer was investigated. Nield applied linear stability analysis to superposed fluid and porous layers with uniform heating from below and general boundary conditions. However, since no experimental data was available, the solution was restricted to the case o f constant-flux thermal boundary conditions. The Marangoni effect was also taken into account at the

deformable upper surface, and it was assumed that only non-oscillatory convection occurs. In the fluid region, the Oberbeck-Boussinesq equations were applied, and in the porous region, the steady-state Darcy-Oberbeck-Boussinesq equations. conditions applied for the perturbation variables included; The boundary

no mass flux across the

boundaries, continuity of tangential and normal stress at the upper boundary, continuity o f normal velocity, normal stress, temperature and heat flux at the interface, and the conditions o f Beavers and Joseph [3] relating the shear in the fluid to the slip velocity at the interface. The result o f the analysis is a tenth-order system o f differential equations

and ten boundary conditions that form a standard eigenvalue problem. The Rayleigh number can be regarded as the eigenvalue and the non-dimensional horizontal wavenumb er a as a parameter. For the stability criterion, the Rayleigh number must be

minimized as a function o f a. The solution for constant heat flux boundary conditions was obtained and checked against known results for special cases such as: viscous fluid between one rigid and one free boundary, viscous fluid between two free boundaries, porous medium between one impermeable boundary and one boundary at constant pressure, and a porous medium between two impermeable boundaries. The results

obtained for the constant flux case were also useful for estimating the stability criterion for more general thermal boundary conditions when the critical wave-number is no longer zero.

Chen and Chen [5] have also used linear stability analysis to investigate the hydrodynamic problem o f the onset o f finger convection in a horizontal porous layer underlying a fluid layer in the directional solidification o f concentrated alloys. However, they used a shooting method to solve the eigenvalue problem. They began by first

considering the thermal convection problem as a check and in the process uncovered some aspects overlooked by previous investigators. They found that, at low depth ratios (the ratio o f the fluid layer depth to the porous layer depth), the marginal stability curve had a bimodal nature and depicted two relative minima. For a depth ratio o f 0.10, the convection pattern was dominated by the porous layer. This changed to that o f the fluid layer as the depth ratio was increased to 0.13. For values greater then 0.13, the flow remained in the fluid layer, and at values greater then 0.5, the velocity in the porous layer was essentially zero. The critical fluid Rayleigh number for a Bernard problem with a fixed or a free boundary is known to be 1100 [5], with the porous interface behaving more like a free boundary than a fixed one. In the salt finger case, with a fixed thermal Rayleigh number, as the depth ratio increases, the critical salt Rayleigh number first decreases and upon reaching a minimum increases. This phenomenon is again due to the fact that, at a small depth ratio, convection is dominated by the porous layer, and at a larger, ratio it switches to the fluid layer.

4

To verify their theoretical results, Chen and Chen [6] also performed a series o f experiments. They once again showed that the fluid layer dominated convection changes to porous layer dominated convection as the thickness ratio decreases.

Kira and Choi [7], further investigated the onset o f buoyancy-induced convection and diffusive phenomena between porous and overlying fluid layers heated from below. They focused on the critical Rayleigh number and the corresponding number o f cells, and defined the depth ratio d, as the thickness of the liquid layer to that o f the porous layer. In the supercritical regime, when d > 0.12, the convection was limited to the fluid layer with conduction dominating the heat transfer in the porous layer. The number o f re

circulating cells was shown to increase as the Rayleigh number increased, which in turn caused a larger Nusselt number.

Desaive et al. [8] studied the problem of buoyancy instability in a liquid with a free surface overlying a porous layer heated from below. They described the porous medium using Brinkman's model and determined the corresponding linear stability equations. The role o f a free surface whose surface tension is temperature dependent was also examined, which makes their stability analysis unique. They found that for the pure thermoeapillary condition, the critical depth ratio d, which in essence was the thickness of the porous layer, is equal to 0.96. If d is below the critical value, the thermoeapillary flow will

dominate the liquid layer without penetrating to the porous layer. For the pure buoyancy condition, this critical value was found to be equal to 0.90, above which the buoyancy convection dominated the entire cavity. The critical Rayleigh and Marangoni numbers for the onset o f convection were also determined.

The effects o f interaction between Rayleigh and Marangoni convection in a system o f a liquid layer on top o f a porous layer with bottom heating was examined by Saghir et al. [9]. They considered several cases. In the first case, the upper cavity wall was rigid and buoyancy convection was studied. In the second case, the liquid layer had a free surface and the interaction between Marangoni and Rayleigh convection was investigated for different thicknesses o f liquid and porous layers. The full Navier-Stokes equations were

solved for the fluid layer, and the Brinkman model was used for the porous layer. From previous studies it was noted that in the porous medium the fluid remains stationary below the first critical porous Rayleigh number Rap = 4tt^. The flow starts beyond the

first critical Rayleigh number and oscillatory flow starts when the second Rap number is above 390. For the fluid layer, it was noted that the critical fluid Rayleigh number Rac was around 1732, and the flow would become oscillatory when the fluid Rayleigh number was above 1x10^. For the buoyancy convection case, it was found that for equal liquid-porous layer thickness, the convection was confined to the liquid layer. Decreasing the liquid layer to the ratio o f 1/11 o f the total cavity layer, forced the convection to move to the porous layer. For the combined buoyancy and Marangoni

convection, it was found that the Marangoni convection enhanced the flow in the liquid layer. There was also an increase in the Nusselt number in the presence of Marangoni convection.

Villers and Flatten [10], studied the convection in liquid acetone due to coupled buoyancy and Marangoni effects. The acetone was subjected to a horizontal temperature difference in a laterally heated cavity. matching numerical simulations. They performed several experiments and ran

Different aspect ratios, Rayleigh numbers and

Marangoni numbers were considered in the study. Results from both methods confirmed the existence of three states: mono-cellular steady states, multi-cellular steady states and spatio-temporal structures for higher values o f the control parameter.

The effect o f interaction between Rayleigh and Marangoni convection in a superposed system but with a lateral heating condition was closely examined by Saghir et al. [11]. The convection patters were studied for various ratios o f liquid to porous layer as well as various non-dimensional parameters. With equal liquid-porous layer thickness for the

Marangoni convection, it was found that as the Marangoni number increases, the formation o f multi-cells also increases in the liquid layer. As a result, the flow does not penetrate into the porous layer. A similar result was found for buoyancy convection. W ith increasing Rayleigh number, the flow did not penetrate into the porous layer.

However, when the thickness o f the liquid layer was decreased, the flow penetrated into the porous cavity even for a small Marangoni number. The same conclusion was

observed for buoyancy convection. This numerical study showed the sensitivity of the thickness and non-dimensional parameters with respect to Rayleigh and Marangoni convection.

A three-dimensional finite rectangular container was considered by Dauby and Lebon [12]. The cavity included rigid lateral walls with a realistic no-slip condition and the free surface o f the liquid layer was assumed to be non-deformable. They studied

thermoeapillary convection with the free surface subjected to a temperature-dependent surface tension. Both the linear and non-linear problems were considered. For the linear problem, a spectral Tau method [12] was used to determine the critical Marangoni number and the convective pattern as functions of the aspect ratios o f the container. The dependence o f the results on non-zero Rayleigh and Biot numbers was examined. The non-linear problem was studied by reducing the dynamics o f the system to the dynamics o f the most unstable modes o f convection. It was found that due to the presence o f the rigid walls, the convective pattern above the threshold may be quite different from that predicted by the linear approach.

Pattern formation in thermo-convection when a horizontal fluid layer is heated from below has also received much interest in the last decade. Generally, the motion that

appears above the stability threshold is well structured and a regular pattern o f convective cells may be observed. The geometrical nature o f the convective cells depends greatly on the mechanism that causes the instability. The main results on this subject are outlined next. Schatz et al. [13], have focused on the onset o f surface-tension driven Marangoni

convection in a fluid layer heated from below. Their experiments with shadowgraph visualization revealed a sub-critical transition to a hexagonal convection pattern in thin liquid layers that have a free surface.

Parmentier et al. [14], have taken on the difficult task o f performing a non-linear theoretical analysis o f coupled buoyancy and capillary thermo-convection. They studied the thermo-convective instability in an infinite horizontal fluid layer heated from below. The influence o f the Prandtl number and Biot number was emphasized. For buoyancy convection only, rolls were observed. capillary effects were present. The situation became more complex when

It was observed that a hexagonal cell structure was

preferred at the linear threshold. For higher thermoeapillary forces, the size o f the region where hexagons were stable was larger. It was also shown that the direction o f motion inside the hexagons was directly linked to the value of the Prandtl number. For Pr >

0.23, the fluid moved upwards at the center o f the hexagons, but for Pr < 0.23, the fluid motion was inverted.

The possibility o f the occurrence o f square structures in gravitational and capillary thermo-convection was also investigated by Regnier et al. [15]. They showed that square cells occurred when the instability was mainly eapillarity driven and the fluid layer was thin enough.

1.3

Evaporation in Liquid

In recent years, there has been an increased interest in the phenomena o f evaporation, and its effects have been studied for various physical and engineering applications. For

example, in the spin-coating process, Haas and Bimie [16] showed evaporation to cause thermoeapillary instability within the coating solution. This instability drove the

convective flows that resulted in non-uniform coatings. It has also been confirmed that Marangoni instability induced eonvection can and does occur in the droplet evaporation process [17-19]. A lot o f focus on the evaporation phenomena has also been given by Ward and his colleagues [20-22]. They performed several experiments to study the

conditions existing at the liquid-vapour interface during evaporation and these are outlined next.

8

Recently, it has been noticed that there is a strong disagreement with the predictions from classical kinetic theory with past measurements o f the temperature profile across the liquid-vapour interface o f an evaporating liquid. However, the previous measurements in the vapour phase were made within 27 mean free paths o f the interface. To determine if the disagreement could be resolved Fang and Ward [20] performed a series o f experiments with temperature measurements as close as one mean free path o f the interface o f an evaporating liquid. They also studied higher rates of evaporation. When the system was brought to a steady state with a constant evaporation rate, the temperature was noted on the center line o f the evaporation chamber with thermocouples and a positioning micrometer. Near the interface, the temperature was measured at

approximately 0.1 mm intervals. Classical kinetic theory does specify that sharp changes in the temperature can occur near the interface. From the results, it is shown that in fact it is the higher-energy molecules that escape the liquid during evaporation. A discontinuity is noted in the temperature profile across the interface but in the opposite direction to that predicted by classical kinetic theory and at a much larger magnitude. The highest

difference in temperature between the vapour at the interface and the liquid at the interface occurred in the experiment with the highest evaporation rate and was 7.8 °C.

W ard et al. [21] have conducted steady state experiments to study the interfacial conditions during evaporation or condensation of water. The temperature profiles were measured in the liquid phase near the interface. A layer was found where the temperature was uniform. Deeper in the liquid phase, the temperature assumed a constant linear gradient, indicating the mode o f energy transport was by thermal conduction. For the evaporation experiments, the thickness o f the uniform temperature layer varied from 0.35 to 0.61 mm and decreased as the evaporation rate was increased. The existence o f the uniform temperature layer and the gradient in the sub-interface region suggests that thermoeapillary convection is present in the liquid near the interface. There was also a temperature discontinuity that was measured at the liquid-vapour interface in each o f the experiments. In both the evaporation and condensation cases, the interfacial temperature in the vapour was greater than that in the liquid. This suggests that it is primarily the molecules from the high-energy end of the energy distribution that are escaping the liquid

during the evaporation case. A correlation was also found between the magnitude o f the temperature discontinuity and an increase in the evaporation flux.

A further experimental analysis was performed by Ward et al. [22], to observe Marangoni-Benard convection o f water, which has previously been difficult to accomplish. This could be due to the fact that earlier analytical studies performed have neglected the flow o f the fluid to the interface when determining the eriterion for the onset o f Marangoni convection. A series of water evaporation experiments were

conducted under steady state by having the evaporation rate equal to the syringe pumping rate in the procedure. The temperature was then measured over a range o f positions by a thermocouple mounted on a positioning mierometer. The temperature profile was found to have a discontinuity at the interface, in which the vapor temperature at the interface was greater than that in the liquid at the interface. As the evaporation flux was increased, the temperature discontinuity increased as well. It has previously been suggested that this discontinuity results from the higher energy molecules escaping the liquid phase during evaporation. To test for recirculation in the uniform temperature region near the liquid interface, the thickness o f the uniform temperature layer was measured. The thickness o f the uniform temperature layer was shown to vary with the evaporation rate. Below the uniform layer, the temperature profile indicated that conduction was the primary mode o f energy transport. It was concluded that the behavior o f the uniform temperature layer is consistent with that o f a convecting liquid.

1.4

Research Objectives

In this thesis, the aim o f the study is to investigate the onset of convection in a twodimensional superposed liquid and porous layer cavity subject to bottom and lateral heating. Based on Desaive et al.'s [8] stability analysis, several cases are considered. First, pure buoyancy, pure thermocapillary and combined buoyancy-thermocapillary convection are analyzed for different porous layer thickness and different aspect ratios for the bottom heating condition. In the second case, the flow is studied in detail for the lateral heating condition. A second aim o f the thesis is to verify that the two-dimensional 10

results reasonably predict the convective fluid motion in the case o f a three-dimensional cavity with buoyancy, thermocapillary and combined convection.

It is also the intention o f this thesis to further study thermocapillary convection in a laterally heated cavity with the phenomenon of phase change, namely evaporation, at the free surface. Two cases are considered. In the first case, Marangoni convection is

examined without evaporation, while the second case is examined in the presence o f evaporation at the free surface. Different parameters are studied, such as the variation o f the liquid-porous thickness, the aspect ratio and the Marangoni number.

11

CHAPTER 2 Governing Equations and Numerical Solution
2.1 Model Description

The schematic diagram for this study is illustrated in Figure 1. It presents twodimensional and three-dimensional versions of the model. rectangular cavity split into a liquid layer and a porous layer. The system consists o f a The incompressible liquid

layer, whose thermal expansion coefficient is P t, has a height of di and a width o f H. The physical properties o f the liquid are assumed constant, except for the density in the buoyancy term in the momentum equation. The top wall o f the liquid layer is a nondeformable free surface.

The liquid layer overlays a homogeneous and isotropic rectangular porous layer that is saturated with the liquid. It is assumed that the fluid and solid are in thermal

equilibrium. The porous matrix has a porosity of ^ = 0.39, which corresponds to having glass beads o f 3.25 mm in diameter [9]. The Darey number is set to a constant o i D a - 1
X

10'^ for the duration o f the study.

The porous layer has the same width o f H and a

height o f dz. The total thickness is defined h y L = d^ -vd^. The aspect ratio is the width o f the cavity to its thickness, denoted b y A R = H I L , and will be studied in detail throughout the thesis. direction. The gravitational acceleration term is set to act in the negative y-

For the three-dimensional model, the cavity is extended by a value o f 0.5, which is half o f the height o f the cavity, in the positive Z-axis direction. For this model, the gravitational acceleration term remains pointing in the negative Y-axis direction. The plane on top o f the cavity remains a non-deformable free surface.

13

Free Surface

Î
Liquid Layer di

Porous Layer

d2

Î
Y L X H

i

g

a)

Free Surface

Î
Liquid Layer d,

t
Y
J -

Porous Layer

dz

i
X H b) 0.5

g

/

Figure 1

Geometrical model o f cavity: b) Three-dimensional cavity

a) Two-dimensional cavity

14

2.2

Liquid Layer Governing Equations

The flow under consideration is assumed laminar and incompressible. The model is presented in Cartesian coordinates. The complete continuity, momentum balance and energy balance equations are solved simultaneously in order to study the convection patterns. Using the finite element technique, the equations are solved numerically for both the liquid layer and the porous layer of the cavity. Following are the governing

equations, boundary conditions and numerical procedure used for the various cases in this study. The equations are presented for the three-dimensional model, but similar

equations with the z-term removed are used for the two-dimensional model. The dimensional and non-dimensional equations are explained in detail in Appendix A.

2.2.1

Continuity Equation

The equation o f continuity is a partial differential equation which represents the conservation o f mass for an infinitesimal control volume. The continuity equation for an incompressible fluid is given by:

du dx

dw 1dv 1 ----By

=

0

dz

0)

2.2.2

Momentum Balance Equation

For the liquid layer, the momentum balance equation is represented by the Navier-Stokes equations. The flow model is Newtonian, incompressible and steady. In the x direction, the principle o f conservation o f linear momentum dictates that:

p .f

du du U - -- + V ---------h W dy dx

du dz

dp
= - -- + //·

d^u dx^
'

d^u

d^u

(2 )
d z \

dx

15

In the y direction, the momentum equation is written as follows: dv dx dp dv dv - - -- + //· W'-- dy dy dz

Pf

ti

f" V

- p , P r ( T - T y g

(3)

The Boussinesq approximation in the momentum equation in the y-direction allows for modeling o f buoyancy effects for an incompressible fluid. The Boussinesq

approximation has the following two assumptions: the variations in fluid density affect only the buoyancy term and the fluid density is a function of temperature [23].

Lastly, in the z direction:

Pf

w *--------\~ V ---------- f- W ' -----

9w dx

3w dy

9iv

dp

d^w dx

d^w dy

d `w dz"

dz

dz

(4)

In the above equations u , v and w represent the velocities in the x, y and z directions in a Cartesian coordinate system. The , T, and g are the density o f the fluid,

pressure, dynamic viscosity, coefficient o f volumetric expansion associated with temperature variations, temperature and gravity, respectively.

2.2.3

Energy Balance Equation

The thermal energy conservation equation for an incompressible fluid is expressed as: dT dx dT dy dT dz d^T dx^ d^T dy^ d^T dz^

X I

hV

f~ W -------

k f

(5)

Where p f , {Cp)f, and ^ denote the density, the specific heat at constant pressure and the conductivity o f the fluid.

2.3

Porous Layer Governing Equations

For the saturated porous matrix, the Brinkman model was used. As noted by Saghir et al.

16

[11], at the fluid-porous interface, the boundary conditions are the continuities o f velocities, temperatures, normal shear stresses and heat flux. Following are the

continuity, momentum balance and energy balance equations for the porous medium.

2.3.1

Continuity Equation

Since the flow is incompressible, the continuity equation for the porous layer is also given by:

^ 3v ^ dw dx dy dz
=

0

(6)

2.3.2

Momentum Balance Equation

Darcy was the first to formulate the basic equation o f flow in porous media based on the proportionality between the flow rate and the applied pressure difference that was revealed from experiment [1], Conventionally, Darcy's law was used as the momentum balance equation in a porous medium. However, as noted by Saghir et al. [9], it suffers from mathematical inaccuracy due to the inability to impose a no-slip boundary condition. Consequently, in this study the Brinkman equation is used to represent the momentum equation. In the x direction, the momentum equation is written as follows:

d^u K dx dx^

d^u dy^

d^u dz^

(7)

In the y direction, the momentum equation is represented by: d^v dy^ d^v - P' dz^

K

dy

dx^

Pt

(8)

Lastly, in the z direction:

17

d^w
K dz

d^w dy^

d^yv dz^

dx^

(9)

Here, the permeability is denoted by K in the Darcy term on the left hand side o f the above equations (7)-(9). The Brinkman form o f the momentum equation is suitable when one wants to match a solution in a porous medium and in an adjacent viscous fluid. The Brinkman extension is added as the second term on the right hand side o f the above equations.

2 3 .3

Energy Balance Equation

The energy equation for the porous layer is given by:

(p c ,),

U

dT
dx

" W -------h V --------1

dr

dr
dz

d^T dx^

d^T dy^

d^T dz^

dy

( 10)

In addition to the governing equation, the following constitutive thermal relationship is used for the overall thermal conductivity:

( 11)

The subscript e specifies an effective property for which the value must be set.

The

effective thermal property is related to the fluid and solid matrix properties by the relation in Equation (11). The subscript s refers to the solid matrix properties while f denotes the fluid properties [23]. In Equation (11), ke , k s , and kf are the effective, solid and fluid conductivities, respectively. The porosity is denoted by (p .
/4

In general, the dynamic

viscosity /n and the effective dynamic viscosity

are only approximately equal to each

other. However, the Brinkman approximation sets the viscosity and the effective viscosity equal to each other. It is also important to note that, in order to maintain

consistent boundary conditions in the porous layer, the equations in the fluid and porous medium are all solved in terms o f volume averaged quantities.

18

2.4

Non-Dimensional Analysis

Non-dimensional formulation of the governing equations has many advantages. Scaling the variables and assembling the non-dimensional parameters provides a measure o f the importance of the various terms in the equations and identifies the dominant physical phenomena [23]. Equations (1) -- (11) were rendered dimensionless by using the

following non-dimensional groups:

u =^ , Uo fl-Uo

v =^ , U o ^

r = ^ ,

A- = ü , L

y .z , L

z = ^ , L ^

(12)

,, _r ' 1 IÇ

L = d ^+ d ^,

= yjg  Pt '

W here U, V, W, X, Y, and Z are the non-dimensional x, y and z component o f velocity, and non-dimensional x, y and z coordinates respectively. P is the non-dimensional

pressure term and Û the non-dimensional temperature term. The characteristic length, temperature and velocity are denoted by L, T, and u,, . During the non-dimensional analysis several other parameters appear, such as the Reynolds number Re, the Darcy number Da, and the Prandtl number, Pr. The parameters in Equation (12) were used in the analysis, which is fully outlined in Appendix A. The governing equations in their dimensionless form are described in the sections below.

2.5 2.5.1

Non-Dimensional Liquid Layer Governing Equations Continuity Equation
du
dx

dV dW =0 +-- +
dY az

(13)

2.5.2

Momentum Balance Equation

The Navier-Stokes equations for the X, Y and Z directions are given as follows.

19

X direction:

Re

dx

dy

dz

dP dx

d^U d^U d^U d x ^ ^ d¥^ ^ a z '

(14)

Y direction:

Re

L, dv +v _-- dv +w -- az] u-- ax ay az.

dP Fa'z a 'z ay ax' ay'

a 'z l - R e - 0

(15)

Z direction:

Re

dx

dv

dz

dp dz

d^W

d^W

d^W

ax'

ay' ^ a 'z

(16)

2.5.3

Energy Balance Equation

Re Pr U- -- + V -- + W- --

d^e

a 'g

d^e

dx

d¥

dz

ax'

ay' az'

(17)

2.6

Non-Dimensional Porous Layer Governing Equations

2.6.1

Continuity Equation

dU dV dW +---+ ax ay az
2.6.2 Momentum Balance Equation

=

0

(18)

20

X direction: I '  u _Da Y direction: V =- ~ + a v dY av av + 'd^U ,a ^ G d x [dx^ ay'

a 'G l az'

(19)

Da Z direction:

--Re G

(20)

'd^W -j---------- a'py a ' r '  w =- -- + ------riD aj dz az' ay' az'


1

(21 )

2.6.3

Energy Balance Equation

Re Pr-

dx

ay

az

=G

d^G d^G d^G dx^ ^ a y ^ ^ a z ^

(22)

(23)

Two model configurations are studied, namely, a bottom heated cavity and a laterally heated cavity illustrated, in Figure 2 and Figure 3. The definitions o f the liquid Rayleigh number Rai and the porous Rayleigh number Rap vary, depending on the case studied. The same also applies to the definition o f the Reynolds number, which is fully derived in Appendix A [11].

For the bottom heating case, the Reynolds number is defined as:

21

Rüp ~D^

(24)

Where the liquid and porous Rayleigh numbers are defined as follows:

g P ,d l\T ,-T ^ ) a v

Rap =

g- (5j -d^ - k -(T,, - T j ) a v

(25)

The Darcy number is defined as Da ---- r- and the Prandtl number is defined as Pr = -- . Û a or and v are the thermal diffusivity and kinematic viscosity respectively. The thickness o f the liquid layer is represented by dj and the porous layer by c/j. Here, Th is the hot

K

V

temperature at the bottom surface o f the cavity, Tc is the temperature o f the surrounding gas near the free surface, and 7} is the temperature at the interface between the liquid and porous layers.

For the lateral heating case, the Reynolds number is defined as:

Re =

Ra^ y Pr

(26) V y

W here the liquid and porous Rayleigh numbers are defined as follows:

V a

Ra - ^ ^

~Tç) v a

(27)

Here, Th represents the temperature o f the right vertical wall also known as the hot surface and Tc denotes the temperature of the cold vertical wall of the cavity. These equations also show a clear relationship between the liquid Rayleigh number and the porous Rayleigh number for the lateral heating condition. By assuming that the thickness

22

o f the porous layer is approximately that o f the entire height o f the cavity, this relationship can be expressed as: Rüp = Ra^  Da  (28)

Each geometrical model also has its own specific boundary conditions depending on the case studied and these are presented next.

2.7

Model Boundary Conditions

In order to properly analyze fluid motion, the basic conservation laws have to be applied along with the appropriate boundary conditions on each segment of the boundary. These conditions are shown for the two cases studied, namely, with the bottom heating and lateral heating conditions. The boundary conditions for the evaporation case are also

fully outlined in the sections below.

2.7.1

Bottom Heating Boundary Condition

Figure 2 shows a diagram o f the boundary conditions applied to the cavity with bottom heating. The bottom surface is maintained at a temperature 9 , while the two vertical side walls are kept adiabatic. In the porous layer, the velocity components that are normal to the wall surface at the boundary of the cavity are set to zero. The velocity components that are parallel to the wall surface remain free to move to take into account the effects o f the porous matrix. However, in the liquid layer, all the components o f velocity are set to zero at the boundary o f the cavity. At the non-deformable free surface, the velocity

component normal to the surface is set to zero, and heat is lost to the surroundings through natural convection.

23

V = 0, 0 = 0 , < T,, =

Ma Re Pr

I
s - « o

Liquid Layer

I
o II 5

= ^

dn

=0

Porous Layer

V = 0, 0 = 1

Figure 2 Bottom heating boundary condition

2.7.2

Lateral Heating Boundary Condition

In the case o f the cavity which is laterally heated, the horizontal temperature gradient is applied parallel to the free surface. The left vertical wall is fixed with the cold

temperature Tc, while the right vertical wall is maintained at a hot temperature Th- The bottom surface is insulated, while the top surface o f the liquid cavity has a nondeformable free surface through which heat is lost to the surroundings by natural convection. Since Marangoni convection is studied, the heat loss through the free surface is defined by the Biot number, Bi.

The boundary conditions for the four walls o f the cavity are presented in Figure 3. To take into consideration the Marangoni effect, which is the variation o f surface tension along the free surface, a boundary condition for the shear stress jum p along the liquid-gas interface is included. defined as, cr,,, = To account for this, a new non-dimensional surface tension is
n /| / j

^ .It is a function o f the Marangoni number. Ma = ------ ------ -----Re Pr ^ Of./i For

the Reynolds number defined previously, and the Prandtl number, Pr =

24

this experiment, a linear variation o f surface tension with temperature is specified at the fi-ee surface, which is kept at a constant location. Ma Re Pr 0 6=
(

1

Liquid Layer

:

I

^=1

Porous Layer

I

V = 0,

dn

=0

Figure 3

Lateral heating boundary condition

2.7.3

Evaporation Boundary Condition

The modeling capabilities in FIDAP 8.7.0 have been enhanced to allow for evaporation at the liquid-vapour interface. This allows for user-defined expressions for saturation

temperature and the latent heat o f vapourization, as well as modeling o f a single phase, in this case, the liquid phase.

For the study o f evaporation at the free surface, a laterally heated cavity was utilized as shown in Figure 4. The right vertical wall was set to the non-dimensional temperature 0 = 1, and the left vertical wall kept as the cold wall with 6 = 0. The bottom surface o f the cavity was kept adiabatic, and the proper velocity constraints were set on all the cavity walls. It is also important to specify appropriate boundary conditions at the liquid-vapour interface to assist the solution of the governing equations for heat, mass and momentum transfer in the two fluids on either side of the interface. As noted in Carey [2], at the

25

interface, the system must satisfy the principles o f conservation o f mass, momentum and energy. It should be noted that the general equations are greatly simplified due to the non-deformable surface condition, as well as the modeling o f the liquid phase only. The conservation o f mass at the interface results in:

A

(29)

Where the subscripts I, v, and n denote the liquid phase, vapour phase and the normal direction, respectively.

Conservation o f momentum in the normal direction to the interface, with no interface curvature effects and with negligible interface motion (hence no liquid and vapour momentum terms), results in the following boundary condition:

(30)

Where C 7, ,, and (T,, ,, are the normal stresses in the liquid and vapour phases normal to the interface.

Continuity o f tangential stress at the interface, along with the no-slip condition can be written as:
~ ^ v ,r = - J : »
« /,r = «V,/ (3 1 )

The surface tension is assumed to vary linearly tangential to the liquid-vapour interface, i, to allow for thermocapillary convection.

Lastly, the balance o f thermal energy at the interface results in the following condition:

? / - ^ v = A -« /.A ^ / v

(32)

26

W here qi and qv are the heat fluxes on the liquid and vapour sides, respectively, and hiv is the latent heat o f vapourization. It is also assumed that local thermodynamic equilibrium exists at the interface. In addition, a necessary boundary condition for thermal transport in the vapour and liquid regions is a saturation temperature that is applied linearly at the interface.

In FIDAP 8.7.0, equations (29), (30), and (31) are imposed during the solution o f the momentum and conservation of mass equations. The saturation temperature condition is imposed during the solution o f the energy equation [23].

Ma Re Pr

Liquid Layer

i
o P

d=\

Porous Layer

V=0, 1 ^ = 0 on Figure 4 Evaporation boundary condition

2.8

Numerical Solution Technique

The fluid dynamics analysis package FIDAP 8.7.0 that uses the finite element method is used in this study. The source code for several cases is outlined in Appendix B.

For free surface problems, FIDAP 8.7.0 utilizes the segregated solver.

This is an

27

uncoupled method where each degree o f freedom is solved separately. To update the free surface during iteration, the normal stress update algorithm is used for cases without evaporation, and the kinematic algorithm for cases with evaporation. In the kinematic update, the normal and tangential stress boundary conditions are satisfied throughout the solution procedure [23].

In post-processing operations, variables such as the stream function, heat fluxes and flow rates can be derived from the numerically computed velocity, pressure and temperature fields. These capabilities are provided by the graphics postprocessor program FIPOST, which can also graphically display the numerical results [23].

2.8.1

Finite Element Analysis

The numerical procedure consisted o f solving the non-dimensional Equations (13) - (17) and Equations (18) - (23) using the finite element technique. The finite element

technique reduces the infinite number o f degrees o f freedom in a problem to a finite number by solving a system o f equations. For the two-dimensional model, the For the three-

computational domain was divided into many small quadrilaterals.

dimensional model, the cavity was divided into brick elements. To achieve a greater accuracy in the results, a finer mesh was applied to the two vertical walls o f the rectangular cavity and at the free surface where the driving force o f the flow is located and where evaporation takes place in the second case. The mesh was defined with a finite number o f elements, where the variables were evaluated simultaneously. As can be seen in Figure 5, the free surface o f the cavity is defined by key-points 3 to 9, and the fluid-porous layer interface by key-points 2 to 8. The velocities, temperature and pressure are unknowns and are numerically calculated at each node in the meshed cavity. A linear approximation for the pressure using the penalty method is adopted. The convergence criterion for the iterative solution of symmetric and non-symmetric linear equation systems is 10'^. Therefore the iterations will continue until an error o f 10'^ is found between two consecutive iterations.

28

6(3,5) 9(1,5) 5(3,3) 8(1,3) 4(3,1) 7(1,1) 1 (5,1) 2(5,3) 3(5,5)

Figure 5 Node numbers for key-points

2.8.2

Mesh Sensitivity Analysis

Performing a mesh sensitivity analysis is an integral part o f producing accurate, timeefficient and cost-effective results. For this study, the nodal point mesh for the cavity was generated according to the anticipated field variables. Since a lateral heating scheme was employed for much of this study, it was assumed that a high temperature gradient occurs parallel to the free surface. Numerically, it is always wise to have fine nodal spacing in the direction o f high gradients, while in directions with smaller gradients much larger nodal spacing may be used. As mentioned before, the mesh is graded so that it is finer near the hot and cold wall, as well as the free surface. For the two-dimensional study, the number o f elements in the Y-axis was kept constant at 40. For the mesh

sensitivity analysis, the cavity was varied from 40 to 140 elements in the X-direction in increments o f 20. Figure 6 shows some of the different finite element mesh

configurations considered. It is evident from this figure how the coarseness o f the mesh changes with each trial. For the sensitivity analysis, the two-dimensional pure

thermocapillary case with a laterally heated cavity was used to calculate and compare the

29

Nusselt number for the various mesh gradients. The case selected had the following parameters: the Marangoni number Ma = 60000, the liquid and porous layer thicknesses d] = d 2 = 0.5 and the aspect ratio AR = 4. The Nusselt number has been chosen for the analysis because it is directly related to the driving force o f the physical problem, the temperature gradient. The Nusselt number is calculated at the hot wall and at the cold wall in a similar fashion to that o f Kim and Choi [7]. The equations are expressed as follows:

X =4

i do 0 a?

d Y
X=Q

(32)

The overall averaged Nusselt number is:

(33)

The results o f the analysis are presented in Table 1, with the Nusselt number listed for each case. It is evident from the table that the Nusselt number is converging to an

accuracy o f two decimal places after the 100 element point. There is not a significant change between 120 and 140 elements. Thus for the present study a mesh o f 120 The chosen mesh

elements in the X-axis by 40 elements in the Y-axis is selected.

configuration is shown in Figure 6c. Utilizing a finer mesh would result in a longer time being required for convergence without significantly improving the accuracy o f the results.

For the three-dimensional model, a similar finite element mesh is adopted in the X and Y direction. It should be pointed out that in the Z-direction the cavity has a length o f 0.5 as compared to the total height o f 1 in the Y-direction for the cavity. Assuming that the driving force o f the temperature gradient is still applied in the X-direction, a finite element mesh o f 10 elements is chosen for the Z-axis.

30

.F IIIilllllllllillllllK IIIH I iin iiiiiiiiiittn iitiiititiii

.

g
4) "o
c/i
I ' II 111111*11111

iim lm lH iK B iiH iim im iiiin iiiiitiiu ii

m u lm M H llllllllll'IlH

iriR iiiiittiiiiiK iiin iitiM ih iim iiiiiiiiiiin iiiiiM iiiiiiii

(/)

S iS is S S

o

liii i i i

X

fiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii !|| l 8ll!!!!!SIII!llllll!iilllllll iiimiiÊÊiÊiiimmiimi 'iiiiiiiiiiiiiiitiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii o

iiiliilliliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiii

C S (N

O

X

1 c s s s
s
w

I I
CO

iillÉli iiii
n iiiiim iiiim iiiitiiiiim im
llllllillllllllM llllltltlilllllil iii iii i i i i i i i i R r n i i n i n t i i i i i M M

"S o c % o "O '03 X o 0 00
6 a

n o Ov OO v n VO v rO O Z rr- r- VO VO VO VO m m m m m (V V ) %

z

3

I
4-» U

u

1
e

o Tf o T fC J 3
X

o

1 I 0 )
w ?

VO

o

O oo

§

O
N

§

I 1
H

§

1
X

13
c £ VO %

I

1
I S 9

liiliiiiiliii IS IIs

&

CHAPTER 3 Superposed Liquid and Porous Layer with Adiabatic Free Surface
3.1 Two Dimensional Modeling

To study the patterns o f fluid motion, the discipline o f fluid mechanics utilizes several different techniques to visualize the flow. One common type o f line pattern is a

streamline, which is a line everywhere tangent to the velocity vector at any given instant [24]. In this study, to display the results of computed flow fields for the two-dimensional modeling, streamline functions are employed. For two-dimensional incompressible flow, the stream function, ÎP , is determined using the following relationships; V = gY and

BY V=-- -- -- . The lines o f constant IPare then used to give the streamline pattern o f the flow in the graphical results. The two-dimensional modeling section is broken down into several subsections. Bottom heating and lateral heating conditions are investigated for buoyancy, thermocapillary and combined convection in a cavity with a superposed liquid and porous layer.

3.1.1

Bottom Heating Buoyancy Convection

The convection pattern predicted by the linear stability analysis o f Desaive et al. [8] for different Biot numbers, Bi = 100 and Bi=\ is shown in Figure 7 for aspect ratio A R = \ . Desaive et al.'s analysis showed that the flow switched from convection in the liquid layer to that o f the porous layer when the thickness <7;, was equal to 0.90. A relationship between the thickness cf; and the critical Rayleigh number was also found for Biot numbers that exceeded 100. Therefore, in the first case, the Biot number is set equal to 100. Also, in the present analysis the liquid Rayleigh number, Rai is set equal to 1000 and the porous Rayleigh number. Rap is set equal to 55, for * = 0.9. For d 2 = 0.97, the

33

liquid Rayleigh number is set to 100 and the porous Rayleigh number is set to 75.

In the figure, two large convective cells are evident, rotating in opposite directions with the left cell rotating counterclockwise. When the porous layer thickness is equal to the critical value o f d 2 - 0.90, the center o f the cell is in the fluid layer. The main convection is also taking place in the fluid layer, with the flow beginning to penetrate into the porous layer. However, as the porous layer thickness is increased to above the critical value, namely d2 = 0.97, the convection then switches completely to a porous layer dominated flow. When the flow o f the Bi = 100 case is compared to that o f the Bi -- 1 case, it can be seen that the flow becomes weaker with decreasing Biot number. This is also evident in Figure 7a as the center o f the convective cell moves closer to the lateral walls. For the case o f Bi = 1 in Figure 7b, the cell also moves closer to the liquid layer due to the lower Biot number. According to Desaive et al.'s analysis, the critical Rayleigh number should be smaller for Biot numbers that are less than 100. However, even for Bi = 1, it is shown that the convective cell pattern behaves in a similar manner.

To further examine the effect o f the aspect ratio on convection. Figure 8 shows in more detail the streamline and temperature variation pattern for aspect ratios ranging from AR = 1 to AR = 6 for the case o f Bi = 1. The critical porous layer thickness value is exceeded at d 2 = 0.97 and the flow is taking place in the porous regime. It is found that as the aspect ratio increases, multi cellular flow begins to form in the porous cavity. This is most evident when the aspect ratio AR is equal to 6 in Figure 8d. The strength o f the flow also increases with a maximum streamline value o f 3.51x10"^ for A R ~ 1 and 6.71x10"* for AR = 6. A similar convection pattern trend has also been observed by Saghir et al. [11], where the flow was studied for a Biot number o f 100.

34

a)

1

I

b) Bi=100 Bi=l

Figure 7 Buoyancy convection in the cavity for different Biot numbers (AR=1, Pr=7): a) di^O.lO, d2=0.90, RaL^lOOO, Rap=55 b) di=0.03, d2=0.97, RaL=100, Rap=75

35

2.1x10-'

3 .5 Ix

9.54x10

AT=9.29xlO

j

y'2.55x10

AT=1.52x10^

AT=8.77xl0`

AT=1.47x10

AT=8.89xlO \o-yM AT=8.41xlO' d)

HBBB
AY= 1.49x10^

Figure 8 Streamlines and temperature variation in the cavity for different aspect ratios (RaL=100, Rap=75, di=0.03, d2=0.97, B i=l, Pr=7) : a)A R = l b) A R -2 c)A R =4 d)A R =6

36

3.1.2

Bottom Heating Marangoni Convection

For Marangoni convection in a bottom heated cavity, Desaive et al. [8] found that the critical depth thickness d 2 was equal to 0.96. Above this value, the flow dominated the entire porous layer, and below this value, it was limited to the fluid layer. They also found a relationship between dv and the critical Marangoni number. For the case o f d 2 = 0.96, the critical Marangoni number was found to be 60000. In Figure 9, the convection pattern is again studied for thermocapillary convection for different aspect ratios and Biot numbers. The flow dominates the porous layer with the porous layer thickness above the critical value o f dj = 0.97. The aspect ratio is once again increased from AR = 1 to AR = 6 and the Biot varied from Bi = 100 to 5 / = 1. In both cases it is shown that the

convection pattern differs greatly from the buoyancy flow pattern in the porous layer, as multiple convection cells do not form as the aspect ratio is increased. Therefore, for flow in the porous regime, the aspect ratio does not have any effect on the number o f cells. The flow also generally becomes weaker with the increasing aspect ratio but much stronger with decreasing Biot number. However, once again the phenomenon o f the

counter rotating cells shifting to the lateral walls is noticed when the Biot number is taken to equal 1. It is also shown that a Biot number below 100 does not have an effect on the convection pattern in the cavity. Therefore, a detailed study is performed next on fluid dominated flow with a Biot number equal to 1.

In Figure 10, thermocapillary convection is presented with Ma = 60000 and Bi - 1. The convection is limited to the liquid layer by setting the porous layer thickness equal to the liquid layer thickness such as < 7/ = = 0.5, which is below the critical thickness value.

W hen the flow is dominated by the liquid layer, multi cell formation is once again observed as the aspect ratio is varied from AR = \ io AR = 6 with multi cells forming accordingly. A similar trend has also been observed by Saghir et al. [11], who found the number o f convective cells to be dependant on the available space in the cavity. The

strength o f the flow also becomes greater with the formation o f more convective cells, with the maximum streamline value fox AR = i being 1.14x10 ' and fox AR = 6 the value being 2.79x10''. 37

i.01x10-5

AY=2.198x10'^ ^.47x1C 0 a)

A'F=6.39xlO'^

A'F=5.48xlO'*° b)
2.07)0

A'F=4.17xlO"'

A T -4 .5 9 x I0 '°

A'F= 1.53x10-^

2.69x10-10

4.4x10"

A'F=5.7xlO`'° d) Bi=100

AY=8.82xlO-s Bi=l

Figure 9 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios and Biot numbers (Ma=60000, RaL=0.1, Rap=0.075, di=0.03, d2=0.97, Pr=7) : a)A R = l b)A R =2 c) A R M d)A R =6

38

3 .8 8 x 1 0 '

-9 .6 8 x 1 0

A'F=2.52 xlO'2
a)

/

AT=5.78xlO

AT=3.95x10
5,77x10-1

3.2x10-

A 'r=6.41xl0

AT=4.45xlO

A'F=6.21xlO d)

AT=4.3xlO'

F igure 10 Streamlines and temperature variation in the cavity for different aspect ratios (Ma=60000, RaL=0.1, Rap=0.0055, di=d2=0.5, B i= l, Pr=7); a) AR=1 b) AR=2 c) AR=4 d) AR=6

39

3.1.3

Lateral Heating Buoyancy Convection

The lateral heating condition is also closely examined, as it is well known that the applied heat transfer insures motion. First buoyancy convection is studied with varied porous layer thicknesses. In the following sections, thermocapillary and combined convection is also studied for the lateral heating condition.

Figure 11 shows buoyancy convection for different aspect ratios with the liquid Rayleigh number held constant at Rai = 1000. When the porous layer thickness is set to d 2 = 0.5, the flow remains in the liquid layer as the aspect ratio is increased from AR = 2 to AR = 4. When d 2 = 0.97, the flow similarly dominates the porous layer in the cavity with the cell now within the porous layer itself. It is also noted that for the case o f c ^2 = 0.97, as the

aspect ratio increases the flow gets stronger. The maximum streamline value increases from 8.59x10"^ for ^7? = 2 to 8.84x10'^ for AR = 4.

Figure 12 investigates buoyancy convection as the liquid Rayleigh number is decreased from 1000 to 400 for the case when the porous layer thickness is set to d 2 = 0.5 and d 2 = 0.97. When the flow dominates the liquid layer, it can be seen that no significant changes occur to the streamline convection pattern as the Rayleigh number decreases. However, the flow weakens considerably, with the streamline value decreasing from 6.08x10'^ to 4.04x10'^ for the liquid Rayleigh number equal to 1000 and 400 respectively. As the flow dominates the porous layer with d 2 = 0.97, it is noticed that the center o f the convective cell does not penetrate as deep into the cavity with the Rayleigh number decreased to Rai = 400. However, there is little difference in the streamline values between the two cases and the flow is still dominant in the porous layer. This has also been observed by Saghir ef al. [11], when studying smaller values o f the Rayleigh number. Therefore, the Rayleigh number has more o f an effect on the strength o f the flow, when the flow is constrained to the liquid layer, as opposed to the porous layer.

40

3.2x10-4-----

AY=9.04x10'^

4 .4 6 x 5 0 `- _

b) di=d2=0.5 d|=0.03 d2=0.97

Figure 11 Buoyancy convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios (RaL=1000, M a= l, B i= l, Pr=7); a) AR=2 b) AR=4

A'P=9.04xl0`^
a)

-- 8.7x10-1

A4^=9.16x10'^ b) d]=d2=0.5 d,=0.03 d2=0.97

Figure 12 Buoyancy convection in the cavity (M a=l, AR=2, B i=l, Pr=7); a) RaL=1000 41 b) RaL=400 FPOPPPTYOF '-.üVSftSJTYLtBW WV

3.1.4

Lateral Heating Marangoni Convection

Several cases are studied in detail for a liquid layer overlying a porous layer in a laterally heated cavity for thermocapillary convection. The Marangoni number is kept constant and equal to Ma = 60000, and the liquid Rayleigh number is kept constant and equal to Jiai = 1 during the entire analysis. It should be noted that the liquid Rayleigh number is not zero but is very small in comparison to the Marangoni number. This approach

ensures that Marangoni convection will be the dominant force. To mimic a microgravity situation, the gravity vector is assumed to be equal to 10"^ g.

In the first case, the flow structure is examined as it varies with the aspect ratio and is compared to a similar analysis by Saghir et al. [11]. In the second case, thermocapillary convection is examined for different Marangoni numbers and thicknesses o f liquid and porous layers. Again a eomparison is made to the results obtained by Saghir et al. [11].

Thermocapillary convection is presented for aspect ratios o f AR --2 and AR = 4 in Figure 13. For a porous layer thickness o f dz= 0.5, the flow is limited to the liquid layer. The porous layer acts as a solid wall and the flow remains entirely in the liquid layer. When the aspect ratio is equal to 2, there is a large convective cell with the eenter near the middle o f the cavity present in the liquid layer. The convection is said to be mono cellular. However, as the aspect ratio is increased to 4, multi-cellular flow becomes

apparent. This has also been predicted by Villers and Flatten [10] and their result o f increasing the aspect ratio, is shown in Figure 13c. Therefore, in a finite cavity, the number o f cells depends on the available space, in essence the aspect ratio.

As the thickness of the liquid layer is minimized and the porous layer is set to d 2 -- 0.97, the flow becomes dominant in the porous layer. It is noticed that a large convective cell invades the porous cavity for both values o f the aspect ratio, with the center o f the cell close to the free surface and liquid layer. However, the aspect ratio has no effect on the number o f eonvective cells present in the porous layer. The streamlines get weaker as the aspect ratio increases, which results in reduction o f size o f the convective cell. The flow

42

also gets weaker when the convection is switched from liquid layer dominated to porous layer dominated, due to the smaller reach of Marangoni convection within the porous layer.

I
/
5.52x10-1

5.47x10-1

AT= 1.094 di=d2=0.5

A ^ = l.033x10'^ di=0.03 d2=0.97

c) F igure 13 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios (Ma=60000, RaL=l, Bi=1, Pr=7); a) AR=2 b) AR=4 c) AR = 4, Ma = 8000, Pr = 4 Villers and Flatten [ 10]

The effect o f varying the Marangoni number is illustrated in Figure 14, with the aspect ratio kept constant atAR = 2 and the flow dominant in the liquid layer. As the Marangoni number was decreased from 60000 to 30000 and finally to 10000, the flow got considerably weaker, with the maximum streamline value equal to 1.05x10*, 5.93 and

43

1.88 respectively. It is also noticed that the center o f the convective cell shifted towards the hot side wall as the Marangoni number got smaller and the flow weaker. This trend

enforces the fact that a laterally heated cavity ensures fluid motion, without dependence on a critical Marangoni number. Figure 15 depicts thermocapillary convection in the cavity for aspect ratios ofA Ji = 2 and AH = 4 with d 2 = 0.5 being held constant. The flow remains dominant in the liquid layer, with multi cellular flow still forming at Ma = 30000. However, as the Marangoni number is decreased to Ma = 10000, multi cellular formation is no longer observed in the convection pattern. The flow also gets stronger as the aspect ratio is increased with a maximum streamline value o f 5.93 for AR - 2 and 6.98 for AR = 4 in the case o f Ma = 30000. In the case o f Ma = 10000, the streamline value increases from 1.88 for AR = 2 to 2.41 for^^i? = 4.

The porous layer thickness is also varied from

= 0.5 to d2 = 0.97 to study the

convection pattern when Ma = 30000 and Ma ^ 10000 in Figure 16. As the porous layer thickness is increased, the flow switches from liquid layer dominant flow to porous layer dominant flow. When Ma = 30000 and d 2 = 0.97, the flow penetrates to the bottom o f the porous cavity. However, when the Marangoni number is decreased further, the flow no longer penetrates right to the bottom o f the cavity due to the weaker flow. The maximum streamline value decreases from 7.11x10'^ to 2.85x10'^.

44

b) AT=6.25xlO"'

9.9xJ0-2

c)A 'F=l.98x10'' Figure 14 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different Marangoni numbers
(R a L = l,

di=d2=0.5, AR=2, B i= l, Pr=7) : b) Ma=30000 c)M a=10000

a)Ma=60000

45

9.9.n10

A'F=6.25xlO'

AY=1.98x10r \

3.67x10-'

1.27x1 OH

A Y -7 .3 4 x l0 ' b) Ma=30000

AY=2.54xlO' Ma= 10000

Figure 15 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different aspect ratios (R at= l, di=d2=0.5, B i= l, Pr=7): a) AR=2 b) AR-4

3.67x10-1

.27x10-'

AY=7.34xlO"

AY=2.54xlO

É

1.49x10

A'T=3.0xl0-4 b) Ma=30000 M a=10000

F igure 16 Thermocapillary convection in the cavity for different thickness dj and d 2 (RaL=l, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7); a) d]=d2=0.5 b) dj=0.03, d2=0.97

46

3.1.5

Lateral Heating Combined Buoyancy and Marangoni Convection

To study combined buoyancy and Marangoni convection. Figure 17 shows the case where the Marangoni number is equal to 60000 and the liquid Rayleigh number is equal to 1000. When the flow is limited to the liquid layer the streamline pattern is very similar to that o f Marangoni convection alone, with multi cellular convection also forming as the aspect ratio is increased. When compared to the case o f buoyancy convection alone in Figure 11a, it can be seen that Marangoni convection significantly enhances the flow in the liquid layer with the maximum streamline value increasing from 6.08x10'^ to 3.32x10"'. However, when the flow penetrates into the porous layer, the flow is mainly due to the buoyancy convection with the streamline patterns being similar to that of buoyancy convection alone. ifT -7

4 . 9 7 x 1 0 :

A4>=9. 94x10"
a)
1.74x10-

AY=3.48x10 df=d2=0.5

-2

A Y -8.7xlO"^ b) d,=0.03 d2=0.97

F igure 17 Combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection in the cavity (Ma=60000, RaL-- 1000, Bi-- 1, Pr=7): a) AR=2 b) AR=4

47

With the combined buoyancy and Marangoni convection, the center o f the convective cell shifts towards the liquid layer and the flow penetrates less into the porous layer. When the aspect ratio is increased, the cell also shifts closer to the hot vertical wall on the right. The Marangoni convection enhances the heat transfer through the free surface

leading to the reduced convection in the porous layer. This analysis is comparable to that shown by Saghir et al. [II ], where the general flow profiles remained approximately the same for the combined flow case.

Figure 18 shows a similar case to that o f Figure 17 but with a decreased Marangoni number o f Ma = 30000. The streamline patters are again similar to the case o f Marangoni convection alone, when the flow is dominant in the liquid layer but with a weaker flow due to the reduced Marangoni number.

9.44%u d

;

4.97x10

AY=9.94xlO

I
AT^=9.25x10'^ b) di=d2=0.5 d]=0.03 dz=0.97

Figure 18 Combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection in the cavity (RaL=1000, AR=2, B i=l, Pr=7): a) Ma=60000 48 b) Ma=30000

3.2 Three Dimensional Modeling

The results for the three-dimensional modeling are presented as velocity vector plots with a velocity vector drawn at each nodal point. The velocity vector's length is proportional to the fluid speed and the direction of flow is indicated by its inclination. The cavity has a height o f L in the Y-axis and a width of H in the X-axis, as in the two-dimensional model. A depth o f 0.5 is added in the positive Z-axis direction to make the cavity threedimensional. To display the results, the cavity is cut right in the middle at 0.25 along the non-dimensional Z-axis.

The three-dimensional modeling section is broken down into subsections that include lateral and bottom heating. Again, different convection types are studied in detail to verify that the two-dimensional model reasonably predicts the three-dimensional results.

3.2.5 Lateral Heating

The two-dimensional buoyancy case with liquid Rayleigh number equal to 1000 and a negligible Marangoni number, to prevent thermocapillary convection, has been chosen as a comparison for the three-dimensional model. The porosity is unchanged at 0.39, with the Darcy number kept at Da = 10'^. A case with the flow limited to the fluid layer with di 0.5 is studied with an aspect ratio AR = 4.

The velocity vector diagram is displayed in Figure 19. It is clearly seen that a similar flow pattern to that o f Figure lib has developed in the liquid layer. The characteristic buoyancy type o f symmetrical convection cell is present, with the center o f the cell near the right vertical wall, exactly in the middle o f the liquid layer. From the arrows on the velocity vectors, one can tell that the flow is moving in a counter-clockwise direction. It is also evident that there is no flow in the porous layer o f the cavity.

49

F igure 19 Buoyancy convection velocity plot with a cut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (RaL=1000, M a=l, di=d2=0.5, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7)

To further investigate the similarity between the two and three-dimensional cases, the temperature and velocity profiles are plotted at the free surface o f the cavity. Figure 20a, shows the temperature versus the X-coordinate, or the aspect ratio, for the two cases studied. It is clearly seen from the plot that the temperature distribution follows the same pattern for both graphs. Further, in Figure 20b, the U component o f velocity is plotted at the free surface. The trend o f the two plots is the same with the maximum two-

dimensional velocity equal to 4.56x10'^ and the maximum three-dimensional velocity equal to 3.92x10'^. The small difference in these magnitudes can be attributed to the fact that the convection is slowed in the three-dimensional cavity by the effects o f the additional vertical walls, as noted by Dauby and Lebon [12] in their three-dimensional cavity study. This effect is further illustrated by plotting the U component o f velocity, with cuts made closer to the vertical wall at Z = 0.1 and Z = 0.01, with the velocity decreasing accordingly.

50

1.00 1
0.90 · 0.80 0,70  0,60 0.50  ® 0.40 0.30 ' 0.20 0.10
-

·2D ·3D



0.00
0.00 0.50
1.00

1.50

2.00 2.50 X-axis Coordinate [1]

3.00

3.50

4.00

a)
0.05

0.04 

g 3 (O o £ u.
B 0 .0 2 '

- -2 0 30 Z=0.25 -  - 3 0 2=0.1 - · - 3 0 2=0.01

0.01



0.00
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.50 2.00 X-axis Coordinate [1] 3 00 3.50 4.00

b)

F igure 20 Comparison o f two and three-dimensional buoyancy convection (RaL=1000, M a=l, AR=4, B H l, Pr=7): a) Temperature at free surface 51 b) U at free surface

A comparison has also been performed for thermocapillary flow in a two and threedimensional laterally heated cavity. The two-dimensional case chosen for the analysis included a Marangoni number o f 60000, equal liquid and porous layer thicknesses dj = da = 0.5 to ensure flow in the liquid layer, and an aspect ratio of 4. The two-dimensional results can be seen in Figure 13b. The Biot number is kept constant at B i = 1 for all cases studied. From the velocity vector plot in Figure 21, it is easy to see that a similar flow pattern developed, with the center o f the larger cell closer to the hot vertical wall and free surface. The presence o f a second cell further to the left cannot easily be seen from the vector plot; however it is seen in Figure 22b as a velocity increase at the free surface in that area. Therefore, for both the two and three-dimensional thermocapillary flow, multi cellular flow develops as the aspect ratio is increased.

iirnirnim m rim siiiiiw iiiw iT T T T T T T T rT ifisi^

V

/ / n ,,.

Figure 21 Thermocapillary convection velocity plot with a cut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (Ma=60000, RaL=l, di=d2=0.5, AR=4, B i=I, Pr=7)

52

Figure 22 displays the comparison o f the temperature at the free surface and the U velocity component at the free surface for thermocapillary convection for both the two and three-dimensional geometry. The small oscillations at the start o f the plot for the three-dimensional case are due to the large temperature gradient in that region and boundary layer problems at the vertical wall. The temperature plot in Figure 22a shows a similar trend for both cases, with the three-dimensional temperature being slightly higher in the first half of the cavity closer to the hot wall. From Figure 22b, it is seen that in the three-dimensional case a second cell also develops and is shifted closer to the hot wall, as compared to the two-dimensional case. This shift of the second cell towards the hot wall could be attributed to the fact that, for the three-dimensional cavity, a third cell is beginning to form near the cold vertical wall. Therefore, it is found that, in the threedimensional cavity, multi cellular flow formation occurs earlier, for smaller aspect ratios, than in the two-dimensional case. The maximum non-dimensional velocity in the Xdirection is equal to 274 and 281 for two and three-dimensional convection, respectively. Thermocapillary convection is visibly a stronger driving force for fluid flow when compared to buoyancy convection alone in a laterally heated cavity.

53

1.00 0.90  0.80 0.70

E
g

0.60

£ 0.50

--2D -·-3 D

I 0 40  . |£
0.30 -

0.20 0.10
0.00 0.00

-- I -0.50 1.00 1.50

--

I--

--

I--

--I--
3.50

--I
4.00

2.00

2.50

3.00

X-axis Coordinate [1]

a)
300.00 1

250.00 

200.00

·

» u.

150.00 

--- 2D - ·-3 D

100.00



50.00 -

0.00 0.10

0.60

1.10

1.60

2 10 2.60 X-axis Coordinate [1]

3.10

3.60

4.10

b) F igure 22 Comparison o f two and three-dimensional thermocapillary convection (Ma=60000, d]=d2=0.5, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7) ; a) Temperature at the free surface 54 b) U at the free surface

The last case studied for lateral heating, is that o f combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection. The two-dimensional case that has been chosen for the analysis has the Marangoni number of Ma = 60000 and the liquid Rayleigh number o f R ül = 1000, as indicated in Figure 17b, The cavity is studied for equal thicknesses dj = d 2 = 0.5 and an aspect ratio o f AR = 4. Multi cellular flow is present in the three-dimensional cavity, with the center o f the cell close to the hot wall and free surface.

m

m

nnm #

IIII, ->'^^yyyy/'/////t 11,.

F igure 23 Combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection velocity plot with a cut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (Ma=60000, RaL=1000, di=d2=0.5, AR=4, B i=l, Pr=7)

Figure 24 presents the plots of the temperature and the U velocity component at the free surface for combined thermocapillary and buoyancy convection. The maximum non-

dimensional velocity for the two and three-dimensional convection is equal to 8.67 and 8.89, respectively. These values are in close agreement with each other. However, once again in the three-dimensional flow, the second cell shifted closer to the hot wall-

55

1.00
0.90  0.80  0.70 

E

0.60 ·

--2D -·-3D
f

I

0.40 0.30  0.20
0.10


·

0.00
0.00 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50 3.00 3.50 4.00
X-axis Coordinate [1]

a)
10.00 9.00  8.00
·

7.00 ·
·

6.00



w

3 » »

5.00 

-2D -3D

3
3.00 
2.00


1.00 0.00 0.10

0.60

1.10

1.60 2.10 2.60 X-axis Coordinate [1]

3.10

3.60

4.10

b) Figure 24 Comparison o f two and three dimensional combined buoyancy and thermocapillary convection (Ma=60000, RaL=1000, di=d2=0.5, AR=4, B i= l, Pr=7): a) Temperature at the free surface b) U at the free surface

56

3.2.6 Bottom Heating

Thermocapillary flow in a bottom heated cavity has also been analyzed for similarity between two and three-dimensional convection in Figure 25. The case studied included thermocapillary convection with a Marangoni number o f Ma = 60000, an aspect ratio o f AR = 2, and equal liquid and porous layer thicknesses dj = d 2 = 0.5. As in the twodimensional model, the flow remained in the liquid layer, without penetrating into the porous one. Two counter-rotating cells formed with the highest velocity near the free surface.

Figure 26 shows a graph of the non-dimensional X-component o f velocity, U, at the free surface for thermocapillary convection in a bottom heated cavity. The counter-rotating nature o f the two cells can clearly be seen by the opposite velocities o f the two cells. The trend in the velocities is also very similar for the two cases studied. The three-

dimensional model is in close agreement with the two-dimensional one. Therefore, for the evaporation analysis in the next chapter, only a two-dimensional cavity is studied for the lateral heating condition with thermocapillary convection.

57

1------- --- XX/ / / / / ,  " i` m\\ ` « '\x \x \V N V ii» 4 » 5 e W * * *
V W C W M

··tumth

Z > ]>!> Z >Z > "!> *Z »

' - / / / / / / / / / / / / / X

< :% % % < % /% V //////////'''''' '///

Figure 25 Thermocapillary convection velocity plot with a eut on the Z-axis at 0.25, displayed in the X-Y plane (Ma=60000, RaL=0.1, Rap=0.0055, dj=d2=0.5, AR=2, B i= l, Pr=7)

58

5.00
4.00  3.00 
2.00



w
u_ % -

0.00 0.20
1.00


0.40

0.60

0 80

foo

1.20

1.40

1.60

1.80

2.00

-- · " 2D --3D

-

2.00



-3.00  -4.00 -5.00 X-axis Coordinate [1]

F igure 26 Comparison o f two and three-dimensional thermocapillary convection (Ma=60000, RaL=0.1, Rap=0.0055, di=d2=0.5, AR=2, B i= l, Pr=7)

59

CHAPTER 4 Superposed Liquid and Porous Layer with Evaporation at Free Surface
4.1 Introduction

The evaporation of the liquid occurs at the free surface, thus simultaneously removing heat and mass from the system at that interface. Numerically, only the liquid phase is being modeled with the vapour phase imposing some boundary conditions at the liquid vapour interface as described in section 2.7.3. The laterally heated thermocapillary

convection case is studied for different aspect ratios, thickness ratios and Marangoni numbers. Evaporation is imposed on the free surface with a linear saturation temperature applied at the liquid-vapour interface.

4.2

Lateral Heating

Figure 27 displays the results for thermocapillary convection with evaporation in the liquid layer. The case is considered with the Marangoni number equal to 60000. The liquid Rayleigh number is suppressed to ensure thermocapillary convection. To analyze the flow, the results are compared to those of the case without evaporation at the free surface, as shown in Figure 13. The phenomenon o f evaporation produces some

interesting results. Most evident is the fact that the location o f the cell switches from the hot wall to the cold wall in fluid dominated flow, where the thickness of the liquid layer is equal to that of the porous. However, the fluid motion is still in the counter-clockwise direction. Also, as the aspect ratio is increased, multi cellular flow does not develop as in the case without evaporation. It is also noted that the flow becomes much stronger when the values o f streamlines are compared. In the case without evaporation, for AR =2, the maximum streamline has a value of 1.05x10' as compared to that with evaporation o f 2.81x1 o '. For an aspect ratio o f AR = 4, the case without evaporation has a maximum streamline of 1.04x10', while with evaporation this increases to 2 .03xl0'. It is evident that evaporation enhances the flow greatly when the fluid flow is constrained to the liquid

61

layer.

Similar findings have been shown by Ward et al. [21], where the evaporation

enhanced Marangoni convection.

When comparing the case where the flow enters the entire cavity with a porous layer thickness o f d 2 = 0.97, another interesting fact is observed. For the case o f convection without evaporation, the maximum streamline value for AR = 2, is 1.0x10^. This

decreases to 6.4x10'^ when evaporation is added at the liquid-vapour interface. Similarly for AR = 4, without evaporation, the maximum streamline value is 9.82x10 and with

evaporation this decreases to 3.98x10'^. The strength o f the flow in the porous layer also decreases as the aspect ratio is increased. A conclusion can be made that evaporation does not have a significant affect on flow that is occurring predominantly in the porous layer.

6 .4 x 1 0

3.37x10-'»

AY=6.75xlO"

1 .0 7 -

7

3.98x10-.!

A'F=4.19x10-''

AY=4.19x10-^ c) di=d2=0.5 di=0.03, ds=0.97

Figure 27 Thermocapillary convection with evaporation in the liquid layer (Ma=60000, RaL=l, Pr=7) ; a) AR=2 b) A R -4 c) A R -6

62

Also analyzed is the non-dimensional X-component o f velocity, U, at the free surface for the case without evaporation and with evaporation. This comparison is shown in Figure 28 for AR = 2 in part a and for AR = 4 in part b. For the case when the aspect ratio is equal to 2, the velocity is seen to increase significantly when evaporation is included in the liquid layer. The case without evaporation has a maximum velocity value of 284, and with evaporation this increases to 375. The evaporation is definitely enhancing the flow when the convection is limited to the liquid layer. For the case o f AR = 4, the velocity actually decreases when evaporation is present. The value changes from 274 without evaporation to 251 with evaporation. This can be explained by the fact that in the case without evaporation, multi cellular flow is present, but with evaporation, multiple cells do not develop.

Figure 29 shows a comparison of the X-component o f velocity, U, plotted on the vertical median o f the cavity for convection with and without evaporation. A parabolic trend in the plot is observed which was also noted by Villers and Flatten [10] for flow in a liquid layer. It is also confirmed that there is no flow in the porous layer with a zero velocity throughout the vertical cut below a Y-axis coordinate value o f 0.5. The direction o f the flow is also similar in both cases with the velocity in the counter-clockwise direction. From the plot, it is clear that evaporation enhances the velocity o f the convection. For the case without evaporation, the surface velocity in the negative X-direction is 92, and with evaporation this increases to 298.

63

400.00

350.00 -

300.00 

250.00 
-·-E v a p o ra tio n - -N o Evaporation

CO 2 0 0 .0 0

u. 150.00 

100.00



50.00 ·

0.00 0.00

0.50

1.00 X-axis Coordinate [1]

1.50

2.00

a)
300.00

250.00 

200.00



C O 150.00 u.
.

-·-E v ap o ratio n - -N o Evaporation

100.00

-

50.00 

0.00 0.00

1.00

2.00 X-axis Coordinate [1]

3.00

4.00

b) F igure 28 Comparison o f thermocapillary convection with and without evaporation in the liquid layer (Ma=60000, R a^^ l, di=d2=0.5, Pr=7); a) AR=2 b) AR=4

64

1.00

0.30 
0.80  0.70  * 0 60 
-·-E v ap o ration - " - N o Evaporation

g 0.40 0.30 0.20 0.10




0.00 -300.00

-250.00

-200.00

-150.00

-100.00

-50 00

0.00

50.00

100.00

U on Veritca! Median of Cavity [1]

Figure 29

Comparison o f U component o f velocity on vertical median o f cavity for thermocapillary convection with and without evaporation (Ma=60000, RaL=l, d,=d2=0.5, Pr=7)

Thermocapillary flow with evaporation at the free surface is also investigated for different Marangoni numbers as shown in Figure 30. The Marangoni number increases from 60000, to 80000 and then to 100000. The flow is limited to the liquid layer by choosing equal liquid and porous layer thicknesses di = d 2 = 0.5. The effect o f increasing the Marangoni number is seen as enhanced flow in the liquid layer of the cavity. This can also be visualized by studying Figure 31, where the non-dimensional X-component o f velocity has been plotted for the various Marangoni numbers. The maximum velocity for M a = 60000 is 375. This increases to 469 for Ma = 80000, and 553 for Ma = 100000. Therefore, increasing the Marangoni number enhances thermocapillary convection in a liquid layer with evaporation at the liquid-vapour interface.

65

1.48

a) AY=2.96

3.62x^ 1.89

- 2 .0 7

Figure 30 Thermocapillary convection with evaporation in the liquid layer for different Marangoni numbers (RaL=l, di=d 2 = 0 .5 , AR=2, Pr=7); a)M a=60000 b) M a-80000 c)M a= l 00000

66

600.00

500,00 

400.00 

«
u.

300.00 

-*-M a=60000 --Ma=80000 -«-M a= 100000

200.00

-

100.00

-

0.00 0.00

0.50

1 00 X-axis Coordinate [1]

1,50

2.00

F igure 31 Thermocapillary convection with evaporation in the liquid layer for different Marangoni numbers (RaL=0, di=d 2 = 0 .5 , AR=2, Pr=7)

In Figure 32, a comparison o f the X-direction component o f velocity, U, is again plotted on the vertical median o f the cavity. In this case, the trend is examined for different values o f Marangoni number in the case with evaporation at the free surface. The graph once again displays the parabolic trend that was observed by Villers and Flatten [10] for a liquid layer. The X-component o f velocity is compared at the free surface when Y = 1, for Marangoni numbers o f 60000, 80000 and 100000. The velocity values in the negative X-direction are 298, 365 and 427, respectively. found to enhance the flow. An increased Marangoni number is

67

1.00 r0.90 0.80  0.70 -

--M a=60000 --M a=80000 -·-M a= 1 0 0 0 0 0 g 0.40  0.30 

0.20
0.10


0.00
-400.00 -300.00
-

200.00

-

100.00

0.00

100.00

U on Vertical M edian of Cavity [1]

Figure 32

Comparison o f U component of velocity on vertical median of cavity for

thermocapillary convection with evaporation (R a t^ l, di=d 2 = 0 .5 , AR=2, Pr=7)

68

CHAPTERS Conclusion
In this thesis, buoyancy, thermocapillary and combined buoyancy-thermocapillary convection has been studied in detail. A rectangular finite cavity has been considered Several cases have been examined and they

with bottom and lateral heating conditions. include:

two-dimensional geometry, three-dimensional geometry and the effect o f

evaporation applied to the liquid-vapour interface.

For buoyancy convection with bottom heating, it has been confirmed that the flow switches from fluid layer dominated to porous layer dominated convection upon reaching a critical porous layer thickness value of d 2 = 0.9. The flow oeeupied the entire porous cavity when this critical value was exceeded. For thermocapillary convection with

bottom heating, it was confirmed that the critical porous layer thickness value is 0.96. Below this value, the flow was limited to the liquid layer, and above it, the flow switched to the porous layer. For porous layer dominated thermocapillary flow, it was found that increasing the aspect ratio does not increase the number of cells in the cavity. But when the flow was limited to the liquid layer only, multi cellular convection did form as the aspect ratio was increased. For buoyancy convection, the opposite was found to be true, with multiple cells forming according to the aspect ratio in porous dominated flow.

The flow was found to behave in a similar fashion in the cavity with the lateral heating condition. The flow switched from fluid layer to porous layer dominated convection upon the critical value o f porous layer thickness. The aspect ratio was also found to have an effect on the number of convective cells in the liquid layer for thermocapillary convection, with multiple cells forming accordingly. Thermocapillary flow was found to be stronger in nature when compared to the buoyancy flow in the lateral heating condition. For combined buoyancy and thermocapillary flow, the Marangoni effect was found to enhance the flow in the cavity.

69

upon comparing the results from the two and three-dimensional convection cases, it was
verified that the two-dimensional flow model is a good representation o f the threedimensional situation. However, for the laterally heated cavity with thermocapillary

convection, a greater number o f cells were found to occur in the three-dimensional model.

Lastly, evaporation was applied to the liquid-vapour interface of a laterally heated cavity with thermocapillary convection. An interesting phenomenon was discovered, in which the vortex o f the convective cell switched from the hot side to the cold side when evaporation was applied. Evaporation was also found to enhance the Marangoni

convection significantly, as was shown through the analysis o f the streamlines and velocity profiles at the free surface.

For further study, it would be interesting to analyze the model for different heating conditions and include a different fluid with a different Prandtl number. It would also be interesting to observe the effect o f tilted gravity and aspect ratio. It might also be useful to additionally study evaporation in a three-dimensional cavity.

70

APPENDIX A Non-Dimensional Analysis of Governing Equations

The following dimensionless variables are substituted into the dimensional equations in order to render them non-dimensional:

yv u =-- , F = -- , w =-- , x=~ ,

u

y =ü,
L

z =- ,

p=p L

, A T = Tf,-T^, Th - T c

L =d,+d,,

R e=^

u

Pr = - , a

D a=4 Lr

B .l

Bottom Heating

Liquid Layer

Continuity Equation

du

3v

5>v
=

0

(B .l)

The dimensionless variables are introduced into the equation for each dimensional term.

dj V u J , d ( f V - u J
+ -

d{XL)

d[Y- L)

d{ZL)

0

dU L

dV dW d Y ^ dz

=

0

This further simplifies to give the non-dimensional form o f the continuity equation.

71

du dx

h

dv dY

1 ---------

dw =0 dz

(B.2)

X-direction Momentum Balance Equation

Pf

u

du dx

h V ---------h W  ----

du dy

du dz

d^u dx^

d^u dy^

d^u dz^

(B.3)

Left hand side:

Pf

Right hand side:

L d(X-L)

+ //·

d^(u u j 3 (jr -L )`

a '( [ / " J d(YLf

,

3{Z-Lf

These equations are then simplified by taking out the common variables on both the left hand side and right hand side:

u.

d^U dX d¥ dZ

d^U

d^U dZ^

Pf-

dx^ " * * d¥^

Multiplying the above equation by a faetor o f ------- to further simplify the equation P'Uo gives:

72

Re . Where: dX dY dz

dP

d^U dx^

d^U d^U dy' ^ az'

(B.4)

Re

_ P f -Uq L
P

Y-direction Momentum Balance Equation

Pf

U · ------ 1-V --------- h W ------

dv dx

dv dy

dv dz

d 'v

d 'v dy^

d 'v dz'

 Ï -

dx'

~ P'fir'{P ~Pc)'8

(B.5)

Substitute in the non-dimensional terms and take out common variables to get:

Pf

p-^o dx dy dz

, p- ^ o

d 'K d 'K d% ' ^ d y '

d 'K dZ'

Multiply the above equation by the factor o f -------- . P- ^o (7 --r^ ) = ( r ,, - r J - 0 .

It should be noted that

Re-

dx

dy

dz

d 'K d 'F d 'F djy' ^ d y ' ^ d z ' ~v"
*

- T c)' 8- P

Simplify the * term:

*

--

Û pprg{T,,-T^) P- ^o

Add and subtract 7} in the (7//-7c) term to get: 73

L^pPrg[(T,-T,)+(T,-Tc)]
W ,

Substitute in t> = -- and separate the two terms:

v- u^

vu,,

The liquid Rayleigh number and porous Rayleigh number for the bottom heating case are defined as:

a v

'

^

g Pr  d, K ( T ,, - T , ) a v

Substitute those into the equation to get:

*

_

a  Rup  1} ^ a ·Rüj^  iJ d^-K-Uo u^- d^

From the Reynolds number, substitute in

Pf-L

the Prandtl number, P r =

^ , a p

and the Darcy number. Da = -- .

*6^2

 L *Da · Re- Pr

Rui^ Ü Re- Pr-

Note that Z = J , -f c?2 · Hence,

74

1 Re- Pr

Rup ~D ^ d.

+ Ra^ -

A definition o f the Reynolds number for FIDAP 8.7.0 can be formulated as follows if the characteristic velocity is taken as A T L , with the A T = T ,, - T c .

V

Re =

yjg-Pr-ATL-L
V

Add and subtract 7} in the A T term, and separate the variables.

Re

Substitute in the liquid and porous Rayleigh numbers, as well as the Darcy and Prandtl numbers. Also note that i = c?, + «ij. The Reynolds number can now be defined as:

Re --

Pr

Rüp Da

d.

Now introduce the defined Reynolds number into the simplified * term.

75



Rap Da
--

+
^2
,

f, d^ t  1 + -^ rf, + Rat

Rap ~ D^

Next, the denominator is rationalized to reveal the final simplified * term:

*

--

Pr

Rup r d A 1H ----- + Rüp  14--^ Da V ^,J 2y

3

Therefore, the final form o f the non-dimensional equation in the y-direction can be expressed as:

Re U- -- + V -- + W --

dx

dr

dz

d^V dx^

d^V 37"

d^V -R e -0 3Z"

(B.6 )

Energy Equation

ip-c, p )'f

U ·--

dT dx

kV·

dT dT -----1- W -----dy dz

= k.

3"r

t-

3 " r 3"T -43y" ' 3z"

(B.7)

Substitute in the non-dimensional parameters to obtain:

Left hand side:

d{X L)

^

3 ( 7 -L)

3(Z-Z,)

Right hand side:

76

d i X L f

d { Y L f

d i Z L f

Extract the common variables from the left hand side and the right hand side.

do
dz dx

'd^ O d^o] dx^ ay"
Re = -- -- --- , and the Prandtl number, M

Substitute in the Reynolds number.

// (Cp) Pr = ---------- --, to get the non-dimensional form o f the energy equation.

Re Pr- U ~ + V -- + W --
dx dY

dz

d^e dx^

d^d dY^

d^e dz^

(B.8)

Porous Layer

Continuity Equation

For the derivation o f the non-dimensional continuity equation, refer to the liquid layer section above.

X-direction Momentum Balance Equation

d^u K dx

d^u d^u +-- T+ dx^ dy^ dz^

(B.9)

Introduce the dimensionless parameters and factor out the common variables:

77

d^U

d^U

d^U

dx^

ay" ^ az"
to further simplify the equation,

Multiply the equation by the factor o f

d^U K dx

d^U

d^U

a % " ay" az"
K

Substitute in the Darcy number Da = -- to get the final non-dimensional form o f the equation:

1

lD a \

U-

dx

^^4-

a"D

d^U

d^U

â^^ay"

(B.IO)

Energy Equation

dT ( p - C ,) ,- U ·-- dx

hV

dT dy

h W -------

dT dz

=

a"r a"r a"r a % " a y " az"

Introduce the dimensionless variables into the above equation to receive the following:

Left hand side:

( p - c ,V

d{x-L)

a(y z) ^

a(z-L)

Right hand side:

78

d[X-LY d{Y-Ly 3[ZLY
Extract the common variables from the left hand side and the right hand side. Substitute in the Reynolds number, Re = -- -- -----, and the Prandtl number,

Pr =

, to get the non-dimensional form o f the energy equation.

Re Pr

dx

dr

dz

=G

d^e d^G d^e ax' ^ a r' ^az'

(B.l 2)

W here the non-dimensional overall thermal conductivity is:

G-- ^ + (l -- ^) ----
kr

B.2

Lateral Heating

The derivations o f the continuity, X and Z direction momentum balance, and energy equations are similar to those for the bottom heating condition and given above.

Y-direction Momentum Balance Equation

Pf

U

dv dx

hV

av av hW· dy dz

a 'v ax'

a 'v

a 'v a%'

-pj3r{T-Tc)g

(B.l 3)

Substitute in the non-dimensional terms and take out common variables:

79

_

p u,,

d P , p u^

av av av
a%" ^ a y " ^ a z "

- p -Pt ' ^ - T c ) - g

Tj

Multiply the above equation b y M- K

, and note that (T --7^) = (7^ --7^)- ^ .

Re U- -- + V -- + W --

dx

dY

dZ - § ^

av + -- avT-+ av ax' ay' az'

p-Pr(T,,-Tc)g-e

**

Simplify the ** term:

For lateral heating case, the liquid Rayleigh and porous Rayleigh numbers are defined as follows:

^

S-Prà^K \T,,-T,)
^

^

av

'

They are also related by:

Rap Da  f = 7?a, L

-(^ 1

+ t/J '
,3

d\

Substitute the liquid Rayleigh number into the ** term:

^ ' P 'RaL -a-'O

80

Substitute in the Prandtl number, Pr = ^f Pf
 )

)/ k.

, the thermal diffusivity of the fluid.

a

Pf ' ^ , and the Reynolds number. Re =  ------M /

* *

Pr- Re

Noting that L = d^ +d^ , the equation becomes:

* *

--

1 Re

Pr

\

`'y

By assuming that

= ^Jg - Pj.  AT L , the Reynolds number can now be defined as:
·

R e=

Pr

The final form o f the non-dimensional equation in the y-direction can be expressed as;

Re

BP dx BY

az

a r" ^

av av av Bx^ ay" az"

-R e -^

81

APPENDIX B Input Files

C .l

Marangoni Convection Lateral Heating

title Marangoni Convection in Fluid/Porous Laterally Heated Cavity /lateral heating Marangoni case fimesh(2-d , imax=5. jmax= 5) expi /I 2 3 4 5 /I 0 15 0 29 1 0 121 0 241 expj 71 2 3 4 5 71 0 15 0 29 1 0 41 0 81 7 /physical dimension of the probl( 6 for different cases /the aspect ratio is! varied here $ar=4 $arl=$ar/2 7the thickness of the liquid and $dl=0. 5 $d2=0. 5 $l=$dl +$d2 7 point y z 7n i ] k X 1 $ar 0 0 1 1 5 $d2 0 2 5 3 1 $ar $1 0 3 5 5 1 $ar 0 0 4 3 1 1 $arl $d2 0 5 3 3 1 $arl $1 0 6 3 5 1 $arl 0. 0 7 1 1 1 0. $d2 0 8 1 3 1 0. $1 0 9 1 5 1 0. line 71st Plane 2 1 5 4 8 7 2 3 5.5 4 5 6 5.5 4 8 9 5.5 4 4 1 5.5 4 5 2 5.5 4 6 3 5.5 4 4 7 5.5 4

83

5 6
1

8 9
8

5 . 5 4 5.5 4

,

surface 2 9 elements(boundary, 3 9 elements(continuum, 7 2 elements(continuum, 8 3 elements(boundary,
8 2

edge, nodes=3, entity="free") quad, nodes=9, entity="porous") quad, nodes=9, edge, nodes=3, entity^"fluid") entity="interface")

elements(boundary, edge, nodes=3, entity="freec") 3 9 bcnode(coordinate) 3 3 9 9 /define a temperature of 1 for the right vertical wall and 0 for left wall bcnode(temperature,constant) 13 1 7 9 0 bcnode(uy,constant) 3 9 0 17 0 bcnode(surface,constant) 3 9 0 bcnode(ux, constant) 12 0 7 8 0 bcnode(velocity,constant) 2 3 0 8 9 0 / /Physical parameters / /the physical parameters can be varied depending on the case studied $da=le-5 $por=0.39 $biot=l $pr=7 $ral=l $ma=60000 $trl-(1+($d2/$dl) )'3 $re=($trl+$ral/$pr)"0.5 $ c2=($ma/($re*$pr)) / end fiprep problem(2-D, buoyancy, free, nonlinear) pressure(mixed=l.Oe-8, disc) execution(newjob) solution(segr=200,velconv=0.001,normal=40,ncgc=le-6,scgc=le-6) option(stress-divergence) relax

84

0.12 0.12 0.12 0.0 0.01 0.6 density(set=l, constant=$re) specificheat(set=l, constant=$pr) viscosity(set=1, constant=l) conductivity(set=l, constant=l) conductivity(set=2, constant=l.43) permeability(acoef, constant=l, x=$da, y=$da, porosity=$por) gravity(magnitude=l) htransfer(constant=$biot, temperature, reftemp=0) surfacetension(curve=4) -100000 0 1 100000 0 0 -$c2 -$c2 renumber(profile) entity(name="porous", porous, maperm=l, mscond=2) entity(name="fluid", fluid) entity(name="free", surface) entity(name="freec", convection, attach="fluid") entity(name="interface", plot, attach="porous") end create(FISOLV)

C.2

Evaporation Lateral Heating

title Marangoni Convection in Fluid/Porous Cavity with Evaporation /lateral heating evaporation case fimesh(2-d, imax=5, jmax=5) expi /I 23 4 5 /I 0 15 0 29 1 0 121 0 241 expj /I 23 4 5 /I 0 15 0 29 1 0 41 0 81 / /physical dimension of the problem

/
/the aspect ratio is varied depending on the case being studied $ar=2 $arl=$ar/2 /the thickness of the liquid and porous layer is varied depending on /the case being studied $dl=0.5 $d2=0.5 $l=$dl+$d2 / point /n i y z j k X 0 0 1 5 1 1 $ar $d2 0 2 5 3 1 $ar 0 $1 3 5 5 1 $ar 0 0 4 3 1 1 $arl 0 $d2 5 3 3 1 $arl 0 $1 6 3 5 1 $arl

85

7

1

1

1

8 1 3 1 9 1 5 1 line /1st Plane
2 1

0. 0. 0.

0. $d2 $1

0 0 0

5 4 8 7 2 3 5.5 5 6 5.5 8 9 5.5 4 1 5.5 5 2 5.5 6 3 5.5 4 7 5.5 5 8 5.5 6 9 5.5 surface
1 8

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

2 9 elements(boundary, 3 9 elements(continuum, 7 2 elements(continuum, 8 3 elements(boundary,
8 2

edge, nodes=3, entity="free") quad, nodes=9, quad, nodes=9, edge, nodes=3, entity="porous") entity="fluid") entity="interface")

bcnode(coordinate) 3 3 9 9 bcnode(temperature,constant) 13 1 7 9 0 bcnode(uy,constant) 3 9 0 17 0 bcnode(surface,constant) 3 9 0 bcnode(ux, constant) 12 0 7 8 0 bcnode(velocity,constant) 2 3 0 8 9 0

/
/Physical parameters / $da=le-5 $por=0.39 $biot=l $pr=7 $ral=l $ma=60000 $trl=(l+($d2/$dl))"3 $re=($trl*$ral/$pr)^0.5

86

$ c 2 = ($ma/($re*$pr))

/
end fiprep problem(2-D, energy, free, nonlinear) pressure(mixed=l.Oe-8, disc) execution(newj ob) solution(segr=2 0 0 , velconv=0.001, lcinematic=10, ncgc=le-6, scgc=le-6) o p t i o n (stress-divergence) relax 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.0 0.01 0.6 density(set=l,constant=$re) specificheat(set=l, constant=$pr) viscosity{set=l, constant=l) conductivity(set=l, constant=l) conductivity{set=2, constant=1.43) permeability(acoef, constant=l, x=$da, y=$da, porosity=$por) gravity(magnitude=l) latentheat(set="evapo", constant=-598) /a subroutine which applies the linear saturation temperature at the free /surface is called bcnode(temp, entity="free", fsub) surfacetension(set="evapo", curve=4) -100000 0 1 100000 0 0 -$c2 -$c2 renumber(profile) entity(name="porous", porous, maperm=l, mscond=2) entity(name="fluid", fluid) /the evap keyword applies mass transfer at the free surface entity(name="free", surface, attach="fluid", evap, mlat="evapo" , msur f = "evapo") entity(name="interface", plot, attach^"porous") end c r e a t e (FISOLV) RUN(FISOLV, IDENT="Trialla", FISOLVEXEC="myfisolv", BACKGROUND)

87

REFERENCES

[1]

D. A. Nield, A. Bejan, Convection in Porous Media. York, 1992.

Springer-Verlag: New

[2]

V. P. Carey, Liquid-Vapor Phase-Change Phenomena:

An Introduction to the

Thermophysics o f Vaporization and Condensation Processes in Heat Transfer Equipment. Taylor & Francis; Bristol PA, 1992.

[3]

G. S. Beavers, D. D. Joseph, "Boundary conditions at a naturally permeable wall," J. Fluid Mechanics 30 (1967) 197-207.

[4]

D. A. Nield, "Onset of convection in a fluid layer overlying a layer o f a porous medium," J. Fluid Mechanics 81 (1977) 513-522.

[5]

F. Chen, C. F. Chen, "Onset o f finger convection in a horizontal porous layer underlying a fluid layer," J. Heat Transfer 110 (1988) 403-409.

[6]

F. Chen, C. F. Chen, "Experimental investigation o f convective stability in a superposed fluid and porous layer when heated from below," J. Fluid Mechanics 207 (1989)311-321.

[7]

S. J. Kim, C. Y. Choi, "Convective heat transfer in porous and overlying fluid layers heated from below," Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 39 (1996) 319-329.

[8]

T. Desaive, G. Lebon, M. Flennenberg, "Coupled capillary and gravity-driven instability in a liquid film overlying a porous layer," Physical Review E 64 (2001 ).

[9]

M. Z. Saghir, P. Comi, M. Mehrvar, "Effects o f interaction between Rayleigh and

89

Marangoni convection in superposed fluid and porous layers," Int. J. Sciences 41 3 (2002) 207-215.

Thermal

[10]

D. Villers, J. K. Flatten, "Coupled buoyancy and Marangoni convection in acetone: experiments and comparison with numerical simulations," Mechanics 234 (1992) 487-510. J. Fluid

[11]

M. Z. Saghir, P. Mahendran, M. Hennenberg, "Marangoni and gravity driven convection in a liquid layer overlying a porous layer: Lateral and bottom heating conditions," Energy Sources 27 (2005) 151-171.

[12]

P. C. Dauby, G. Lebon, "Benard-Marangoni instability in rigid rectangular containers," J. Fluid Mechanics 329 (1996) 25-64.

[13]

M. F. Schatz, S. J. VanHook, W. D. McCormick, J. B. Swift, H. L. Swinney "Onset o f Surface-Tension-Driven Benard Convection," Physical Review E 75 (1995) 1938-1941.

[14]

P. M. Parmentier, V. C. Regnier, G, Lebon, J. C. Legros, "Nonlinear analysis o f coupled gravitational and capillary thermoconvection in thin fluid layers," Physical Review E 54 (1996) 411-423.

[15]

V. Regnier, P. C. Dauby, P. Parmentier, G. Legon, "Square cells in gravitational and capillary thermoconvection," Review E 55 (1996) 6860-6865.

[16]

D. E. Haas, D. P. Bimie, "Evaluation of thermocapillary driving forces in the development o f striations during the spin coating process," J. Material Science 37 (2002)2109-2116.

[17]

F. Mashayek, "Dynamics o f evaporating drops.

Part I:

formulation and

evaporation model," Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 44 (2001) 1517-1526.

90

[18]

V. M. Ha, C. L. Lai, "Onset o f Marangoni instability o f a two-component evaporation droplet," Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 45 (2002) 5143-5158.

[19]

A. T. Shih, C. M. Megaridis, "Thermocapillary flow effects on convective droplet evaporation," Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 39 (1996) 247-257.

[20]

G. Fang, C. A. Ward, "Temperature measured close to the interface o f an evaporating M qm àf Physical Review E 59 (1999) 417-428.

[21]

C. A. Ward, D. Stanga, "Interfacial conditions during evaporation or condensation o f water," Physical Review E 64 (2001).

[22]

C. A. Ward, F. Duan, D. Stanga, Z. Saghir, "Characteristics o f Marangoni-Benard Convection During Water Evaporation," Microgravity Transport Processes in Fluid, Thermal, Materials, and Biological Sciences II, Sept. 30 - Oct. 5, 2001, Banff, Canada.

[23]

FIDAP USER MANUAL, Volume 8.7.0, 1999

[24]

F. M. White. Fluid Mechanics 4^^ Edition. WCM/McGraw-Hill: Toronto, 1999.

91

