                 

"HEY  FAGGOT"   UNDERSTANDING  THAT  THE  CURRENT  HOMELESS  SYSTEM,  PLANNING  POLICY,  AND   LAND  USE  PLANNING  TOOLS  IS  NOT  DESIGNED  TO  ADDRESS  THE  SOCIALIZED  AND   INSTUTIONALIZED  DISREGARD  FOR  THE  LGBTQ  HOMELESS  YOUTH  POPULATION      by   James  Bar   BMGMT,  Dalhousie  University  2011      A  Major  Research  Paper   Presented  to  Ryerson  University      In  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of        Master  of  Planning   In   Urban  Development            Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2013                                                ©  James  Bar  2013              

  

  

     

Author's  Declaration  

   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  major  research  paper.  This  is  a  true   copy  of  the  major  research  paper,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by   my  examiners.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  major  research  paper  to  other  institutions  or   individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.        I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  major  research  paper  by   photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  as  the  request  of  other  institutions   or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  the  scholarly  research.        I  understand  that  my  major  research  paper  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the   public.                                                                                              

  

ii  

   "HEY  FAGGOT"   UNDERSTANDING  THAT  THE  CURRENT  HOMELESS  SYSTEM,  PLANNING  POLICY,   AND  LAND  USE  PLANNING  TOOLS  IS  NOT  DESIGNED  TO  ADDRESS  THE  SOCIALIZED   AND  INSTUTIONALIZED  DISREGARD  FOR  THE  LGBTQ  HOMELESS  YOUTH   POPULATION      James  Bar,  2013      Master  of  Planning     In   Urban  Development     Ryerson  University  

ABSTRACT  
Making   up   a   disproportionate   amount   of   the   homeless   youth   population,   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   face   a   myriad  of  problems  from  increased  depression  and  anxiety,  emotional  and  belonging  issues;  higher  rates   of  suicide,  drug  and  alcohol  abuse;  and  higher  rates  of  STI  and  heath  problems  associated  with  increased   rates  of  survival  sex.      The  findings,  derived  from  a  literature  review,  a  review  of  current  policies  and  land  use  planning  tools  in   Toronto,  interviews  with  two  frontline  homeless  service  providers  and  two  policy  workers,  have  brought   to   light   areas   where   the   profession   of   urban   planning   can   contribute   to   reform   the   current   system   of   shelter  and  support  facilities.          Through  language  and  skills  training,  provincial  and  municipal  policy  on  housing  and  homelessness,  land   use   planning   tools   of   zoning   by-laws   and   public   consultations   and   the   siting   of   facilities,   and   political   backing,  urban  planning  can  help  to  aid  in  the  provision  of  services  for  LGBTQ  homeless  youth.    

  

  

Key  Terms    
   LGBTQ  ­  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual,  Transgender,  Queer      Queer  ­  An  umbrella  term  for  the  LGBTQ  population,  as  well  as  a  means  of  self- identification  in  the  LGBTQ  population     

  

iii  

  

Acknowledgements  

   Joseph  Springer,  my  faculty  supervisor.  Thank  you  for  your  guidance,  partnership,  and   shared  passion  for  this  topic.              Sharif  Mahdy,  my  second  reader.  Thank  you  for  your  support,  added  enthusiasm,  and   knowledge  about  this  field.              Sonya  Reynolds.  Thank  you  for  guiding  me  through  this  large  field  of  work  pointing  me   towards  numerous  organizations  across  the  city.                                                                                                    

  

iv  

Table  of  Contents  
AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION   ABSTRACT   KEY  TERMS   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   1.0  ­  INTRODUCTION  AND  CONTEXT   1.1  -  LGBTQ  YOUTH  HOMELESSNESS   1.2  -  TORONTO  AND  LGBTQ  YOUTH  HOMELESSNESS   1.3  -  PLANNING  AND  SOCIAL  ISSUES   1.4  -  PLANNING  AND  LGBTQ  YOUTH  HOMELESSNESS   LANGUAGE   POLICY  AND  FUNDING   LAND  USE  PLANNING  TOOLS   2.0  ­  METHODOLOGY   2.1  -  LITERATURE  REVIEW  ON  LGBTQ  YOUTH  HOMELESSNESS   COMING  OUT  AND  LEAVING  HOME   ABUSE  IN  THE  SUPPORT  AND  SHELTER  SYSTEM   HEALTH  ISSUES  FOR  HOMELESS  LGBT  YOUTHS   TACKLING  LGBT  YOUTH  HOMELESSNESS   2.2  ­  TORONTO'S  POLICIES  SURROUNDING  HOMELESSNESS   ADDRESS  THE  ISSUE   EVIDENCE  AND  REALITY   VISION   BUDGET   INDICATORS   2.3  ­  REVIEW  OF  EXISTING  LAND  USE  PLANNING  TOOLS   ZONING   PUBLIC  CONSULTATION   2.3  -  INTERVIEWS  WITH  PARTICIPANTS   INTERVIEWS  WITH  POLICY  AND  PROGRAM  PROFESSIONALS  IN  THE  FIELD  OF   HOMELESSNESS   II   III   III   IV   1   1   1   4   5   5   6   6   8   8   8   10   11   14   15   17   17   18   18   18   18   19   21   22   23  

WHAT  IS  YOUR  KNOWLEDGE  ON  LGBTQ  FOCUSED  PROGRAMS  AND  SERVICE  PROVIDERS  IN  THE  CITY  OF   TORONTO?  WHAT  ARE  THE  BARRIERS  TO  ACCESSING  SERVICES  IN  THE  CITY?   23   HOW  DOES  THE  HEALTH  OF  LGBTQ  HOMELESS  YOUTH  COMPARE  TO  THAT  OF  THEIR  HETEROSEXUAL   COUNTERPARTS?   25   WHAT  ARE  THE  FACTORS  THAT  PROLONG  HOMELESSNESS?   26  

  

v  

HOW  CAN  THE  CURRENT  DESIGN  OF  SHELTERS  IN  THE  CITY  BETTER  REFLECT  THE  NEEDS  OF  LGBTQ   HOMELESS  YOUTH?   26   WHAT  ARE  THE  CHALLENGES  TO  SITING  NEW  SHELTERS  AND  ASSISTED  HOUSING  UNITS?  AND  HOW  CAN  WE   ALTER  THE  CURRENT  DESIGN  AND  APPROACH  TO  THE  SITING  OF  SHELTER  AND  SUPPORT  FACILITIES?   27   3.0  -  DISCUSSION   4.0  -  RECOMMENDATIONS  AND  CONCLUSIONS   LANGUAGE   POLICY  AND  FUNDING   LAND  USE  PLANNING  TOOLS   5.0  ­  LIMITATIONS   6.0  -  WORKS  CITED   29   36   36   37   38   40   41  

  

              
                                         

  

vi  

1.0  ­  Introduction  and  Context   1.1  -  LGBTQ  Youth  Homelessness  

Fifty  percent  of  gay  males  experience  a  negative  parental  reaction  when  they  come  out,   and  26%  of  those  are  met  with  a  demand  that  the  youth  leave  home  (Ray,  2006,  p.  16).   Survival,   identity,   belonging,   health   issues;   homelessness   bring   young   people   face-to- face  with  new  risks  as  well  as  exacerbating  already  existing  issues  in  their  lives  (Walls,   Potter,  &  Van  Leeuwen,  2009,  p.  235).      Available  data  suggest  LGBTQ  young  people  are  over-represented  in  the  homeless  youth   population   (Reck,   2009,   p.   223).   Based   on   a   press   release   from   Human   Resources   Development   Canada,   LGBT   youth   are   thought   to   represent   25-40%   of   street   youth   in   Canadian  cities  (Josephson  &  Wright,  2000),  which  is  out  of  proportion  with  the  1.1%  of   Canadians   that   identify   as   LGBTQ   (Canadian   Community   Health   Survey,   2012).   Similar   findings  have  been  released  in  the  USA,  where  the  estimate  is  between  20  and  40%,  with   some  estimates  as  high  as  50%  of  the  homeless  youth  population  (Ray,  2006,  p.  13).        LGBTQ   homeless   youth   face   a   myriad   of   problems   from   increased   depression   and   anxiety,  emotional  and  belonging  issues;  higher  rates  of  suicide,  drug  and  alcohol  abuse;   and  higher  rates  of  STI  and  health  problems  associated  with  increased  rates  of  survival   sex.    

1.2  -  Toronto  and  LGBTQ  Youth  Homelessness  
Numerous  cities  in  North  America  are  seeing  a  rise  in  homeless  queer  youth,  though  it  is   not   reflected   in   current   policy   and   programming   as   shelters   and   faith   based   housing  

  

1  

organizations  do  not  adequately  address  the  unique  emotional  and  belonging  issues  of   this  population  (Ray,  2006,  p.  2).        Tackling   the   issue   of   homelessness   in   the   City   of   Toronto   is   a   seemingly   daunting   and   ever   challenging   task.   A   staple   in   the   urban   fabric,   homelessness   is   a   prominent   issue.   Toronto   has   faced   challenges   generating   public   support   to   recognize   and   assist   its   homeless   population.   Former   mayors   of   Toronto   have   declared   that   there   are   no   homeless   people   in   certain   areas   of   the   city   only   to   wake   up   the   next   morning   to   find   that  a  homeless  woman  has  frozen  to  death  in  a  bus  shelter  over  night  (Butt,  De  Gaetano,   &  Thompson,  2004).        There  exists  shelter,  support,  and  numerous  outreach  organizations  in  the  city  to  aid  in   the  everyday  lives  of  these  citizens.  Through  broad  sweeping  objectives  in  the  Toronto   Housing   Charter,   policy   makers,   planners,   NGO's,   faith-based   organizations,   and   activists,   have   been   working   on   policies   and   programs   to   assist   this   population   as   a   whole.   But   these   objectives   ignore   the   nuance   of   specific   populations   that   exist   within   the  homeless  community.          Addressing  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender,  and  queer  (LGBTQ)  homelessness  in  the   City   of   Toronto   has   not   been   a   priority   for   this   is   constantly   seen   through   a   lack   of   recognition   by   formal   channels.   This   young,   vulnerable   population   is   underserved   by   support  agencies  and  underrepresented  in  the  current  homeless  lexicon.        Every   year,   thousands   of   homeless   youth   stay   in   shelters   in   Toronto   (CMHC,   2001).   The   current  system  of  shelter  support  and  programs  is  not  designed  to  address  the  stigmas   and  hate  directed  at  LGBTQ  homeless  youth,  and  as  a  result,  queer  homeless  youth  end   up  on  the  streets  rather  than  in  a  system  of  care.  

  

2  

   There   are   numerous   city   programs   aimed   at   helping   homeless   youth   in   the   City   of   Toronto   (Streets   to   Homes,   Youth   Shelter   Support,   Housing   Help   and   Follow-up,   Employment   and   Training,   Aboriginal   Youth   Programs),   and   while   the   Sherbourne   Health   Centre   caters   to   the   health   needs   of   the   LGBTQ   community,   there   are   no   designated   shelters   or   transition   programs   aimed   directly   at   serving   the   LGBTQ   homeless  youth  in  Toronto.        There   has   already   been   one   push   to   create   an   LGBTQ   homeless   shelter   in   the   City   of   Toronto   but   with   no   results.   Titled   "House   Call,"   a   series   of   community   conversations   were  held  to  build  a  movement  to  create  a  shelter  for  homeless  LGBTQ  youth.        Toronto's  housing  charter  outlines  the  policies  that  serve  as  a  guide  for  City  Council  and   the   public   service   on   how   to   aid   in   the   provision   of   delivering   services   for   all   its   citizens   to   provide   access   to   safe,   secure,   affordable,   living   spaces   and   outreach   programs   free   from  bias  and  discrimination  (City  of  Toronto,  2009).  Regardless  of  whether  they  rent,   own,  or  are  homeless,  they  all  have  an  equal  stake  and  voice  in  Toronto's  future.        The  social  challenges  faced  by  cities  like  Toronto  are  complex  and  nuanced  and  cannot   be   addressed   broadly   in   policy   and   programming.   Toronto   is   not   new   to   the   game   of   creating   action   on   social   issues.   Recognizing   and   tackling   the   issue   of   LGBTQ   youth   homelessness   in   the   city   will   take   the   coordination   of   policy   and   programming,   leveraging  of  land  use  planning  tools,  as  well  as  funding  and  the  political  will  to  elevate   the  issue.      

  

3  

1.3  -  Planning  and  Social  Issues  
The   correlation   between   public   health   issues   and   urban   planning   interventions   is   strong.  Planning  is  rooted  in  public  health  and  safety,  dating  back  to  its  early  triumphs   with  its  role  in  sanitation  and  separation  of  unfavorable  land  uses,  exemplified  by  John   Snow's   mapping   of   cholera   outbreaks   to   contaminated   wells   from   sewage   in   London,   England.  Planners  responsibility  to  the  public  is  to  ensure  a  healthy  and  livable  space  for   everyone   that   inhabits   them.   Through   policy   direction,   planning   interventions,   and   design  solutions,  urban  planners  have  long  been  intervening  in  urban  affairs.      Planners   are   change   agents,   charged   with   representing   societies'   best   interests,   they   aid   in   the   provision   of   services   and   social   equity   through   management   of   the   built   form   and   recognition   and   action   on   societal   issues.   The   role   of   the   planner   is   to   not   just   recognize   the   issues   at   hand,   but   to   develop   policy   creation   and   implementation,   comprehensive   planning   interventions,   and   design   solutions.      Planners   are   guardians   of   public   health   and  aid  in  the  provision  of  services.        Toronto   is   not   new   to   reacting   and   working   to   solve   social   ailments   with   planning   interventions.   Saul   Betsch's   sexual   assault   and   murder   of   the   12-year-old   Toronto   shoeshine   boy   Emanuel   Jacques   in   1977   shocked   the   city   and   led   to   protests   and   pressure   on   politicians   to   clean   up   Yonge   Street   (OMNI).   It   was   this   pressure   that   led   politicians  and  urban  professionals  to  revitalize  the  seedy  Yonge  Street  Strip  by  shutting   down   body   rub   parlors   and   clearing   out   undesirable   businesses   for   the   creation   of   Yonge-Dundas  Square.        With   Cabbagetown   gentrifying   in   the   1970's   and   1980's,   there   was   a   push   to   remove   prostitution   from   the   neighbourhood.   Through   redirecting   traffic   movement   of   the  

  

4  

numerous   one-way   streets,   it   became   inconvenient   for   `tricks'   to   drive   through,   pushing   the  business  out  of  the  neighbourhood.        Most  recently,  urban  planning  has  reacted  to  remediating  its  own  outdated  intervention.   Urban   planners   have   begun   to   revitalize   Regent   Park,   the   large   1940's   social   housing   project,   attempting   to   reduce   social   alienation   through   environmental   design   by   reconnecting   the   street   grid   with   the   larger   city,   rebuilding   the   urban   fabric,   and   introducing  services  back  into  the  neighbourhood.    

1.4  -  Planning  and  LGBTQ  Youth  Homelessness    

Planners   have   a   dynamic   expanded   vision.   The   role   of   the   planner   is   to   recognize   the   issues   at   hand,   and   develop   policy   creation   and   implementation,   comprehensive   planning   interventions,   and   design   solutions,   giving   planners   a   broad   perspective   on   how   to   address   LGBTQ   youth   homelessness.      Planning   responses   need   to   be   proactive   and   collaborative,   utilizing   policy   to   aid   in   the   provision   of   services.   Policy   begins   by   formally   recognizing   the   issue   at   hand,   outlining   how   a   society   has   chosen   to   address   and  remediate  the  issue.        Coupled   with   research,   there   are   three   main   areas   of   focus   where   urban   planners   can   aid  in  the  provision  of  services  for  LGBTQ  homeless  youth;  language,  policy  and  funding;   and  through  land  use  planning  tools.    

Language  
Language   skills   training   alone   cannot   be   addressed   directly   through   planning   interventions.  This  does  not  mean  planners  are  excused  from  language  comprehension   and  knowledge  of  the  issues,  as  they  must  possess  the  skills  and  knowledge  in  order  to   write   effective   policy   and   secure   funding.   They   will   also   need   to   interact   with   LGBTQ  

  

5  

homeless  youth  in  order  to  create  interventions  using  municipal  land  use  that  reflect  the   needs  of  the  community.        Planners,   when   bringing   their   expertise   outside   the   realm   of   traditional   land   use   planning,  must  be  able  to  communicate  and  use  particular  language  skills  that  pertain  to   the  subject  at  hand  in  order  to  write  effective  policy.      

Policy  and  Funding  
Policy   should   clearly   address   the   issue   it   is   hoping   to   affect,   and   be   supported   by   evidence   such   as   statistics,   best   practices,   and   professional   opinion.   Effective   policy   should   include   a   vision   and   action   plan   with   a   clear   source   of   funding   for   obtaining   policy   objectives.   They   should   also   include   a   means   to   measure   how   a   policy   is   being   achieved   through   its   projects   and   programs.   Currently   this   is   lacking   in   the   municipal   policies  with  regard  to  LGBTQ  youth  homelessness.  Not  only  can  policy  be  a  reflection  of   societies  values  and  ideals,  policy  lays  the  groundwork  for  program  delivery,  design,  and   funding  to  aid  in  the  provision  of  services.  

Land  use  Planning  Tools    
Planning  processes  need  to  be  clear,  equitable,  and  have  the  greater  needs  of  society  in   mind.   Toronto   needs   to   look   towards   the   creation   of   an   LGBTQ   focused   shelter   and   support   services,   utilizing   municipal   land   use   planning   tools   through   the   reworking   of   zoning  by-laws  to  include  shelters  as-of-right  across  the  city.      The   public   process   for   siting   of   new   facilities   should   include   all   stakeholders,   but   the   current   municipal   planning   tools   of   zoning   by-laws   and   public   consultations   favour   property  owners  and  discourage  the  siting  of  new  shelter  and  support  facilities.        The  planning  process  itself,  designed  to  give  everyone  a  chance  to  be  heard,  is  actually   hindering   the   placement   of   new   shelters   based   on   the   interests   of   a   few   actors   with   a      6  

perceived  greater  interest.    Planners  need  to  recognize  this  limitation  and  act  not  in  the   interests  of  a  small  few,  but  for  the  greater  public  good.    

                             
     

  
        

  

7  

2.0  ­  Methodology  
There   are   three   methods   employed   to   explore   the   subject   of   LGBTQ   youth   homelessness,   each   addressing   an   area   that   the   profession   of   planning   can   address   to   strengthen  its  approach.        By   analyzing   accounts   of   discrimination   and   abuse   in   the   system   through   a   literature   review,   it   will   bring   forward   the   issues   and   challenges   facing   LGBT   homeless   youth   is   not  adequately  reflected  in  the  current  outreach  and  programs  in  place.        Examining   the   current   youth   housing   and   homelessness   policies   and   programming   in   the  City  of  Toronto  to  pinpoint  where  professionals  can  address  the  problem  in  language   and   service   delivery,   and   review   existing   land   use   planning   tools   to   further   highlight   where  urban  planning  can  take  action  to  ease  the  siting  of  shelters  and  support  facilities.        Through   key   informant   interviews   with   frontline   workers   and   policy   professionals,   valuable   insight   into   how   professionals   in   the   field   view   LGBT   homelessness   in   the   larger  context  of  homelessness,  and  the  potential  policy  directions  and  service  options   that  can  be  utilized  to  begin  alleviating  the  plight  of  queer  homeless  youth.    

2.1  -  Literature  Review  on  LGBTQ  youth  Homelessness  
Coming  out  and  Leaving  Home  
While   most   people   believe   that   an   individual   is   born   either   straight   or   gay,   there   are   some   who   still   believe   that   it   is   a   personal   choice   to   be   homosexual   (Ordover,   1996)(Greenberg,   2007).   There   is   also   a   misconception   amongst   youth   that   homosexual   individuals  present  a  threat  to  heterosexuals  (Sharpe,  2002).  Boys  and  girls,  aged  11-17,   found  a  majority  of  males  stating  that  homosexuality  is  always  wrong  (Sharpe,  2002,  p.   264),   specifically   with   the   physical   sexual   aspects   of   gay   or   lesbian   relationships  

  

8  

strongly  bothering  the  young  people  (Sharpe,  2002,  p.  266).  Homophobia  among  young   people  plays  a  major  part  in  enforcing  gender  conformity,  and  thus  in  the  construction   of  heterosexuality  (Sharpe,  2002,  p.  266).      Dehumanization   allows   people   to   suppress   emotions   that   they   would   normally   feel   toward  other  human  beings  (Lammers  &  Stapel,  2011,  p.  114).  Although  this  might  seem   cynical,   this   also   means   that   dehumanization   is   functional,   and   without   the   ability   to   dehumanize,   people   would   see   their   victims   as   humans   like   themselves   with   similar   qualities   as   themselves   (Lammers   &   Stapel,   2011,   p.   114).   As   a   result,   they   would   experience   feelings   of   empathy   and   compassion   if   they   were   to   abuse   these   people   or   otherwise  cause  pain  and  suffering  (Lammers  &  Stapel,  2011,  p.  114).  Because  everyday   dehumanization  can  help  to  justify  decisions  that  are  painful,  people  dehumanize  for  a   specific   purpose.   A   crucial   part   of   dehumanization   is   that   it   leads   people   to   ignore   the   individual  viewpoints  of  others  (Lammers  &  Stapel,  2011,  p.  115).        Fifty  percent  of  gay  males  experienced  a  negative  parental  reaction  when  they  came  out,   and   twenty   six   percent   of   those   disclosures   were   met   with   a   demand   that   they   leave   home  (Ray,  2006,  p.  16).    Young  queers  face  a  myriad  of  abuse  at  home.  They  face  higher   rates   of   sexual   assault   (Ray,   2006,   p.   19),   with   40   to   60   percent   of   all   homeless   youth   stating  physical  abuse  contributed  to  their  no  longer  living  at  home  (Ray,  2006,  p.  18).   Conflict   and   abuse   at   school   -   of   which   80%   of   LGBTQ   youth   report   facing   -   further   increases   the   likelihood   of   homelessness   (Ray,   2006,   p.   20).   Youth   fear   that   because   their   sexual   orientation   or   gender   identity   will   disappoint   their   parents,   they   need   to   find   an   alternative   space   where   they   can   be   respected   and   optimize   their   chances   of   succeeding  in  life  (Ray,  2006,  p.  20).       

  

9  

If  a  youth  is  thrown  out  of  their  home  or  runs  away  in  their  late  teens,  they  may  not  be   placed   in   foster   care   before   aging   out   of   the   system   (Hunter,   2008,   p.   544).   Additionally,   social  service  agencies  may  decline  to  place  older  youth  with  foster  families,  and  many   of   those   LGBTQ   youth   who   are   placed   in   foster   care   ultimately   run   away   because   of   abuse  in  the  foster  home;  ending  up  on  the  streets  (Hunter,  2008,  p.  545).  Consequently,   as  many  as  seventy-eight  percent  of  LGBTQ  youth  in  foster  care  run  away,  which  helps   account   for   the   fact   that   sixty   percent   of   homeless   LGBTQ   youth   were   previously   in   foster  care.  (Hunter,  2008,  p.  545).  Homelessness  brings  young  people  face-to-face  with   new  risks  as  well  as  exacerbating  already  existing  issues  in  their  lives  (Walls,  Potter,  &   Van  Leeuwen,  2009,  p.  235).  

Abuse  in  the  Support  and  Shelter  System    
The  faith  based  youth  shelters  in  the  city  (City  of  Toronto,  2008)  are  not  set  up  to  deal   with   the   prejudice   against   the   LGBTQ   population   and   the   unique   emotional   needs   of   young   queers,   with   some   refusing   service   to   out   queer   individuals   (Ray,   2006,   p.   86).   Additionally,   queer   youth   are   less   likely   than   their   heterosexual   counterparts   to   use   faith   based   services,   indicating   that   they   are   less   receptive   to   LGBTQ   individuals   (Ray,   2006,   p.   86).   This   demonstrates   that   it   is   possible   that   LGBTQ   youth   might   put   off   seeking   help   if   they   believe   that   their   only   option   is   a   potentially   anti-LGBTQ   service   provider  (Ray,  2006,  p.  85).      Fifty   percent   of   LGBTQ   youth   in   homeless   youth   emergency   housing   programs   are   physically   assaulted   (Hunter,   2008,   p.   545).   Many   homeless   LGBTQ   youth   choose   to   live   on   the   streets   or   exchange   sex   for   a   place   to   stay   rather   than   continue   to   face   the   pervasive   anti-LGBTQ   physical   abuse,   intimidation,   and   denigration   which   they   encounter  in  homeless  youth  housing  programs  (Hunter,  2008,  p.  545).    

  

10  

   Eighteen-year-old   Kelly   R.   was   homeless.   At   the   age   of   sixteen,   her   parents   kicked   her   out  of  her  home  because  she  is  transgender.  Subsequently,  she  ran  away  from  the  group   home   in   which   she   had   been   placed   by   the   Administration   for   Children's   Services   (Hunter,  2008,  p.  543).  When  the  weather  got  too  cold  for  her  to  sleep  outside  and  she   could   not   earn   enough   money   from   prostitution   to   rent   a   hotel   room,   she   stayed   at   a   large   emergency   youth   housing   facility   in   lower   Manhattan.   The   staff   regularly   forced   her   to   bathe   in   an   open   showering   facility   with   the   shelter's   male   occupants   (Hunter,   2008,  p.  543).  One  day  in  the  shower,  a  group  of  these  males  attacked  her.  They  beat  her   against   the   cement   floor   until   her   entire   body   was   inflamed   with   contusions.   They   did   not   stop   until   her   jaw   was   ripped   from   her   face.   This   all   occurred   with   staff   present   (Hunter,  2008,  p.  543).     At   one   residential   placement   facility   in   Michigan,   LGBTQ   teens,   or   those   suspected   of   being   LGBT,   were   forced   to   wear   orange   jumpsuits   to   alert   staff   and   other   residents   (Ray,  2006,  p.  5).  At  another  transitional  housing  placement,  staff  removed  the  bedroom   door  of  an  out  gay  youth,  supposedly  to  ward  off  any  homosexual  behavior.  The  second   bed   in   the   room   was   left   empty   and   other   residents   were   warned   that   if   they   misbehaved  they  would  have  to  share  the  room  with  the  "gay  kid"  (Ray,  2006,  p.  5).    

Health  Issues  for  Homeless  LGBT  Youths  
Problem   behaviors   such   as   alcohol   or   drug   use,   risky   sexual   behavior,   or   involvement   with  the  criminal  justice  system  are  strong  predictive  factors  influencing  acceptance  of   LGBT  homeless  youth  back  to  their  families.  The  greater  the  level  of  such  behavior  at  the   point  of  homelessness  and  the  greater  the  increase  in  such  behavior  over  the  course  of   the  following  12  months,  the  less  likely  strong  familial  bonds  that  might  draw  a  young   person  home  would  endure  (Ray,  2006,  p.  22).  The  lifestyle  of  homeless  youth  puts  their  

  

11  

health   at   risk;   and   the   longer   a   person   is   homeless,   the   worse   his   or   her   health   becomes   (CMHC,  2001).        Homeless   sexual   minority   youth   appear   to   be   more   likely   to   engage   in   survival   sex  than   homeless   heterosexual   youth,   particularly   for   homeless   bisexual   and   gay   male   youth   (Walls,  Potter,  &  Van  Leeuwen,  2009,  p.  241).  The  likelihood  of  engaging  in  survival  sex   appears  to  increase  with  age  among  gay-  and  bisexually-identified  street  youth  (Walls,   Potter,  &  Van  Leeuwen,  2009,  p.  242).        In   Toronto,   HIV/AIDS,   Hepatitis   B   and   C,   and   suicide   are   serious   concerns   for   the   homeless  youth  population  (CMHC,  2001);  and  these  problems  amplify  for  young  LGBTQ   youth.   Queer   homeless   youth   have   higher   rates   of   HIV   contraction   and   over   twice   the   rates   of   sexual   victimization   than   their   heterosexual   counterparts   (van   Leeuwean,   et   al.,   2006,  p.  155).        Substance   abuse   is   more   common   with   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   (van   Leeuwean,   et   al.,   2006,  p.  162).  There  was  also  a  higher  proportion  of  LGBT  youth  trying  cocaine;  crack  or   freebase;   ecstacy;   cigarettes;   marijuana;   alcohol;   ketamine;   mushrooms;   GHB;   PCP;   heroin;   methamphetamines;   DMX   and   Coricidin;   Calium;   Librium;   Xanax;   LSD;   and   Morphine,   Codeine,   Vicodin,   or   Demerol   (van   Leeuwean,   et   al.,   2006,   p.   162).   Social   stigma  is  a  potent  force  behind  the  substance  abuse  problems  of  LGBTQ  homeless  youth.   LGBTQ   youth   in   general   experience   chronic   stress   that   is   inflicted   by   peers   and   family   members   in   the   form   of   verbal   and   physical   abuse   (Ray,   2006,   p.   49).      However,   this   verbal   and   physical   abuse   is   associated   not   only   with   increased   substance   abuse   by   LGBTQ   youth   but   also   with   negative   outcomes   including   school   related   problems,  

  

12  

running  away  from  home,  conflict  with  the  law,  prostitution  and  suicide  (Ray,  2006,  p.   49).        Mental  health  issues  are  experienced  by  sexual  minority  youth  at  a  rate  higher  than  their   heterosexual  counterparts  including  suicidal  ideation  and  attempts  (Walls,  Potter,  &  Van   Leeuwen,   2009,   p.   238).   One   study   found   that   53%   of   the   homeless   gay   male   youth   reported   at   least   one   suicide   attempt   compared   to   32%   of   the   general   homeless   male   youth  participants  (Kurks,  1991).  These  stressors  may  include  feelings  of  being  different   from   their   peers,   isolation   both   in   their   lives   and   in   their   school   experiences,   victimization   and   ridicule   because   of   sexual   orientation,   rejection   by   peers   or   family   because  of  sexual  orientation  societal  oppression  and  discrimination  and  actual  violence   (Walls,  Potter,  &  Van  Leeuwen,  2009,  p.  239).  Those  who  identified  as  sexual  minority   were   almost   three   times   as   likely   to   have   reported   a   suicide   attempt   as   those   who   identified  as  heterosexual  (Walls,  Potter,  &  Van  Leeuwen,  2009,  p.  245).    Racialized  queer  youth  also  face  abuse  both  in  the  system  and  on  the  street.  Gay  villages   are   areas   mostly   inhabited   by   non-racialized   middle   class   queers   (Reck,   2009,   p.   235),   making   racialized   youth   feel   excluded.   Extensive   institutionalized   and   interpersonal   exclusions   position   racialized   queer   youth   as   outsiders,   and   deny   them   needed   community   resources   (Reck,   2009,   p.   235).   LGBTQ   youth   of   coluor   also   often   face   the   dual   dilemma   of   homophobia   within   their   ethnic   communities,   and   racism   from   white   gay   communities   (Reck,   2009,   p.   239).   They   also   face   higher   levels   of   police   and   community  harassment  (Reck,  2009,  p.  236).        Some   adult   gay   community   members   participate   in   the   exploiting   of   homeless   youth   for   sex   (Reck,   2009,   p.   237).      "Chickenhawks"   ­   term   for   an   older   gay   man   that   prefers  

  

13  

younger  male  partners  -  use  underage  boys  for  their  sexual  pleasure,  taking  advantage   of   their   disadvantaged   position   and   need   to   acquire   resources   to   survive.   Survival   sex   is   especially   risky   for   trans   youth,   as   they   risk   being   "found   out"   by   a   trick   and   risk   physical  abuse  in  order  to  obtain  money  or  shelter  (Reck,  2009,  p.  234).    

Tackling  LGBT  Youth  Homelessness  
Tackling   the   issue   of   LGBTQ   homelessness   is   not   easy,   and   requires   overhauling   the   current  approach  to  dealing  with  homeless  youth.  Family  outreach  and  the  promotion  of   positive   parenting   in   the   context   of   homelessness   can   provide   mentoring   for   parents   and   attempt   to   get   LGBTQ   youth   off   the   street   (Cowan,   Gewirtz,   Haskett,   Perlman,   &   Stokes,  2012).        The  unstable  and  violent  conditions  faced  by  LGBTQ  homeless  youth  in  shelters  and  on   the   street   decrease   their   prospects   of   transitioning   into   stable   living   arrangements   (Hunter,  2008,  p.  546).  LGBTQ  youth  are  significantly  more  likely  to  be  involved  in  child   welfare   than   their   non-LGBTQ   counterparts,   identifying   a   need   to   outfit   child-welfare   providers   with   the   needed   tools   and   training   to   make   the   system   more   safe   and   welcoming  for  LGBT  youth  (van  Leeuwean,  et  al.,  2006,  p.  165).  Without  such  practices   in  place,  as  soon  as  an  LGBT  youth  runs  away  from  the  system  of  care,  their  respective   public   health   risks   are   significantly   greater   than   non-LGBTQ   youth.   Recognizing   that   simple   changes   to   the   operations   of   the   shelter   system   would   directly   benefit   LGBTQ   homeless  youth  in  the  system,  as  well  as  other  homeless  youth  could  drastically  enhance   the  overall  effectiveness  of  the  system.        Ernt   Hunter,   in   his   report,   What's   Good   for   the   Gays   is   Good   for   the   Gander:   Making   Homeless   Youth   Housing   Safer   for   Lesbian,   Gay,   Bisexual,   and   Transgender   Youth,   recognizes   that   simple   changes   to   the   operations   of   the   shelter   system   would   directly  

  

14  

benefit  LGBTQ  homeless  youth  in  the  system  (Hunter,  2008,  pp.  549-552).      (1)   Placing   low   maximum   limits   on   the   occupancy   capacity   at   which   these   programs  may  operate;   (2)  Requiring  that  all  showering  facilities  provide  individual  privacy;   (3)  Prohibiting  anti-LGBT  discrimination  in  the  provision  of  services;     (4)  Requiring  nondiscrimination  and  sensitivity  training;   (5)  Promoting  the  creation  of  LGBT-specific  homeless  youth  housing  programs.    

  

Politics   may   also   play   into   these   kinds   of   decisions.   Some   believe   that   the   lack   of   an   accurate   count   of   the   nation's   homeless   population   provides   an   excuse   for   politicians   and  public  policy  administrators  to  avoid  dealing  with  the  issue  comprehensively  (Ray,   2006,  p.  15).  Advocates  for  homeless  people  and  politicians  have  often  clashed  over  how   many   people   experience   homelessness   and   the   funds   needed   to   serve   them   appropriately  (Ray,  2006,  p.  15).      While   there   exist   shelters   and   transitional   living   spaces   for   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   in   New   York   City   and   Detroit,   no   such   places   have   been   constructed   in   Toronto.   And   while   the   city   of   Toronto   has   the   Housing   Charter   ­   Opportunity   for   All   (City   of   Toronto,   2009)   and   programs   designed   to   assist   homeless   youth   populations   (City   of   Toronto,   2008),   LGBTQ   youth   still   face   discrimination   in   the   institutionalized   support   system,   and   therefore  are  not  adequately  accounted  for  in  the  policy  and  programming  of  the  City.  

2.2  ­  Toronto's  Policies  Surrounding  Homelessness  
   Policy   is   an   adopted   principle   or   action,   implemented   through   programming,   using   projects  to  implement  specific  directed  initiatives.  The  objectives  outlined  in  policy  are   realized   through   programs   and   projects,   which   are   initiated   through   the   budget   process   (NICVA,   2011).   From   affordability,   discrimination,   and   homelessness,   housing   policy   sets  the  overarching  goals  that  a  city  wants  to  reach.    

  

15  

   The  City  of  Toronto  has  outlined  in  the  Toronto  Housing  Charter,  the  policy  framework   that  is  needed  to  address  shelter  related  issues  in  the  city.  Through  Shelter,  Support  and   Housing   Administration   Division,   the   City   of   Toronto   looks   after   a   wide   variety   of   issues   surrounding   homelessness,   program   support,   the   Streets-to-Homes   program,   tenant   landlord   resources,   social   housing,   community   initiatives,   and   hostel   services.   The   Division   also   provides   and   funds   a   variety   of   programs   to   help   homeless   and   street   involved  youth  (City  of  Toronto,  2009).        The   Division   supplies   a   range   of   outreach   services,   from   shelters   with   comprehensive   supports,   to   training   and   employment   opportunities   and   housing.   This   includes   a   new   partnership   proposal   to   renovate   or   repair   existing   transitional   housing   to   support   homeless   people   who   are   moving   from   the   streets   or   shelters   into   stable   housing   (Shelter,  Support  and  Housing  Administration  ,  2012).        In   the   How   Toronto   Is   Solving   Youth   Homelessness   report,   the   city   has   outlined   several   programs   and   projects   directed   towards   helping   homeless   youth   in   Toronto   with   the   Streets   to   Homes,   youth   shelters,   housing   help   and   follow-up,   and   employment   and   training   skills   programs.   Special   programs   have   also   been   developed   for   lesbian,   gay,   bisexual,   transsexual   and   transgender   (LGBT)   youth   and   Aboriginal   youth   (City   of   Toronto,  2008).        There  are  five  key  characteristics  of  effective  policies  (NICVA,  2011).  And  housing  policy   needs   to   address   these   five   characteristics   in   order   to   fully   tackle   the   issue   of   LGBT   homelessness.        1. Clearly  address  the  issue  that  it  is  hoping  to  affect;    

  

16  

2. Be   supported   by   evidence.   Statistics,   current   best   practices,   knowledge   of   best   practices,  and  professional  opinion;     3. Have   a   vision   for   attaining   the   objectives   of   the   policy   and   action   points   should   flow  from  this;   4. Clear   funding   as   policies   with   budgets   are   more   attractive   to   departments   than   polices  without  budgets;   5. A   means   to   measure   how   the   policy   is   functioning   through   its   programs   and   projects.     (NICVA,  2011)  

Address  the  Issue  
In  the  report   How  Toronto  Is  Solving  Youth  Homelessness,  they  provide  a  clear  synopsis   and   outline   on   how   the   City   is   working   to   solve   youth   homelessness.   Provided   in   the   report   is   a   detailed   description   for   each   unique   initiative,   except   one   for   LGBTQ   youth   homeless  issue.  The  Shelter,  Support  and  Housing  Administration  Division  outlines  the   Sherbourne  Health  Centre's  Supporting  Out  Youth  Program  that  aims  to  directly  address   immediate  housing,  food  and  transportation  needs  while  providing  emotional  and  social   supports   (City   of   Toronto,   2008).   But   there   is   no   policy   or   program   by   the   City   that   address   the   issue   of   LGBT   youth   homelessness   directly.   While   the   report   does   outline   special   programs   developed   for   LGBTQ   homeless   youth,   these   programs   are   not   City   initiatives.    

Evidence  and  Reality  
There   is   no   evidence   of   the   level   of   LGBT   homelessness   in   the   youth   homelessness   population   by   the   City   of   Toronto.   Based   on   a   press   release   from   Human   Resources   Development   Canada,   LGBT   youth   are   thought   to   represent   25-40%   of   street   youth   in   Canadian   cities   (Josephson   &   Wright,   2000),   yet   the   City   does   not   recognize   this   in   their   own   policy.   Furthermore,   there   is   no   recognition   of   current   programs   in   other   jurisdictions,   documented   knowledge   of   the   rise   in   recent   years   of   LGBT   youth   in   the   homelessness  youth  populaiton.    

  

17  

Vision  
There   is   little   vision   for   LGBTQ   programs,   as   it   does   not   state   a   starting   point,   deliverables,  or  end  objective.  And  with  no  form  of  evidence  as  to  how  many  LGBT  youth   there   are   on   the   streets   to   support   initiatives   of   the   program,   it   becomes   harder   to   craft   a   vision   and   strategy   with   a   lack   of   a   realistic   concept  of   the   current   state   of   affairs.   The   policy   does   not   address   the   major   concern   of   LGBT   youth   homelessness,   and   does   not   put   forward   any   action   plan   to   begin   to   remediate   the   terrible   situation   facing   these   young  and  disadvantaged  members  of  the  homeless  population.    

Budget  
Currently,   through   the   Shelter,   Support   and   Housing   Administration   Division,   there   exists   little   indication   of   direct   funding   or   resource   allocation.   The   programs   at   the   Sherbourne  Health  Centre  that  deal  with  the  physical  and  mental  health  of  LGBT  youth   and  homeless  youth  are  funded  through  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Health  and  Long  Term   Care;   as   well   as   private   donations   and   support   and   contributions   from   the   City   of   Toronto's   Supporting   Community   Partnerships   Initiative   and   several   other   charitable   organizations.  Proper  funding  for  programs  and  projects  is  what  gives  policy  teeth,  the   means  to  enact  the  changes  it  wishes  to  see  in  a  society.    

Indicators  
There  currently  exists  no  set  of  measurable  targets  to  assess  whether  the  LGBTQ  policy   actions   are   effective.   Policies   must   have   actions,   and   targets   must   match   these,   otherwise  they  are  simply  statements  of  opinion.  Effective  targets  need  to  be  set,  and  the   should  be  clear  on  what  they  want  to  achieve,  outlining  a  timeframe  by  which  to  achieve   intended  results  (NICVA,  2011).    

2.3  ­  Review  of  Existing  Land  Use  Planning  Tools  

Using   the   existing   municipal   planning   tools   of   zoning   by-laws   and   community  

  

18  

consultations,   urban   planners   can   engage   the   public   and   manage   land   uses   across   the   city.   Land   use   planning   tools   implement   policy.   Planning   and   design   solutions   must   take   into  consideration  integrating  policy  analysis,  and  an  awareness  of  the  spatial  activities   of  different  social  groups,  into  their  design  work  (Kerkin,  p.  35).        Municipalities   are   limited   in   their   abilities   to   address   the   issues   they   are   required   to   resolve.   Constrained   budgets,   long   political   processes,   and   a   lack   of   tools,   inhibit   planning's   ability   to   remediate   social   issues   through   existing   planning   tools   as   the   existing   process   favours   those   with   legal   land   rights.   Using   zoning   by-laws   and   community   consultations,   planners   can   design   and   site   facilities,   retrofit   existing   buildings,  and  construct  new  buildings.  All  of  these  potential  changes  are  subject  to  the   interests   of   the   community   and   the   political   process.   Solutions   must   be   place   specific,   realizing  the  interplays  between  policy,  programming,  an  policies.  

Zoning  
Because  municipalities  must  often  rely  heavily  on  zoning,  matters  that  might  be  better   suited  to  other  types  of  legal  solution,  if  brought  before  a  municipality,  end  up  funneled   into   zoning   and   planning   mechanisms   (Ranasinghe   &   Valverde,   2006,   p.   327).   The   problems   rigid   prescriptive   zoning   by-laws   present   are   exacerbated   when   municipalities   are   forced   to   address   matters   of   social   justice,   in   particular,   homelessness.      A  zoning  by-law  controls  the  use  of  land  in  a  community.  A  zoning  by-law  states  how  the   land   may   be   used,   where   buildings   and   other   structures   can   be   located,   the   types   of   buildings  that  are  permitted  and  their  use,  and  the  lot  and  building  dimensions  (Ministry   of  Municipal  Affaris  and  Housing,  2010).       

  

19  

The   zoning   by-law   implements   the   objectives   and   policies   of   a   municipality's   official   plan   and   contains   specific   requirements   that   provide   a   legally   enforceable   way   to   manage  land  use  and  future  development.  Outlined  by  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Municipal   Affairs   and   Housing,   zoning   also   protects   a   person   from   conflicting   and   possibly   dangerous   land   uses   in   a   community,   with   zoning   taking   into   consideration   adjacent   land  uses  and  suitability  of  a  new  use  in  existing  areas.        These   laws   surrounding   land   use   have   never   been   about   equity   or   social   justice   but   more   concerned   with   the   protection   of   property,   regulating   undesirable   uses   of   land,   and   segregating   and   compartmentalizing   spaces   according   to   uses   (Ranasinghe   &   Valverde,   2006,   pp.   327-328).   Shelters,   transitional   housing,   and   human   care   facilities   are   controversial   land   uses,   generally   recognized   as   being   needed,   however,   they   are   seen   as   undesirable   neighbouring   land   use   and   encounter   opposition   at   the   neighbourhood  scale  (Kuzmak  &  Muller,  2010).          Land   uses,   which   provide   some   solace   to   the   very   poor   (halfway   houses,   shelters,   supportive   housing)   have   no   rights   (Ranasinghe   &   Valverde,   2006,   p.   326).   The   fact   that   land  uses  have  no  rights  is  crucial  to  the  municipal  shelter  by-law  story  and  other  efforts   to  provide  housing  for  the  homeless  in  general  (Ranasinghe  &  Valverde,  2006,  p.  327).   Given   that   the   homeless   have   no   property   to   call   their   own,   they   are   peremptorily   excluded  from  relying  strictly  on  a  rights  based  approach  (the  right  to  shelter),  because   rights,   in   land   use   law,   are   tied   to   uses   and   not   directly   to   persons.   Thus   in   land   use   law   and   municipal   politics,   planning   can   do   very   little   to   provide   meaningful   solutions   for   many  homeless  people  (Ranasinghe  &  Valverde,  2006,  p.  327).       

  

20  

Inclusionary  zoning  has  been  cited  as  a  means  to  increase  the  ability  of  municipalities  to   build  shelters  and  support  facilities  as-of-right  in  specified  zones  across  a  municipality.   Being   able   to   build   shelter   across   the   city   will   give   local   patrons   the   ability   to   access   shelter  services  and  keep  them  within  their  community  (Ranasinghe  &  Valverde,  2006,   p.  332).  But  in  Toronto,  where  some  shelters  have  been  built,  zoning  provisions  prohibit   shelters  from  being  built  within  250m  of  each  other  because  they  are  defined  as  crisis   facilities.          Section  37  of  the   Planning  Act,  whereby  municipalities  attain  community  benefits  from   private  sector  developments  offers  potential,  however,  there  have  been  extremely  little   shelter,  assisted  and  transitional  housing  units  created  (Mah,  2009).       

Public  Consultation  
Public   participation   and   rights   were   installed   into   Toronto   planning   in   the   1960's   as   citizen   groups   were   fed   up   with   how   experts   were   imagining   changing   their   neighbourhoods.   The   principles   of   public   consultations   in   Toronto   are   openness,   transparency,   inclusion,   and   accessibility   (City   of   Toronto,   2004),   but   public   consultations   and   public   input   make   it   difficult   to   implement   meaningful   solutions   for   the   homeless   and   precariously   housed.   While   public   consultations   and   input   do   create   a   dialogue,   the   process   and   outcomes   tend   to   give   the   greatest   influence   to   those   who   have   legal   property   rights   within   proximity   to   a   subject   site   (Ranasinghe   &   Valverde,   2006,  pp.  328-329).        Arguments   for   shelters   based   on   rights   and   land   rights   are   hard   fights   to   win   for   advocacy  groups,  because  the  surrounding  land  rights  of  their  owners  hold  greater  value  

  

21  

than  rights  argued  for  in  the  constitution.  It  is  an  argument  of  who  bears  the  "burden"  of   a  new  shelter  and  the  questions  of,  "why  this  site,  why  this  neighbourhood,  why  now?"   Planners  need  to  understand  the  context  in  which  their  decisions   are  being  made.   Every   community,   every   neighbourhood,   every   street   is   different   but   only   the   sum   of   all   the   parts  can  equal  the  greater  public  interest.  Sandercock  (2007)  argues  that  if  planning's   constituency  is  to  continue  to  be,  at  least  in  part,  those  groups  who  are  most  vulnerable,   whether   from   economic   or   political   disadvantage   or   from   cultural   discrimination   and   oppression,  then  new  forms  of  planning  will  be  increasingly  important  and  planners  will   need   greater   design   and   issue   literacy   in   order   to   work   effectively   in   the   multi-ethnic,   multi-racial  cities  and  regions  of  the  next  century  (Kerkin).    

2.3  -  Interviews  with  Participants  
Interviews  were  conducted  between  13  March  and  02  April  2013.  The  importance  of  the   interviews   for   this   research   topic   was   to   gain   primary   knowledge   from   those   working   directly  with  the  population  in  Toronto.        Two  interviews  with  frontline  workers  with  first  hand  knowledge  and  experiences  from   interacting   with   LGBT   homeless   youth,   bring   forward   barriers   they   perceive   LGBT   homeless   youth   face   and   ways   we   can   build   a   stronger   system   of   care   that   meets   the   needs  of  the  population.    As  well,  two  interviews  were  conducted  with  policy  workers  to   highlight   the   challenges   facing   the   shelter   and   support   system   surrounding   political   support,  policies,  and  the  planning  process.  Each  participant  was  asked  a  standard  set  of   questions.   Below,   their   answers   have   been   synthesized   and   arranged   according   to   the   questions  posed  to  them.  

  

22  

Interviews  with  Policy  and  Program  Professionals  in  the  Field  of   Homelessness  
What  is  your  knowledge  on  LGBTQ  focused  programs  and  service  providers  in  the   City  of  Toronto?  What  are  the  barriers  to  accessing  services  in  the  city?  

Interviews  with  professionals  in  multiple  organizations  that  work  on  the  front  lines  with   homeless   youth   and   LGBT   homeless   youth   noted   that   there   is   a   lack   of   LGBT   focused   programs   across   the   city,   and   some   admitted   that   their   knowledge   of   specific   LGBT   focused  programs  was  limited.  But  the  programs  that  are  available  retain  young  people   as  they  are  serving  needs  that  were  not  being  met  somewhere  else.  One  policy  worker   noted  that,  "we  do  not  have  any  that  are  designed  for  LGBT  youth."      It  was  noted  that  it  [our  society]  is  a  very  "heterocentric  society,"  and  that  people  make  a   lot   of   assumptions   about   sexuality.   One   participant   stated   that,   "within   the   street   involved  community,  there  are  a  lot  more  young  people  and  old  people  that  are  engaged   in  relationships  with  same  sex  people  than  people  actually  think."      In  one  interview,  one  person  noted  that:      "There  is  a  disproportionate  amount  of  people  in  the  youth  homeless  population   that   identify   as   LGBTQ.   There   is   an   understanding   that   around   10%   of   the   population   is   LGBTQ,   but   around   40%   of   the   homeless   youth   population   identifies  as  LGBTQ,  and  there  is  not  adequate  support  in  order  to  deal  with  this   population.  "      All  of  the  interviewees  stated  that  there  was  a  lot  of  homophobia  and  transphobia  in  the   shelter  system  and  that  youth  who  did  speak  to  them  said  there  was  a  lack  of  response   from  care  providers  in  dealing  with  homophobia  and  transphobia  when  it  did  arise.  And   though  there  has  been  training  work  conducted,  there  is  still  a  lack  of  understanding  and   knowledge   amongst   the   staff   on   how   to   best   work   with   and   communicate   with   this   community,   as   currently,   shelters   and   support   facilities   do   not   feel   like   safe   spaces   for   LGBTQ  homeless  youth.    

  

23  

   There   needs   to   be   greater   resources   to   support   young   LGBTQ   youth   to   live   independently.   While   there   exists   no   shelter   for   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   in   Toronto,   there  also  exists  little  transitional  and  assisted  housing.  Toronto  is  a  fairly  unaffordable   city  to  rent  in,  and  those  looking  for  housing  for  the  first  time  may  not  be  able  to  afford   to  live  in  the  spaces  they  need  to.        Many   service   providers   and   front   line   workers   are   still   scared   of   LGBTQ   people   and   LGBTQ   issues.   They   do   not   know   how   to   address   homophobia   or   transphobia   when   it   arises   in   front   of   them   when   homeless   youth   or   the   service   providers   themselves   say   something  homophobic.  One  service  provider  said  that,  "Something  homophobic,  when   said   left   unaddressed,   can   make   another   person   feel   terrible.   Language   can   attack   and   violate  a  person,  and  if  they  do  not  feel  safe,  they  will  leave  and  not  return."      In   one   interview,   a   frontline   worker   noted   that,   "homophobic   language   is   like   sexist   language   and   it   all   comes   from   the   same   bigoted   place.'   Current   service   providers   not   schooled   on   how   to   talk   to   or   address   LGBTQ   people   on   their   level,   or   be   comfortable   with  the  language,  are  barriers  because  they  cannot  connect  with  the  person.  It  is  tone   or  body  language  that  set  the  stage.  If  a  scared,  homeless,  abandoned  LGBTQ  youth  does   not   feel   comfortable,   they   will   not   stay   and   they   will   attempt   to   find   services   elsewhere.   They  may  have  services  and  stuff  that  youth  want,  but  the  way  they  lay  out  the  menu  off   putting  and  the  person  turns  away  from  those  services.      Another   noted   barrier   in   Toronto   were   Christian   service   providers.   As   they   aimed   to   help  the  disadvantaged,  helping  people  if  they  followed  a  certain  set  of  rules  which  did   not  align  with  those  of  the  LGBTQ  community.  One  of  the  service  providers  noted  that  

  

24  

they  were  attempting  to  have  their  staff  better  reflect  the  homeless  population  by  hiring   a  more  diverse  staff  that  can  address  these  issues.        For  resource  access,  one  participant  noted  that:        `It   is   not   clear   to   folks   where   to   access   resources.   There   is   a   real   shortage   of   clearly   outlined   and   accessible   information.   City   language   is   not   clear   and   confusing.   It   is   like   navigating   a   zoning   by-law   sign   with   4000   words   of   text   with   no  clear  indication  of  who  to  contact  or  how.  They  should  be  easier  to  read  and   designed   like   a   shoe   add,   which   are   clear   and   informative   on   what   you   are   getting,  how  much  it  is  and  where  to  access  it.'    

How  does  the  health  of  LGBTQ  homeless  youth  compare  to  that  of  their   heterosexual  counterparts?  

All   service   providers   noted   that   the   health,   both   mental   and   physical,   of   LGBTQ   homeless  youth  is  generally  worse  than  their  heterosexual  peers.  One  of  the  participants   noted   that,   "homelessness   does   not   help   a   persons   health   in   any   regard,   regardless   of   sexual   orientation,   race,   or   gender   construct.   It   is   hard   to   be   healthy   when   you   are   homeless."   LGBTQ   homeless   youths   physical   health   is   compromised   as   they   have   less   available  shelters,  less  food  bank  options.        All   participants   noted   that   these   mental   ills   are   compounded   with   a   lack   of   housing.     Their   emotional   health   is   especially   compromised,   with   higher   levels   of   anxiety   and   depression.  One  front  line  employee  noted  that  youths  making  the  choice  to  go  back  into   the   closet   for   shelter   and   meals   (if   they   were   lucky   enough   to   be   able   to   mask   their   sexuality),   and   constantly   looking   over   their   shoulder   in   fear   of   physical   harm,   can   be   both   mentally   and   emotionally   draining.   Segregation   and   marginalization   impacts   a   person's  mental  heath,  as  new  community  and  new  family  are  hard  to  build.    

  

25  

What  are  the  factors  that  prolong  homelessness?  
Interviewees   noted   that   there   were   several   factors   that   increased   prolonged   homelessness   in   youth.   Skills   and   education,   resources,   and   lack   of   affordable   living   spaces  all  prolonged  a  youths  time  on  the  streets  and  in  the  care  system.        In   an   interview   with   one   front   line   employee,   they   noted   that   classism   kept   the   youth   homeless,  and  that  the  only  youth  to  make  it  off  the  street  are  the  ones  that  can  "fake  it   until  they  make  it."  If  they  do  not  enter  the  streets  with  some  skills  and  knowhow,  they   are  more  likely  to  end  up  staying  homeless.        One   participant   noted   that   "we   need   to   connect   where   resources   are   and   where   affordable   housing   is.   Folks   do   not   want   to   live   far   from   where   the   resources   are."   Because  the  LGBTQ  community  is  more  central,  and  if  someone  is  forced  out  to  the  edge   where   it   may   be   more   affordable,   they   are   forced   out   of   the   community   they   so   badly   need  and  into  a  possibly  more  homophobic  area.    

How  can  the  current  design  of  shelters  in  the  city  better  reflect  the  needs  of  LGBTQ   homeless  youth?  
Interviews   with   participants   revealed   that   the   current   design   and   location   of   facilities   did   not   meet   the   needs   of   the   LGBTQ   homeless   population.   For   the   homeless   community,   it   is   important   to   have   gender   separation   for   beds.   The   binary   separation   of   male   and   female   does   not   incorporate   those   who   identify   as   trans   or   queer   or   two- spirited,   or   anything   other   than   male   or   female,   leaving   a   very   large   proportion   of   the   homeless  youth  population  either  entering  establishments  where  they  do  not  feel  safe,   making  the  decision  to  remain  out  on  the  streets.       

  

26  

This   is   exacerbated   when   the   initial   point   of   contact   for   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   is   negative.   One   participant   noted   that,   "they   are   just   trying   to   stay   there   to   sleep   for   a   night,  and  for  them  it  becomes  a  not  restless  night."     

What  are  the  challenges  to  siting  new  shelters  and  assisted  housing  units?  And  how   can  we  alter  the  current  design  and  approach  to  the  siting  of  shelter  and  support   facilities?  

In   Toronto,   the   Church-Wellesley   neighbourhood   is   the   central   village   for   the   LGBTQ   population   in   the   city.   But   in   recent   years   the   village   has   become   more   decentralized,   spreading  west.  And  the  region  itself  has  grown,  with  over  3  million  people  surrounding   Toronto.        One   frontline   employee   stated   that,   "It   cannot   be   just   a   rainbow   sticker   on   an   office   window.   We   need   to   make   them   [services]   accessible   in   various   parts   of   the   city.   A   shelter   that   is   queer   and   trans   is   important,   but   one   is   not   the   ideal   solution   because   we   cannot  just  send  everyone  there,  as  the  population  is  spread  over  the  city."        Solutions   need   to   be   citywide.   Addressing   the   issue   in   one   location,   though   a   step   in   the   right  direction,  fails  to  address  the  deficiencies  in  service  delivery  in  other  parts  of  the   city.   An   interview   with   a   policy   official   noted   that   you   cannot   over   saturate   an   area   with   shelters   and   affordable   units   otherwise   market   paying   people   will   leave   and   you   will   end  up  with  an  unfavorable  area.  Urban  planners  need  to  see  what  has  worked  and  what   has  not,  and  work  towards  spreading  units  across  the  city  and  the  region  to  keep  people   in  their  communities.        One  policy  worker  noted  that  it  was  largely  a  funding  constraint  and  that,     "We   need   a   shift   in   the   limited   resources   available   from   shelters   to   more   permanent   housing.   Shelters   are   acting   as   defacto   housing   for   three   to   five   to   seven   years,   with   shelters   becoming   not   temporary   housing   but   becoming   a  

  

27  

home   for   some.   Shelters   are   more   costly   to   run   than   other   forms   of   affordable   housing  where  tenants  would  have  access  to  medical  resources."        They  further  noted  that  we  need  to  stop  having  these  "thousands  of  dollars  emergency   response   calls"   where   all   uniforms   show   up   to   assess   a   homeless   person   lying   on   the   sidewalk.   Answers   need   to   be   built   with   frontline   workers,   as   they   know   what's   going   on,  and  neighbourhoods  as  they  have  to  live  with  their  new  neighbours.        The  policy  worker  also  stated  they  wanted  to  see  inclusionary  zoning  legislated,  not  just   at  the  municipal  level,  but  also  supported  at  the  provincial  level.  They  outlined  concerns   where   developers   would   overturn   regulations   in   the   municipalities   Official   Plan   and   Zoning  By-Laws  at  the  Ontario  Municipal  Board,  and  that  legislation  and  support  from   the   province   would   make   this   more   difficult.   The   interviewee   stated   that   the   current   Section  37  negotiated  community  benefits  was  a,  "crap  shoot,"  and  did  not  provide  any   consistency   or   reliability   for   any   parties   involved.   Developers   all   want   a   level   playing   field,   and   do   not   want   anyone   to   have   advantage   over   one   another.   This   provincially   led   legislation   would   make   it   fairer   and   provide   consistency   and   reliability   to   all   parties   involved.                         

  

28  

3.0  -  Discussion    
Interviews   with   participants   brought   to   light   several   areas   where   frontline   workers   and   policy   officials   felt   that   the   current   system   of   outreach   and   support   for   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   was   failing.   Language   and   first   interaction   with   homeless   youth;   the   mental   and   physical   health   of   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   due   to   a   lack   of   services   and   difficulty   navigating  services  offered;  policies  from  both  provincial  and  municipal  governments  on   homelessness   and   securing   units   to   add   to   the   portfolio   of   assisted   and   transitional   housing;   funding   of   the   current   system   and   the   attainment   of   new   funds   for   shelters,   assisted  housing,  and  transitional  housing;   the  clustering  of  shelters  and  housing  units   creating  deficiencies  in  other  parts  of  the  city;  all  of  which  are  compounded  by  a  lack  of   political  support.        Language   is   the   most   important   starting   point   for   this   subject.   How   can   someone   expect   to  intervene  in  an  issue  if  they  cannot  connect  with  the  issue?  Diversity  training  and  an   understanding  of  the  struggles  faced  by  the  LGBT  homeless  youth  community  bring  to   light  what  LGBTQ  homeless  youth  require  from  the  shelter  and  support  system,  building   solutions  from  the  bottom-up  rather  than  top-down.        From   interviews   with   frontline   workers,   knowing   how   to   tackle   homophobia,   being   comfortable   talking   with   a   young   queer   youth,   and   understanding   the   unique   mental   challenges  they  face,  can  work  towards  creating  a  comfortable  place  for  LGBTQ  youth  so   they   do   not   turn   away   from   the   system   because   their   first   interaction   with   a   frontline   worker  is  negative.  This  first  interaction  is  critical  to  helping  their  mental  and  physical   health.   As   noted   in   the   interviews,   the   mental   and   physical   health   of   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   was   worse   than   their   heterosexual   counterparts   as   they   have   higher   rates   of   depression   (Ray,   2006),   anxiety(Ray,   2006),   substance   abuse   (van   Leeuwean,   et   al.,  

  

29  

2006),   and   survival   sex   (CMHC,   2001).   Professionals   interviewed   recognize   the   issues   faced   by   this   population,   but   they   represent   a   subset   of   the   outreach   workers.   More   needs   to   be   done   to   engage   all   service   providers   to   both   engage   and   assist   LGBTQ   homeless  youth.        Social  planning  policies  and  interventions  are  limited  by  the  planning  process,  funding,   and  political  will.  As  Toronto  and  the  province  make  cuts  to  social  programs,  funding  for   such  specific  initiatives  has  to  become  more  politically  viable  as  the  public  wants  to  see   the   greatest   impact   with   the   limited   amounts   of   funds   being   spent.   Policy   will   have   to   guide  decision-making,  as  politicians  make  decisions  based  on  problems  with  solutions   and  measureable  facts.        The  best  policy  positions  are  those  that  can  analyze  the  issue  and  offer  realistic  solutions   (NICVA,   2011),   Toronto   currently   lacks   holistic   approach   to   the   issue   of   LGBTQ   youth   homelessness.  While  Toronto  has  recognized  that  there  is  a  homeless  issue  in  the  city,   and  recognized  that  there  are  LGBTQ  homeless  youth  on  the  streets  by  mentioning  the   health  initiative  championed  by  the  Sherbourne  Health  Centre,  there  is  still  a  deficiency   of  programs  aimed  at  helping  the  approximatly  25-40%  of  homeless  youth  that  identify   as   LGBTQ   (Josephson   &   Wright,   2000).   This   proportion   of   the   population,   40%,   was   echoed  in  one  interview  with  a  frontline  worker.  Comprising  a  disproportionate  amount   of   the   homeless   youth   population,   LGBTQ   youth   must   have   greater   acknowledgement   and   representation   in   services   directed   at   alleviating   youth   homelessness,   as   was   echoed  in  several  interviews  with  professional  participants.        Policy   changes   need   champions,   someone   to   spearhead   the   change   and   who   have   the   ability  to  influence  colleagues  and  the  minds  of  others  (Devlin-Foltz  &  Molinaro,  2010,  p.  

  

30  

8).  A  substantive  understanding  of  how  many  homeless  youth  are  on  the  streets  coupled   with   a   person   of   power   who   has   interest   in   the   cause   will   be   the   only   viable   way   to   putting   LGBTQ   youth   homelessness   back   on   the   political   agenda   and   into   guiding   policies.      The   current   policy   lacks   measurable   indicators   and   a   time   frame   to   track   progress   on   actions   plans   by   which   to   assess   the   effectiveness   of   the   policy   in   place.      Without   having   an  understanding  of  the  severity  of  the  issue,  the  lack  of  an  action  plan  makes  sense,  as   the   City   needs   a   starting   point   from   which   to   tackle   the   problem.   Adding   to   the   inability   of  service  providers  to  start  making  a  difference  is  the  lack  of  clearly  identified  funding   for   specific   programs,   shelters,   or   out   reach   programs   run   by   the   City,   and   a   lack   of   clearly   available   and   accessible   information   for   youth   to   navigate   towards   support   services   directed   at   them.   Each   frontline   worker   noted   that   they   reference   youth   that   come  to  them  to  other  services,  but  information  from  the  city  was  confusing  and  hard  to   decipher.        The   lack   of   funding   for   LGBTQ   specific   programs   is   also   a   function   of   two   variables;   competition   for   limited   available   funds,   and   a   lack   of   political   will   and   interest.   Policy   workers   and   frontline   workers   echoed   this   as   they   see   numerous   organizations   competing  for  limited  funds  and  decisions  being  made  based  on  the  political  flavour  of   the   time.   Reiterated   by   one   policy   worker,   there   needs   to   be   a   shift   in   focus   in   providing   for  the  homeless,  as  shelters  were  not  meant  to  act  as  long-term  housing.  There  needs  to   be   political   will   to   shift   funds   around,   even   within   the   shelter   system   itself,   to   provide   for  more  long-term  spaces  such  as  assisted  and  transitional  housing.       

  

31  

Policy  needs  to  be  firmly  rooted  in  political  support.  If  private  sector  development  funds   are   to   be   secured   and   stand   the   test   at   Ontario   Municipal   Board   hearings,   legislation   needs  to  be  enacted  by  not  just  municipalities,  also  the  Province  of  Ontario.  With  Ontario   being  a  provincially  led  planning  system,  the  province  can  lend  much  needed  legal  policy   support   to   municipalities   by   enacting   policy   province   wide   to   ensure   stronger   policy   frameworks   to   support   the   construction   of   shelters,   transitional   and   assisted   units   in   municipalities  where  zoning  specifies.        The   current   method   of   securing   community   benefits   from   private   developments   in   Ontario,   Section   37   benefits   for   increased   density,   is   a   shot   in   the   dark   and   unpredictable   when   it   comes   to   attaining   benefits.   Negotiation   provides   little   predictability   for   all   parties   involved   and   has   delivered   little   to   no   affordable,   transitional,  or  assisted  living  spaces.  As  noted  by  the  policy  worker,  no  developer  wants   an   uneven   playing   field,   and   they   all   want   to   be   treated   fairly.   Enacting   provincial   legislation  surrounding  shelters,  transitional  an  assisted  housing,  and  support  facilities,   will   ensure   that   not   only   are   standards   fair   across   all   municipalities,   but   may   assist   in   providing  more  reliable  delivery  of  needed  units.        With   effective   policy   in   place,   projects   such   as   an   LGBT   focused   shelter,   assisted   and   transitional  housing,  and  health  and  wellness  support,  we  can  begin  to  assist  in  getting   queer  youth  off  the  streets  and  into  a  system  of  care  that  has  the  capacity  to  help  them   with  their  unique  emotional  needs.  As  they  quickly  become  the   fastest   growing  segment   of  the  youth  homeless  population  (Josephson  &  Wright,  2000),  effective  policy  is  needed   now,   proactively,   rather   than   as   a   reaction   to   a   catastrophic   occurrence   as   the   system   continues  to  fail  this  disadvantaged  population.       

  

32  

The   current   system   of   municipal   planning   tools   ­   zoning   by-laws   and   public   consultations   ­   favours   existing   owners,   land   uses   and   visions   for   a   specified   area,   of   which,  shelters  are  never  envisioned.  It  gives  greater  weight  on  decisions  to  individual   rights   based   interests   rather   than   the   more   diffuse   idea   of   a   public   interest.   This   is   exemplified   in   the   new   visions   for   the   Urban   Growth   Centres   outlined   by   each   municipality   that   enacts   a   vision,   master   plan,   or   secondary   plan,   where   there   is   no   inclusion   of   community   support   services   by   way   of   homeless   shelters,   food   banks,   or   transitional  and  assisted  housing  units.        Currently   in   Toronto,   in   the   zoning   by-laws,   there   is   no   inclusion   for   shelters,   support   services,  transitional,  and  assisted  housing  units.  Because  rights  travel  with  the  use  and   not   with   the   person,   social   planning   decisions   are   further   limited   by   zonings   current   inability   to   legally   include   shelters   in   their   provisions.   Toronto   needs   to   better   utilize   land   use   planning   regulation   process   to   build   legal   support   and   aid   in   the   siting   of   shelters  and  assisted  housing  units,  supported  by  provincial  legislation.  Inclusion  in  the   legal  status  of  the  zoning  by-law  would  give  greater  as-of-right  development  capabilities   to  the  municipality  and  service  providers.        There   is   still   fear   of   shelters   and   support   facilities,   which   becomes   evident   in   public   consultations  as  neighbourhing  property  owners  fear  a  declining  property  value,  harm   to  their  neighbourhoods  or  streets  charm  or  character,  or  harm  to  themselves  because   of,   `the   people   they   will   attract'   (Ranasinghe   &   Valverde,   2006,   p.   329).      Planners   should   realize   the   limitations   and   bias   that   arise   in   public   consultations,   and   should   do   more   to   include   the   interests   of   those   not   represented   by   land   titles   in   the   discussion   and   decision   making   process   by   expanding   the   dialog   surrounding   the   needs   of   not   only  

  

33  

LGBTQ   homeless   youth,   but   all   disadvantaged   street   populations   that   would   benefit   from  such  services.        In   designing   the   overall   system   of   shelters   and   support,   actions   should   be   spread   across   the   city.   Connecting   the   places   where   people   live   and   the   services   they   require   is   paramount.   Shelters   and   support   services   should   be   located   near   where   people   need   them,  and  in  Toronto,  that  extends  beyond  the  central  city.  One  policy  worker  noted  that   it   is   not   fair   to   cluster   all   affordable   units   and   shelters   in   one   ward   as   too   many   units   may  negatively  impact  a  community  and  drive  other  renters  and  owners  out.        As   the   LGBTQ   population   is   not   just   located   in   the   Church-Wellesley   neighbourhood,   actions   need   to   extend   beyond   this   area.   One   or   a   few   highly   accessible   locations   can   be   chosen   for   the   highest   forms   of   infrastructure   interventions   (LGBTQ   focused   shelter),   while   transitional   housing   units   and   support   services   for   LGBTQ   homeless   and   precariously   housed   youth   can   be   implemented   across   the   city   and   the   region.   Staff   in   existing  outreach  organizations  across  the  region,  and  teachers  in  elementary  and  high- schools,  can  be  trained  in  LGBTQ  issues,  to  provide  the  needed  positive  first  interaction   with  the  youth.        But   none   of   this   can   be   accomplished   without   political   will.   Planning   is   an   inherently   political  activity.  As  part  of  the  municipal  decision  making  process,  planners  give  their   professional   assessments   and   opinions   to   that   of   municipal   councilors   who   make   the   final   decisions.   As   voters   within   a   councilors   ward   (those   with   a   fixed   address)   often   have   the   greatest   influence   on   a   councilor,   it   becomes   difficult   to   appeal   to   councilors   interests   if   there   is   no   political   gain   and/or   re-election   prospect.   An   unfavourable   or   unwanted   policy   position   may   decrease   their   popularity   within   their   riding.   No   social  

  

34  

justice   issue   can   move   forward   in   policy   and   action   without   the   support   and   funding   from   political   decision-making.   Politicians   and   planners   need   to   connect   with   communities,   connect   with   neighbourhoods,   connect   with   individuals,   to   build   consensus   and   break   down   the   stigma's   associated   with   shelters,   transitional   housing   and  assisted  housing  units,  and  the  stigmas  associated  with  this  population.        Helping  LGBT  youth  homelessness  shouldn't  just  start  once  they  are  on  the  streets,  but   should   begin   earlier   in   schools   to   help   erase   irrational   homonegativity   for   both   youth   and   their   parents.   The   fear   stems   from   not   fully   understanding   homosexuality,   and   seeing   it   as   presenting   a   hidden   danger   to   heterosexuals   (Sharpe,   2002).   Gay-Straight   Alliances  in  schools  can  help  to  break  down  barriers  and  stereotypes,  exposing  people  to   new  social  and  cultural  experiences.  The  Toronto  District  School  Board  (TDSB)  is  using  a   handbook  created  by  Gale-BC  that  helps  schools  to  establish  and  understand  the  positive   implications  of  Gay-Straight  Alliances.  Gale-BC  advocates  for  change  in  the  educational   system,   which   results   in   a   positive   environment   for   lesbians,   gays   and   bisexuals   in   education,   whether   they   are   students,   parents,   teachers,   or   administrators.  And   with   80%  of  LGBT  youth  stating  they  faced  abuse  at  school,  further  increasing  their  likelihood   of   becoming   homeless   (Ray,   2006,   p.   20),   positive   classrooms   are   the   first   chance   to   provide  a  safe  space  for  closeted  and  newly-out  LGBT  youth.                   

  

35  

4.0  -  Recommendations  and  Conclusions  
Coming   out   of   the   closet   is   never   easy;   it   is   exponentially   more   difficult   when   it   leads   to   the   possible   eviction   from   your   current   life   and   support   systems.   Being   homeless   exacerbates   existing   life   issues   while   adding   on   numerous   new   ones.   And   while   being   homeless   is   never   an   easy   experience,   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   are   at   a   greater   disadvantage  than  their  heterosexual  counterparts.  With  the  increased  health  concerns   for   LGBTQ   homeless   youth,   action   is   required   to   address   the   deficiencies   of   current   policies,   land   use   planning   tools,   and   shelter   and   support   systems   are   not   designed   to   address  the  stigmas  and  hate  directed  at  LGBTQ  homeless  youth.      Urban   planning's   successes   and   failures   in   intervening   in   social   issues   have   illustrated   the   professions   capacity   and   multi   disciplinary   abilities   to   remedy   social   problems.   Being   able   to   build   a  digestible   understanding   of   the   larger   issues   at   hand,  addressing   it   through   policy,   land   use   planning   tools,   politics,   and   societal   consciousness,   gives   planners  rich  perspective  on  how  to  aid  in  the  provision  of  services  for  LGBTQ  homeless   youth.        While   there   has   been   some   work   done   to   quantify   the   problem   and   begin   to   build   solutions  for  LGBTQ  youth  homelessness,  there  needs  to  be  further  research  to  properly   assist  this  rapidly  increasingly  visible  population.       

Language  

With  the  LGBTQ  population  moving  further  into  mainstream  society,  gaining  full  rights   and   recognition   from   governments,  employers,   and   society,   the   unique   issues  faced  by   this  population  will  shed  further  light  as  less  and  less  LGBTQ  identified  people  feel  the   need  to  hide  their  sexuality.             36  

There   needs   to   be   a   firm   starting   point   of   an   understanding   of   the   severity   of   the   problem   of   LGBTQ   youth   homelessness   by   the   City,   with   a   focus   on   developing   need   specific   programs   and   projects   targeted   at   homeless   queer   youth.   In   order   to   further   assist   the   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   population   in   Toronto,   further   research   needs   to   be   conducted  to:      1. Understand   the   number   of   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   in   the   city   and   to   provide   measurable  indicators  to  monitor  progresses  and  change  in  the  population;  and   2. Conduct   interviews   with   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   to   understand   their   needs   and   the   barriers   they   face   based   on   their   interactions   with   the   current   shelter   and   support  services  providers.    

  

Policy  and  Funding  
Programs  need  to  have  a  clear  vision  and  funding  to  implement  the  objectives  laid  out  in   the   policy,   with   the   means   to   measure   and   track   the   objectives   over   a   specified   timeframe   if   they   are   going   to   assess   the   effectiveness   of   the   current   policy   in   place.   Localized   service   actions   that   can   drastically   improve   first   interactions   with   the   system,   need  to  be  undertaken  to  assist  LGBTQ  homeless  youth:      1. Mandatory   diversity   training   and   language   skills   for   all   frontline   and   policy   workers  to  provide  better  first  interactions  with  the  support  system;   2. Creation  of  programs  in  all  current  outreach  organizations  for  LGBTQ  homeless   youth  across  the  city;  and   3. Creation   of   school   education   programs   by   the   outreach   organizations   to   both   further   program   providers   diversity   training   while   educating   young   people   and   their  parents  about  LGBTQ  people.        Policy   is   a   starting   ground   for   greater   changes   to   be   made   to   assist   this   population,   as   it   lays   out   the   overall   objectives.   Currently   there   exists   policy   that   recognizes   homelessness   and   youth   homelessness   in   the   City   of   Toronto,   and   there   are   clear   programs  and  projects  being  undertaken  to  improve  the  lives  and  outlook  of  homeless   youth,   but   land   use   planning   tools   restrict   the   creation   of   new   shelters   and   support  

  

37  

services.   To   become   effective,   planning   policy   and   land   use   planning   tools,   several   changes  need  to  be  reviewed:       1. Policy  needs  to  be  enacted  that  recognize  the  distinct  issues  faced  by  the  LGBTQ   homeless  youth  population;     2. Policies   that   support   land   use   planning   tools   and   objectives   need   to   be   strengthened  through  provincial  support;       3. Review   the   policies   and   process   for   attaining   new   transitional   and   assisted   housing   units   from   private   developments   to   provide   clear,   fair,   and   predictable   contributions;  and   4. Study  the  possibilities  to  shift  funding  around  in  the  shelter  and  support  budget   to  support  the  creation  of  more  assisted  and  transitional  housing  units.  

  

Land  use  Planning  Tools  
Policy  is  both  a  reflection  and  direction  of  where  a  government  is  headed,  and  land  use   planning   tools   are   the   method   to   implement   those   policies.   Current   polices   and   tools   do   not  adequately  address  the  issue  of  LGBTQ  youth  homelessness  in  the  City  of  Toronto.   Policies  need  to  be  implemented  by  land  use  planning  tools  in  order  to  properly  aid  in   the   provision   of   services   and   spaces   for   LGBTQ   homeless   youth.   Action   needs   to   be   taken  to:   1. Pressure  the  province  to  strengthen  its  role  in  the  provision  and  procurement  of   shelters,  transitional  and  assisted  units;     2. Reinforce  and  further  provincial  policies  through  municipal  inclusionary  zoning,   giving   greater   as-of-right   development   provisions   to   the   creation   of   shelters,   transitional  and  assisted  living  units;   3. Realize   the   limitations   in   public   consultations   in   their   ability   to   generate   acceptance   or   consensus   regarding   the   siting   of   new   shelters,   support   facilities,   assisted   and   transitional   housing   units   and   look   towards   new   methods   of   engaging  communities.      If   we   are   to   influence   people   and   move   towards   a   more   inclusive   society,   we   need   to   focus  on  finding  proactive  solutions  to  our  issues.  The  basic  knowledge  exists.  We  need   to   recognize   that   the   LGBTQ   homeless   youth   issue   can   be   addressed   not   only   in   one   facet   of   the   support   system   in   Toronto,   but   through   numerous   actions   from   policy,   programming,  education,  marketing,  and  the  planning  process.    

  

38  

   "It  takes  a  village  to  raise  a  child."  The  coordinated  actions  of  many  actors  are  needed  to   properly  rectify  the  issue  and  aid  in  the  provision  of  services  for  LGBTQ  homeless  youth.   Remembering   nothing   can   be   done   without   political   support   and   community   backing,   the  issue  of  LGBTQ  youth  homelessness  is  going  to  be  rectified,  current  policy  needs  to   adequately  address  the  issue  at  hand,  and  implement  a  program  and  targeted  projects   both   for   the   shelter   and   support   system,   as   well   as   outreach   programs   to   schools   and   parents  to  reduce  homonegativity.                                                       

  

39  

5.0  ­  Limitations  
Although   the   research   was   carefully   conducted,   there   were   a   few   unavoidable   limitations.   First,   the   number   of   interview   participants   was   limited   by   the   short   study   period.   Lengthening   the   study   period   to   be   able   to   attain   more   interviews   with   professionals  would  be  beneficial  to  providing  a  wider  view  on  the  subject.        Furthermore,   extending   the   interviews   to   LGBTQ   homeless   or   precariously   housed   youth   would   add   another   critical   viewpoint   to   the   topic,   attaining   first   hand   accounts   from   the   youth   on   their   interactions   with   the   current   shelter   and   support   system.   It   would   also   assist   in   building   solutions   from   the   bottom-up,   working   with   the   youth   to   build  the  system  that  is  attempting  to  support  this  population.                                                                                               40  

6.0  -  Works  Cited  
Abadalian,  S.  E.  (2004,  August).  Street  youth  more  likely  to  die  of  suicide  and  drug   overdose.  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Association  .      Akkar,  M.  Z.  (2005).  Questioning  Inclusivity  of  Public  Spaces  in  Post  Industrial  Cities:   The  Case  of  Haymarket  Bus  Station,  Newcastle  Upon  Tyne.  METU  JFA  ,  22  (2),  1-17.      Ali  Forney  Center.  (2012).  Housing  for  Homeless  LGBT  Youth.  Retrieved  11  19,  2012,   from  Ali  Forney  Centre:   http://www.aliforneycenter.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=cms.page&id=1006      Berberet,  H.  (2006).  Putting  the  Pieces  Together  For  Queer  Youth:  A  Model  for   Integrated  Assessment  of  Needs  and  Program  Planning.  Child  Welfare  ,  85  (2),  361-384.      Boyle,  T.  J.  (2009).  The  experiences  of  homeless  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  and  transgender   youth  and  the  meanings  attached  to  these  experiences.  ProQuest  Dissertations  and   Theses  .      BUILD  Toronto.  (2009).  Annual  Report.  City  of  Toronto,  Toronto.      Butt,  N.,  De  Gaetano,  R.,  &  Thompson,  R.  (2004).  Homelessness  In  Toronto  -  A  Review  of   the  Literature  from  a  Toronto  Perspective.  Retrieved  04  01,  2013,  from  The  Homeless   Hub:  http://www.homelesshub.ca/library/homelessness-in-toronto---a-review-of-the- literature-from-a-toronto-perspective-53932.aspx      Canadian  Community  Health  Survey.  (2012,  11  28).  Gay  Pride  -  By  The  Numbers.   Retrieved  04  04,  2013,  from  Statistics  Canada:   http://www42.statcan.gc.ca/smr08/2011/smr08_158_2011-eng.htm      City  of  Toronto.  (2008).  How  Toronto  is  Solving  Youth  Homelessness.  Shelter,  Support,   and  Housing  Devision.  Toronto:  City  of  Toronto.      City  of  Toronto.  (2004,  02  04).  Public  Consultations.  Retrieved  03  23,  2013,  from  City  of   Toronto:   http://www.toronto.ca/wes/techservices/involved/wws/biosolids/pdf/meeting_9_pub lic_consultation_plan.pdf      City  of  Toronto.  (2009).  Toronto  Housing  Charter:  Opertunity  for  All.  Affordable  Housing   Committee.  Toronto:  City  of  Toronto.      CMHC.  (2001).  Environmental  Scan  on  Homeless  Youth.  Research  Highlights  ,  86,  1-3.      CMHC.  (2002).  Innovative  housing  for  homeless  youth.  Socio-Economic  Series  ,  108,  4.      CMHC.  (2012).  Land  Leases.  Retrieved  11  3,  2012,  from  CMHC:  http://www.cmhc- schl.gc.ca/en/inpr/afhoce/tore/afhoid/fite/lale/lale_001.cfm     

  

41  

Cowan,  B.,  Gewirtz,  A.,  Haskett,  M.,  Perlman,  S.,  &  Stokes,  L.  (2012).  Promoting  Positive   Parenting  in  the  Context  of  Homelessness.  American  Journal  of  Orthopsychiatry  ,  82  (3),   402-412.      Devlin-Foltz,  D.,  &  Molinaro,  L.  (2010).  Champions  and  "Champion-ness".  Centre  for   Evaluation  Innovation.   Dwelly,  T.,  &  Cowans,  J.  (2006).  Rethinking  Social  Housing.  The  Smith  Institute.      Emsley,  S.,  Phibbs,  P.,  &  Crabtree,  L.  (2008).  Models  of  Sustainable  and  Affordable  Housing   for  Local  Government  .  University  of  Western  Sydney,  Urban  Research  Centre.      Fullarton,  F.  (2004).  Public  Private  Partnerships  for  Affordable  Housing.  ING  Direct,  ING   Hague  Bursary.      Greenberg,  G.  (2007).  Gay  by  Choice?  Mother  Jones  ,  32  (5),  61-94.      Griffin,  L.  (2004,  January).  Creating  Affordable  Housing  in  Toronto  Using  Public  Private     Partnerships.  FES  Outstanding  Graduate  Student  Paper  Series  ,  9  (2).   Hall,  D.,  Lethbridge,  J.,  &  Lobina,  E.  Public­public  partnerships  in  health  and  essential   services.  University  of  Greenwich,  Public  Services  International  Research  Unit,  .  Regional   Network  for  Equity  in  Health  in  Southern  Africa.      Hein,  L.  C.  (2011).  Survival  Strategies  of  Male  Homeless  Adolescents.  Journal  of  the   American  Psychiatric  Nurses  Association  ,  17  (4),  274-282.      HRSDC.  (2005).  Youth  Profile  Toronto/York  Service  Delivery  Sector  Human  Resources   Development  Canada.  Toronto.      Hunter,  E.  (2008).  Whats  Good  for  the  Gays  is  Good  for  the  Gander:  Making  Homeless   Youth  Housing  Safer  for  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual  and  Transgender  Youth.  Family  Court   Review  ,  46  (3),  543-557.      Josephson,  G.,  &  Wright,  A.  (2000).  Ottawa  GLBT  wellness  project:  Literature  review  and   survey  instruments.        Kemp,  P.  A.,  &  Neale,  J.  (2005).  Employability  and  problem  drug  users.  Critical  and  Social     Policy  ,  25  (1),  28-46.   Kerkin,  K.  Designing  a  Social  Space.  Australian  Planner  ,  37  (2000),  35-38.      Kitchen,  H.  M.  (2002).  Municipal  Revenue  and  Expenditure  Issues  in  Canada.  Toronto,  ON,   Canada:  Canadian  Tax  Foundation.      Kuzmak,  N.,  &  Muller,  L.  (2010,  Winter).  Siting  Homeless  Shelters  in  Calgary:  Impacts  of   the  New  Land  Use  Bylaw  and  the  Local  Development  Process.  Canadian  Journal  of  Urban   Research  ,  1.      Lammers,  J.,  &  Stapel,  D.  A.  (2011).  Power  increases  dehumanization.  GPIR  ,  14  (1),  113- 126.     

  

42  

Leduke,  N.  W.  (2009,  05  22).  The  Salvation  Army  in  Toronto  Celebrates  the  Opening  of  the   New  $35  million  Harbour  Light  Ministries  Building.  Retrieved  11  15,  2012,  from  Toronto   Affordable  Housing:  http://www.toronto.ca/affordablehousing/pdf/harbour_light.pdf      Lehrer,  U.,  &  Winkler,  A.  (2006).  Public  or  Private?  The  Pope  Squat  and  Housing   Struggles  in  Toronto.  Social  Justice  ,  33  (3),  142-157.      Mah,  J.  (2009).  Can  Inclusionary  Zoning  Help  Address  Shortages  of  Affordable  Housing  in   Toronto?  Canadian  Policy  Research  Networks,  Toronto.      Mah,  J.,  &  Hackworth,  J.  (2011).  Local  Politics  and  Inclusionary  Housing  in  Three  Large   Canadian  Cities.  Canadian  Journal  of  Urban  Research  ,  20  (1),  57-80.      Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing.  (2012,  05  22).  Governments  of  Canada  and   Ontario  Celebrate  New  Affordable  Housing  in  Toronto  with  YWCA.  Retrieved  11  15,  2012,   from  News  Ontario:  http://news.ontario.ca/mah/en/2012/05/governments-of-canada- and-ontario-celebrate-new-affordable-housing-in-toronto-with-ywca.html      Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing.  (2012,  October  11).  Pan  and  Parapan  Am   Games  to  Create  Affordable  Housing  Legacy.  Retrieved  November  15,  2012,  from  Ontario   News  Release:  http://news.ontario.ca/mah/en/2012/10/pan-and-parapan-am-games- to-create-affordable-housing-legacy.html      Ministry  of  Municipal  Affaris  and  Housing.  (2010,  10  20).  Land  Use  Planning  -  Zoning  By- Laws.  Retrieved  03  25,  2013,  from  Ontario  Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing:   http://www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page1758.aspx      Moskalyk,  A.  (2008).  The  Role  of  Public-Private  Partnerships  in  Funding  Social  Housing  in   Canada.  Canadian  Policy  Research  Networks.  Scoial  Housing  Services  Corporation.      Neuman,  L.  W.  (2003).  Social  Research  Methods:  Qualitative  and  Quantitative  Approaches.   Boston,  MA,  USA:  Pearson  Education  INC.      NICVA.  (2011).  How  to  do  a  Policy  Analysis.  NICVA,  Combat  Poverty  Agency  ,  Belfast.      OMNI.  (n.d.).  The  Shoeshine  Boy.  Retrieved  03  03,  2013,  from  Language  Docs:   http://www.omnibc.ca/programming/languagedocs/details.php?id=146      Ordover,  N.  (1996).  Eugenics,  the  gay  gene,  and  the  science  of  backlash.  Socialist  Review  ,   26  (1-2),  125-144.      Ranasinghe,  P.,  &  Valverde,  M.  (2006).  Governing  Homelessness  Through  Land-use:  A   Sociolegal  Study  of  the  Toronto  Shelter  Zoning  By-law.  Canadian  Journal  of  Sociology  ,  31   (3),  325.      Ray,  N.  (2006).  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual,  Transgener  Youth:  An  Epidemic  of  Homelessness.   199.  New  York,  USA:  National  Gay  and  Lesbian  Task  Force  Policy  Institute  and  the   National  Coalition  for  the  Homeless.     

  

43  

Reck,  J.  (2009,  August  14).  Homeless  Gay  and  Transgender  Youth  of  Color  in  San   Francisco:  "No  One  Likes  Street  Kids"--Even  in  the  Castro.  Journal  of  LGBT  Youth  ,  223- 242.      Ruth  Ellis  Center.  (2012).  Youth  Programming  .  Retrieved  11  15,  2012,  from  Ruth  Ellis   Center:  http://www.ruthelliscenter.org/programs      Scheyvens,  R.,  Scheyvens,  H.,  &  Murray,  W.  (2003).  Working  with  Marginalised,   Vulnerable  or  Privileged  Groups.  In  S.  Regina,  &  D.  Storey,  Development  Fieldwork.  SAGE   Publications  Ltd.      Sharpe,  S.  (2002).  Its  Just  Really  Hard  to  Come  to  Terms  With:  Young  peoples  views  on     homosexuality.  Sex  Education  ,  2  (3).      Shelter,  Support  and  Housing  Administration  .  (2012).  Homelessness  Partnership   Strategy  .  Retrieved  12  15,  2012,  from  City  of  Toronto:   http://www.toronto.ca/housing/about-hpi.htm      Skelton,  I.  (1996).  The  Geographic  Distribution  of  Social  Housing  in  Ontario,  Canada:   Comparing  Public  Housing  and  Locally  Sponsored,  Third  Sector  Housing.  Housing  Studies   ,  11  (2).      Tarantello,  R.,  &  Seymore,  J.  (1998).  Affordable  Housing  Through  Non-Profit/Private- Public  Partnerships.  Real  Estate  Issues  ,  23  (3),  15-17.      Toronto  Community  Housing  .  (2012).  Regent  Park.  Retrieved  11  15,  2012,  from  TCHC:   http://www.torontohousing.ca/regentpark      Toronto  Community  Housing.  (2012).  Building  a  Plan  in  Alexandra  Park.  Retrieved  11   15,  2012,  from  TCHC:   http://www.torontohousing.ca/investing_buildings/alexandra_park      True  Colors  Residence.  (2011).  True  Colour  Residence.  Retrieved  11  19,  2012,  from  West   End's  Residences:  http://westendres.org/true-colors-residence-2/      van  Leeuwean,  J.,  Boyle,  S.,  Salmonsen-Sautel,  S.,  Baker,  D.  N.,  Garcia,  J.,  Hoffman,  A.,  et  al.   (2006).  Lesbian,  Gay,  Bisexual  Homeless  Youth:  An  Eight-City  Public  Health  Perspective.   Child  Welfare  ,  85  (2),  151-170.      Walls,  N.  E.,  Potter,  C.,  &  Van  Leeuwen,  J.  (2009).  Where  Risks  and  Protective  Factors   Operate  Differently:  Homeless  Sexual  Minority  Youth  and  Suicide  Attempts.  Child  and   Adolescent  Social  Work  ,  26,  235-257.      Waytz,  A.,  &  Epley,  N.  (n.d.).  Social  connection  enables  dehumanization.  Journal  of   Experimental  Social  Psychology  .      YWCA.  (2010).  About  Us.  Retrieved  11  15,  2012,  from  YWCA:   https://www.ywcatoronto.org/page.asp?pid=58     

  

44  

YWCA  Elm  Centre.  (2012,  05  12).  YWCA  Elm  Centre  Fact  Sheet.  Retrieved  11  15,  2012,   from  YWCA  Toronto:  https://www.ywcatoronto.org/files/1339525837016-YWCA- ElmCentre-FactSheet.pdf              

  

45  


