Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Journalism Publications and Research Journalism

1-1-2012

Telling scholarly stories: Translating research outcomes into multimedia stories for the purposes of dissemination
Sahar Fatima
Ryerson University, syeda.fatima@ryerson.ca

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/journalism Part of the Journalism Studies Commons Recommended Citation
Fatima, Sahar, "Telling scholarly stories: Translating research outcomes into multimedia stories for the purposes of dissemination" (2012). Journalism Publications and Research. Paper 4. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/journalism/4

This Unpublished Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Journalism at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journalism Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Telling scholarly stories: Translating research outcomes into multimedia stories for the purposes of dissemination
by Sahar Fatima An essay completed in partial fulfilment of the requirements of an Undergraduate Research Opportunity Award Ryerson University

September, 2012

1

Introduction

Universities have always focused on research, but the dissemination of research Media outlets regularly report on new results beyond the scholarly community is research, presenting it in a way that is easy often less of a priority (Armstrong, 2011) for audiences outside of scholarly and poses serious challenges for scholars. communities to understand. This paper Research is regularly published in books and argues that combining the Internet's wide in specialized scholarly journals, but both reach and multimedia capabilities with are expensive and often not readily journalistic storytelling is an elegant available to the general public. The solution to the problem of research presentation of research dissemination. In addition to papers at scholarly The dissemination making various aspects of conferences is also research available to a of scholarly research potentially huge audience, problematic in that audiences tend to be poses a challenge for this approach ensures the limited to other scholars. information is presented in a many disciplines way that is easily digestible Lack of ready access to upfor students, other scholars to-date research results means that and the general public. Since it is standard individuals, communities and sometimes practice for journalists to seek reaction to even government policy makers do not the latest news, translating scholarly have the information they need for articles and reports into stories that include decision-making purposes. Moreover, reaction is also an opportunity to engage students' preoccupation with day-to-day communities, including those who are most studying and their focus on class-related directly affected. Finally, a research-related work means they too are often unaware of website is also useful as a place to publish advances in knowledge and the work and publicize reports and other research professors do in their role as researchers in documents that, due to scope or focus, may the academy. not be suitable for inclusion in traditional scholarly journals or books. To address the challenge of making

April Lindgren's Local News Research Project was used as the test case.

"

"

research results available to a wider audience, my Undergraduate Research Opportunity award focused on the creation of multimedia journalism stories for a research-focused website. Ryerson University School of Journalism professor

Background The dissemination of scholarly research poses a challenge for many disciplines. The most common form of research dissemination in the Humanities and Social Sciences are articles and conference papers.
1

In both cases, this limits the audience primarily to other academics (Bazeley, 2006).

practice. In their research on the decreasing productivity of degraded lands, for instance, Seely, Klintenberg and Kruger (2009) found that the extensive research on the subject is Scholarly journals are particularly not usually accessible to the policy makers problematic because they are often and community groups actually involved in expensive to download from journal sites addressing desertification and the on the Internet and only available to users degradation of drylands. Researchers for free through libraries. With a few Kerner and Hall (2009) conclude that such notable exceptions, the journals themselves gaps are due at least in part to passive do little to publicize the contents of their diffusion practices in the science publications. This limited circulation means community that tend to be limited to word the results of major studies often go of mouth or the publication of results in unremarked and are not generally available. journals and books with limited circulation. This slows the process of integrating that This is less than desirable for a variety of research into practice. They suggest that reasons. One consequence is that policy more proactive mechanisms designed to makers and decision reach a wide array of makers may be unaware The general public, disciplines would be a of or lack access to the better alternative for best, most-up-to-date meanwhile, is disseminating research information as they go uninformed about the (Kerner & Hall, 2009). I about their work. The contributions of believe journalism is one general public, meanwhile, is uninformed scholars to state-of-the such mechanism.

"

about the contributions of In this Undergraduate art knowledge scholars to state-of-the Research Opportunity art knowledge, a situation that undermines project we argue that adopting a support for research endeavors at postjournalistic approach to the presentation of secondary institutions. Finally, the limited research results on the Internet allows dissemination of research means taxpayers researchers to tell their own stories to a ­ who foot the bill for many scholarly broader public. investigations through publicly funded government research grants ­ often end up The great advantage of taking a web-based with little or no access to research journalistic approach to the dissemination outcomes. of research is that it provides widespread access to results, methodologies and other The fields of science and healthcare have a aspects of scholarly investigation in particular problem translating research into language that is readable and easily

"

2

understood. It is unlikely, for instance, that many people would devote significant amounts of time to reading the Local News Project's lengthy research paper on portrayals of disadvantaged areas in the Toronto Star (Lindgren, 2009). They might, however, read the researcher's much shorter op ed piece. It is accompanied by an audio clip from an interview I did with Evon Reid, a former Malvern resident, who talks about how the negative news reporting about his neighbourhood affected him. In 2007, Reid was described as a "ghetto dude" in an email mistakenly sent to him by the person dealing with his application for a job with the Ontario government. The packaging of this interview with Professor Lindgren's op ed piece helps readers connect the issue of geographic stigmatisation to a real example of its
3

consequences. It also helps the dissemination process in that Reid himself, as a well-connected community member, was made aware of the research and the research website. In another example that illustrates the multiple ways the web can be used to disseminate research, I also reported on Professor Lindgren's presentation on the importance of local news to a meeting of the National Ethnic Press and Media Council of Canada. Interviews I did with representatives of the ethnic media who attended the presentation were included in my story. In two cases I also post audio clips along with the subjects' photographs. The interviews prompted participants to ask about where the interviews would appear ­ again leading them to the research website and other work by the Local News Research Project.

The Internet advantage Many scholarly articles and journals can be found on the Internet (Thelwall, 2002), which suggests that researchers and journal publishers do recognize the web's potential as a source of fast, easy access to information. Unfortunately, except in the case of open-access journals, few papers are accessible for free. Posting stories, photos and commentary about research studies on a public website as we have done in this experiment is one way to make the results available beyond the academy to those who are not willing or able to pay for and download the original publications. There are also advantages to using various web features that are not available in print documents. Stories about newly published research can be quickly published online and this also allows us to directly link readers to related sources (Thelwall, 2002) including the original publication. A research website is also a forum for posting content that hasn't been peer-reviewed, such as essays and articles by the researcher and research assistants.

Publishing online means that we can include a variety of multimedia components to help explain the research. Videos, audio clips and data charts within a web post give readers a break from reading, and offer another opportunity to deepen their understanding of the topic. One final advantage of a well-designed website with content presented in various journalistic forms is that journalists in mainstream media may see the site, develop a better understanding of the research because it is presented in a jargonfree manner, and then do a story for their own news organizations. In terms of dissemination, this is a major coup. The Local News Research Project website and content The Local News Research Project website tackles the challenge of research dissemination by combining journalism story-telling techniques and the worldwide reach of the Internet. The website features Professor Lindgren's studies in a variety of ways that make use of different web options. The use of links to charts and real life examples and reaction from other
4

experts or the community provides more detail on the findings and their impact. The videos, audio clips and data charts within our stories provide enough variety to hold viewers' interest and allow us to present the findings in various formats. Examples of various elements currently on the website include:  Opening video slideshow on the homepage featuring a voiceover by the researcher accompanied by images. This provides a general introduction and description of the Local News Research Project with a particular emphasis on why local news matters. Professor Lindgren's op ed piece on research about the portrayal of disadvantaged neighbourhoods in the news. Earlier versions of this article first appeared online in J-Source, a platform for news, commentary and discussions of journalism, and the community news site Openfile.ca. On the research website, we expanded coverage to include a photo and audio interview with Evon Reid, a young man who talks about how he was affected by negative media portrayals of his disadvantaged neighbourhood. A news story on the researcher's presentation to ethnic media news
5







outlets that makes the case for more local news content in their coverage. The multimedia story includes photos of two ethnic media journalists along with audio interviews where they provide their reaction to the researcher's conclusions. The piece also has links to Professor Lindgren's open-source, peerreviewed journal article, as well as links to charts that provide information on the local news content for each of the four ethnic newspapers examined in the study. The researcher, in a short audio interview that is accompanied by a photo, lists practical ways ethnic media could cover more local news. A scholarly paper co-authored by the researcher and a research assistant that explains how the mapping of local news can be used to advance scholarly research on journalism. This academic article, which first appeared in a conference proceedings, includes colour images of maps and a chart explaining coding procedure with a view to increasing readers' understanding of the local news mapping methodology. The scholarly tone of the paper is offset by a piece of journalism ­ a video slideshow that appears at the beginning ­ with a voiceover by Professor Lindgren. In the voiceover she explains the methodology

of the research, particularly the use of maps to determine geographic patterns of news coverage. Reaching beyond the academy through social media Websites that feature research can be paired with social media to further the dissemination process online. In 2007, for instance, the mainstream media covered a story about Scarborough residents who complained that the area was being negatively portrayed in the news. Toronto city councillors representing Scarborough brought the issue to the city's executive committee and asked for an edict on how incidents that take place in Scarborough should be referred to in news reports (Moloney, 2007). If a similar controversy erupted today, Professor Lindgren could tweet about it on Twitter and refer people to the article on the Local News Research Project website about media coverage of troubled neighbourhoods. We also hope the website will attract broader public interest and be of use to community agencies, including some that will link to the research website from their own online site. A website such as JaneFinch.com, created to combat the negative image of the Jane and Finch neighbourhood, could link to our website on its own page. This way, Jane-Finch.com could connect its audience to academic research supporting the need for an alternative way to report on disadvantaged neighbourhoods.
6

University students could also benefit from having such websites available to them. Students are often unaware of the research activities within the academy. They attend professors' lectures and, in many cases, only ever know them as instructors. To the extent that the research outlined on websites like ours is drawn to students' attention by faculty, social media and other means, it can inform their own studies and they may become more aware of and more interested in research as a long-term career option. Conclusion Journalistic storytelling combined with the Internet is an excellent way to disseminate research to university students, the general public, community groups, and others interested in or affected by the research. Journalism techniques and writing are designed to reach a wide audience; these techniques result in stories that eliminate jargon and condense information so that complex research ideas and results can be conveyed to audiences outside the scholarly community. Posting these stories online means that everyone has easy access to the research. The web also allows for the use of videos, photos and charts, which can help maintain the audience's interest and enhance their understanding of research questions and answers. The Internet is a powerful tool for making information available for free to worldwide audiences. It is essential, however, that the information be presented in ways people

can easily understand and, dare I suggest, enjoy. This Undergraduate Research Opportunity project argues that the journalist's toolbox is full of exactly the sorts of tools required to do the job.

Research on Social Work Practice, 19(5), 519-530. Lindgren, April. (2009). News, geography and disadvantage: Mapping newspaper coverage of high-needs neighbourhoods in Toronto, Canada. Canadian Journal of Urban Research, 18(1), 74-97. Moloney, P. (2007, January 16). Mayor sticks up for Scarborough. Toronto Star. Retrieved from
http://www.thestar.com/news/article/171 476--mayor-sticks-up-for-scarborough

Sahar Fatima is a journalism student at Ryerson University.

References Armstrong, M. (2011). We're all in this together: Supporting the dissemination of university research through library services. Boise State University Scholar Works. Retrieved from: http://scholarworks.boisestate.edu/cgi/vi ewcontent.cgi?article=1045&context=li b_facpubs&seiredir=1&referer=http%3A%2F%2Fscho lar.google.ca%2Fscholar%3Fhl%3Den %26q%3Dresearch%2Bdissemination% 26btnG%3DSearch%26as_sdt%3D0%2 52C5%26as_ylo%3D2000%26as_vis% 3D0#search=%22research%20dissemin ation%22 Bazeley, P. (2006). Research dissemination in creative arts, humanities and the social sciences. Higher Education Research & Development, 25(3), 307321. Kerner, J. F., & Hall, K. L. (2009). Research dissemination and diffusion: Translation within science and society.
7

Seely, M., Klintenberg, P., & Kruger, A. S. (2009). The unmet challenge of connecting scientific research with community action. The Future of Drylands, 10, 687-697. Thelwall, M. (2002). Research dissemination and invocation on the Web. Online Information Review, 26(6), 413-420.

