NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI

A lternative fuel vehicles today and their im pacts in the Transportation industry
By Abdul M. Miraz Student No. 019025766 Bachelor o f Science in Civil Engineering, West Virginia University Institute o f Technology, Montgomery, West Virginia, U.S.A. 1995 Submitted to the Civil Engineering Department for course work CV 8001 : Civil Engineering Project in Partial Fulfillment o f the Requirements for the Degree o f Master of Engineering in Civil Engineering at Ryerson University , Toronto, ON, Canada April 2004

Signature o f student. Abdul M. Miraz Dept, o f Civil Eng., M. Eng. Student Accepted by. Dr. Said M. Easa, Chairman & Professor Department o f Civil Engineering Project Advisor Accepted by. Dr. Ziad Saghir, Professor Dept, o f Mechanical and Industrial Eng. Accepted by. Dr. Mohamed Lachemi, Canada Research Chair in Sustainable Construction, Associate Professor & Graduate Program Director

UMI Number: EC52941

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52941 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Alternative fuel vehicles today and their impacts in the Transportation industry 6;/ Abdul M. Miraz Submitted to the Civil Engineering Department for course work CV 8001 : Civil Engineering Project in Partial Fulfillment o f the Requirements for the Degree o f Master of Engineering in Civil Engineering

Abstract
Canadians are concerned about their environment around them, global warming and also related issues regarding this aspect. But on the other hand many don't realize that the cars and trucks that they drive are a major source o f these problems, and that there are alternative choices o f transportation that they can make out there. Majority o f us drive or ride in vehicles that are powered by petroleum based fossil fuels i.e. gasoline or diesel. But some people, however, are choosing to drive vehicles that run on smaller amounts of fuel, and/or partially or completely on fuels other than diesel or gasoline. These types o f advanced and alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) help reduce our dependence on foreign oil imports, save us money on fuel costs, and improve our air quality. Alternative fuels nowadays have received some attention as a potential option to curtail the carbon dioxide emissions from vehicles. My project report discusses the feasibility and desirability o f the use o f alternative fuels as a strategy to mitigate automotive carbon dioxide emissions. For example what types o f impact are we to expect in the transportation industry due to alternative fuel vehicles and are they economically feasible to consumers? And what type o f long-term benefits do they offer? And if a person is willing to know more about these alternative fuel vehicles that are out in the market, where should they go for more information? It is a type of a summary o f all the aspects about alternative fuel vehicles and their pros and cons.

Project Advisor:

Dr. Said M. Easa, Chairman & Professor o f Civil Engineering

Acknowledgements
This project is the final step in my protracted and meandering journey through the Graduate program. It has been a tremendous experience for me, educationally and otherwise, and I have a number o f people to thank for that. I would lo like to thank my father Dr. Md. Mirazuddin Mondai, who is a professor of Mathematics at East-West University in Dhaka, Bangladesh who encouraged me for this Graduate degree and always gave me encouragement to keep on going and to never give up. My M aster's program would have never been accomplished without his encouragement. My graduate program would have never been completed without the supportive and understanding attitude o f my program supervisor, Dr. Said M. Easa, Dr. Ziad Saghir and not to mention Dr. Mohamed Lachemi, for which I am very grateful. 1 appreciate their understanding for realizing the difficulty for a part-time student while having a full-time job. I feel particularly fortunate in having completed a significant portion o f my graduate program with the first batch here at Ryerson University Class o f `2001 - the times spent with them were marvelously stimulating for me, intellectually and socially. I also have to mention Ms. Leah Stanwyck, for always responding to my requests promptly in a very professional fashion. The process o f completing this program has also given me the opportunity to get a first-hand and eye-opening glimpse into the nightmarish and surrealistic fashion in which a project is completed in the real world. I would also like to express my appreciation and gratitude to my wife for her constant love, encouragement, and support. And in the end I would like to thank my General Manager at work for always being cooperative in letting me leave work early, due to my classes or reasons related to my graduate studies.

Table of Contents
Abstract Acknowledgements Table o f Contents Chapter 1: 1.1 Chapter 2: 2.1 2? Introduction Project Summary What is the need for an Alternative Source o f Power Emissions in the Transportation Sector Emissions by Passenger Vehicles

page no. 2 3 4-6 7 9
10

11 12

Chapter 3: Current Vehicle Engineering and Design Changes 3.1 Vehicle Weight Reduction and Drag Reduction 3.2 Progressive Vehicle Technologies 3.2.1 Hybrid-Electric Vehicle 3.2.2 Direct-Injection Engines 3.2.3 Fuel Cell Technology 3.2.4 Light Weight Materials Chapter 4: 4.1 4.2 4.3 Chapter 5: 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 Chapter 6: 6.1 6.2 6.3 Chapter 7: 7.1 The Alternative Fuels Act Characteristics o f the Alternative Fuels Emissions from Alternative Fuels Alternative Fuel Prices Compared to Gasoline Alternative Transportation Fuels in Canada Propane Natural Gas Methanol Ethanol Electric Power Hydrogen Performance Comparison o f Alternative Fuels Alternative Fuel Incentives/Tax Advantages Federal Government Programs Provincial Government Programs Utility Company Incentives Alternative Fuel Vehicle Models Available in the Market Ford a Major Player in AFVs

13 13 13 14 15 15 15 16 16 17 17 18 19 20 22 24 25 25 26 28 28 28 29 31 35

Chapter 8: 8.1 Chapter 9: 9.1 9.2 Conclusion

Life Cycle Emissions The Development o f the GREET Model Survey in Alternative Fuel Vehicle Objective o f my Survey Summary o f Survey Results

37 38 40 40 41 45 47 48 49 49 63

Recommendations References Appendix Survey Questions For More Information one can go to the Following Links List of Tables: Table 4.1 Table 5.3 Table 5.7 Table 7 Table 8 Table 8.1 Characteristics o f Alternative Fuels Leading Methanol Producing Regions Performance Comparison o f Alternative Fuels Alternative Fuel Vehicles in the Market or Nearing Completion Life-Cycle Emission Comparison GREET MODEL

16 23 26 31 37 39

List of Figures: Figure 2 Figure 2.2 Figure 4.2 Figure 4.3 Figure 5.2 Figure 7a Highest/Capita GHG Emissions among Industrialized Countries Vehicle Showing Source o f Emissions % CO and NOx Emissions for Each Alternative Fuel Average Price Compared to Gasoline Travel Distance for Using Gasoline, Propane, & Natural Gas Ford Escape Hybrid 11 12 17 17 20 33

Figure 7b Figure 7c Figure 7d Figure A .l Figure A .la Figure A.2 Figure A.2a Figure A.3 Figure A.4 Figure A.5 Figure A.6 Figure A. 7 Figure A.7a Figure A .8 Figure A.9 Figure A.9a Figure A. 10 Figure A. 11

Honda Insight Toyota Prius Honda Civic Hybrid Results for Survey Question No. 1 Comparison Chart between My Survey and EV Survey Results for Survey Question No. 2 Comparison Chart between My Survey and EV Survey Results for Survey Question No. 3 Results for Survey Question No. 4 Results for Survey Question No. 5 Results for Survey Question No. 6 Results for Survey Question No. 7 Comparison Chart between My Survey and EV Survey Results for Survey Question No. 8 Results for Survey Question No. 9 Comparison Chart between My Survey and EV Survey Results for Survey Question No. 10 Results for Survey Question No. 11

33 33 34 51 51 52 52 53 54 55 56 57 57 58 59 59 60 61 61 62

Figure A .l la Comparison Chart between My Survey and EV Survey Figure A. 12 Results for Survey Question No. 12

1.

Introduction

Here in Canada air pollution continues to be one o f its priority environmental and health challenges. The federal, provincial and local governments, in cooperation with the industry, have taken measures in the past few decades to reduce pollution and improve air quality. But on the other hand at the same time, improvements in technology have permitted reductions in the emissions o f air pollutants entering the environment. Therefore, as a result, emissions o f some particular air pollutants in Canada have gone down over the past few decades. However, there are still some problem areas that remain, with some regions not meeting Canada's air quality objectives for all pollutants. For the benefit o f all Canadians not only we should take action to correct these areas o f problem, we should also make sure that the improvements that have been achieved are maintained. Major impacts to the environment and to human health, including the effects of fine particulates (PMio), ground-level ozone, and toxic substances are due to the use of vehicles. The use o f vehicles significantly contribute to the emissions of carbon dioxide, and thus to climate change. In addition, the Canadian population is growing and the number o f vehicle-kilometres driven is also increasing. My project report will focus on the impacts o f vehicle emissions on the air quality here in Canada, and it proposes recommendations that will result in near and long term improved air quality. For Canadians the greatest concerns are for air pollutants from vehicles use, which are nitrogen oxides, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), air toxins such as benzene, and fine particulates. Just as an example, nitrogen oxides and VOCs released from vehicles are the principle agents causing smog (ground-level ozone), and they also form secondary fine particulate aerosols. These pollutants are recognized as contributors to human health impairments such as respiratory disease. Benzene, which is a substance that is present in gasoline, is a proven carcinogen; fine particulates, which are extremely fine particles o f solid matter, can be inhaled and have been shown to contribute to premature death. On top o f that pollutants present in the atmosphere can lead to damage to agricultural crops, degradation o f forests, soil and water ecosystems, and can also reduce eye-sight. In certain regions o f Canada a higher levels o f some o f these pollutants are present. For example, ground level ozone tends to be in higher concentrations in the Lower Fraser Valley, the Windsor-Quebec City corridor and the Saint John area. However, from time to time, almost all the regions in Canada do experience higher levels o f ozone. Under certain climatic conditions almost more than half o f the ground-level ozone and its precursors flow from the United States o f America into South-Western Ontario and the Atlantic Canada. The majority o f this trans-boundary pollution originates from vehicles from the United States o f America. Thus, there are

opportunities for Canada to demonstrate leadership and to encourage actions by the U.S. with respect to emissions from these vehicles. Other pollutants such as toxic substances, particulates, and greenhouse gases are of concern in all regions o f Canada. In order to reduce these pollutants, and for it to be most effective, it requires the coordinated efforts o f both the federal and provincial/territorial governments. Therefore the need is evident that Alternative fuel vehicle seems to be the only solution to our problem. In this project report I will also discuss what types o f impact are we to expect in the transportation industry due to AFVs and are they economically feasible to consumers? And what type o f long-term benefits do they offer? And if a person is willing to know more about these alternative fuel vehicles that are out in the market, where should they go for more information? It will be a type o f a summary of all the aspects about Alternative fuel vehicles and their pros and cons. We all know that this is a limited world with limited resources. So for researchers and scientists it is their duty to come up with ideas and technologies that will utilize the natural resources that we have in their maximum potential. We all know that in conventional vehicles we use petroleum and diesel in the majority o f our vehicles in the roads today. But aren't there other types o f fuels out there? I personally wasn't very much aware about this whole area o f subject (Alternative fuels) that is so important for us to know as consumers. Completing my project I am amazed to know the environmental benefits that it has on our overly polluted cities. Me being a supporter of alternative fuel vehicles I will tell consumers why one should consider AFVs The reason being most alternative fuel vehicles produce less pollution than petroleum vehicles, tax credits and financial incentives help lower the cost o f alternative fuel vehicles, the prices o f alternative fuels are more stable and they are often lower than petroleum fuels. And the thing that is most important is that the use o f alternative fuels reduces our dependence on imported foreign oil.

1.1

Project Summary

In my project I will be going in detail about the following subjects: The various types of emissions; various alternatives to the solution o f the problem; alternative fueled vehicles and the new technologies; and alternative fuels and issues regarding their availability, environmental performance, safety, vehicle performance, refueling sites, conversion, and also the technology development. An average vehicle (car or light truck) on the road today emits more than 600 lbs of air pollution each year.'^ These pollutants (such as CO, SOx, NOx, and particulate matter) contribute to smog and to many health problems. For example, smog can cause eye and respiratory tract irritation, and CO can inhibit the ability o f a person's blood to carry oxygen to vital organs. An average vehicle, through its combustion of fossil fuels, also emits greenhouse gases. Greenhouse gases-- such as CO 2 , CFI4, Nitrous Oxide, hydrocarbons, and chlorofluorocarbons-- surround the Earth's atmosphere like a clear thermal blanket, allowing the sun's warming rays in and trapping the heat close to the Earth's surface. This natural greenhouse effect keeps the average surface temperature at around 33°C.'^ Canadian GHG emissions are also relatively high on a per-capita basis, among industrialized countries; Canada was ranked fourth in GHG emissions per capita after Luxembourg, Australia and the United States in 1996, and transportation has played a large role in this increase.'"* Therefore the need is evident and alternative fuel vehicle seems to be a big part o f the solution to our problem. In my project report 1 will discuss what types o f impact are we to expect in the transportation industry due to AFVs and are they economically feasible to consumers? And what type o f long-term benefits do they offer? And if a person is willing to know more about these alternative fuel vehicles that are out in the market, where should they go for more information? It will be a type o f a summary of all the aspects about alternative fuel vehicles and their pros and cons. Therefore the basic goal o f my project is to analyze the problem stated above and reaching at a natural conclusion that by reducing vehicle emissions, AFVs and advanced vehicle technologies help combat both air pollution and global climate change. My project report will also conclude with a survey done among the general public here in Toronto, Ontario. The survey was done using the telephone and also in person handing out the questionnaire in the appendix from my work place. Some of the candidates were also my neighbors. The purpose o f my survey was to gauge Torontonian public awareness o f the state o f alternative fuel vehicles development and also to find out about their environmental consciousness.

2.

What is the Need for an Alternative Source of Power?

Internal combustion engine has powered vehicles for over 100 years. As an example in the United States, internal combustion engines power 98% o f all new vehicles sold.'^ Moreover, most consumers are quite satisfied with the both the cost and performance characteristics of the internal combustion engine. So, the first question that needs to be addressed is why should an alternative power source be developed? The fir s t reason an alternative power source is the inefficiency o f the current power source. The internal combustion engine, though it continues to improve its fuel economy, is only 19% efficient. The second reason for an alternative power source is the impact on the environment. Energy use is the largest source o f greenhouse gas emissions, accounting for approximately 86% o f total emissions.'^ With only 5% o f the global population, the United States emitted 25% of the global CO? emissions. In 1999, global emissions of CO] from fossil fuels were 6.1 billion metric tons." Globally, and in the United States, about 1/3 o f the total CO? emissions came from the combustion o f coal, while nearly 45% comes from petroleum. CO] emissions in the United States are expected to increase by approximately 2% per year through 2010," These emissions have a significant impact on the health o f the world's population. There are over 113 million in the United States and over one billion people worldwide that suffer from severe air pollution. According to the World Bank, over 700,000 deaths result annually. " Many of the emissions are thought or known to cause cancer in humans. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that vehicle emissions pose "the greatest potential threat to public health in the largest number o f urban areas ^ The third reason for development o f an alternative power source is the reliance on foreign oil. Though fuel economy has significantly improved, the United States total demand for foreign oil has increased and its share o f imported oil is up from 36% in 1975 to more than 50% today.^ America's reliance on foreign oil could be cut in half if the U.S. Department o f Energy reaches its goal o f hydrogen energy providing 10% of total energy consumption by 2025.^ Given the tragic events o f September 11, 2001. the availability of domestic energy sources are even more important today. The fo u rth reason for the development o f an alternative power source is the limit on our planet's resources. Over 380 Quads (equivalent of approximately 10 barrels o f oil for every person on the planet) o f energy are used everyday. Thus, with no change in usage, the current supply o f oil is estimated to last approximately 100 years.^ However, it is reasonable to expect an exponential increase in the demand for energy as the total population grows and as developing countries increase their per capita energy demands. Energy use is dominated by the United States, Canada and the other developed world countries. The United States uses 97 Quads per year, which is roughly equal to China, Russia, Japan and Germany combined.® Thus, it is reasonable to expect that the demand for energy in the developing countries will grow in step with the growth in their economies.

10

2.1

Emissions in the Transportation Sector

A significant contributor of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in Canada continues to be the transportation sector. It is estimated that in the year 1997 transportation related emissions accounted for twenty-seven percent o f all GHG emissions in Canada.'* Importantly, passenger car approx. twenty-seven percent and passenger light truck approx. seventeen percent emissions combined represent over forty-four percent of transportation sector GHG emissions. The most recent information in Alberta available (1996) indicates that the transportation sector accounted for fourteen percent o f the total GHG emissions in the province, and that thirty-five percent of transportation sector emissions resulted from passenger cars and light trucks.'* Canadian GHG emissions are also relatively high on a per-capita basis. As Figure-2 shows, among industrialized countries, Canada was ranked fourth in GHG emissions per capita after Luxembourg, Australia and the United States in 1996.'" ' Luxembourg' Australia United S taiss Canada N w Zealand

Deim art
Irdard Finland

Ndiedanda
E O
T CCfsqiAaieni

Figure 2:

Highest Per Capita GHG Emissions Among Industrialized Countries

(7996- CoMar/a

* 799J t/a/a

Source: Key World Energy Statistics 99. International Energy' Agency

It is quite scary to know that today the global car park - or total number o f vehicles in the world- exceeds 750 million vehicles: however this represents only 12% of the people in the world. With no change in vehicle penetration, there would be over one billion vehicles on the road by 2050.® In either case, if we continue to rely on the internal combustion engine, the world's dependence on oil will increase dramatically and therefore contribute to the emissions in the transportation sector.

II

2.2

Emissions by Passenger Vehicles

All over the country in majority o f the cities, the personal automobile is the single greatest polluter, as emissions from millions o f vehicles on the road add up. Driving a private car is probably a typical citizen's most "polluting" daily activity. The average distance traveled in Canada annually per vehicle has been increasing. It had risen to 18,000 km in 1996 from 17,000 km in 1990.* This trend, o f increased mobility, is projected to continue. In Canada the passenger vehicle population continues to grow. Over the period 1990-1996 the number o f passenger vehicles (gasoline and diesel automobiles and light trucks) in Canada increased from 14.7 million to 15.5 million.' In the 1990s, North American sales o f light-duty gasoline trucks, vans, and fourwheel drive vehicles have been increasing at a much faster rate than automobile sales. In Canada over the period 1990-1996 the population o f passenger light trucks increased by twenty-four percent, while the number o f cars being driven declined.' The net effect has been an increase in total fuel consumption. Although some degree o f regional variability does occur in regard to passenger vehicle emissions, particular trends continue to manifest across Canada. But the net result o f these trends is continuing growth in passenger vehicle GHG emissions. Sources o f Auto Emissions: The power to move a car comes from burning fuel in an engine. Pollution from cars conies from by-products o f this combustion process (exhaust) and from evaporation o f the fuel itself, shown in the figure below (Figure 2 . 2). · E v a p o r a tiv e E m is a lo n a

<2^

<r

· F te fu e lin g

· E xhauat E m ia s io n a

Figure 2.2: Vehicle showing source o f emissions Emissions from passenger vehicles could be reduced in two different ways: First, the way in which we engage in transportation activities, and second., to change the very nature o f transportation. The first strategy involves behavior modification, whereby individuals alter their transportation habits and partake in less GHG intensive transportation choices and practices and the second strategy involves both incremental and extensive changes to vehicles and transportation infrastructure, and the development o f new technology to be implemented over the short, medium, and longer-terms.

12

3.

Current Vehicle Engineering and Design Changes

Internal combustion engines in passenger vehicles convert the heat released by the combustion o f fuel into mechanical energy to drive the wheels. Because there is limitations in the engine design, friction and heat loss reduce the overall efficiency. Due to this, several strategies are under development to improve the efficiency of internal combustion engines. And it is done by using design features that minimize engine size, by incorporating design features that minimize throttling losses and friction, improving engine efficiency, by reducing the heat loss to the coolant, by running the engine at the lowest speed at which the required power can be generated, by reducing engine friction and parasitic losses (efficiency losses to accessories such as air conditioning), by increasing combustion speed, to improve the combustion process and increase efficiency, by recapturing and using exhaust heat energy, and also by increasing the compression and/or expansion ratios o f the engine to improve efficiency

3.1

Vehicle Weight Reduction and Drag Reduction

Fuel economy can also be increased through vehicle weight reduction and drag reduction. Weight reduction measures generally involve the use o f alternative materials in the design o f the vehicle and its components, which includes minimizing engine size. And measures to reduce drag include designing more aerodynamic vehicles and minimizing friction between vehicles and the road surface. One can achieve reducing weight and drag by doing the following: by using lightweight engine components, by using lower rolling-resistance tires, by using aluminum bodies, by the improvement of the aerodynamics o f passenger vehicle design, by reducing the brake drag, by using high-strength steel bodies, by incorporating vehicle design changes and by substituting other materials.

3.2

Progressive Vehicle Technologies

The U.S. Government formed a partnership, in S ep f 93, The Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles (PNGV), with Chrysler Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and General Motors Corporation, to initiate development o f vehicles that would achieve three times the fuel efficiency o f conventional ones. By January 1998 the technology selection process was completed, identifying four key areas for further research that would enable the goal o f the partnership to be achieved: (1) Hybridelectric vehicle, (2) Direct-injection engines, (3) Fuel cell technology; and (4) Lightweight materials.

13

3.2.1 Hybrid-Electric Vehicle
The Hybrid propulsion systems have two power sources onboard a vehicle. The, first power source may be a combustion engine, fuel cell, or gas turbine, which convert fuel into usable energy. The second power source is an electric motor that lowers the demand placed on the first power source. Depending on the situation, either or both of the power sources may be in operation. For example, under city driving conditions the electric motor may be sufficient to propel the vehicle, while the combustion engine would operate on the highway, and if a steep incline was encountered both power sources may operate in tandem. And the end result is superior fuel economy. The hybrid technology has another very important advantage, which is the energy normally lost during braking can be captured and used to regenerate the electric motor onboard. Therefore, Hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) combine the internal combustion engine o f a conventional vehicle with the battery and electric motor o f an electric vehicle, resulting in twice the fuel economy o f conventional vehicles. This combination offers the extended range and rapid refueling that consumers expect from a conventional vehicle, with a significant portion o f the energy and environmental benefits of an electric vehicle. The practical benefits o f HEVs include improved fuel economy and lower emissions compared to conventional vehicles. The Hybrid power systems were conceived as a way to compensate for the shortfall in battery technology. Because batteries could supply only enough energy for short trips, an onboard generator, powered by an internal combustion engine, could be installed and used for longer trips. We thought in the old days that by biasing the system toward battery-electric power and operating on wall-plug electricity as much as possible, efficiency and emissions would then be about as optimal as we could hope for until better batteries came along. Therefore the natural conclusion o f this concept was that, with better batteries, we probably would not need hybrids at all. But after 20 years o f study, it seems that hybrids are taking center stage and electric vehicles are only being used in niche market applications where fewer miles are traveled. Hybrids will never be true zero-emission vehicles, but the first hybrids on the market will cut emissions o f global-warming pollutants by a third to a half, and later models may cut emissions by even more.^ Hybrid-Electric Advantages: Hybrid vehicles have a lot more advantages than regular gasoline powered vehicles. Just as an example, its regenerating braking capability helps minimize the loss o f energy and it recovers the energy used to slow down or stop a vehicle. Its engines can be sized to accom m odate average load, not peak load, which reduces the engine's weight, its fuel efficiency is greatly increased, and its emissions are greatly decreased. Hybrid Electric Vehicles can reduce dependency on fossil fuels because they can run on alternative fuels. Special lightweight materials are also used in order to reduce the overall vehicle weight of Hybrid Electric Vehicles and now they are at the forefront o f transportation technology development.

14

3.2.2 Direct-Injection Engines
On the other hand Direct-injection engines exhibit an efficiency advantage over conventional combustion engines by injecting fuel directly into each engine cylinder. Already researchers are optimistic about integrating already efficient direct-injection engines into hybrid vehicle applications to achieve further fuel economy improvements. This technology is widely used in heavy-duty diesel vehicle and equipment applications for increased efficiency over traditional diesel engines. Volkswagen offers a direct injection engine on its Beetle, Golf, and Jetta platforms, that are rated as the most fuel-efficient subcompact and compact vehicles offered in North America (excluding the Honda Insight and Toyota Prius hybrid vehicles).

3.2.3 Fuel Cell Technology
Regarding Fuel cell technology, over the long term it could result in zero or near-zero emission vehicles with equivalent range, performance, and refueling o f conventional vehicles. Electricity is generated from fuel cells via a chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen, which is used to power a traction motor that drives the wheels of the vehicle. Here the hydrogen can be carried onboard as a compressed gas or it may be derived from any hydrocarbon fuel, including gasoline, natural gas, methanol, ethanol, or propane. There is ongoing research, which is focused on reducing fuel cell size, lowering production costs, and developing efficient, compact onboard fuel reformers to provide hydrogen. Market presence o f fuel cell vehicles is estimated as early as within the next five years to over a decade for production-ready designs. It all depends on the rate of technological advancement and choices, refueling considerations, fuel choice, production costs, and market acceptance.

3.2.4 Light Weight Materials
In addition to changes in vehicle propulsion systems, advanced materials that combine weight savings with increased strength will be integrated into vehicle design and engineering. The likely material to be utilized could be aluminum, steel, plastics, magnesium, and composites (carbon fiber, metal matrices etc.). In order to ensure that advanced materials are incorporated into production vehicles they must be durable and cost-effective, therefore current research focuses on vehicle manufacturing methods, design, structural engineering, and increasing the recyclability o f new materials. Therefore materials research has been and continues to be a critical component o f vehicle engineering.

15

4.

The Alternative Fuels Act

"Alternative fuels are substantially non-petroleum and yield energy security and environmental benefits." ' ' (DOE) U.S. Department o f Energy currently recognizes the following as alternative fuels: methanol and denatured ethanol as alcohol fuels (mixtures that contain no less than 85% of the alcohol fuel), natural gas (compressed or liquefied), liquefied petroleum gas (propane), hydrogen, coal derived liquid fuels, fuels derived from biological materials, 100% Biodiesel (BlOO), and electricity (including solar energy).'' The Alternative Fuels Act: On June 22, 1995 the Alternative Fuels Acf' became law here in Canada. The Act applies to all government departments, agencies and Crown Corporations here in Canada. It is required by the Act that the federal fleet use alternative fuels whenever it is cost effective and operationally feasible and also the government departments adhere to a schedule for procuring vehicles that operate on alternative fuels.^ An effective alternative fuel must offer as a minimum, equivalent or lower emissions than gasoline engines under this Act. The Act also prescribes a schedule for procurement o f vehicles that will be capable of operating on alternative fuel. The Acts purpose is to accelerate the use of alternative fuels in vehicles here in Canada.

4.1

Characteristics of Alternative Fuels
Characteristics of Alternative Fuels
E th a n o l (E 8 5 ) L iq u efied N a tu r a l G a s (L N G )
CH4 M eth a n e that is c o o le d c r y o g e n ic a lly U n d erg ro u n d r eser v es A b y -p ro d u c t of p etro leu m r e fin in g or natural gas p r o c e s sin g

Table: 4.1

C o m p r esse d N a tu r a l G as (C N G ) C h e m ic a l S tr u c tu r e P rim a ry C o m p o n e n ts
CH4 M eth an e

L iq u e fied P etro leu m G a s (L P G )
C ]H , P rop ane

M eth a n o l (M 8 5 )
c H ,o ir M eth an ol and g a so lin e

1

i

L H ( H ,O H D en atu red eth an ol an d g a so lin e

j
N atural g a s, b io m a ss ^ c o a l, or w o o d y |

M ain S o u r c e

U nder ground r eser v es

C orn, grain s or agricultural w a ste

E n ergy C o n te n t p er G a llo n E n ergy R a tio C o m p a r e d to G a so lin e P h y sic a l S ta te

2 9 ,0 0 0 Btu

8 0 ,4 6 0 B tu

7 3 ,5 0 0 B tu

8 4 ,0 0 0 Btu

6 5 ,3 5 0 Btu

3 .9 4 to 1 or

1 .42 to 1

1 .55 to 1 or
6 6

1 .3 6 to 1 or 74%

1.75 to 1 or 57%

25% at
3 0 0 0 psi G as

or 70%
L iqu id

%

L iq u id

L iq u id

L iqu id

Source : www. afdc. doe. gov

16

4.2

Emissions from Alternative Fuels

Ail the alternative fuels do reduce ozone-forming tailpipe emissions. By looking at the figure below we can see the percentage o f combined carbon monoxide (CO) and nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions for each alternative fuel as compared to reformulated gasoline (RFG). Here we can see that the emissions from CNG vehicles are estimated to be 20%, compared to 100% emissions from vehicles using RFG, Which shows that vehicles powered by CNG shows an eighty percent reduction in ozone-forming emissions.

CNG 20% f

LPG 40%

MSS 60%

E85 75%

I RFG

, 100%

Figure 4.2: Percentage o f CO and NOx emis.sions fo r each alternative fu e l as compared to reformulated gasoline (RFG). Alternative Fuels Data Center; afdc.doe.gov Similarly the emissions from LPG, M85 and E85 are estimated to be 40%, 60% and 75% consecutively compared to 100% emissions from vehicles using RFG (reformulated gasoline).

4.3

Alternative Fuel Prices Compared to Gasoline

The price o f alternative fuels changes in accordance with outside factors. Obviously, it changes because o f international economic changes and also because o f the change of supply and demand, just as it fluctuates for diesel and gasoline. In order to have access for alternative fuels, it varies from region to region and also the geographic location can greatly affect the price at the pump. Just as an example, considering the easy accessibility for propane due to the Dixie pipeline, it is generally less expensive in southern states; similarly natural gas is much more economical in the urban areas; and ethanol producers tend to sell their fuel in the Midwest to cut down on fuel transportation cost. Gasoline $1.00 CNG less 1E85 1more LNG more 1LPG 1less M85 less 1 i|

Fig. 4.3 Average price compared to gasoline, Source: Alternative Fuels Data Center. afdc.doe.gov

17

5.

Alternative Transportation Fuel in Canada

Around the world Canada is recognized as a leader in the development and use of alternative transportation fuels (ATFs). Today, there are more than 170,000 alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) in use from British Columbia to Newfoundland. Propane, the first ATF to be widely used in Canada, accounts for approximately 150,000 o f the AFV total.'' While propane vehicles are located from coast to coast, the vast majority is in Ontario and the western provinces. Propane fuel is available through an extensive network o f some 5,000 public refueling stations throughout the country. There are an additional 20,000 vehicles operating on natural gas (NG), supported by approximately 120 public natural gas refueling stations. Natural gas vehicles (NGVs) are presently concentrated in the lower mainland o f British Columbia, the Edmonton-Calgary corridor, southern Ontario and the M ontréalQuébec City eorridor. In addition, a demonstration o f more than 500 methanol vehicles is underway in British Columbia, Alberta and Ontario. Ethanol and electric vehicles are not yet commercially available in Canada '' History of Alternative Transportation Fuel in Canada: The Canadian federal government had begun to support the use o f some alternative gaseous fuels in the early 1980s, and it continues to support it at the present time. The federal government came up with some programs to assist the natural gas and propane industry to overcome early barriers in the marketplace and also to establish these type of fuels as viable alternative fuels here in Canada. As the federal government started to show support, some o f the provincial governments also started to show support in some of the initiatives. And because o f these two governments along with the industry working together the programs became a success.

18

5.1

Propane

Propane is the type o f gas maintained as liquid under pressure. It is non-toxic, has high octane and there is large surplus. There is a potential market for propane in the sector o f transportation. Fifty percent o f production is currently exported. There are about 5,000 public and 2,000 private stations across Canada. The average price for propane is about sixty five percent to seventy five percent o f gasoline.^ Certification is required to refuel propane vehicles. The original equipment manufacturer (OEM) production presently is limited but it is expanding Numerous independent shops provide conversions o f gasoline vehicles in all provinces across Canada. Six and eight cylinder engines are normally converted. Vehicles can be converted for mono-fuel (propane only) or bi-fuel (propane/gasoline) operations. Conversion cost: $2,400 to $2,800, higher for increased range/multiple storage tanks. The performance of propane vehicle range to eighty percent o f gasoline vehicle.' They can add storage capacity to match or exceed gasoline range and there is no significant degradation of performance relative to gasoline or diesel. Regarding their environmental performance, propane-powered vehicles have greenhouse gas advantage over gasoline. Their reactive hydrocarbon emissions are lower than gasoline and it has no evaporative emissions. Their particulate emissions are much lower than diesel and also lower than gasoline. It also has low carbon monoxide relative to gasoline. It has no emissions o f benzene, butadiene and aldehydes are lower than gasoline A good safety record is maintained by national standards, staff training. And certification o f equipment installers and refueling sites are mandatory due to safety. Engine parts last much longer in propane vehicles. The engine, including the exhaust system has much longer life than gasoline vehicles. Converting into propane vehicles make a lot o f sense for high usage fleet vehicles for example taxis, police cars RCMP fleet etc.

19

5.2

Natural Gas

If a person wants to own one o f the cleanest running vehicles on the road it can now be a reality. In order to meet the growing demand for environment-friendly vehicles, the O.E.M.s have added natural gas-dedicated vehicles to their line up o f cars and trucks. They are built right at the factory and strictly operate on natural gas and provide economic and environmental savings. Natural Gas is recognized worldwide as the preferred low emission fuel alternative to gasoline, diesel and propane. Since natural gas is already delivered through existing gas lines to most businesses, it's very easy to use. Natural Gas is the safest, cleanest and most cost-effective fuel for ones refueling needs. It offers substantial cost savings, reduced emissions and is always available. Used as a vehicle fuel for decades, natural gas is the cleanest and safest fuel available today. One can only be in a winning situation by using Natural Gas as an Alternative Fuel. You as a consumer are not only saving money but are also saving the environment by using a much safer fuel. There could be a substantial savings by using Natural Gas because o f the price being much lower than gasoline. Another advantage that one has by using natural gas, as an Alternative Fuel is that it keeps the engine much cleaner which in return needs less frequent maintenance. AT TODAY'S PRICES. HOW FAR CAN ONE TRAVEL ON $20 WORTH OF FUEL? Gasoline 148 km Propane__________________________________ p. 170 km Natural Gas 227 km
( F u e l p r ic e m a y v a r y b e tw e e n p ro v in c e s a n d m ile a g e a n d w ill d e p e n d o n v e h ic le ty p e )

Figure 5.2:

Travel distance fo r using gasoline, propane and natural gas. Source: The Natural Gas Vehicle Alliance, www.ngvcanada.org

This figure {figure 5.2) shows us that at todays price: for example $20 worth of fuel we can travel approximately 148 km with gasoline, 170 km with propane and 227 km with natural gas. It gives us a comparison between the three types o f fuel - natural gas, propane and gasoline.^ Choosing a natural gas vehicle is a very wise environmental decision. Natural gas burns cleaner than gasoline and other alternative fuels, and drastically reduces harmful tailpipe emissions, including: carbon monoxide (CO); nitrogen oxide (NOx); volatile organic com pounds (VOC) and particulate matter. And because it is contained in a pressurized fuel system, it completely eliminates evaporative emissions (gasoline vapours containing the cancer causing substance, benzene). As well, natural gas reduces greenhouse gas, which contributes to climate change. There are about 130 public and 80 private stations; the public stations are concentrated in lower mainland o f British Columbia, Calgary-Edmonton corridor and

20

southern Ontario. Two thousand o f them are small refueling appliances. Thirty-five percent o f federal fleet can access natural gas for vehicles (NGV). The average price is about sixty percent o f gasoline and there is no certification required for refueling. ' For Natural Gas original equipment manufacturer (OEM) vehicle production is expanding to include mono-fuel (NGV only) and bi-fuel (NGV/gasoline) options. Vehicle manufacturers offer widest selection o f all ATF vehicles. In after-market conversions to natural gas the majority o f light-duty vehicles are bi-fuel conversions. The average conversion cost is $3,500 to $4,000."* There are approximately 90 NGV conversion shops in operation at the present time. Particulate and air toxic emissions are very low relative to gasoline and diesel and it has low carbon monoxide relative to gasoline. Regarding safety, natural gas is the fuel that is used to heat our homes and offices. It is also a proven vehicle fuel used around the world for the last 50 years.* If Natural Gas spills it rapidly disperses into the air also because it is lighter than air, natural gas does not settle in low-lying areas, as does heavier propane or gasoline vapors. It is considered a safer vehicle fuel than either gasoline or propane. City of Hamilton converting to N GVs: Hamilton, Ontario a city located in the south-west corner o f Lake Ontario in the past have often been painted as a "steeltown" whose history is often built on industry at the environments expense. The problem with that image and reputation is now being wiped away as the new City's green initiatives are taking place. When the City was amalgamated with the four other municipalities on January 2000, it created a task force on environmental excellence. Natural gas vehicles were to be introduced in all its public fleets' wherever possible. As a result, all o f its transit buses are now being switched to natural gas by replacing the ever-aging diesel buses. Therefore the city at present now operates over 100 Natural Gas Vehicles and estimates the lifetime cost of a dedicated natural gaspowered bus at $157,500, compared with $172,300 for a dedicated diesel b u s'\

21

5.3

Methanol

History of M eth an o h Methanol has been seen as a possible large volume motor fuel substitute at various times during gasoline shortages and it was often used in the early part of the century to power automobiles before inexpensive gasoline was widely introduced. In the early 1920s, some viewed it as a source o f fuel before new techniques were developed to discover and extract oil. The World War II era saw wide use o f synthetically produced methanol as a motor fuel in Germany. During the wartime fuel shortages throughout Europe prompted the use o f the fumes produced by wood-burners as a source of fuel to power vehicles. The use o f methanol as a motor ftiel received attention during the oil crises o f the 1970s due to its availability and low cost. Problems occurred early in the development o f gasoline-methanol blends. As a result o f its low price some gasoline marketers over blended. Others used improper blending and handling techniques. This led to consumer and media problems and the eventual phase out o f methanol blends. However, there is still a great deal o f interest in using methanol as a neat fuel. Many tests have shown promising results using 85-100 percent by volume methanol as a transportation fuel in automobiles, trucks and buses. The flexible-fuel vehicles currently being manufactured by General Motors, Ford and Chrysler can run on any combination o f ethanol, methanol and/or gasoline. Methanol in Canada: Canada is a major producer o f methanol. About 75% of production is exported. It is stored, transferred and dispensed like gasoline. There are approximately 12 stations in Alberta and British Columbia. Also portable refueling stations are available. The price is about equal to regular gasoline on energyequivalent basis. Regarding its performance the acceleration is higher than for gasoline vehicles. The range approaches that o f comparable gasoline vehicles through use o f a larger fuel tank. Methanol vehicles have no improvement in greenhouse gas emissions relative to gasoline vehicles but VOC emissions are lower than for gasoline vehicles. It also has lower carbon monoxide emissions relative to gasoline. It has low benzene and formaldehyde emissions are similar to those from gasoline. Gasoline must be added to produce M85 to improve cold starting and it has flame luminosity. But fire risk is lower than that for gasoline. It's Pros and Cons; Methanol use in current-technology vehicles has some distinct advantages and disadvantages. On the plus side, methanol has a higher octane rating than gasoline. This reduces "knock" in today's engines and can result in greater fuel efficiency with proper adjustment o f the engine's compression ratio. Methanol's high heat o f vaporization results in lower peak flame temperatures than gasoline and lower nitrogen oxide emissions. Its greater tolerance to lean combustion higher air-to-fuel equivalence ratio results in generally lower overall emissions and higher energy efficiency. Dedicated-methanol-fuel vehicles would increase this advantage even further.

22

However, several disadvantages must be studied and overcome before neat methanol is considered a viable alternative to gasoline. Methanol's energy density is about half that o f gasoline, reducing the range a vehicle can travel on an equivalent tank o f fuel. Current-technology vehicles using neat methanol at temperatures below 45 deg. Fahrenheit are difficult to start because o f methanol's lower vapor pressure and single boiling point. However, engineering solutions to these problems have been identified and are under development. Methanol Regions: Table 5.3 below shows the major Methanol producing regions in the world, Canada being the number fourth in the list. Therefore it is available in abundance and to utilize it is the responsibility o f the people. Table 5.3: Leading Methanol Producing Regions

L e a d in g M e th a n o l P r o d u c in g R e g i o n s
Billions o f Gallons per Year

E urop e....................................................

2 ,6 1 6

U S A ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1,805 A ustralia/A sia............................................................................................................................................................90 0 C a n a d a /M e x ic o ....................................................... 837

Far E ast/A s ia ............................................................................................................................................................733 South A m e ric a .........................................................................................................................................................713 M iddle E a s t............................................................................................................................................................... 62 8 A frica............................................................................................................................................................................26 6 Total W o rld .............................................................................................................................................................8 ,4 9 8

Source: Information R eso u rc e s, Inc. a n d Clean F uels D e v e lo p m e n t Coalition

"

23

5.4

Ethanol

History of Ethanol: Since the 1900s ethanol has been used as a motor fuel. Henry Ford in the year 1908 designed his Model T car to run on ethanol. At that time he had thought that ethanol made from renewable biological materials would be the principle automobile fuel. But in the early 20^ century a new dominant fuel, the gasoline had emerged. Because of it had a low rating o f octane it was suitable for the material then available for engine construction. As time went by there was also a growing, seemingly unlimited supply of low cost petroleum from all the discoveries o f oil fields. But today, ethanol has become widely used around the globe as an environmentally friendly fuel. Ethanol production in Canada is expected to triple by 2005 to 1 billion litres per year.^ Ethanol in Canada: Ethanol is playing an increasing role in meeting the cormtry's needs for renewable fuels as the Canadian ethanol industry continues to grow. Ethanol, which is first blended with gas and sold in Manitoba twenty years ago, today ethanol is offered at approximately 1 , 0 0 0 locations in six provinces (the four Western provinces, Ontario and Quebec). The annual ethanol production is approximately 238 million litres per year, here in Canada o f which some is exported to the United States. The federal government has committed itself to increase ethanol production in Canada by 750 million litres per year^ for supporting the industry. At present there are lots o f initiatives underway which will boost the production significantly in the next coming years. Ethanol is one o f the best tools we have to fight air pollution from vehicles. It contains 35% oxygen; is non-toxic, soluble in water and it is quickly biodegradable. By adding oxygen to fuel it results in the type o f fuel combustion which is more complete, thus reducing harmful tailpipe emissions. By increasing the ethanol production, it will provide a much- needed economic boost to the rural part of Canada. Ethanol provides a vital values-added market for corn, wheat and other commodities. In the U.S. it has been found by research that the use o f grain for ethanol production adds up to 45 cents to every bushel o f corn.^ Therefore by increasing the production o f ethanol here in Canada, it is just a matter o f time before similar increases to Canadian corn prices are realized. It is now widely accepted that the ethanol industry has had and will continue to have a very positive impact on out economy particularly at the local level. Ethanol is a liquid fuel. When it is used as five percent to ten percent low-level blends in gasoline it is referred to as E5 to ElO. Low-level blends can be used in any gasoline vehicle. It is also used as blend o f 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline E85 in light-duty vehicles. E85 requires special equipment and is stored, transferred and dispensed like gasoline. E85 has high octane. Precautions are required at E85 sites to avoid water contamination. Currently there are several hundred stations that offer ethanol blends and numbers are expanding. High-level ethanol blends E85 are not yet available in Canada. Low-level ethanol blends are priced comparable to gasoline. There is very limited selection of E85 vehicles offered by original equipment manufacturers.

24

5.5

Electric Power

The most available out there is electricity and also there is low-cost electricity available out there. For electric vehicles the off-peak capacity can be utilized. And for refueling slow recharge is possible at fleet sites or at home. In Canada, so far public sites are not yet available. At the present moment there are a limited selection of electric vehicles available from manufacturers out there. If anybody wants to purchase an electric vehicle it is by special arrangement only by the Original Equipment Manufacturer. In Canada, in the field o f battery technology there are some on going research projects. Regarding vehicle performance, the range with the conventional lead acid batteries is from 50 to 100 km. And for advanced batteries their range is around 200 km. For Electric vehicles, they can have low or medium or high power depending on the application and the way they are configured. Because there is a high price to replace batteries it reduces the advantage o f the low cost off peak electricity. Electric vehicles have near zero emissions. Electric vehicles are Just as safe as electric appliances. Even after considering emissions from electricity generation plants, Electric Vehicles would have a beneficial impact on air quality in major Canadian urban centers. Therefore the overall mix o f electricity generating sources in Canada means low greenhouse gas emissions for electric vehicles.

5.6

Hydrogen

Hydrogen is stored as compressed gas (3,000 psi), cryogenic (very low temperature) liquid, metal hydride (a hydrogen compound) or in a hydrogen carrier such as methanol. It is non-toxic. There is inexhaustible supply through the electrolysis of water, using renewable energy sources. Currently there are limited refueling sites to those used for fuelling prototype vehicles. Fuel cell powered transit buses are currently being demonstrated for hydrogen vehicles. Commercial fuel-cell buses are in operation today. Experimental buses in Montréal are fuelled by hythane (a mixture o f natural gas and hydrogen). There are various prototype automobiles and trucks powered by hydrogen-fuelled, internal combustion engines are now in operation. Fuel cell powered automobiles are expected to be on the market by 2005. Fuel-cell bus meets or exceeds diesel bus in performance. They also have a quieter operation and they have more power at low speeds. Hydrogen fuel-cell vehicle is 2 to 3 times more energy-efficient over a driving cycle compared to an internal combustion engine running on gasoline or diesel. Hydrogen is the cleanest fuel, it has zero emissions from hydrogen-powered fuel-cell vehicles, also it has no greenhouse gases, no particulates or hydrocarbons, no carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides or ozone and no toxic components. It is as safe or safer than gasoline. Any fuel leak rapidly disperses, and there will be no pooling o f fuel. Hydrogen detectors are used at refueling stations and on-board. A major obstacle to

25

the use o f hydrogen as a fuel is the high cost o f electrolysis with current technology. But research is currently ongoing to reduce production costs. One should also know that the environmental performance o f regular petroleum vehicles are also improving parallel to all o f these alternative fuels, in order to regulate the emissions o f CO, HC, and NOx. Not only are gasoline and diesel getting cleaner, now a days the vehicles are equipped with sophisticated diagnostic systems in order to ensure that they operate at optimal emissions level. It is wrong to assume that in future all the alternative fuels only will give us a substantial environmental benefit over gasoline unless the modern engines and its technology also continuously improve along with it.

5.7

Performance Comparison of Alternative Fuels

Below is a summary o f the environmental performance and vehicle performance of some alternative fuels: Table 5.7; Performance Comparison o Alternative Fuels Environmental Performance Vehicle Performance When ElO blends are used Ethanol blended gasoline's use fuel the vehicle performance and ethanol made from Ontario grown fuel consumption are the com which benefits farmers and the economy same as gasoline Cleans the vehicle fuel tank When using ElO or E85 its emissions and fuel lines from Carbon Monoxide are less from Reduces unbumed gasoline hydrocarbons (especially in When compared to diesel it generates older vehicles) low levels o f particulates Ethanol blended gasoline's When the Ozone production from Emeet the BMW North 1 0 fuelled vehicles is compared to American standard o f intake gasoline it is the same valve cleanliness for If the ethanol from biomass is used the greenhouse gas emissions are less unlimited mileage__________ The recycling of the toxic Hybrid gasoline engines are Hybrid components from batteries are (Ultra Low Emissions Gasoline/ Rated) ULEV rated critical when vehicles are disposed Electric Depending on the mode of When operating in the electric mode operations its range is it has lesser emissions greater than gasoline When gasoline engine is working it therefore effects the air quality It has zero emissions when it operates in the electric mode One can get maximum benefit during stop and go and low speed city driving conditions

Fuel Ethanol

26

Propane

It has no evaporative emissions, and its reactive hydrocarbon emissions are lower than gasoline It also has lower carbon monoxide compared to gasoline Compared to gasoline it also has advantage over greenhouse gases Its particulate emissions are lower than gasoline and a lot lower than diesel There isn't ant emissions in these type o f vehicles Low greenhouse gas emissions in Canada due to the electric mix that exists When the vehicles are disposed the recycling of the toxic material in the batteries are critical One needs to consider the emissions for air quality that are generated from the electricity plants It also has no evaporative emissions, and its reactive hydrocarbon emissions are lower than gasoline Similarly compared to gasoline it also has low carbon monoxide Also compared to gasoline it has advantage over greenhouse gases One o f the major advantages over emissions that a natural gas vehicle emissions has is very low reactivity o f ozone

-

It can add storage capacity to match the range of gasoline Its range is about 80% of gasoline run vehicle Compared to diesel or gasoline it has very little degradation o f performance

Electric

-

Their range isn't much They are special purpose clean vehicles Because the batteries weigh a fair amount it reduces the vehicles performance

Natural Gas

-

-

-

-

There might be a slight loss o f power when these type of vehicles are converted Compared to gasoline vehicles it has a range almost 50%, range could be increased if

27

6.

Alternative Fuel Incentives/Tax Advantages_____

Various financial incentives exist for purchasers o f alternative fuel vehicles, which directly lowers its cost. Financial incentives are available from the federal government and also the provincial government. In addition, incentives may be available from local natural gas utility companies for fleet applications. There are also tax advantages associated with alternative fuel vehicles. These tax advantages serve to lower both the cost o f purchasing and the cost o f operating alternative fuel vehicles.

6.1

Federal Government Programs

The Canadian federal government offers financial incentives to purchasers o f natural gas vehicles through two methods; (1) The Natural Gas for Vehicle Program, and (2) Exemption from Excise Tax on Natural Gas as a Transportation Fuel. (1) The Natural Gas for Vehicles Program (NGVP): The federal government in 1983 started the Natural Gas for Vehicles Program. The NGVP program provides financial contributions towards the purchase o f natural gas vehicles. Contributions are $3,000 for a medium duty natural gas vehicle, $2,000 for a light duty natural gas vehicle and $500 for a vehicle converted to natural gas operation. The program also provides a $500 contribution to the dealer selling the vehicle."* Under the NGVP program it provided a grant o f $500 for the conversion o f a vehicle to natural gas operation. To be eligible for the contribution, the vehicle must be registered in a region that is serviced by natural gas supplied from Alberta and be in good mechanical condition. Local natural gas companies are administering this program."* (2) Exemption from Excise Tax on Natural Gas as a Transportation Fuel: Natural gas for vehicles is exempt from federal excise tax. Gasoline is subject to federal excise tax o f 10 cents per litre, and federal excise tax on diesel fuel is 4 cents per litre. The only federal tax on natural gas is the Good and Services Tax (GST) of seven percent, which applies to all other transportation, fuels as well. Natural gas's exemption from the federal excise tax provides the fuel with the first o f several tax advantages. The Ethanol Fuel Initiative is another federal program that is designed to increase the use o f ethanol as a transportation fuel. The strategy that the federal government has currently is to encourage using ethanol blended gasoline both in the low level (E-10) and high level (E-85) blends. Currently most o f the vehicles can use low level blends and flexible fuel vehicles can use the high level blends."* Software for AFVs: QTOOL SE is a software package developed by Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), the Canadian Natural Gas Vehicle Alliance (CNGVA) the Propane Gas Association o f Canada (PGAC), and the vehicle manufacturers. It is very user-friendly software for consumers to find out the cost effectiveness of vehicles capable o f operating on alternative fuels."*

28

6.2

Provincial Government Programs

The government o f Ontario provides incentives to purchasers o f alternative fuel vehicles in the form o f tax refunds and reduced taxes. Just like Ontario many other provinces also are following the lead o f the federal government by providing tax relief for alternative fuels. Sales Tax Refunds: The Ontario Ministry o f Finance provides rebates o f the 8 % provincial sales tax (PST) paid on the purchase price o f a factory-equipped alternative fuel vehicle, or on the cost o f an aftermarket conversion. The PST is refundable up to a limit o f $750 on propane-powered vehicles, and up to a limit o f $1000 on vehicles powered by alternative fuels other than propane. (These limits do not apply to buses, in which case the tax is refundable in full) Qualifying vehicles are those that: operate exclusively on natural gas, propane, electrical energy, ethanol, methanol, or operate as dual-powered vehicles (that use one o f the alternative fuels noted above and that can also be powered by gasoline or diesel fuel). A refund is not available on vehicles using a mixture o f an alternative fuel and gasoline or diesel fuel. Time Limits for Conversions - For refunds o f the retail sales tax on vehicles converted after purchase, conversions must be completed within 180 days from the date the vehicle is purchased. If the conversion is not completed within the 180 days, a buyer may still be entitled to a refund o f the eight percent retail sales tax paid on the cost o f conversion kit and the labour to install the kit. Vehicles leased on long-term leases are also eligible for refunds o f the retail sales tax, subject to the refund limits above. Leases must be for twelve months or more, and vehicles must meet all o f the above requirements. Fuel Conservation Tax - In addition to the 8 % retail sales tax, the fuel conservation tax paid on new passenger cars or sport utility vehicles (bought or leased) may be refunded if the vehicles operate, or are converted to operate, exclusively on an alternative fuel. A refund of this tax is not available if a vehicle can operate as a dual powered vehicle. In addition the government o f Ontario does not tax automotive natural gas, methanol, or ethanol. The provincial tax on gasoline is 14.7cents per litre, and the tax on automotive diesel fuel is 14.3 cents per litre. Propane used for automotive is taxed in Ontario at a rate o f 4.3 cents per litre. Flere propane is taxed at a lower rate than gasoline relative to its energy content; it is taxed at forty percent o f its energy equivalent level. If like gasoline, propane were taxed on an energy content basis, the tax on propane would be 1 0 . 8 cents per litre.

29

6.3

Utility Company Incentives

Enbridge Consumers Gas - For qualifying vehicles or applications, Enbridge Consumers Gas offers incentives valued at $1000 for factory equipped dedicated natural gas vehicles, and incentives valued at $500 for factory equipped bi-fuel natural gas vehicles. Incentives available from Enbridge Consumers Gas for NGV conversions are based on vehicle use and the level o f fuel consumption. For further information, one should call 1-888-NGV-4SAV (1-888-648-4728). Union Gas - Incentives are available from Union Gas for some commercial applications. Incentives are based on fuel consumption levels and are evaluated on a case-bv-case basis. For information one should call: 1 (800) 265-5277.

30

7. Alternative Fuel Vehicle Models Available in the Market
Following is a list o f different alternative fuel vehicles that are available in the market or are nearing completion: Table 7; Model Year 2003, Alternative Fuel Vehicles Available in the Market or Nearing Completion

A m erican Honda Motor Corporation 88S-CCHONDA http:iAvww.honda.com
CNG Dedcafed CNteQX ILEV.SULEV (im pact Serten (TtefttEinlt) 1.71,4-cyndsr 8GGE 2i]0mi

D alm lerChrysler 1-800-999-FLEET http://w ww .fl66t.chrysier.com
C o d ^ Ram Van, D oe lpRani M ad %n 'ciT'fïlef Ta*n and Oauilrc, Dodÿ C aa«an 'Doc^e Grand Cararan LEV, IJLEV (CA-StlEV) 18.7 OGE

CNG DedcaiHi

van

5% V 8

200-300 mt

E8S m v

Mtntmn

IFV

3 .1 V6

20 Gat

320-420 int

E85PFV E æ FFV

'Chri^tef Setfing Sedan, t h r ^ e t a r l n g Cmv-entle, -D od^ stratus Sedan Serfin, Cm W tPle ttT)StefV Q',^Cf Van

LEV LEV

2.7LVB 31V G

16 Gat 20 Gat

,300-400 mt 300400 mt

Ford M otor Com pany 1-877-ALTFUEL http://www.fl6elford.com
CNGBI-FKl F - ia uqtrl'Duti'Flcfcip ULEV m v8 12.3 GGE I75mt

CNG Dedcaled

E-ssftesyan(E2S0aiad E350) E -senes% gcnfE3@ q

van waqon

SULEV. (CA-SUIEV)

5.4LV8

standard 2® Standard 19.2 GGB rrl.' Extended Etdenctedl^nge 26.9 GGE Ranrp 420 mt

CNG Dedcated

F-150

lE V , SULEV, LIqtrt-Outr Flctip (CA-5ULEV)

5.4LVB

CNG Dedcated Eaa m

CrafflVIclaila te c u y ^ td e S M Q u n b trE ff %jplO(Ef TdcfcuyM ajnbtneef % # c re r Sport ^ s n ^ rF F V F-1S0

Sedan Sedan w ^on

tiE V ULEV

4 .1 V5 3A V 6

.350 mt Standard 200 Standard 12.3 GOB nr ExtancW Rame Extended 16.2 GGE R a n ^ .350 mt 18 Gat 225 Gat 17.5 Gat 23 Gat 19.5 Gat 26 j! GGE 250-350 ml

21.7 GGE

Effi FFV E8SFFV LPGB-Fuel

SUV LtqtrtDuyPlcKn) Llqtrt-Du^Rc*i|)

LEV LEV ULEV

4.0LSOHCV6 3 1 V6 5Æ V B

TBD TBD 400 mt

31

General Motors Corporation 1488-GM`AFT-4U http://www.gmaltfuel.com
CNG EJ-Fuel CNG Bt-Fuet,' CNQ DeOrated CheAYSrærado GMCSfetra ei-FualS Dadlcafed m slom o l Cfiffay Express GMC Sayaiia Chew Cavalier Llqht-Dutr Ftckip Catgocf P s e r q a Van Sedan

LEV
U.EW (IXdlcalad

6.0. V8

26 GGE 11.2 G G E # IU0IWOJGGE

220-280 ml

1 2 0 * 0 ml *F mal,« 2 0 -2 8 0
ni fctedlralfiit) 110-160 ml 260339 ml

CA-SULEV1 LEV

6.0. V'6 2 .a V t

,'W kaledi 62 GGE 26 Gal

CNG El-Fuel

EaSFP/
E85 FFV

Chatty TAoe tMCYUkm
tr K w a tr jit ia n

SUV SUV

m i m i

S .1 V8

tMC YUKcn XL
'CtKWldSlhBractp

5.3LVa

3 2 5 Gal

300402 ml

EB5 FFV

y MC Siena

LiqMOUh' RcKup

m i

S3L V 0

,327 392 ml 34 Gal {brq box) 28 i b n i r a o m ml Btorl) Gal I'sncrt boXi

Mazda USA 800-222-5500 http:i.fwww,mazda u sa.com
E8S FFV BMOO llqht-Dutr Ptcttp LEV

3 .0 . VB

193 Gal

230 - 300 6 1 1

Mercedes-Benz USA 800-367-3672 http:/.iwww.mbusa.cotri,fbrand/lndex.|sp
EB5FFV c a z o S p o ts Sedan
Sedan LEV S Odegree ¥ 6 ,19& or In. 16.4 Gal tOOdOQ ml

Nissan North America 800-NISSAN1 httpi/Mw/.nissandriven.com/menu nf.html
Eteciilc (UiniuiTHon) Eledric (Lliminnon) 'm a-E V ^ l e d Heels In CA) 'H^paimlrt (seteci Ifeels In CA) MH-SlsWaion Ta o Sealer

ZEV ZEV

02KW.AC IndlKlfcri 24ltW.AC M u clb n

80 to

I4A

40 n1

Solectrta Corporation 781-932-9009 http:/,fwww.solectria.com
Etectric 52 n c d iite Clll'ffin
(ual ox asly M a d a t s w !: I g 3SJDps'>

(lea d AdtJi
CM.1 and i r e

ser.tra Vdi

ZEV

12SHW AC im tc ltn

isaeled PbAi

4010

Hsimalsd fM gj on ilfernaiis fusi arc! Etasad a t !h wadlji'. PDf E'/î ra iw d spJii* im MUan; t'/pa Ail ÊSÎ v ah eS s ÎT* IkalMa lua vafilcte (fFV li ftialhSIs t o teasa ta safcd*) itedj

K . ·XltfflitsCiirarr
ZA-carqnu CM C- Conpîsad Ni/srt Cm OS-nKEXimci
ik

LEV · ixst Brtssnn VsTitto L K . Lifim w Wtoam gjs, fnç-rw M -M ia MOJ .te a c js n u ti MFW · Mdd 'M U Hyjtua F t* - Uï4 M i sure,'. a p r ura l« Em sw w . t s îU 'r.sw iuiiÿV îH cte Tao-TXB«aa*Twu4 am'-OhlnxBnwtim'i'WM» OE'r.JîraBTiSSHlVaiji

Alterna Uv« Fuel V eh lcb B u y e rs G u id e .s'A '* '.riK ts.d » .g o v ,v b g A ltw n jllv r F u els Data C en ter .sw A '.atd(.doe.gcA '

,'Ssk* i «

Ef · BMat Vifta«

rp i'.fl8 a t* îF i» i`. î* tte
ÎJ - U 5 a m . O s t tK a & l I t '» ' - ttitfanlyl.-wEmstni '«nBa ·;A'-Slî*aa (X* WtwsM tars . «Ito

J .S . DOE C le a n C ities AWA'.*:cltiê4.d,>î.go'(

P rc g ra m

32

Gas Electric Hybrids in the M arket: More people here in North America, especially women are ready to give gas-electric vehicles a try, according to a study on hybrid vehicles. In the overall, the survey concluded that more women were interested in hybrid vehicles than men. Agoura Hills, California-based Power after doing the survey found 30% o f new-vehicle buyers would consider a hybrid "definitely", and also another 30% said that they would consider it "strongly". The survey eoncluded that the majority o f the people who were going to purchase a car said that they would want a vehicle that they are already driving in a hybrid. A person already driving a sport utility vehicle preferred to have a hybrid sport utility vehicle, similarly people who were driving minivans preferred to have a hybrid minivan. Hybrid SUV:

Fig 7a: Ford Escape Hybrid Ford Escape Hybrid {Figure 7a) was the first sport utility vehicle (SUV) in the U.S. that came out in 2003. Hybrid Cars:

"Honda Insight"

Fig 7b: Honda Insight The first hybrid vehicle in the U.S. market introduced in 1999. It has a tiny racy look and seats two people.

'Toyota Prius'

Fig 7c: Toyota Prius The second hybrid in the U.S. market had an increase in sales o f 180% in the year 2001. Toyota has a target sale o f 14,000 sales o f Prius annually. It has the distinction o f being the leader in hybrid vehicle sales.

33

"Honda Civic Hybrid'

Fig 7d: Honda Civic Hybrid Honda's second hybrid, the 2003 Civic started to sell in April 2002. It looks very similar to the regular Civic sedan. Also it is produced in the same assembly line as to the other Civics. The most tempting thing that this hybrid Civic has to offer from the regular Civic sedan is it offers 50 miles/gal. in combined city/highway fuel mileage. It has all the looks very similar to the typical Civic sedan. This Honda Hybrid sedan is a high-tech alternative to the conventional economy cars, i.e. the Toyota Echo and the Volkswagen's turbo-charged diesel cars. Honda which is almost every year the top selling small car in North America was very smart to base the front drive Civic Hybrid on its regular Civic, which has set the pace for subcompact car refinement. The reason was because Honda didn't want potential car buyers to be scared o f the gasoline-electric setup o f its new model. The Civic Hybrid does not require any more maintenance than the regular gasoline Civic. Honda has projections o f selling two thousand o f its Civic Hybrid models every month in the U.S., which is a fairly large number for hybrids. There is an immediate savings in gas with the Honda Civic Hybrid. The savings is so great that it almost makes owners pretty much strangers to gas filling stations. The Civic Hybrid delivers approximately 46 miles/gallon in city driving and approximately 51 miles/gallon on highway driving with its 5-speed manual transmission, and approximately 48 miles/gallon and 47 miles/gallon with its automatic continuously variable transmission. It only requires the regular grade gasoline and one can get more than six hundred miles from its 13.2-gallon fuel tank. On the other hand the Civic with the next highest fuel economy is its 117 HP gasoline-engine. It delivers approximately 36 miles/gallon in city driving and 44 miles/gallon in highway driving with the five-speed manual transmission and 35 miles/gallon and 40 miles/gallon with the continuously variable transmission. Therefore there is no doubt that the Honda Civic Hybrid offers an impressive fuel economy compared to other vehicles even compared to it's very own gasolinepowered Civic. The one thing that's different from the regular Civic sedan is that the Civic Hybrid model has a more aerodynamic front end and a small rear spoiler.

34

7.1

Ford a Major Player in AFVs

Ford Motor Company quotes themselves as the major player in AFVs and their motto is "Driving Environmental Solutions". They claim that they provide more alternatives in Alternative Fuel Vehicles for any business, than any other Original Equipment Manufacturer (O.E.M.), which is true because o f all the different options that are available out there. Ford Motor Company's role is to help develop innovative transportation solutions as well as to educate visitors about a balance between transportation and nature. Ford also claims that their vehicles do not compromise the beauty o f the parks. Currently one can choose from three different fuels, and a total o f eleven different models. Below are some o f the Alternative Fuel Vehicles that are available out there.

Ford Taurus: A flexible Fuel Vehicle - Vehicles that run on Ethanol are called Flexible Fuel Vehicles (FFVs) because they can run on ethanol, gasoline or any combination of the two fuels in one tank. It's available on the LX, SE and SES sedans and also on the SE wagons. It is LEV (Low Emission Vehicle) certified and has a 3.0L 2V V 6 engine, and has on-board fuel mixture sensors,'' C row n V ictoria: A Natural Gas Dedicated Vehicle (NGV) - It's available on the LX and heavy-duty commercial use models. It is ULEV (Ultra Low Emission Vehicle) certified, has a 4.6L V 8 engine w/automatic transmission. There is an optional extended range package available for police and heavy duty commercial use applications.''
It was introduced in 2001 and there cannot be any other vehicle more perfect for school bus, hotel, and airport shuttle companies than this vehicle. It is available on the E-450 Cutaway. It is ULEV (Ultra Low Emission Vehicle) certified, has a 5.4L V 8 engine w/automatic transmission. It has 225 horsepower with 325 ft/lbs torque.''

E -Series C utaw ay Dedicated NGV -

E lectric R anger - The Electric Ranger is the type o f vehicle that reduces the
usage o f valuable resources and with rechargeable batteries it is considered a very ecologically friendly vehicle. It is a considered a ZEV (Zero Emissions vehicle) which makes it a perfect indoor vehicle. It has a driving range o f 120 kms and it can accelerate from 0-80 km/hr in 12.5 seconds. The Electric Ranger has 90 horsepower and 140 ft/lbs o f torque. It can reach up to a top speed o f 120km/h.'^

T hink C ity - In order to provide another innovative and environmentally friendly
transportation solutions this Think City vehicle was introduced. It is a stand alone type o f vehicle that's perfect for warehouses, military bases, closed gate communities, zoos, campuses or any indoor place because it has zero emissions and also are quiet to operate. It seats two people, can only reach up to a top speed o f 90 km/h, and its range is 80 kms.'^

F -Series L igh t D u ty Bi-Fuel L PG - The only Original Equipment Manufacturer (O.E.M.) that offers a factory built Bi-Fuel Propane pickup is Ford Motor Company. Production is beginning in February o f 2004. It has a 5.4L V 8 Bfuel CNG engine w/automatic transmission, 230 horsepower and 325 lbs/ft torque.

36

8.

Life Cycle Emissions

One will get an incorrect assessment o f an alternative fuel by only controlling vehicle emissions, without considering the upstream emissions. The total emission, which includes the overall life cycle o f a particular fuel, is life cycle emissions. It consists of the emission that is created while the fuel is produced, it consists o f the emission while the fuel is being delivered in the market while transporting it, and it also consists o f the emissions while it is being used at the vehicle in its operation. Therefore life cycle is a methodology for the assessment o f environmental impacts of production systems on a cradle-to-grave basis. Life Cycle Analysis approach is an end from the conventional assessments which tend to focus either on product manufacturing or end o f life disposal. Several studies have been done on the life cycle of different alternative fuels. And their results all vary a lot beeause o f the type o f assumptions made in estimating emissions. In my report I will quote from the data of a study that is o f importance here in Canada. It will be from the study "Alternative transportation fuels in Canada: Prospects and Policies" produced by the Canadian Energy Researeh Institute in 1996."' The life cycle emissions for alternative fuels was calculated in the Canadian Energy Research Institute study by estimating and incorporating upstream emissions, downstream emissions and vehicle emissions. Table 8
P o ll u t a n t s CO2 N2 O
CH 4

Life Cycle Emissions Comparison (Light Dut> Vehicles) (g/km)
G a s o lin e 2 9 1 .0 4 0 .0 0 2 0 .6 7 6 3 .1 3 0 .2 7 1.6 0 7 0 .1 8 9 3 0 5 .9 5 2 2 .1 8 9 N a tu r a l G a s 2 2 1 .5 5 4 0 .0 0 7 1.11 1 .6 3 3 0 .7 1 7 0 .6 9 0 .2 5 2 2 4 7 .0 6 2 1 .2 8 2 P rop an e 2 5 6 .9 3 0 .0 1 3 0 .6 2 5 0 .4 5 7 1 .3 7 3 0 .8 6 2 0 .2 6 8 2 7 4 .2 5 5 1.6 1 3

CO2 NOx VOCs SO 2 C O 2 E quivalent O zo n e

Source: Environmental Assessment o f Propane as a Motor Vehicle Fuel, November 2001 ' For CH 4 the potential for global warming that is used to find emissions on a CO 2 equivalent basis is "21" and "310" for N 2 O. Here the pollutants for Ozone are calculated as the total for the emissions for CO/7, NOx/2 and Volatile Organic Compounds, Here the reason for CO/7 and NOx/2 is because they are estimated to contribute 7 and 2 times less to the formation o f ozone than Volatile Organic Compounds. If one wants to do an overall evaluation o f emissions for the different vehicle technologies, all the things starting from the fuel cycle from wells to wheels and cycle o f vehicle through the recovery o f material and the disposal they are all to be put into consideration.

37

8.1

The Development of the Greet Model

The Center for Transportation Research at Argonne National Laboratory had been conducting fuel-cycle analysis for different transportation fuels and vehicle technologies for the past 20 years. And then in the year 1995 Argonne started developing a spreadsheet-based fuel cycle model. It was funded by the U.S. Department o f Energy. GREET (Greenhouses gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy use in Transportation) was introduced with its first version, a fuel cycle model. This model was released in 1996 and it is free to the public. After it was introduced it evolved significantly. It's updated version GREET 1.5a which was released in January o f 2000 was used in this analysis. It can be downloaded free o f charge. For a given transportation fuel/technology combination the GREET 1.5a separately calculates ; (a) the fuel-cycle consumption of, total energy, fossil fuels (petroleum, natural gas, and coal), and petroleum, (b) fuelcycle emissions for Green House Gases, primarily carbon dioxide (CO?) , methane (C H 4), and nitrous oxide (N 2 O), and (c) fuel-cycle emissions o f five criteria pollutants i.e. VOCs, CO, NOx (nitrogen oxides), PM 10 (particulate matter with a diameter < 1Omicrometers), and SOx (sulfur oxides)^' Table 8.1 in the next page shows the fuel-cycle energy and emission changes of the technologies that are near-term (Options that are already available or will be available within the next few years) using dedicated Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) and Liquefied Propane Gas (LPG) vehicles relative to baseline gasoline's vehicles that are fueled with conventional gasoline's. By looking at the results we can clearly see that compared to gasoline vehicles. Liquefied Propane Gas and Compressed Natural Gas vehicles gives us a lot o f energy and emissions benefits. We also can see that Liquefied Propane Gas vehicles gives us better energy and emissions benefits than Compressed Natural Gas vehicles. These results say that alternative fuel vehicles must be optimized in order to take the advantage o f specific fuel properties.

38

Table 8.1

GREET MODEL (Fuel -C ycle Energy and Emission Changes)
P e r c e n t C h a n g e C o m p a r e d t o G a s o lin e V e h ic le s D e d ic a t e d C N G V e h i c l e s D e d ic a te d L PG V e h ic le s -1 1 .3 % -1 1 .3 % -9 8 .2 % -6 2 .5 % -5 6 ,7 % -3 9 .6 % -3 9 .7 % -1 7 .2 % -4 .8 % -4 2 .5 % -3 1 .4 % -8 7 .4 % -9 8 .1 % 2 .5 % - 1 .2 % -1 3 .4 % -1 2 .7 %

T o ta l e n e r g y F o s s il fu e ls P e tr o le u m V O C ; T o ta l VOC: U rban C O : T o ta l CO; U rban N o x : T o ta l N O x: U rban P M 1 0 : T o ta l PM 10: U rban S o x : T o ta l SO X : U rban CH4 N 2O CO2 GHGs

1 . 1% -0 .5 % -9 9 .4 % -7 0 .5 % -7 4 .1 % -3 4 .8 % -3 5 .5 % 2 6 .6 % 2 2 .4 % -3 6 .0 % -3 2 .0 % -3 3 .6 % -9 6 .2 % 2 0 1 .1% -2 3 .7 % -1 6 .1 % - 1 0 .2 %

Here the "minus" means decrease compared to gasoline and " p lu s" means an .21 increase Here when compared to gasoline propane and natural gas both offered lower emissions o f carbon monoxide, toxic hydrocarbons and ozone precursors. On the bass of life -cycle they both produce less greenhouse has emissions than gasoline. Also when comparing all the aspects, for example emissions, vehicle perfomiance, fueling infrastructure and cost, it shows than propane is better than Compressed Natural Gas. Therefore propane should offer substantial benefits in the economic and environmental aspect especially significantly in police cars, taxicabs, and other high usage vehicles. Regarding batteries which is one o f the main power sources for AFVs, and likely to increase in the future, there is on going research which is primarily aimed at the performance o f a battery that can deliver at a certain cost. And by studying only the use phase in life cycle o f batteries for alternative fuel vehicles only gives a limited picture o f the total environmental impact of these batteries. Therefore if only the use phase is considered then battery-powered vehicle should be the cleaner alternative fuel vehicle when compared to gasoline vehicles because they have no tail pipe emissions. But batteries use large amount o f hazardous and toxic material that must be taken into consideration when calculation the environmental attributes for AFVs. Therefore the entire life-cycle for batteries must be considered, that should involve the accounting for the material required to manufacture the batteries, the process used for manufacturing the battery, the battery phase o f use, disposal and also recycling. Therefore when considering environmental issues for alternative fuel vehicles one should always include the tailpipe emissions and the emissions from processes at other stages in the life o f the alternative fuel. 39

_________ 9.

Survey in Alternative Fuel Vehicle_________

I conducted a survey here in Toronto, using the telephone and also in person handing out the questionnaire in the appendix from my work place, some in my neighborhood and also in some o f my friend's neighborhoods. Eaeh survey required approximately five minutes o f the respondent's time. It gives us a somewhat knowledge of Torontonian public's awareness and views regarding alternative fuel vehicles in Toronto, Ontario. In my survey, I had responses from thirty people. The questions that I had selected to ask my respondents would give us an idea o f the public's awareness on the environment around them and also to the extent o f how much they know about alternative fuel vehicles. There are questions that will be asked coneerning attitudes about the pollution and the environment. It will therefore gauge the public's awareness to how mueh they know about the alternative fuels that are out there and is the government doing enough about it in order to promote it.

9.1

Objective of My Survey

One of the major aims o f my project was to summarize and analyze the results of my survey that was done using the telephone and also in person handing out the questionnaire from my work place, some in my neighborhood, and also some in my friend's neighborhoods, of consumer vehicle preferences and attitudes toward the alternative fuel vehicles. It basically will gauge the awareness o f the state of alternative fuel vehicles among the public. It will also give us an idea o f the interest of Torontonian's in respect to the advanced technology and environmentally friendly vehicles that are out there. Basically it will show us the knowledge that Torontonian's have or are interested in knowing in this area o f transportation. Therefore the questions that I have selected to ask will garner opinions about a Torontonians attitude towards the envirormient related to the means o f transportation that they use and their knowledge in the alternative fuels that are available out there. Overall as a summary I could say that the questionnaire will measure the respondents awareness o f alternative fuel vehicles and attitudes about air pollution and environmentalism. It will somewhat ascertain whether and to what extent respondents have heard about alternative fuel vehicles, also it will show us o f how concerned they are about the air pollution in their area, also it will show us the Torontonians perception o f the relative safety o f alternative fuels to gasoline, and finally it will also show us to what extent does the Torontonian's consider themselves environmentalists.

40

9.2

Summary of Survey Results

The following is the findings o f my survey: In Question No. 1, thirty (100%) out of thirty people said that they had heard about alternative fuel vehicles. This number is quite encouraging because that's everyone that knows or somehow heard that there are alternative choices out there. Canada being a country o f immigrants, where there are lots o f people coming from the third world country each year, to me this is a very encouraging figure that people are actually aware that there are other types o f options other than gasoline out there. Because people are already aware that there are options out there it is our duty to let them know o f the various options and their benefits us being transportation professionals. Compared to the Electrical Vehicle (EV) Consumer Survey in 1999 there was a very similar question, " Have you ever heard o f electric vehicles". The response was that 87% had and the remainder 13% never heard about electric vehicles.^ {Figure A. la ) From the comparison chart we can see that the number o f people that have heard about AFVs has increased from 87% to 100%. In my survey the results are more promising because it shows that people now in the year 2004 are more aware about vehicle fuel choices and its availability out there. My question was more general therefore the response is more positive than the more specific question o f people hearing about electric vehicles only. Like I said earlier they have heard about alternative fuel vehicles, therefore it is the duty o f the people in this industry to try to tell them about the different choices and the most benefits that it has to offer. In question No. 2 out o f the thirty people that were asked this question 5 (17%) people said "yes" and the other 25 (83%) people said that "no" that they have never seen an alternative fuel vehicle out there. Flere these numbers are very alarming because people know that they are out there but they just haven't seen one. This is very damaging to the public because they will forget about it and will also not be able to know of how it looks and be able to compare the looks from a conventional gasoline-powered vehicle. It will always remain a mystery for the public unless they are able to actually see it. It is therefore very important to have these types of vehicles out on the road as many as possible and also to come up with ways to make them noticeable. By having more and more alternative vehicles out there public's confidence will grow when they actually see the vehicle running on the road. A similar question "Have you ever seen an electric vehicle " was asked in the survey in the Electric Vehicle (EV) Consumer Survey o f 1999" and the response was that 75% of the people had not seen electric vehicles.'® Compared to my survey there is an increase o f people that haven't seen AFVs. Also in my survey the question was in general about any AFVs and in the EV Survey about Electric Vehicles. Therefore the answer for being "no" which has increased is also because the question is more specific in the EV Survey. It seems like the automakers are not doing a very good job in promoting alternative fuel vehicles, especially in commercials, auto shows etc. where they could promote these types of vehicles.

41

In Question No. 3, 22(73%) out o f 30 people here said that they were concerned about the environmental pollution created due to vehicles out there. This figure (73%) is a very encouraging number. (Figure A. 3) It tells us that almost three-quarter of the population are aware that the environment out there is polluted by the emissions that are coming out from these transportation fuels o f vehicles. The other 27% people that are not aware about the outdoor air pollution due to vehicles tells us that there is more for transportation professionals to do out there. To make these people aware o f the dangerous consequences and pollution that are caused due to the emissions from gasoline fuel vehicles. The almost three quarter o f the people who are concerned about the environmental pollution is a positive sign for automakers to market the environmentally friendly vehicles because it tells us that the public are already aware of the environment that is suffering. Now, if these autos are economical in gas, there should be no doubt to market these alternative fuel vehicles to consumers easily. In Question No. 4, it confirms that the knowledge o f people in alternative fuel vehicles is very low. Here we see that only 7% people think that they are knowledgeable in this type o f vehicles, which is a very low number o f people. And the number o f people that do not almost know anything about it is 40%. (Figure A. 4) People who think they know just a little bit about the alternative fuel vehicles selected the next category "4" which was 20%. And even a little bit less than that chose the category" 3" which was again another 20% o f them. Here these results only confirm that people knowledge in this area of field is very limited and there is a lot o f room for advancement. In the Electric Vehicle Consumer survey o f 1999 a similar question was asked regarding people's knowledge in Electric vehicles. The response was almost very similar because it showed that 60% people almost had no knowledge about Electric Vehicles and a very low 5% people only had some knowledge about the Electric Vehicles out there. In Question No. 5, here 40% people responded by saying that electricity is the most economical fuel. Also another 40% responded by saying that natural gas is the most fuel-efficient alternative fuel out there other than gasoline. (Figure A. 5) Here it shows that people even with basic knowledge can come to a conclusion that electric vehicles are the most economical vehicles. I could only think of one reason why 40% people think that natural gas is an economical fuel among the others because they see all these natural gas and propane powered taxicabs all over Toronto out there. It has to be economical otherwise the taxicab drivers would not be driving these types of alternative fuel vehicles. In Question No. 6, here also 40% people responded by saying that electricity is the most environmentally friendly alternative fuel out there compared to others. The next one that my respondents think is the most environmentally friendly is Natural gas, 27% people think that. (Figure A. 6) Therefore it again shows that people even with basic knowledge can come to a conclusion that electric vehicles are the most environmentally friendly vehicles along with natural gas compared to the conventional gasoline powered vehicles. The other thing that is most interesting in

42

this response is that only 3% people think that gasoline is still the most environmentally friendly fuel out there. (Figure A. 6) That is a very low number. I am sure that people only because o f their lack o f knowledge in this field can make that comment. In Question No. 7, the thirty people that were surveyed 21 (70%) o f them responded by saying that they would pay more for a vehicle that had the same benefits that a conventional vehicle had to offer and if that vehicle was more environmentally friendly. It's a positive sign because it shows that people care about their environment that they live in and are willing to sacrifice some money to achieve that. It is also to note that 9 (30%) people said that they are not going to pay more to purchase a most expensive vehicle even though it offered all the benefits that a regular conventional vehicle had to offer. Probably the question should be more specific that how much more do they have to pay for this type o f vehicle. Probably that's why the 30% people were not willing to pay more. Only if the question were more specific by saying how much more then probably more people would have said yes to this answer. In the Electric Vehicle Consumer Survey o f 1999 a much similar question was asked if people were willing to pay more for an Electric Vehicle, and 52% responded by saying that they would pay $ 1 , 0 0 0 or more extra, another 18% said that they would pay $2,000 or more and 7% responded by saying that they would not pay anything extra/° When compared to my survey, it shows less people are willing to pay more for the extra cost. Here the number increases probably because in my survey it doesn't say how much the extra cost might be. So people without knowing what the additional cost might be are skeptical on making a commitment.^" In Question No. 8, the thirty people that were surveyed 27 (90%) o f them responded by saying that they would pay more for a vehicle that had the same benefits that a conventional vehicle had to offer and if that vehicle gave better gas mileage they would purchase that vehicle. (Figure A .8) Here it seems that people are willing to pay more because they see savings o f gasoline, which will in return pay o ff for the extra cost for the alternative fuel vehicle. People are very concerned with the amount of money that they have to spend on gasoline. Here in this question the response confirms that because they see a savings from the gas mileage they are willing to pay more for the type o f vehicle at front. In Question No. 9 the thirty people that were asked this question 11 said that they had at one point in time seen an ad in the newspaper, which is almost 37% of them. The only thing that is very positive in my survey is that all thirty o f them at some point in time have seen a commercial, which was promoting alternative fuel vehicle. It seems like the media is so far doing a good job in promoting them Also 43% said that they have seen an ad in the TV. If the media continues to play a role in promoting these types o f vehicles it will not only persuade consumers to purchase these vehicles and save the environment, in return they can also benefit from better mileage, etc. Even though the media is playing a role in promoting these vehicles there need to be more coverage in the future.

43

In the 1999 Electric Vehicle Consumer Survey a similar question was asked regarding Electric Vehicle Survey. And the Question was" Have you seen media covering Electric Vehicles in the past 12 months", and the response was 44% said "No" and 56% had said "Yes".^ * ^ Therefore there is always room for improvement for the media to promote alternative fuel vehicles. In Question No. 10, here 70% people out o f the thirty that were surveyed responded by saying that the government is not doing a good job in offering incentives to consumers o f alternative fuel vehicles. (Figure A. 10) Consumers are clearly concerned about their environment as we saw in the previous answers and they feel that government should take financial steps to encourage the growth of clean alternative fuel vehicles. It shows that a large number o f people wants to do something about our environment if there is government support by tax incentives, rebate checks, etc. Almost three quarter o f the people are saying that there is not enough government support. Therefore our government needs to come forward and take a positive stand in promoting these vehicles. In Question No. 11, here 93% people are willing to sacrifice a little bit o f money for the research and development o f cleaner vehicles. (Figure A .11) This shows that consumers do support the environment to be cleaner in which they live in by paying a little from their pocket. Comparing with the 1999 Electric Vehicle Consumer survey it shows that people are still eager to pay more for saving the environment Also in that survey the people supported in majority in saving the environment by responding to a similar question in 84% in favor o f it. Here there is an increase in the results in my survey in people willingness to pay a little extra for the alternative fuel to save the environment. It went from 84% to 93% In Question No. 12, it is very encouraging to know that even if people had to refuel their vehicles twice as much, they are still willing to go that extra hassle to save the environment by lower emissions. 63% people are willing to do that and 37% are not. (Figure A. 12) Therefore there are a big number o f people it shows that are environmentally conscious.

44

Conclusion
Canada is facing an unprecedented environmental challenge today with climate change and the ever-increasing release o f green house gases. Ethanol blended gasoline's are high performance gasoline's that are good for your car, competitively priced and they offer additional benefit o f being environmentally friendlier than conventional gasoline's. Ethanol is widely accepted as the most environmentally friendly fuel available today. It reduces GHGs and other harmful pollutants while providing important value-added markets for grain at a time when commodity prices are at an all time low. Ethanol blended gasoline's help reduce emissions o f carbon monoxide by up to 30%. Ethanol blended gasoline's are certified to meet Canadian General Standards Board (CGSB) specifications - a requirement o f the Province of Ontario. Also as the ethanol industry continues to grow, its impact on the economy will be felt in variety o f areas, such as at the local level, farmers will see new markets for grain while the government will benefit from the increased tax revenue. As the government has committed itself to increase production by 750 million litres per year, its estimated impact on the economy will be significant. Vehicles powered by such fuels as electricity, natural gas/propane, and alcohol etc. will also reduce petroleum usage and could improve urban air quality. Alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) differ from gasoline vehicles in terms o f cost (purchase price and fuel cost) and, in terms o f such attributes as vehicle range between refueling, fuel availability and convenience o f refueling, operating performance, reliability, and interior space. The natural gas industry has an enormous impact on the Canadian economy, by employing over 55,000 people directly and providing about $13 billion in economic benefits. Because there is an abundance o f natural gas here in Canada, its price and assured supply are not threatened by offshore events that are very unpredictable. On top of that by purchasing natural gas, one's dollar stays in Canada where it belongs and help support our country's economy and secure jobs for Canadians. Nowadays lots of our school buses are using natural gas all across the country. Also Canada Post's natural gas vehicles reflect the government's commitment to incorporating alternative fuels into its fleet. Other types o f vehicles, such as ice resurfacing equipment, forklifts, heavy duty trucks and transit buses are also all becoming more popular in Canada. The anticipated growth in world energy demand will greatly influence transportation fuel prices and alternative fuel options in the coming century. Alternative fuels can provide real economic savings to consumers and business and at the same time deliver significant environmental benefits. Fuel savings o f 30% to 45% over gasoline are possible with natural gas and propane fuels. With these levels o f savings, the incremental cost to acquire a natural gas or propane vehicle can often be repaid in two years or less. Methanol fuel is marketed at a price approximately equal to gasoline on an energy-equivalent basis. All o f the alternative fuels offer air quality benefits and

45

some have the additional advantage o f producing less greenhouse gas emissions compared to conventional fuel vehicles. Although alternative fuels are being serious consideration for tackling the global warming and other environmental issues related to passenger transportation, it seems clear that currently available options are applicable mainly for a few selected scenarios rather than on a global scale, and even then primarily for local air pollution issues only. Beyond alternative fuels, a number o f additional options (such as increasing the efficiency within a given mode o f transportation, and switching to more efficient modes) are presently available to policy-makers that could serve as tools to effectively tackle the greenhouse emissions problem from automobiles. Most o f these options do not suffer from any major technological constraints, and very importantly, also offer the possibility o f ameliorating other problems (such as local air pollution, traffic congestion, high-cost per passenger mile, and inefficient resource utilization) related to personal automobile use. It is this potential to simultaneously deal with the many facets o f transportation-related issues that makes these choices particularly interesting and useful. Automakers and researchers will continue to develop and improve on the transportation technologies I have discussed. They're exploring better ways to use fuel cells, alternative fuels, and EV and HEV systems. They are also working on new ways to store energy, and creating lightweight advanced materials to make vehicles that run cleaner and use less fuel. In addition to the technologies available now, researchers across the United States and Canada are developing new advanced technologies for use in cars, minivans. pickup trucks, sport utility vehicles, buses, and heavy-duty trucks-that will steer us toward an even cleaner future with more available, domestic fuel resources.

46

Recommendations
After working on my project following are my recommendations: Giving more incentives/subsidies to people using alternative fuel vehicles. Because the more incentives that are available out there, the more people are going to be encouraged to use it. By making the refueling sites more abundant in number is going to be more convenient. It is very important to have numbers o f refueling stations in order for it to be successful. Also by giving tax rebate to the fuelling stations having alternate fuels is an idea that will have a very positive outcome. Media should play an adequate role in brain storming the people to use alternative fuel vehicles, because that is also their responsibility in doing so. Information about refueling sites locations should be assisted by the Government. It should be made mandatory for taxicabs to be operated on alternate fuels (specially abundant in our country). Recently TTC has ordered for 127 hybrid electric vehicles, which is a very positive thing towards the right direction for our City. Similarly more money should be put into bring more vehicles in other parts o f the country too. Additionally more money is also needed for the research in this field for sustainable transportation and a better future. The future might look pretty scary if nothing drastic isn't done at the present time. Throughout the report I not only stop by talking about the problems that might occur if the pollution rate is not decreased, I also talk about the solutions that are available out there and what we all can contribute by working together, the public along with the government to save our world from the disaster that is eminent if nothing is done about it. This is a problem that just w ouldn't go away by avoiding it or by forgetting about it. Therefore, it is in the best interest for people to learn to the best of their knowledge regarding the ways o f how we can get around this eminent disaster in future and come up with solutions. One being, reducing pollution in the transportation sector by introducing more and more alternative fuel vehicles out there.

47

References
1. 2.
w w w .energy.ca.gov/education/A FV s/ Law rence Schm idt, Jason Poiitylo, Infrastructure Policy and Planning, Clim ate C hange and Transportation: A lternative Technologies for Passenger Vehicles, February, 2000 C om pliance Prom otion Bulletin, Environm ent Canada, June 2003 http://alt-fuels.nrcan.gc.ca, Natural R esources C anada http://w w w .ccities.doe.gov O ffice o f Transportation Technologies, U.S. D epartm ent o f Energy vvww.greenfuels.orgCanadian R enew able Fuels A ssociation The C anadian N atural Gas Vehicle Alliance, w w w .ngvcanada.org Electric V ehicle Society o f C anada (EV S ) C lean Fuels, Paving the way for A m erica's future w w w .epa.gov/ U.S. Environm ental Protection A gency

3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12. 13. 14. 15. 16.
17.

FuelSense, C lean Transportation Today, January 2002 Inform ation Resources, Inc. and Clean Fuels D evelopm ent Coalition Key W orld Energy Statistics 1999. International Energy A gency w w w .fleet.ford.ca

www.sen.parl.gc.ca/ckenny, A lternative Fuels, 1997
w w w .afdc.doe.gov A lternative Transportation Fuels in Canada: Prospects and Policies, Canadian R esearch Institute, N ovem ber 1996 M ichael W ang, The G reenhouse Gases, Regulated Em issions, and Energy Use in Transportation (G R EET) M odel V ersion 1.5, C enter for T ransportation Research,
A r g o n n e N a t i o n a l L a b o r a to r y , A u g u s t 1 9 9 9

18. 19.

20. 21.

Electric V ehicle A ssociation o f Canada, Electric V ehicle C onsum er Survey 1999 Environm ental A ssessm ent o f Propane as a M otor V ehicle Fuel, N ovem ber 2001

48

Appendix Survey in Alternative Fuel Vehicle Awareness
1. Do you know or have you ever heard about alternative fuel vehicles? a) Yes b) No 2. If you have, have you ever seen one? a) Yes b) No 3. Are you concerned about the outdoor air pollution due to vehicles? a) Yes b) No 4. If you have heard or seen an alternative fuel vehicle, how much do you think your knowledge is on a scale from 1 to 5? 1 - being an expert and 5 - not knowing very much about it. (a) 1 (b) 2 (c) 3 (d) 4 (e) 5

5. If you were given the choices below which do you think is the best alternative fuel out there regarding its fuel economy? a) b) c) d) e) f)
6

Gasoline Ethanol Natural Gas Methanol Electricity Hydrogen

. If you were given the choices below which do you think is the best alternative fuel out there regarding its environmental benefits? a) b) c) d) e) f) Gasoline Ethanol Natural Gas Methanol Electricity Hydrogen

49

7.

Are you willing to pay more for a vehicle that is environmentally friendly and has almost or very close to all the benefits o f a current gasoline powered vehicle? a) b) Yes No

8

.

Are you willing to pay more for a vehicle that is better in gas mileage and has almost or very close to all the benefits of a current gasoline powered vehicle? a) b) Yes No

9.

Have you seen any of the following media advertising alternative fuel vehicles in order to promote it? a) b) c) d) Newspapers Magazines TV Radio

10.

Do you think our Government is doing a good job to promote alternative fuel vehicles out there, by offering enough incentives to individuals who are purchasing it? a) Yes b )N o

11.

Are you willing to pay a little more for your gasoline if the extra money was to be used to achieve cleaner vehicles in Canada? a) Yes b) No

12.

If you had to refuel your vehicle twice as often in order to reduce vehicle emissions are you willing to do so? a) Yes b) No

50

Question 1.
D o y o u k n o w or h a v e y o u ev er heard ab ou t a lter n a tiv e fu e l v e h ic le s ? a) Y es b) No

120

100
100 80

% 60
40

1.

.

20
0

Figure A. I Results f o r Survey Question No. I
C ount Y es No T o ta l
30 0 30

P ercent 100
0 100

 EV S u n ey I Y es O M y Survey I

100

Figure A. la Com parison C hart between My Sun'ey and E V Survey

Conclusion;

T h irty (1 0 0 % ) ou t o f thirty p e o p le sa id that th e y h ad heard a b ou t a ltern ative fu el

v e h ic le s . T h is n u m b er is q u ite e n c o u r a g in g b e c a u se th a t's e v e r y o n e that k n o w s or s o m e h o w heard that there are a lter n a tiv e c h o ic e s out there. C an ad a b e in g a co u n try o f im m ig r a n ts, w h er e there are lots o f p e o p le c o m in g fro m the third w orld cou n try e a c h year, to m e th is is a v e r y e n c o u r a g in g fig u re that p e o p le are a c tu a lly a w a re th at there are oth er ty p e s o f o p tio n s o th er than g a s o lin e ou t there. B e c a u se p e o p le are a lre a d y aw are that there are o p tio n s ou t there it is ou r du ty to let th em k n o w o f th e v ariou s o p tio n s and th eir b e n e fits u s b e in g transp ortation p r o fe ssio n a ls. C om p ared to th e E lec tric a l V e h ic le (E V ) C o n su m e r S u r v e y in 1 9 9 9 th ere w a s a v e r y sim ila r q u estio n , " Ha\'e you ever h eard o f electric vehicles's T h e r esp o n se w a s th at 87% had and th e rem ain d er 13% n ev er heard a b o u t e le c tr ic v e h ic le s ." {Figure A. ] a) From th e c o m p a r is o n chart w e ca n s e e that the n u m b er o f p e o p le th at h a v e heard ab ou t A F V s h as in crea sed fro m 87% to 100% . In m y su rv e y the r esu lts are m o r e p r o m isin g b e c a u se it s h o w s that p e o p le n o w in the y e a r 2 0 0 4 are m o r e aw are abou t v e h ic le fu e l c h o ic e s and its a v a ila b ility o u t there. M y q u e stio n w a s m o r e g e n e r a l th erefo re th e r esp o n se is m ore p o s itiv e th an the m o r e s p e c ific q u e stio n o f p e o p le h e a r in g a b o u t e le c tr ic v e h ic le s o n ly . L ike 1 sa id earlier th e y h a v e heard a b o u t a ltern ative fu el v e h ic le s , th e r efo r e it is th e du ty o f th e p e o p le in this industry to try to te ll th e m ab ou t th e d iffe re n t c h o ic e s and the m o st b e n e fits th at it has to o ffer.

51

Question 2.
I f y o u h a v e , h a v e y o u e v e r se e n o n e ? a) Y es b) No

Figure A. 2 Results f o r Survey Question No. 2
C ount Y es No T o ta l 5 25 30 P ercent 17 83 100

No
 E V S u rv e y

Yes
0

 M y S u rv ey

50

100

___________ J
Fig A.2 a Com parison Chart between My Survey and EV Survey

Conclusion:

O u t o f th e th irty p e o p le that w e re ask ed th is q u e s tio n 5 (1 7 % ) p e o p le sa id "y e s " and

the o th er 2 5 (8 3 % ) p e o p le sa id that "n o " that th e y h a v e n e v e r s e e n an a lter n a tiv e fu e l v e h ic le ou t there. H ere th e se n u m b e rs are v e ry ala rm in g b e c a u se p e o p le k n o w that th e y are o u t th ere but th e y ju st h a v e n 't s e e n o n e . T h is is v e r y d a m a g in g to the p u b lic b e c a u se th e y w ill fo r g e t a b ou t it an d w ill a lso not be ab le to k n o w o f h o w it lo o k s an d be a b le to co m p a re th e lo o k s from a c o n v e n tio n a l g a s o lin e p o w er ed v e h ic le . It w ill a lw a y s rem ain a m y ste r y for th e p u b lic u n le ss th e y are a b le to a c tu a lly se e it. It is th erefo re v e r y im portant to h a v e th e se ty p e s o f v e h ic le s ou t o n th e road as m a n y as p o s s ib le and a lso to c o m e up w ith w a y s to m ak e th em n o tic e a b le . B y h a v in g m ore and m ore a lter n a tiv e v e h ic le s out there p u b lic 's c o n fid e n c e w ill g r o w w h en th e y a c tu a lly s e e th e v e h ic le ru n n in g on the road. A sim ila r q u e s tio n "Have you ever seen an electric vehicle" w a s a sk e d in th e su r v e y in th e E lectric V e h ic le (E V ) C o n su m e r S u r v e y o f 1 9 9 9 " . T h e r e s p o n se w a s th at 7 5 % o f th e p e o p le had n ot se e n e le ctr ic v e h ic le s .'" C o m p a red to m y su r v e y th ere is an in crea se o f p e o p le that h a v e n 't se e n A F V s . A ls o in m y su r v e y th e q u estio n w a s in g en era l a b ou t a n y A F V s and in th e E V S u r v e y a b o u t E lectric V e h ic le s . T h e r e fo r e the a n sw e r for b e in g " « o " w h ic h h as in c re a se d is a ls o b e c a u se th e q u e s tio n is m ore s p e c ific in th e E V S u r v e y . It s e e m s lik e th e a u tom ak ers are n o t d o in g a v e r y g o o d Job in p ro m o tin g a ltern ative fu e l v e h ic le s , e s p e c ia lly in c o m m e r c ia ls, au to s h o w s etc. w h e r e th e y c o u ld p ro m o te th e se ty p e s o f v e h ic le s .

52

Question 3.
A re y o u c o n c e r n e d ab ou t the o u td o o r air p o llu tio n d u e to v e h ic le s ? a) Y es b) No

Figure A. 3 Results fo r
P ercent 73 27 100

Question No. 3

C ount Y es No T o ta l 22 8 30

Conclusion:

2 2 (7 3 % )

out

of

30

p e o p le

h ere

sa id

th at

th e y

w ere

concerned

ab ou t

the

en v iro n m en ta l p o llu tio n c re a ted du e to v e h ic le s o u t there. T h is fig u r e (7 3 % ) is a v e ry e n c o u r a g in g nu m ber. It te lls u s that a lm o st th ree quarter o f th e p o p u la tio n are aw are that th e e n v ir o n m e n t ou t there is p o llu te d m y th e e m is s io n s that are c o m in g o u t from th e se tran sp ortation fu e ls o f v e h ic le s . T h e oth er 2 7 % p e o p le that are not aw are a b ou t the o u td o o r air p o llu tio n d u e to v e h ic le s te lls us that there is m ore for tran sp ortation p r o fe ssio n a ls to d o ou t there. T o m a k e th e s e p e o p le aw are o f the d a n g er o u s c o n s e q u e n c e s and p o llu tio n that are c a u se d due to the e m is s io n s from g a s o lin e fu el v e h ic le s. T h e a lm o st th ree quarter o f th e p e o p le w h o are c o n c er n e d ab ou t th e e n v ir o n m e n ta l p o llu tio n is a p o s itiv e sig n fo r a u to m a k ers to m arket the e n v ir o n m e n ta lly fr ie n d ly v e h ic le s b e c a u se it te lls us that the p u b lic are a lre a d y aw are o f th e e n v iro n m en t that is su ffer in g . N o w , i f th e s e a u to s are e c o n o m ic a l in g a s, there sh o u ld b e no d ou b t to m arket th e se a ltern ative fu e l v e h ic le s to c o n su m e r s e a sily .

53

Question 4.
I f y o u h a v e h eard o r s e e n an a ltern ative fu el v e h ic le , h o w m u c h do y o u th in k y o u r k n o w le d g e is on a sc a le from 1 to 5? 1 - b e in g an ex p e rt and 5 - n o t k n o w in g v e ry m u c h a b ou t it.

(a)

1

(b )

2

(c)

3

(d )

4

(e)

T"-----

20

I <

1

t

i
20.

Figure .4.4 Results f o r S un 'ey Question No. 4
C ount 1 2 3 4 5 T o ta l 2 4 6 6 12 30 P ercent 6 .7 13.3 20 20 40 100

Conclusion:

T h is q u e stio n c o n fir m s that the k n o w le d g e o f p e o p le in a lter n a tiv e fu el v e h ic le s is

v ery lo w . H ere w e s e e that o n ly 7% p e o p le th in k that th e y are k n o w le d g e a b le in th is ty p e o f v e h ic le s, w h ic h is a v e r y lo w n u m b er o f p e o p le . A n d the n u m b er o f p e o p le that d o n o t a lm o st k n o w an y th in g ab ou t it is 4 0 % . P e o p le w h o th in k th ey k n o w ju s t a little bit a b ou t the a ltern a tiv e fu e l v e h ic le s se le c te d the n e x t c a te g o r y "4 " w h ic h w a s 20% . A n d e v e n a little bit le s s than that c h o s e th e c a te g o r y " 3 " w h ic h w a s a gain an o th er 20% o f them . H ere th e se resu lts o n ly c o n fir m that p e o p le k n o w le d g e in th is area o f fie ld is v e r y lim ite d and th e r e is a lo t o f ro o m for a d v a n ce m e n t. In the E lec tric V e h ic le C o n su m e r su rv e y o f 1 9 9 9 a sim ila r q u e s tio n w a s a sk ed reg a rd in g p e o p le 's k n o w le d g e in E lec tric v e h ic le s . T h e r e s p o n se w a s a lm o st v e r y sim ila r b e c a u se it sh o w e d that 60% p e o p le a lm o st had n o k n o w le d g e a b ou t E lec tric V e h ic le s an d a v e r y lo w 5% p e o p le o n ly had so m e k n o w le d g e a b o u t the E lec tric V e h ic le s ou t there.

54

Question 5.
If y o u w e r e g iv e n th e c h o ic e s b e lo w w h ic h d o y o u th in k is th e b e st a lter n a tiv e fu el ou t th ere regard in g its fu el e c o n o m y ? a) G a so lin e ; b) E than ol; c ) N atu ral G as; d ) f) H yd rogen M eth a n o l ; e ) E lectricity ;

Figure A .J Results f o r Survey Q uestion No. 5

C ount G a s o lin e E th a n o l N a tu r a l G a s M e th a n o l E le c t r ic it y H ydrogen T o ta l 2 1 12 1 12 2 30

P ercent 6 .7 3 .3 40 3 .3 40 6 .7 100

Conclusion:

H ere 4 0 % p e o p le r esp o n d ed b y s a y in g th at e le c tr ic ity is th e m o st e c o n o m ic a l fuel. can c o m e to a

A ls o an oth er 4 0 % resp o n d ed b y s a y in g that natural g a s is the m o st fu e l- e ff ic ie n t a ltern a tiv e fu el out there o th er th an g a s o lin e . H ere it s h o w s that p e o p le e v e n w ith b a sic k n o w le d g e c o n c lu s io n th at e le c tr ic v e h ic le s are th e m o st e c o n o m ic a l v e h ic le s . 1 c o u ld o n ly think o f o n e reason w h y 4 0 % p e o p le th in k that natural g a s is an e c o n o m ic a l fu el a m o n g th e o th ers b e c a u se th e y s e e all th e se natural g a s and p ro p a n e p o w e r e d ta x ica b s all o v e r T o ro n to o u t th ere. It has to be e c o n o m ic a l o th e r w ise th e ta x ica b d rivers w o u ld n o t be d r iv in g th e se ty p e s o f a lter n a tiv e fu e l v e h ic le s.

55

Question 6.
I f y o u w e r e g iv e n th e c h o ic e s b e lo w , w h ic h d o y o u th in k is th e b est a lter n a tiv e fu e l o u t there regard in g its en v iro n m en ta l b e n e fits? a ) G a so lin e ; b ) E th an ol; c ) N atu ral G as; d ) M eth an ol; e ) E lec tric ity ; f) H y d r o g en

45 40 35 30 25 '20 15
10 -I

26 7

10 3.3

10

10

5 0

xn.

/ / / / / /
Figure A. 6 Results f o r Survey' Question No. 6
C ount G a s o lin e E th a n o l N a tu r a l G a s M e th a n o l E le c t r ic it y H ydrogen T o ta l 1 3 8 3 12 3 30 P ercent 3 .3 10 2 6 .7 10 40 10 100

Conclusion:

H ere

a lso

40%

p e o p le

r esp o n d ed

by

s a y in g

that

e le c tr ic ity

is

th e

m o st

e n v ir o n m e n ta lly fr ie n d ly a ltern ative fu e l ou t there c o m p a r ed to oth ers. T h e

n e x t o n e that m y

resp o n d en ts th in k is th e m o st e n v ir o n m e n ta lly fr ie n d ly is N atu ral g a s, 2 7 % p e o p le th in k that. T h erefore it again s h o w s that p e o p le e v e n w ith b a sic k n o w le d g e ca n c o m e to a c o n c lu s io n that e le ctr ic v e h ic le s are the m o st e n v ir o n m e n ta lly fr ie n d ly v e h ic le s a lo n g w ith natural g a s c o m p a r ed to th e c o n v e n tio n a l g a s o lin e p o w e r e d v e h ic le s . T h e oth er th in g that is m o st in te re stin g in th is r e s p o n s e is that o n ly 3% p e o p le th in k that g a s o lin e is still th e m o st e n v iro n m en ta lly fr ie n d ly fu e l o u t th ere. T hat is a very lo w nu m ber. 1 am su re that p e o p le o n ly b e c a u se o f their lack o f k n o w le d g e in th is f ie ld can m ake that c o m m e n t.

56

Question 7.
A re y o u w illin g to p ay m o r e for a v e h ic le that is e n v ir o n m e n ta lly fr ie n d ly a n d has a lm o st or very c lo s e to a ll th e b e n e fits o f a current g a s o lin e p o w e r e d v e h ic le ? a) Y es b) No

Figure A. 7 Results f o r Survey Question No.
C ount Y es No T o ta l 21 9 30 P ercent 70 30 100

No  EV S u r v e y : Yes 50 %

p t)
1 00

 My S u r v e y '

Figure A. 7a Com parison Chart between M y Survey and EV Survey

Conclusion:

T h e thirty p e o p le that w ere su rv e y e d 21 (7 0 % ) o f th em r esp o n d ed b y sa y in g that

th ey w o u ld p a y m ore for a v e h ic le that had the sa m e b e n e fits that a c o n v e n tio n a l v e h ic le had to o ffer and i f that v e h ic le w a s m ore e n v ir o n m e n ta lly fr ie n d ly . It's a p o s itiv e sig n b e c a u se it s h o w s that p e o p le care ab ou t th eir e n v ir o n m e n t that th e y liv e in and are w illin g to sa c r ific e s o m e m o n e y to a c h ie v e that. It is a lso to n o te that 9 (3 0 % ) p e o p le sa id that th ey are n ot g o in g to p a y m o re to p u rch ase a m ost e x p e n s iv e v e h ic le e v e n th o u g h it o ffe r e d all th e

benefits

that a regu lar c o n v e n tio n a l v e h ic le had to

o ffer. P ro b a b ly th e q u e stio n sh o u ld be m ore s p e c ific that h o w m u ch m ore d o th e y h a v e to p ay for this ty p e o f v e h ic le . P ro b a b ly th a t's w h y the 30% p e o p le w e re n ot w illin g to p a y m ore. O n ly i f th e q u estio n w ere m ore s p e c if ic by s a y in g h o w m u ch m ore then p ro b a b ly m ore p e o p le w o u ld h a v e sa id y e s to this an sw er. In the E le c tr ic V e h ic le C o n su m e r S u rv e y o f 1 9 9 9 a m u ch sim ila r q u e s tio n w a s a sk e d i f p e o p le w ere w illin g to p a y m ore for an E lectric V e h ic le ? 52% resp o n d ed b y s a y in g that th e y w o u ld p a y $ 1 ,0 0 0 or m ore extra, an o th er 18% sa id that th e y w o u ld p a y $ 2 ,0 0 0 o r m ore an d 7% r es p o n d e d by s a y in g that th ey w o u ld n o t p a y a n y th in g extra.'® C o m p a rin g it w ith m y survey, h ere w e s e e that le s s p e o p le are w illin g to p a y m ore for th e extra c o st. H ere th e n u m b er in c r e a se s p r o b a b ly b e c a u s e in m y su rv e y it d o e s n 't sa y h o w m u c h th e ex tra c o st m ig h t b e. S o p e o p le w ith o u t k n o w in g w h a t the a d d ition al c o st w ill b e, are sk e p tic a l o n m a k in g a c o m m itm e n t.

57

Question 8.
A re y o u w illin g to p a y m ore for a v e h ic le that is better in g a s m ile a g e an d h as a lm o st or very c lo s e to all the b e n e fits o f a current g a s o lin e p o w er ed v e h ic le ? a) b) Y es No

100 80 60 % 50 40

Yes

No

Figure A .8 Results for Survey Question 8
C ount Y es No T o ta l 27 3 30 P ercent 90 10 100

Conclusion:

T h e th irty p e o p le that w e re su r v e y e d 2 7 (9 0 % ) o f th em r e sp o n d e d b y s a y in g that

th ey w o u ld p a y m ore for a v e h ic le that had th e sa m e b e n e fits that a c o n v e n tio n a l v e h ic le had to o ffer and i f that v e h ic le g a v e b etter g a s m ile a g e th ey w o u ld p u rch a se that v e h ic le . H ere it s e e m s that p e o p le are w illin g to p a y m ore b e c a u se th e y se e a s a v in g s o f g a s o lin e w h ic h w ill in return p a y o f f for the extra c o st for th e a lter n a tiv e fu el v e h ic le . P e o p le are v ery c o n c e r n e d w ith th e a m o u n t o f m o n e y that they h ave to sp e n d o n g a s o lin e . H ere in th is q u e stio n the r esp o n se c o n fir m s that b e c a u se th e y s e e a sa v in g s from the g a s m ile a g e th e y are w illin g to p a y m ore for the typ e o f v e h ic le at front.

58

Question 9.
H a v e y o u s e e n a n y o f th e fo llo w in g m e d ia a d v e r tisin g a ltern a tiv e fu e l v e h ic le s in order to p ro m o te it? a) b) N ew spapers M a g a z in e s

c)
d)

TV
R a d io

45 40

35 30 % 25
20 15

Figure A. 9 Results f o r Survey Question No. 9

C ount N ew sp a p er M a g a z in e TV R a d io T o ta l 11 3 13 3 30

P ercent 3 6 .7 10 4 3 .3 10 100

No a E V S u r v e y i; Y es  My Survey

0

50

100

Figure A .9a Com parison C hart betw een M y Survey an d EP'S un 'ey

Conclusion:

In th is q u estio n th e thirty p e o p le that w e r e a sk ed th is q u e s tio n 11 sa id that th ey had

at o n e p o in t in tim e s e e n an ad in th e n e w sp a p er , w h ic h is a lm o st 37% o f th em . T h e o n ly th in g that is v ery p o s itiv e in m y su rv e y is that all thirty o f th em at s o m e p oin t in tim e h a v e s e e n a c o m m e r c ia l, w h ic h w a s p r o m o tin g a ltern a tiv e fu e l v e h ic le . It s e e m s lik e th e m e d ia is so far d o in g a g o o d jo b in p r o m o tin g th em A ls o 4 3 % sa id that th e y h a v e se e n an ad in th e T V . I f th e m e d ia c o n tin u e s to p lay a r o le in p r o m o tin g th e se ty p e o f v e h ic le s it w ill n ot o n ly p e r su a d e c o n su m e r s to p u rc h a se th e se v e h ic le and sa v e th e e n v ir o n m e n t, in return th e y c a n a lso b e n e fit from b etter m ile a g e , e tc. E v e n th o u g h the m e d ia is p la y in g a ro le in p r o m o tin g th e se v e h ic le s there n e e d to b e m ore c o v e r a g e in th e future. In the 1 9 9 9 E le c tr ic V e h ic le C o n su m e r S u rv e y a sim ila r q u e s tio n w a s a sk ed reg a rd in g E lec tric V e h ic le S u rv ey . T h e Q u e stio n w a s " H a v e y o u se e n m e d ia c o v e r in g E lec tric V e h ic le s in th e p ast 12 m onths?" T h e r e s p o n se w a s 4 4 % sa id "N o " and 56% had sa id " Y e s " ."° T h e r efo r e th ere is a lw a y s room for im p r o v em e n t for the m e d ia to p rom ote a ltern ative fu e l v e h ic le s .

59

Question 10.
D o y o u th in k our G o v e r n m e n t is d o in g a g o o d j o b to p ro m o te a lter n a tiv e fu e l v e h ic le s o u t th ere, by o ffe r in g e n o u g h in c e n tiv e s to in d iv id u a ls w h o are p u rc h a sin g it? a) Y e s b) N o

80 70 60 50 %40 30
20 10 0

.

30

-

r

> l|

Figure A. 10 Results f o r Survey Question No. 10
C ount Y es No T o ta l 9 21 30 P ercent 30 70 100

Conclusion:

H ere 7 0 % p e o p le o u t o f the thirty that w e r e su r v e y e d r e sp o n d e d by s a y in g that the

g o v e r n m e n t is n o t d o in g a g o o d j o b in o ffe r in g in c e n tiv e s to c o n su m e r s o f a ltern a tiv e fuel v e h ic le s . C o n su m e r s are c le a r ly c o n c e r n e d a b ou t their e n v iro n m en t as w e s a w in th e p r e v io u s a n sw e r s and they fe e l that g o v e r n m e n t sh o u ld tak e fin a n c ia l ste p s to e n c o u r a g e th e g r o w th o f c le a n a ltern ative fuel v e h ic le s . It s h o w s that a large n u m b er o f p e o p le w an ts to d o so m e th in g a b o u t our e n v ir o n m e n t i f there is g o v e r n m e n t su p p ort b y tax in c e n tiv e s, reb ate c h e c k s, etc. A lm o s t th ree quarter o f th e p e o p le are s a y in g that th ere is n o t e n o u g h g o v e r n m e n t su pp ort. T h e r efo r e our g o v e r n m e n t n e e d s to c o m e forw ard and take a p o s itiv e stan d in p r o m o tin g th e se v e h ic le s .

60

Question 11.
A re y o u w illin g to p ay a little m ore for you r g a s o lin e i f th e extra m o n e y w a s to b e u se d to a c h ie v e clea n er v e h ic le s in C an ada? a) Y e s b) N o

100

-----93 3- --

80 60 40
20

& .........
Y es

0

6.7 1 .... ...........- . t
No

Figure A. 11 Results f o r Survey Question No. 11
C ount Y es No T o ta l 28 2 30 P ercent 9 3 .3 6 .7 100

No ja E V Y es Survey
j

{  M y Survey '

0

50

100

Figure A. I la Com parison Chart between My Survey and EV Survey

Conclusion;

H ere 9 3 % p e o p le are w illin g to sa c r ific e a little bit o f m o n e y for th e research and

d e v e lo p m e n t o f c le a n e r v e h ic le s . T h is s h o w s that c o n su m e r s d o su p p ort th e e n v ir o n m e n t to be clean er in w h ic h th e y liv e in by p a y in g a little from th eir p ock et. C o m p a rin g w ith th e 1 9 9 9 E lec tric V e h ic le C o n su m e r su r v e y it s h o w s that p e o p le are still ea g er to pay m ore for s a v in g the e n v ir o n m e n t A ls o in that su rv e y th e p e o p le su p p o rte d in m ajority in sa v in g the e n v iro n m en t b y r e s p o n d in g to a sim ila r q u estio n in 84% in fa v o r o f it. H ere th ere is an in crease in the r esu lts in m y su r v e y in p e o p le w illin g n e s s to p ay a little ex tra for th e a ltern a tiv e fu el to sa v e the en v iro n m en t. It w e n t fro m 84% to 93%

61

Question 12.
I f y o u had to r efu el y o u r v e h ic le tw ic e as o fte n in order to red u c e v e h ic le e m is s io n s are y o u w illin g to d o so? a) Y es b) No

' 60 50 40 30 20 10  0
·

387

No

Figure A. 12 Results f o r Sur\'ey Question No. 12
P ercent 6 3 .3 3 6 .7
100

C ount Y es No T o ta l
19 11

30

Conclusion:

It is very e n c o u r a g in g to k n o w that e v e n i f p e o p le had to r efu el their v e h ic le s tw ic e

as m u ch , th e y are still w illin g to g o that extra h a s sle to sa v e th e e n v ir o n m e n t by lo w e r e m is s io n s . 63% p e o p le are w illin g to d o that and 37% are not. T h e r efo r e there are a b ig n u m b er o f p e o p le it s h o w s that are e n v ir o n m e n ta lly c o n s c io u s .

62

For more information one can go to the following links:
A few websites regarding Alternative Fuel Vehicles:
American Coalition for Ethanol American Methanol Institute American Gas Association Canadian Natural Gas Vehicle Alliance Canadian Renewable Fuels Association California Energy Commission Clean Cities Hotline Electric Vehicle Society o f Canada (EVS) Electric Drive Transportation Association Environmental Defense Canada Energy Information Administration FuelMaker Corporation Ford Motor Company Ford Motor Company Canada ENG Express National Alternative Fuels Hotline Natural Resources Canada National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition National Gas Vehicle Coalition National Propane Gas Association National Alternative Fuels Training Propane Vehicle Council Renewable Fuels Association U.S. Clean Car Campaign www ethanol.org www methanol.org www aga.org www ngvcanada.org www greenfuels.org www energy.ca.gov www ccities.doe.gov www evsociety.com www evaa.org www edcanada.org www .eia.doe.gov www .fuelmaker.com www .fleet.ford.com www .fleet.ford.ca www,.lngexpress.com www..afdc.doe.gov www..oee.nrcan.gc.ca www,.e85fuel.com www,.nvvc.org www .propanegas.com www .naftp.nrcce.wvu.edu www .propanegas.com/vehicle www .ethanolRFA.org www cleancarcampaign. org

A N ational (U.S.) A lternative Fuels H otline
In the U.S. one can call toll free in between the hours o f 9 am and 6 pm to get information regarding Alternative Fuels at 1(800) 423-1363 if calling from the U.S. and also if one is an international caller they can call 1(703) 934-3069. The Hotline can also be contacted by e-mail at hotline@afdc.nrel.gov.

63

N ew sletters & M agazines R egarding A lternative Fuel V ehicles:
If a person is willing to know more about AFVs they can go to some o f the following newsletters and magazines. There are lots o f them that are absolutely free o f cost. AltFuels Advisor Alternative Fuel Price Report Alternative Fuel News Biodiesel Bulletin Biofuels News Biobased Products and Bioenergy Newsletter Clean Fuels Forum Clean Fuels Report Conservation Update DOE Pulse Electric Vehicle Progress eNEWS ECO e-FFlClENCY NEWS Electrifying Times E85 FYl EREN Network News Ethanol Report Fleets & Fuels Fuel Cell Technology Update FuelSense Fuel Cells Today Green Car Journal Hybrid Vehicles Inside the Greenhouse TNG Express Natural Gas Fuels NGV Worldwide New Fuels & Vehicles Report Propane Vehicle Trans Forum and Future Drive Transportation Times World Natural Gas Vehicles

64

