NOTE TO USERS

This reproduction is the best copy available.

UMI
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

HAZARDOUS WASTE TRANSPORTATION: AN OVERVIEW
By Muhammad Ashiq B E. (Civil), NED University o f Engineering and Technology Karachi, Pakistan, 1987

A project Presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment o f the requirement for the degree of Master o f Engineering in the Program of Civil Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2003 © Muhammad Ashiq 2003

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

UMI Number: EC52925

INFORMATION TO USERS

The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction. In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI
UMI Microform EC52925 Copyright 2008 by ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. ProQuest LLC 789 E. Eisenhower Parkway PC Box 1346 Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

A U T H O R 'S DECLARA TIO N

I hereby declare that I am the sole author o f this project.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this project to other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

Muhammad Ashiq Department o f Civil Engineering Ryerson University

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this project by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request o f other institutions or individuals for the purpose o f scholarly research.

Muhammad Ashiq Department o f Civil Engineering Ryerson University

1 1

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Borrowers
Borrowers undertake to give proper credit for any use made o f the thesis. Ryerson University requires the signatures o f all persons using or photocopying this project. Please sign below and give address and date.

Name

Signature of Borrower

Address

Date

Ill

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Ryerson University School of Graduate studies
The undersigned certify that they have read, and recommend to the School o f Graduate Studies for acceptance, a project entitled "Hazardous Waste Transportation: An Overview" submitted in partial fulfillment o f the requirements for the degree o f M aster o f Engineering. Dr. Said M. Easa, Supervisor, Department o f Civil Engineering

Dr. Mostafa A.Warith, Co-Supervisor Department o f Civil Engineering

Dr. Medhat Shehata, Second Reader Department o f Civil Engineering

Date

IV

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Hazardous Waste Transportation: An Overview

Muhammad Ashiq Master o f Engineering, 2003 Department o f Civil Engineering Ryerson University

ABSTRACT
Increasing industrialization and globalization has spawned the unprecedented generation o f environmental toxic and hazardous wastes. The existence o f publicly known hazardous waste problems such as toxic spills, and river pollution that pose serious and very real threats to human health puts extensive pressure on the government to take an aggressive role in hazardous waste control and transportation. The main objective o f hazardous waste transportation is public safety. Each government has the responsibility to ensure that hazardous materials should be transported safely for the social and economic good o f the country. Hazardous waste management is now a major and urgent global concern. Various techniques, models, and guidelines for the perception of risks associated with the transport o f the hazardous materials are developed. Database o f the accident data are developed by transportation agencies to be used for the development o f models to improve safety o f hazardous waste transportation. Based on the available risk perception models, accident models, the type o f hazardous material, origin/destination, and the availability o f emergency response routes for their transport

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

are properly designed. Advanced technologies, automated vehicle location system (AVL) and geographical information system (GIS) are also used for the analysis and modeling for the safe transport o f hazardous materials. The purpose o f this project is to present a literature review o f hazardous waste materials and their impact on human health, regulations to control the movement o f hazardous materials, Basel Convention and its effectiveness, treatment and disposal o f hazardous materials, model developments for risk perception and management and the use o f advanced technologies for safe transportation o f hazardous wastes. Based on the literature review, the conclusions and future recommendations for possible improvement o f the models and techniques used for safe transportation o f hazardous wastes are presented.

VI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my project supervisors Dr. Said M. Easa, Dr. M ostafa A. Warith for their outstanding supervision and guidance. Their support, advice and constructive criticism through my graduating have been invaluable. 1 feel honor to say thanks to Dr. Medhat Shehata and Dr. Amleh Lamya for their continuous guidelines and encourage throughout my studies. 1 am also grateful to my brothers, sister, dear wife and children for their continued support, pray and love. Special thanks to my friend A tif Mahmood for his continued support during my study. I am also grateful to my all colleagues at Ryerson University for their moral and technical support. Deepest gratitude to my wife and kids, who had to sacrifice their needs and time and supported me to finish my studies. Finally, I am grateful to the Grace o f God for the countless blessings I have
r t\ eived.

VII

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

DEDICATION

Dedicated to my loving parents.

vin

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table of Contents
Abstract Acknowledgement List ol Figures List o f Tables v-vi vii xii xiii

Chapter 1
1.1

INTRODUCTION

1-5
5

Purpose and Scope o f Project

Chapter 2 HAZARDOUS WASTES AND ITS IMPACT ON HUMAN HEALTH
2.1 Introduction

6-18
6 6 6 7 7

2.2 Hazardous Wastes 2.2.1 2.2.2 2.2.3 2.2.4 2.3 Ignitability Corrosivity Reactivity Toxicity ,

7 8 8 8 9 Businesses 10 10

Generation o f Hazardous Wastes 2.3.1 Hazardous Wastes Generated by Industrial Activity 2.3.1.1 Mining Industry

2.3.1.2 Oil and Gas Exploration 2.3.2 Hazardous Wastes Generated by 2.3.2.1

Vehicle and Equipment Repair, Transportation and Cartage

2.3.2.2 Building and Road Construction, Renovation and Maintenance 2.3.2.3 Manufacturing 10 10 11 11
12

2.3.2.4 Printing, Publishing and Photo Finishing 2.3.2.5 Dry Cleaning
2.3.3 Hazardous W astes Generated by Community A ctivity

2.3.3.1

Education

12 13 13 13

2.3.3.2 Health and Dental Care 2.3.3.3 Power Production and Communication 2.3.3.4 Household Activities

IX

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7

Hazardous Wastes Impact on Human Health Hazardous Wastes a Real Problem Hazardous Wastes and New Generation Health Hazardous Categories

14 14 16 17

Chapter 3
3.1 3.2 3.3

HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT IN CANADA

19-36
19 19 12 24 25 26 26 27 28 29 30 32 33 34

Introduction Management o f Hazardous Waste in Canada Import/Export o f Hazardous Wastes in Canada 3.3.1 Federal Regulations

3.4

Hazardous Waste Management in Ontario 3.4.1 3.4.2 3.4.3 3.4.4 3.4.5 3.4.6 3.4.7 Pre-Treatment Standards Destruction o f Wastes Hospital Incinerators Destruction Technologies for Hospital Wastes Regulations in Ontafio Past Initiatives in Regulations Prospective Initiatives in Regulations

3.5

Canada US Agreement 3.5.1 Compatibility with Basel Convention

Chapter 4
4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4 .6

EVOLUTION OF THE BASEL CONVENTION

37-46
37 37 38 40 41 42 43 43 44

Introduction Background o f Basel Convention Implementation o f Basel Convention Importance o f Basel Convention 1he Vital Goal o f Basel Convention An Overview o f Compliance and Enforcement 4.6.1 4 .6.2 4.6.3 The Control System for the Movement o f Hazardous Waste National Reporting o f Hazardous Wastes Technical Assistance Offered by the Convention

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.6.4 Training in the Management and Minimization o f Hazardous Wastes 4.7 Milestones in the Convention's History

44 45

Chapters HZARDOUS WASTE TRANSPORTATION
5.1 5.2 Introduction Modes o f Transportation 5.2.1 5.2.2 5.2.3 5.2.4 5.2.5 5.3 5.4 Highway Transport Rail Transport Water Transport Air Transport Pipeline Transport

47-63
47 47 48 49 50 51 51 52 56 57 58 60

Risk Management in Hazardous Waste Transport GIS and Transportation 5.4.1 5.4.2 GIS Applications in Routing Planning GIS Risk Analysis o f Hazardous Materials Transport

5.5

Use o f Advanced Technologies for Improving Hazmat Transportation Safety

Chapter 6 CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
6.1
0.2

64-68
64 66

Conclusions I uture Recommendations

REFERENCES
APPENDIX: A

69-73
74-78

XI

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 3.1 Statistics on export and import o f hazardous waste from 1991-2001 Figure 3.2 Canadian Imports by Disposal and Recycling Operation in 2001 Figure 3.3 Ontario Imports by Disposal and Recycling Operation in 2001 Figure 3.4 Quebec Imports by Disposal and Recycling Operation in 2001 22 22 23 24

XU

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

LIST OF TABLES
Table 2.1 ASTDR Public Health Hazard Categories 18

xm

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION
Most Canadian and American federal and other States define "hazardous waste" as any waste or combination o f wastes in solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous due to its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible, illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, treated, transported, or disposed o f or otherwise managed. The danger posed by hazardous waste to hunian life, health, property and the environment have been o f great concern to the public in recent years. Generally everyone agrees that there must be disposal sites for hazardous waste somewhere. But no one wants these sites located near where they live and work. Therefore ever-increasing hazardous wastes generated by industrial society are transported to few disposal sites available at great distances. For example, every two weeks a truck loaded with radioactive waste departs from New England Nuclear Corporation in Boston bound for a nuclear waste dump across the country in the State o f Washington, a distance o f 2,890 miles (Stephen 1983). As more hazardous wastes are transported to greater distances, the probability o f accidents and spills will naturally increase.
The highw ay transport m ode is regarded as the m ost versatile. Tank/trucks can

access the most industrial sites as well as treatment, storage and disposal facilities. While the railway shipping requires expensive sidings and is suitable only for the large quantity
o f shipments. Cargo tanks are main carriers o f bulk hazardous materials, however large

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

quantities o f hazardous wastes are shipped in 55 gallons drums. They range in capacity from about 2000-9000 gallons depending on the road weight laws. Hazardous waste materials transportation accidents tend to be spectacular, dangerous and unpredictable. Accidents involving truck shipment o f hazardous materials occurring in the urban area are more likely to endanger human lives and property. In transportation there is little distinction between hazardous waste and hazardous materials. Both are deleterious substances capable o f causing injury or environmental damage if not properly managed in the transportation system. The responsibility for ensuring the public safety in the movement o f hazardous waste is shared by the transporters, the shippers and the government agencies. Each plays an important role in dealing with the issues, and if they fulfill their obligation, will result in safe effective transportation o f hazardous waste. In order to avoid accidents in the transportation o f hazardous wastes their movements are subjected to considerably more regulatory control. Much o f the regulatory focus has shifted to accident prevention, emergency response activity, and surveillance o f import/export activity, safe route design and tracking o f wastes from source to ultimate disposition (Eugene 1990). There has been significant increase in the dumping o f the imported hazardous waste in Ontario (Ministry o f Environment 2001). There are numerous factors for this increase; however, the most significant is the absence o f proper restriction on the land disposal. The situation requires an immediate action by the province. Increase in imports arises from increasingly strict disposal standards in the United States, and

implementations o f more relax standards in Ontario. In 1994, for example, a prohibition

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

on the land disposal o f untreated hazardous wastes was finalized under the US Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). This ban flowed from amendments to the U.S. legislation adopted in 1984, following the Love Canal disaster in New York State in 1883. Canada is a party to the Basel Convention on the Control o f Trans-boundary Movements o f Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal. Under Article 2(g) o f the Convention, Parties are required to "prevent the import o f hazardous waste and other wastes if it has reason to believe that the wastes in question will not be managed in an environmentally sound manner." Under international law, it is the Government o f Canada, which is ultimately responsible to the international conununity for the fulfillment o f this obligation. There are no comparable standards for land combustion or disposal existed in Ontario until 2000. At the same time, the approvals process for hazardous waste disposal sites has been significantly weakened since 1995. This has occurred through a combination o f legislative amendments and policy changes. The Ontario Ministry o f the Environment has also suffered a significant loss o f capacity to oversee the management o f hazardous wastes, and other activities, which may pose a threat to human health or the environment, as a result o f major budgetary reductions (Wilson et al. 2000). In Canada there are three waste sites exclusively devoted to hazardous wastes. The Laid law's hazardous waste facility near Sarnia will contain 7.5 million tones when full (Wilson et al. 2000). In addition, municipal wastes generally contain about one percent o f hazardous wastes, e.g. vinyl chloride, lead, arsenic and benzene, many o f which are carcinogenic. A continually increasing population is challenging our

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

environment's ability to absorb all these wastes, as demonstrated by increase in pollution level in the Great Lakes and the decline in fish stock. The Philip Services Corporation at Taro landfill in Stoney Creek was approved as a "non-hazardous industrial waste" disposal site without a public hearing under the Enviroiunental Assessment Act in July 1996 (W ilson et al. 2000). It was later discovered that the operator was importing hazardous wastes from the U.S., solidifying them with Portland cement, and disposing them as non-hazardous wastes in the landfill. The Ministry o f the Environment was forced to take action to end this practice in September 1999, after this practice was followed for several years. The third site is Safety-Kleen Ltd. hazardous waste landfill near Sarnia, which was approved without a public hearing under the Environmental Assessment Act in September 1997 (Wilson et al. 2000). In November 1999 it was discovered that groundwater and methane were leaking into one o f the new areas o f the landfill, breaching the liner and raising the possibility o f groundwater contamination. The facility was temporarily prohibited from receiving wastes for disposal in December 1999. The danger from the hazardous wastes is posed by two factors: the material's inherent toxicity and its accessibility. By isolating the waste its accessibility is greatly reduced. Industry, from which we all benefit, must share responsibility for the increasing burden o f wastes in our environment. Transportation is an obvious example with its contribution to urban smog, acid rain and global warming. The energy industry is no different: combustion o f fossil fuels, coal, oil and natural gas, emits the hazardous gases to the environment. Coal also emits carcinogenic chemicals and heavy metals in ash, both to the atmosphere and in huge land based heaps.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Generators, transporters and receivers o f hazardous waste are subject to, and must comply with, detailed and exacting requirements and responsibilities. The liability exposure for anyone involved with hazardous waste is enormous. Compliance efforts m ust be a top priority. There is an absolute necessity to keep informed o f the latest regulatory changes and interpretations. All parties should be certain that they are adequately insured, both as to amount and breadth o f coverage.

1.1

Purpose and Scope of Project
The purpose of this project is to carry out a literature review o f hazardous waste

transportation practices and estimate possible environmental improvements if proper management techniques are used during handling and transportation o f hazardous waste. This study will also focus on the following: · · Review o f various hazardous waste materials and their impact on human health. Review o f various regulation issues that are enforced to control the

movement/transportation o f hazardous waste materials. The review includes the Basel Convention and Canada-US agreement for the transportation o f hazardous waste materials across the border. · Discuss the development o f hazardous materials database, risk assessment during their transport, management and the use o f advance technologies for the safe movement of hazardous waste materials. Based on the literature review, recommendations for the improvement o f techniques used to manage and transport hazardous waste materials safely are presented.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 2 HAZARDOUS WASTES AND ITS IMPACT ON HUMAN HEALTH
2.1 Introduction
The rapid industrialization without proper hazardous wastes disposal facilities, has not only polluted the global environment and the human health but also has posed a potential threat to the balance o f ecosystem, which is pivotal to the sustainable development. This chapter will discuss various characteristics and categories o f hazardous waste and how these affect the global environment specially the human health.

2.2

Hazardous Wastes
All countries, irrespective o f their state o f development, produce hazardous

wastes. Examples o f such ubiquitous wastes might include oils from transportation, redundant pesticides from agriculture, hospital wastes, waste from ship cleaning, chemical wastes from commerce, mercury from fluorescent lamps and batteries, acids and lead from recycling o f motor batteries (Wilson and Balkan 1990). A waste is hazardous if it exhibits one or more o f the following characteristics:

2.2.1

ignitability
Ignitability is the characteristic used to define as hazardous those wastes that

could cause a fire during transport, storage or disposal. Example o f ignitable wastes includes waste oils and used solvents.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.2.2

Corrosivity
Corrosive wastes are acids or bases that are capable o f corroding metal storage

tanks or containers which may result in release o f the material, or may injure persons who come in contact with it. Corrosivity, as indicated by pH, was chosen as an identifying characteristic o f a hazardous waste because wastes with high or low pH can react dangerously with other wastes or cause contaminants to migrate from certain wastes. Example o f corrosive wastes includes acidic wastes and used pickle liquor from selected steel manufacture. Steel corrosion is a prime indicator o f a hazardous waste since wastes capable o f corroding steel can escape from drums and liberates other wastes (Wilson and Balkan 1990).

2.2.3

Reactivity
Reactive wastes are unstable under normal conditions. They can cause explosions,

or release toxic fumes, gases or vapors when mixed with water. Examples o f reactive waste include water from TNT operation and used cyanide solvents.

2.2.4

Toxicity
Toxic wastes are harmful or fatal when ingested or absorbed. When toxic wastes

are disposed on land, contaminates may leach from the waste and pollute ground water or surface waters. Toxicity characteristic wastes are identified by concentration levels o f contaminate that may be harmful to human health or the environment. This characteristic only identifies wastes, which contain certain specified contaminants. Listing them in regulations identifies other toxic wastes.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.3

Generation of Hazardous Wastes
Hazardous wastes are generated by different activities: industrial, business,

community and household activities. The following sections provide the details o f hazardous waste produced by each activity.

2.3.1

Hazardous Wastes Generated by Industrial Activity
There are two main industry groups that cause the production o f hazardous wastes

from their activities, · · Mining industry Oil and gas exploration In most cases, these industries because o f their remote locations, act as industries and small industrial communities or work camps. Thus, they generate both industrial and domestic wastes.

2.3.1.1

Mining Industry
The primary hazardous wastes generated by mining industry are acid solutions,

spent solvents, alkali solutions, tank sludjges, contaminated soil and sand, drilling mud, explosives, oils, wastes associated with equipment repair, and the construction (Reid and Pertners 1980, Thompson 1990). Wastes associated with equipment repair include: waste
oil, acid batteries, antifreeze, cutting oil, and bulky wastes. W astes associated with

building maintenance and construction includes: resins, adhesives, paints, paint thinners, strippers and lacquers, and bulky wastes.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Many mining wastes are placed in on-site disposal areas called tailings ponds. The treatment accomplished in tailings ponds includes: gravity settling, chemical oxidation or reduction, and ultraviolet breakdown o f solids and liquids. Wastes treated in this manner are usually acids, alkalis, contaminated soil and sand, and drilling mud. Other wastes as obsolete explosives are detonated with fresh material in the extraction o f ore stage. Used oil and spent solvents are either burnt or used for dust control and many other wastes are stored on site or disposed o f at an on-site landfill.

2.3.1.2

Oil and Gas Exploration

Predominant wastes which are produced by oil and gas companies include: waste drilling fluid, alkaline solution, waste oil sludge, filters, oil spill debris, glycol, catalysts, and wastes from equipment, repair, and maintenance (Stanley 1986, Reid and Partners 1980, Canadian Petroleum Association 1984). Drilling mud is generated in a large quantity than the rest o f these wastes (Lavalin 1984). It is needed in the drilling system to flush away broken rock, lubricate the bit, and maintain pressure that prevents fluids in the rock formation from flowing. Drilling mud is generally either discharged into receiving bodies or collected in a sump, where the water evaporates. The remaining sludge is land farmed. Treatment methods used for other wastes include: waste oil sludge, recycled or treated to remove soil and sand, spread on roadways or burnt off. Filters burnt or disposed o f in landfill sites and other wastes, generally taken to on-site or municipal landfill sites.

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.3.2

Hazardous Wastes Generated by Businesses

2.3.2.1 Vehicle and Equipment Repair, Transportation and Cartage
This group of business includes more businesses than any o f the others. Hazardous wastes generated by these facilities are: waste oil, fuel tank sludges, spent solvents, acid batteries, waste paint, anti-freeze, paint thinner, windshield washer fluid, contaminated fuels, resins, and adhesives (Stanley 1986, Reid and Partners 1980, Technology Resources 1989). These wastes may be produced in small quantities by each generator but are substantial, collectively. M ost o f these wastes are either spread on roadways, burned o ff or dumped into municipal sewers, landfill sites or elsewhere.

2.3.2 2 Building and Road Construction, Renovation and Maintenance
This group includes businesses involved in construction, lumber, painting, and glass, wood and concrete products. This is the next largest group. Their wastes are: waste paint, resins and adhesives, waste paint thiimer, waste tar and residues, primers and sealers, asbestos, strippers and lacquers, cutting oil, spent solvents, and wood preservatives (Reid, Crowther and Partners Limited 1980, Technology Resources Inc. 1989, Alaska Department o f Environmental Conservation 1986). Most o f these wastes are disposed o f in municipal sewers and landfill sites.

2.3.2 3 Manufacturing
This group consists o f metal fabrication, machine shops, and ship and boat building. Wastes produeed by this category include: waste paints and paint thinner, spent solvents, machining wastes, cutting oil, resins and adhesives, and metal finishing

10

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

solutions. Most o f these wastes are disposed o f in municipal sewers and landfill sites or private landfills (Reid and Partners 1980, Technology Resources 1989).

2.3.2 4 Printing, Publishing and Photo Finishing
These businesses produce wide range o f toxic by products (Deyle 1989). Printing and publishing wastes include: spent solvents, ammonia for blue print machines, copy machine chemicals, waste ink, and ink sludge. Photo-finishing generates: waste fixers, waste developers, ferricyanide bleach, and bleach-fix solutions. These waste solutions and sludges may contain silver and are sometimes recycled to recover this metal (Alaska 1986). Their chemicals are toxic. If not recovered or reused photo finishing wastes generally end up in municipal sewers or landfills.

2.3 2.5 Dry Cleaning
There are four commonly used substances in the dry cleaning business: perchloroethylene (PCE), petroleum solvents (Deyle 1989, Technology Resources 1989). PCE is harmful to the liver and kidneys in humans if swallowed. It may also be carcinogenic. Used petroleum solvents can cause nausea, vomiting, coughing, and lung irritation. Hazardous wastes generated by the dry cleaning industry, irrespective o f the solvent used, include: (Technology Resources Inc., Deyle 1989, Raymond 1990) waste solvent, still residues, spent filter cartridges, cooked powder residues, drained filter residues, and oil and grease sludge contaminated with heavy metals. Most operations are equipped with stills to recover cleaning solvents; very small plants without stills probably discharge waste solvent directly to the sewer (Technology Resources Inc. 1989). The still

11

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

residues and solvent filtration cartridges contain small fractions o f solvent as well as waste grease, oil and dirt. Most solid residues and cartridges are picked up by the local f garbage disposal and are land filled. Sometimes these wastes are taken out o f the states for proper disposal.

I
2.3.3 Hazardous Wastes Generated by Community Activity
Hazardous wastes are generated, in small quantities, by routine community activities. Activities which generate hazardous wastes in communities include: building
I

|

construction and road maintenance, vehicle and equipment repair and maintenance, education, health and dental care, power production and communication, and household activities. Wastes generated by building construction and road maintenance and vehicle and equipment repair and maintenance are already discussed. A recent study (Heinke and Wong 1990) revealed domestic waste generation rates o f 0.013-0.015 m /person/day o f un-compacted wastes in the three communities studied. If construction activities are substantial in a community these rates can be as high as 0.017 m^/person/day. The wastes generated by other communities are described in the following subsequent sections. >
I
3

'

'

f

2.3.3.1 Education
Secondary and post-secondary educational institutions often incorporate chemical laboratories, which may contribute to the hazardous waste problem. Most labs store a large variety o f toxic substances that must eventually be disposed of, used or unused. Other wastes produced by educational facilities are biological wastes, photo-finishing wastes, cleaning solvents and solutions and wastes involved with machine, auto body. I ,

12

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

and carpentry shops. In general, these substances end up in sewers, landfills or are stored on site indefinitely.

2.3.3 2 Health and Dental Care
This group includes nursing stations, hospitals, dental clinics, veterinary clinics and funeral services (Reid and Partners 1980, Thompson 1990, Carpenter 1990). These facilities generate a variety o f infectious or otherwise toxic wastes including: disposables used in medical practice, anatomical wastes, sharps, out o f date medication, discarded mercury thermometers, X-Ray developing fluid, disinfectants, waste formaldehyde, and animal carcasses. The carcasses o f euthanized animals are o f particular concern. Not only could a carcass be carrying a disease but could also contain significant quantities o f a deadly drug. If improperly disposed of, animals or birds may feed on the earcass and be harmed.

2.3.3 3

Power Production and Communication

The places where power is supplied by both hydroelectric and diesel generators, the wastes include: contaminated fuel, fuel tank bottoms, used oil, maintenance chemicals, asbestos, mercury, empty gas cylinders, acid batteries, and flammable wastes (Reid and Partners 1980, Heifrick 1990).

2.3 3.4 Household Activities
The largest quantity o f hazardous wastes generated in households all over the world is human sewage. Many communities are serviced with bagged sewage (honey

13

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

bags) or pump-out sewage systems. Some o f these communities do not have adequate methods o f disposing o f these wastes. In some cases, honey bags and pump-out sewage are merely discarded in the landfill site. Few dumps in the Arctic (regions where no mean monthly temperature is greater than 10 degree centigrade) are free from human and

animal scavenging. The health hazards o f this situation are evident. Otherhousehold hazardous wastes are produced in any developed region (Environment Canada 1988). They include: household cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, expired pharmaceuticals, drain and oven cleaners, paints and paint thinners, nail polish remover, bleach, lighter fluid, hair spray, shoe polish, glues, bulky wastes, and various other wastes. In most cases, these wastes end up in landfills, metal dumps or sewers.

2.4

Hazardous Wastes Impact on Human Health
Hazardous wastes are wastes that have the potential to harm humans or the

environment, in either the short or long term. They impact on human health in many ways. The impacts may lead to disability or loss o f life. Various hazardous wastes along with their impacts on human health are discussed in Appendix A.

2.5

Hazardous Wastes a Real Problem
Increasing industrialization and globalization have spawned the unprecedented

generation o f environmental toxic and hazardous wastes. Hazardous w aste m anagem ent

is now a major and urgent global concern. Far more controversial is the issue about the significant quantities o f wastes from the worlds' developed nations being shipped to developing countries in Asia, Africa and other parts o f the world. The existence o f

14

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

publicly known hazardous waste problems such as toxic spills, and river pollution that pose serious and very real threats to human health puts extensive pressure on the government to take an aggressive role in hazardous waste control. Sometimes industries are built in the middle o f city, which are like ticking bombs. In India, Union Carbide and Bhopal explosion is an example o f these situations. Several people lost their eyesight. Some got cancers. Mothers are giving birth to deformed babies. People were not given proper attention. Another disaster is the Chernobyl Nuclear power plant accident in Russia where several neighboring countries also got affected. Recent footage shown on CNN documentary revealed that the ill effects o f that accident are still haunting the neighboring region. Disable people, deformed babies, various unknown disease are very eommon in this area surrounding the Chernobyl Nuclear power plant. These two incidents are examples o f several accidents, which happened due to negligence in the industry. But these accidents showed that the hazardous waste problem js not limited to just one country. These accidents can become an international issue in which several countries can get affected. Last year, oil spill near Spain seashore by an oil tanker made a big dispute between the ship owners and Government o f Spain. Spain was insisting that since this ship is not theirs so the owner o f the ship or the country where it was coming from should pay the cost o f cleaning. But after the intervention o f I nvironmental Agencies this was settled and Spain cleaned the beach and shared the cost o f cleaning o f oil spill.

15

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.6

Hazardous Wastes and New Generation
In the last 50 years, more than 75,000 new chemicals have been introduced into

the environment. Health experts are increasingly concerned about the role chemicals may play in childhood diseases. Asthma, for example, has tripled in the 1980s. Over the last 20 years, childhood cancer rates have increased by 10 percent. Neurodevelopment delays and possibly endocrine disruption are the worst ill effects o f environmental threats to the health o f children. A child's exposure to the environment begins in the womb and continues throughout the life course. Whether or not a child develops to attain his or her full potential depends on the very environment where he lives, learns and plays (Barry 1999). The basic tenet in understanding children's health is the fact that "a child is not a small adult". A child's unique susceptibility to toxins in the environment arises from several conditions. Children undergo rapid growth and development and their delicate developmental processes are easily disrupted. Children have more future years o f life than do most adults and thus have more time to develop any chronic diseases that may be triggered by early exposure to an unhealthy environment. Children have greater exposures to environmental toxins on a kilogram per kilogram basis since they eat more food and drink more fluid, and breathe more air with twice as much resting air intake than adults. They have immature metabolic pathways (especially in the first month after birth) and their hand-to-mouth behavior, worsened by their playing close to the ground. A report from the Natural Resource Defense Council showed that lead, air pollution, pesticides, environmental tobacco smoke and water contamination are the five worst environmental threats to the health o f children.

16

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2.7

Health Hazardous Categories
The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) classified the

health hazard posed by individual uncontrolled hazardous waste sites in six categories (Table 1). A site is assigned one o f these categories on the basis o f professional judgment, using weight-of-evidence criteria; the assignments are not risk-based derivations. ASTDR's site categories differ from EPA's Hazard Ranking System for the same sites. For example, the EPA's ranking scheme takes into account ecological effects and environmental hazard; the ASTDR's scheme focuses solely on human health impact. By classifying sites according to human health hazard, the ASTDR is able to direct program resources and effort to those sites believed to present the greatest hazard to the public's health. Some EPA regions use the ATDR's hazard categories to refine their priorities for site remediation. Health departments and agencies use public health advisories to warn the public o f imminent, serious threats to their health. A public health advisory may be issued, for instance, when a local water supply is find to be contaminated by biological or chemical agents under conditions that make the water unsafe for drinking. Public health advisories are intended to effect personal and institutional actions. In the contaminated drinking water example, persons would be advised to boil the water (microbiologie contamination) or forego the water (chemical contamination). Institutions like coal or state environmental groups would be expected to identify the source o f contamination and eliminate it (Barry 1999).

17

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Table 1.1 : ASTDR Public Health Hazard Categories (Barry 1999) H azard C ategory Urgent Public Health Hazard Indeterminate Health Hazard No Apparent Public Health Hazard No Public Health Hazard Unclassified D escription/C riteria This category is used for sites that pose urgent public health hazards as a result o f short-term exposures to hazardous substances. This category is used for sites with incom plete inform ation. This category is used for sites where human exposure to contaminated media is occurring or has occurred in the past but a t levels below those o f health concern. This category is used for sites that do not pose public health hazards. This category is no longer used, but was used for sites with very few data.

18

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 3
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT IN CANADA 3.1 Introduction
This chapter presents the background o f hazardous waste management in Canada. The Federal and Ontario' regulations are also discussed. The hazardous waste management in Canada is comprised o f Federal and Provisional management. The Federal government controls the international movement o f hazardous wastes and also amends the regulations to improve the system. The provisional management regulates and operates the waste management facilities. The statistics o f import and export o f hazardous wastes and their importance are also presented. The Ontario regulations and prospective amendments are also discussed in detail. The US-Canada agreement for the inter-country movement o f hazardous wastes along with its compatibility with the Basel Convention is also discussed.

3.2

Management of Hazardous Waste In Canada
In Canada, the management o f hazardous waste is a shared responsibility. The

Cxovemment o f Canada regulates international movements o f hazardous wastes, while the provincial and territorial governments control generators, waste management facilities and transportation within their jurisdictions. The provinces and territories also have regulations that set out requirements for the operation o f waste management facilities. One o f the key elements o f the Canadian federal regulatory process o f hazardous waste management is the mechanism o f multi-stakeholder consultation, by which governmental

19

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

and non-governmental organizations, interested parties and businesses are permitted to comment on proposed policies and legislation at the draft stages. Canada provides bilateral assistance through its Canadian International

Development Agency and participates in many bilateral activities related to capacity building. Canada has Memoranda o f Understanding on environmental cooperation with several countries and has undertaken various activities related to hazardous waste management. Internationally, Canada is a party to the Basel Convention, the OECD Council Decision on Trade in Recyclable Materials, and the Canada-USA Agreement dealing with Trans boundary Movement o f Hazardous Wastes. Domestically, the Canadian Council o f Ministers o f the Environment (CCME) and its Hazardous Waste Task Group has undertaken work in the areas o f harmonization o f waste legislation, policies and programs on a national basis. The Canadian market for hazardous waste management services is estimated at $2 billion annually, and employs 4,000 to 5,000 people providing services in consulting, chemical analysis and operation o f hazardous waste management facilities. A number o f Canadian waste management firms offer specialized services and technologies for oil and gas extraction and delivery, electrical power generation, and pulp and paper manufacturing, to name a few. Several firms in British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario and Nova Scotia have developed considerable expertise in cleaning up oil-contaminated sites and marine oil spills. Other unique Canadian technologies treat specific chlorinated contaminants, heavy metals or oily sludge. New Canadian hazardous waste technologies also help prevent pollution and reduce and recycle hazardous waste. As well, many Canadian environmental service

20

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

firms offer site assessments and diagnostics using advanced instrumentation in preparation for site remediation. A few companies market specialized thermal, biological, phyto and chemical technologies for contaminated soil treatment. The ultimate goal is to eliminate all generation o f hazardous waste. Until technology can reach a point where this is possible, steps must be taken to ensure that these wastes are properly managed. Minimizing volumes, reducing toxicity and diverting to recycling are all important steps in the right direction (Environment Canada 2001).

3.3

Import/Export of Hazardous Wastes in Canada
The Trans boundary movement o f hazardous waste enables the use o f disposal

facilities on either side o f the border, which in some cases reduces long distance transportation between facilities within one country. In many cases, Canadian wastes are exported to the U.S. because the capacity for disposal or recycling does not exist in Canada, such as waste fuel for energy recovery; catalysts destined for precious metal recovery and spent caustic (black liquor) from the pulp and paper industry. Canada has strict regulations on the Trans boundary movement and transportation o f hazardous wastes under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999. Total hazardous waste imports represent less than 10% o f what is generated in Canada. However imports for disposal increased in 1994-2001 (Figure 2.1). In 2001, nearly 98% o f Canadian imports came from the United States. All but 10 tones o f Canadian exports were sent to the United States. The balance was exported to Belgium for recycling.

21

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

EXPORTS & IMPORTS (TONNES) 1991-2001
700,000'
600,000 500.000

400.000 300.000 200.000
100,000
0

u

1991 19*2 1993 19*4 1995 1996 19*7 1 * 9* 1999 2000 20(11

I Im ports o Exports

Figure 3.1: Statistics on export and import of hazardous waste from 1991-2001 (Environment Canada 2001)

2001 Canadian imports by Disposal and Recycling Operation
o t h e r D is p o s a l 4%

All O ther recycling
18%

R eco v eiy of Metal
29%

Incineration
15%

P h y s ic a l/C h e m ic a l T r e a tm e n t 13%

Landfill
21%

Figure 3.2: Canadian Imports by Disposal and Recycling Operation in 2001 (Environment Canada 2001)

22

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Shipmenls for recycling, which benefit Canadian industry and reduce reliance on primary resources, represent close to half o f all imports. Batteries and metal-bearing wastes, such as shredded electronic scrap and mining residues, make up the majority of imports. Other hazardous waste imports include acids from metallurgical processes, contaminated soils and residues from oil refining (Figure 2.2). Imports of hazardous waste for recycling were destined to six provinces, but Ontario and Quebec continue to receive nearly all hazardous waste imports into Canada (Figures 2.3 and 2.4). More than 99.7% of all imports for final disposal were destined for Ontario and Quebec, with very small quantities imported into British Columbia, Alberta and Manitoba. Total imports into Quebec are higher than those into Ontario. In both provinces over 46% of imports were destined for recycling.

2001 Ontario Imports by Disposal & Recycling Operation
Recovery of
Fuel

Other Disposal

R e co v er y of

4%
Other Recycling

Metal

25%

13%

Incineration

15%
Physical/Chem Treatment

Landfill

31%

4%

Figure 3.3; Ontario Imports by Disposal and Recycling Operation in 2001 (Environment Canada 2001)

23

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

2001 Quebec Imports by Disposal & Recycling Operations
o th e r D isposal

4%
R ecovery o f li/letal All Other R ecy cly ln g ^

16%

.

30%

incineratioi

16%
Landfill P h y slca l/C h em lcS Treatment

15%

19%

Figure 3.4: Quebec Imports by Disposal and Recycling Operation in 2001 (Environment Canada 2001) Canadian exports between 2000 and 2001 decreased from 323,000 to 313,000 tonnes. Exports of hazardous waste for recycling originated from eight provinces, with Ontario and Quebec accounting for 76% of these shipments. The bulk of these shipments were managed by facilities in the Northeastern and Central United States. Waste from petroleum refining, the production of aluminum and the pulp and paper industry represent near half of all exports.

3.3.1

Federal Regulations
There are various regulations to regulate the import/export shipments and storage

of the hazardous waste materials. The regulations are amended day by day to meet the present requirement of securing the common people from the threat of hazardous wastes. Federal Legislation Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act & Regulations: provide a

24

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

series o f criteria and tests against which products to be shipped can be assessed to determine whether or not they are dangerous goods according to the regulations. Requirements are also prescribed for packaging and labeling o f hazardous wastes to be shipped by road, rail, and marine or air (Environment Canada 2001). Export and import o f hazardous wastes regulation provides legislation and controls for the import and export o f hazardous wastes for the purpose o f recycling and disposal. This regulation is written under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act (CEP A). The CEP A regulations also deal with the management o f specific hazardous materials "PCBs". It is a useful guide to follow when establishing management procedures for the storage o f any hazardous material. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are a group o f chlorinated compounds that have evidence o f adverse environmental and human effect.

3.4

Hazardous Waste Management in Ontario
The Ontario government has introduced a comprehensive plan that will place

Ontario among the world leaders in the management and reduction o f hazardous wastes. The hazardous waste is managed under regulation 347 (General Waste Management) o f Environmental Protection Act. EPA: regulates how all wastes, including hazardous wastes, are to be managed in Ontario and requires approval for transportation, processing and disposal o f wastes. EPA Regulation 347 - General Waste Management: "Cradle to
grave" m anagem ent o f hazardous and liquid industrial waste requires generators to

register their facility and wastes generated with the MOE, to use registered carriers to ship their waste, to manifest their shipments, and to maintain records (Ministry o f Environment 2001).

25

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

3.4.1

Pre-Treatment Standards
The province is seeking input from the public and stakeholders regarding a

proposal to establish pre-treatment requirements for hazardous wastes prior to land disposal. These standards are commonly referred to as land disposal restrictions, and are similar to those used in the United States. Land disposal restrictions prohibit activities that involve placing untreated hazardous wastes in or on the land. Under the proposal, hazardous wastes could not be disposed on land until the waste meets specific treatment standards to reduce the mobility or toxicity o f its hazardous components. Implementing these standards would further harmonize Ontario's hazardous waste management requirements with those o f the U.S. The standards will reduce the amount o f hazardous waste being imported into Ontario in order to avoid U.S. treatment requirements. These new rules would also act as a catalyst for Ontario's environmental industry to develop new technologies and new business ` opportunities as needed facilities are set up in Ontario to meet the new requirements.

3.4.2

Destruction of Wastes
There are approximately 99,000 tones o f Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)

wastes in storage at 1,000 sites throughout Ontario. Some 7,000 tones are considered high-level (greater than 10,000 ppm), and 92,000 tones are considered low-level (less than 10,000 ppm). Until recently, there were few options available for destroying PCBs. More options now exist within and outside o f Ontario, making the elimination o f this waste possible.

26

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Eliminating Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) wastes from storage will improve environmental protection by reducing the risk o f toxic byproducts being released to the environment should a fire or other emergency occur at these sites. The elimination o f these wastes over a three-year time frame set out in the regulation will also promote opportunities for Ontario's environmental industries to respond to the demand for Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) destruction technologies. A timetable in the regulation will provide destruction dates for: · · · PCBs currently in storage in sensitive sites, PCBs currently stored at all other sites, and PCBs coming out o f service and into storage.

As part o f the phase-out schedule, the ministry will require that all PCBs currently stored at sensitive sites such as schools and hospitals will be eliminated within one year o f the regulation becoming law.

3.4.3

Hospital Incinerators
Each year in Ontario, about 10,000 tones o f biomedical waste is generated and

requites special management. This includes 2,000 tones o f anatomical waste; 7,000 tones o( non-anatomical waste (needles, glass, human and animal cultures); and 1,000 tones o f pharmaceutical waste. Currently, 44 Ontario hospitals incinerate approximately 1,400 lories of biomedical waste and 700 tones o f municipal solid waste each year. The majority o f the hospital incinerators currently in operation is over 20 years old and was not designed to handle the composition o f biomedical waste currently being generated.

27

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

These existing hospital incinerators will be phased out within one year o f the proposed regulation taking effect. They are the 13th largest emission source o f mercury in Ontario, and the largest emission source o f dioxins, accounting for about one-eighth o f national emissions and one quarter o f provincial emissions. In Ontario, there are three waste management firms that operate incineration and non-incineration technologies (autoclave and hydroclave technologies). These facilities have the capacity to manage the increased waste volumes when existing hospital incinerators close. Several Ontario hospitals have recognized cost savings from closing their incinerators and use alternative technologies for destruction o f hazardous wastes.

3.4.4

Destruction Technologies for Hospital Wastes
Before choosing the destruction method, sources, weight and moiphology o f

hazardous wastes generated should be identified. The collection and transported method should also be specified. A system should be put in place to control and segregate the generated waste into individual categories for further destruction by a proposed method. The world's most common technologies are sanitation based on steam or steam and vacuum and microwave sanitation (Rutala and Mayhall 1993). The destruction methods used are: steam sanitation, disinfection with superheated steam, hydroclave, dry heat disinfection, microwave sanitation, chemical disinfection, method of waste

mineralization, method o f waste sterilization with mineralization, and burying o f sanitary waste (Citizens Environmental Coalition 1991, Pruss et al. 1999). The use o f these methods has many advantages (Rutala and Mayhall 1993), including: · Lower investment and operating costs

28

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

· The environment not being burden with toxic products o f incineration · The waste remaining after remaining the destructive methods has properties o f municipal waste · It is possible to use mobile installations · Economic and social security · Easy handling and public acceptance

3.4.5

Regulations In Ontario
A further hazardous waste initiative that took effect on January 1, 2002, is an

amendment to Ontario's waste regulation that requires hazardous waste generators to register annually, rather than on a one-time only basis. In addition, hazardous waste generators will be required to pay for the ministry's costs o f managing hazardous and liquid industrial waste in the province. The amended regulation requires that each generator o f liquid industrial and hazardous waste register annually with the Ministry o f the Environment, providing more accurate and current information on the amount and type o f waste being disposed o f both on- and off-site. Each generator is to pay a charge tor the annual registration: The charge will have the following three components, · · All generators must pay $50 for each registered site All generators must pay $5 for work associated with each manifest used to track the movement o f waste off-site for treatment or disposal · All generators must pay $10 for each tone o f hazardous waste disposed.

29

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The regulations will help offset nearly $12 million o f ministry's costs for managing hazardous waste. More than 16,000 hazardous waste generators will be affected. They include large waste management companies, power producers, chemical, oil and steel industries and municipal, provincial and federal governments. Annual registration will help keep an up-to-date picture o f the amounts and types o f hazardous wastes being produced and assist the ministry in developing policies to set reduction targets. The tonnage fees will also act as an incentive for companies to reduce the amount o f hazardous wastes they generate. Including as part o f this initiative is the implementation o f a new electronic hazardous waste information network (or HWIN), the first o f its kind in North America. It will provide better service to generators and immediate up-to-date information on the generation, movement and disposal o f hazardous waste. Online registration o f hazardous waste generators is scheduled to begin on January 2, 2002, and be completed by mid February 2002.

3.4.6

Past Initiatives in Regulations
Over the past two years the govermnent has introduced several new rules that

make its hazardous waste requirements the toughest in Ontario's history. Since 1999, a number o f changes to the hazardous waste regulations have made Ontario's hazardous waste standards more compatible with U.S. hazardous waste regulations, and the toughest in provincial history. These changes to the regulation have included: Implementing the next-generation leaching tests procedure, referred to as the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP). This testing procedure determines whether a waste is likely

30

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

to leach contaminants into groundwater at levels o f concern. The new procedure is better at detecting organic contaminants and is tougher than the current U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) requirements. The Ontario procedure tests for 88 contaminants, while the U.S. procedure tests for 40 contaminants. Updating Ontario's lists o f hazardous waste to be compatible with those o f the U.S. Adding a "derived from" rule similar to that o f the U.S. EPA. This rule states that any listed hazardous waste will still be listed hazardous waste until it can be clearly demonstrated that it is no longer hazardous. Giving legal force to the ministry's Generator Registration Manual, which describes how to classify wastes. Adding a new "mixture rule" to ensure that, even if a listed hazardous waste is mixed with other substances, it will still be considered the same type o f listed hazardous waste. The Ontario government's Environmental Statute Law Amendment Act gave the ministry strong new legal powers to deter and punish illegal waste operators and others wtuj choose to operate outside the law and threaten our environment. The legislation closed loopholes that enabled polluters to continue violating the law and avoiding penalties imposed on them. The law is fair to those who comply with environmental laws
an d

lough on those who break them. The province created an Environmental SWAT Team in the fall o f 2000. This

highly mobile unit dedicated to ensuring compliance with Ontario's environmental laws through tough, effective and fair enforcement. Working in partnership with the ministry's district offices, the team targets specific sectors o f concern - those that have high noncompliance rates and/or may have significant impacts on public health and the environment. The inspections by the Environmental SWAT Team complement the

31

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

significant number o f inspections performed by ministry staff on a daily basis. This strong enforcement presence helps provide a higher level o f environmental protection for the people o f Ontario and helps level the playing field for Ontario businesses so that those who defy environmental laws do not benefit at the expense o f those who comply. Since its inception, the Environmental SWAT Team has completed more than 700 inspections in the following areas; pesticide applicators; septic waste haulers; hazardous, liquid industrial and solid waste haulers; hazardous waste transfer and processing facilities; electro/metal platters; and recycling in the industrial, commercial and institutional sectors.

3.4.7

Prospective Initiatives in Regulations
As part o f its overall hazardous waste plan, the government intends to implement

the following hazardous waste initiatives over the next two to three years: · A pollution prevention program that will include specific reduction targets for hazardous wastes; a technical assistance program to help industry reduce their hazardous waste; diversion programs for used oil, electronic equipment, fluorescent tubes and special household wastes; and requirements for specific industries to develop pollution prevention plans. · A new legislative framework for wastes and recyclables to foster increased recycling o f materials; enhanced inspection, abatement and enforcement activities; regulatory changes to clarify requirements and encourage proper management and recycling, while maintaining environmental protection; and the phasing out o f other

32

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

waste management activities such as deep well disposal o f hazardous wastes and the use o f landforms to treat and dispose o f hazardous wastes.

3.5

Canada US Agreement
Each year, millions o f tones o f wastes are generated in Canada as by-products o f

industrial activities. About six million tones o f these wastes contain toxic chemicals such as acids, phenols, arsenic, lead and mercury. Although it may be impossible to eliminate hazardous wastes entirely, efforts are being made to minimize their generation. Those wastes that remain are disposed o f through a variety o f methods intended to reduce environmental and human health risks. Ideally, hazardous wastes are recycled into other non-hazardous products or compounds so that valuable resources can be re-used. Other hazardous wastes are either disposed o f at the site where they were generated, or shipped elsewhere to be incinerated, detoxified by physical or chemical treatment, or disposed o f in a secure landfill site. Canada and the United States both recognize the environmental and economic advantages o f minimizing the distances that hazardous wastes must travel. As a result, approximately 900,000 tones o f hazardous waste cross the Canada-U.S. border annually, on their way to the nearest environmentally sound recycling, treatment or disposal site. In order to lessen any threat to the environment or public safety during transportation, and to manage Trans boundary shipments effectively, Canada and the United States have entered into a comprehensive agreement. This agreement sets out specific administrative conditions for the export, import, and transportation o f hazardous waste between the two countries.

PRO PtR T Y O F

33

RYERSON UWiVERSlTY LIBRARY

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The Agreement between the Government o f Canada and the Government o f the United States o f America Concerning the Trans boundary Movement o f Hazardous Waste was signed by the Canadian Environment Minister and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator on October 28 1986 and came into effect on November 8, 1986. The Agreement ensures both that the Trans boundary movement o f hazardous waste is handled safely and that such waste is shipped to facilities that are authorized by the importing jurisdiction. Within the context o f the Agreement, wastes are considered hazardous if defined as such by the legislation o f the exporting country. In Canada, hazardous wastes are covered by the Export and Import o f Hazardous Wastes Regulations.

3.5.1

Compatibility with Basel Convention
Article 11 o f the United Nations Basel Convention on the Control o f Trans

boundary Movements o f Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal allows countries to enter into bilateral/multilateral agreements or arrangements, as long as these agreements or arrangements do not derogate from environmentally sound management o f wastes. The Canada-U.S.A. Agreement, together with its supporting regulatory framework, is entirely compatible with the control procedures under the Basel Convention. The Agreement affirms the four basic principles that both countries recognize as necessary to control Trans boundary shipments o f hazardous waste: · Each country must adequately manage waste within its own jurisdiction.

34

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

·

The exporting country must give the importing country prior notice o f the proposed shipment; the importing country then indicates whether it objects to the proposed shipment.

·

The two countries must co-operate to ensure that Trans boundary shipments o f hazardous waste are accompanied by proper manifests, in order to verify compliance with the Agreement and domestic regulations; and

·

The exporting country must permit re-entry o f any hazardous waste that may be returned by the importing country. Hazardous waste generators and parties wishing to transport hazardous waste

across the border must first submit, together with other relevant documents, a notice that contains a variety o f detailed information about the proposed shipment including: · · · The type and amount o f waste. When the waste will be exported. The name o f the transporter and the method o f transportation (air, highway, rail, water). · · · The type o f container used (drums, boxes, tanks, etc.). The name and address o f the party to whom the waste will be shipped; and The method o f recycling, treatment, storage, or disposal. The notice is submitted to the designated authority in the exporting country, whicti notifies the designated authority in the importing country (Environment Canada or the
I J . S .

EPA) o f the proposed shipment. For imports into Canada, Environment Canada

forwards the notice for review to the appropriate environmental authorities in the

35

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

province to which waste will be shipped. Each province has jurisdiction over hazardous waste management within its borders. After acknowledging receipt o f the notice, the importing country has 30 days to review the request and indicate its objection or consent to the proposed shipment. The importing country has the right to alter the conditions o f transport as described in the notice. Responses to the notice are then provided to the designated authority in the exporting coimtry. If no response is received within the 30-day period, the importing country is considered to have no objections to the shipment.

36

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 4
EVOLUTION OF THE BASEL CONVENTION

4.1

Introduction
Before 1970s industries were ju st disposing hazardous waste by either burying

them underground or sending the liquid waste into river and ponds, which in effect polluted several rivers, streams and seashores. The gasoline drums, for instance, which were buried underground, leaked and contaminated groundwater. W hen communities started complaining about the quality o f water then several studies were made and finally the hazardous waste control laws were brought to legislation. Basel convention was not only implemented to regulate the hazardous waste transport but also to standardize disposal methods worldwide. This chapter presents background, implementation, importance, and milestones o f the Basel convention.

4.2

Background of Basel Convention
In recent decades the problem o f hazardous waste has grown considerably. In

1947, the worldwide generation o f waste was about 5 million metric tons (Environment Canada 2001). By 1988, that figure had grown to over 300 million metric tons, with more than three-quarters o f that, 265 million metric tons, coming from the United States alone (Environment Canada 2001). Disposal o f hazardous waste has become a major concern to both developed and developing countries. Over the past few decades, developed nations have increasingly opted to ship their waste to developing countries. It was believed by both sides that agreeing on proper disposal methods was mutually

37

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

beneficial from an economic standpoint; the developed world could dispose o f its waste at a lower cost, while developing countries would benefit from the substantial revenue generated by waste disposal. Unfortunately, developing countries were often ill-

equipped to dispose o f the waste properly, leading to considerable environmental damage. Developing countries, desperate for hard currency, were also concerned that the garbage o f the first world was destroying their environment. A compromise solution was needed to deal with the massive amount o f hazardous waste generated every year. In late 80s when developed nations became aware o f dangers o f hazardous wastes they started making their laws tight and stringent. This "problem" for industries led these "toxic traders" search for cheaper ways to dispose o f the hazardous wastes. These countries started dumping their hazardous wastes in poor developing and Eastern Europe nations. When this activity was revealed, international outrage led to the drafting and adoption o f the Basel Convention. The Basel Convention on the control o f Trans boundary Movements o f Hazardous Wastes and their disposal was adopted in Basel, Switzerland on 22 March 1989. The Convention was initiated in response to numerous international scandals regarding hazardous waste trafficking that began to occur in the late 1980s. The Convention entered into force on 5 May 1992 and today has its Secretariat in Geneva, Switzerland.

4.3

Implementation of Basel Convention
During its first decade (1989-1999), the Convention was principally devoted to

setting up a framework for controlling the "Trans boundary" movements o f hazardous

38

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

wastes, that is, the movement o f hazardous wastes across international frontiers. It also developed the criteria for "environmentally sound management". A Control System, based on prior written notification, was also put into place. The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in 1987 took the first step toward a solution to the world's waste disposal problems. It adopted the Cairo Guidelines and Principles for the Environmentally Sound Management o f Hazardous Waste, which contained recommendations concerning the export o f hazardous waste. The Cairo

Guidelines call for "notification to receiving and transit nations o f any export and consent by those nations prior to export." Under these guidelines, it is the exporter's

responsibility to ensure that the disposal site meets specified requirements for safety. UNEP wanted to enlarge the scope o f their international regulation o f hazardous waste by creating a convention to formalize regulation procedures into international law. The Basel Convention, signed by 116 nations, was the result o f this effort. Signed in Budapest, Hungary in October 1987, the Convention went into force on May 5, 1992. The debate over the scope o f the Convention caused many delays in the negotiating process. Some nations wanted an outright ban on the Trans boundary movement o f

wastes, while others sought only minimal regulation. In the end, the Basel Convention produced twenty-nine articles and six annexes that regulate, from cradle to grave, all hazardous wastes that are to be shipped across national borders. Before the Convention could set down regulations for hazardous waste, a mutually agreeable definition for waste had to be reached. The final version allowed for the definition o f hazardous waste to come from provisions written into the national laws o f the signatories; thus, the definition was not universal but country based. In addition.

39

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

wastes were defined according to their origins and component parts. The incorporation o f national laws into the definition o f waste products helped foster consensus among the signatories (United Nations Environment Program 1989). The Basel Convention also called for signatories to work to reduce the amount o f hazardous waste that they generate. There were no provisions for how much, or in what time frame, waste generation should be reduced, thus mitigating much o f the provision's effectiveness. However, it did note that any waste that cannot be properly disposed

abroad should be disposed o f as close as possible to the source o f production and done in an environmentally safe manner.

4.4

importance of Basel Convention
The regulation o f the international shipment o f hazardous waste was the real goal

o f the Basel Convention. Regulation o f waste origins and destinations is important to ensuring products are disposed o f in an environmentally sound way. The regulation procedure is as follows: the exporting nation must notify in advance the importing nation o f the nature o f the waste to be trans-shipped. Proper disposal sites are then to be

guaranteed by the exporter. The receiving nation and any intermediate nations may deny entry, request additional information, or approve the shipment. A type o f uniform

consignment note, listing contents, hazards, and disposal procedures, must accompany waste shipments at all times. The disposer must notify the exporter and the exporting nation once disposal o f the waste is complete. To prevent any country from

circumventing the provisions, signatories are forbidden to export waste to non-signatory

40

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

nations unless it is done under the provisions o f a separate bilateral or multilateral agreement. Based on the background and implementation of the Basel Convention it is concluded that this is in fact a very good program. The Convention Report has goals to control the hazardous waste in a very secure way. Their program is not for the present but it is also for the future. During The Next Decade (2000-2010), the Convention will build on this framework by emphasizing full implementation and enforcement o f treaty commitments. The other area o f focus will be the minimization o f hazardous waste generation. Ministers meeting held at Basel in December o f 1999 set out guidelines for the Convention's activities during the next decade, including: · · · · Active promotion and use o f cleaner technologies and production methods. Further reduction o f the movement o f hazardous and other wastes. The prevention and monitoring o f illegal traffic. Improvement o f institutional and technical capabilities, through technology when appropriate especially for developing countries and countries with economies in transition. · Further development o f regional and sub regional centers for training and technology transfer.

4.5

The Vital Goal of Basel Convention
The main goal o f the Basel Convention is "environmentally sounds management"

(ESM), the aim o f which is to protect human health and the environment by minimizing hazardous waste production whenever possible. ESM means addressing the issue through

41

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

an "integrated life-cycle approach", which involves strong controls from the generation o f a hazardous waste to its storage, transport, treatment, reuse, recycling, recovery and final disposal. Many companies have already demonstrated that "cleaner production" methods, which eliminate or reduce hazardous outputs, can be both economically and environmentally efficient. The United Nations Environment Program's (UNEP) Division on Technology, Industry and Economics works to identify and disseminate "best practices". Please refer to their site, which again shows their hard work to control the hazardous waste problems (United Nations Environment Program 2001). In the coming decade, more emphasis will be placed on creating partnerships with industry and research institutions to create innovative approaches to ESM. One o f the most critical aspects o f ESM is lowering demand for products and services that result in hazardous by-products. Consumers need to educate themselves as to the methods used in production processes and think about what they buy every day.

4.6

An Overview of Compliance and Enforcement
The Basel Convention contains specific provisions for the monitoring o f

implementation and compliance. A number o f articles in the Convention oblige Parties (national governments which have acceded to the Convention) to take appropriate measures to implement and enforce its provisions, including measures to prevent and punish conduct in contravention o f the Convention.

42

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.6.1

The Control System for the Movement of Hazardous Waste
Because hazardous wastes pose such a potential threat to human health and the

environment, one o f the guiding principles o f the Basel Convention is that, in order to minimize the threat, hazardous wastes should be dealt with as close to where they are produced as possible. Therefore, under the Convention, Trans boundary movements o f hazardous wastes or other wastes can take place only upon prior written notification by the State o f export to the competent authorities o f the States o f import and transit (if appropriate). Each shipment o f hazardous waste or other waste must be accompanied by a movement document from the point at which a Trans boundary movement begins to the point o f disposal. Hazardous waste shipments made without such documents are illegal. In addition, there are outright bans on the export o f these wastes to certain countries. Trans boundary movements can take place, however, if the state o f export does not have the capability o f managing or disposing o f the hazardous waste in an environmentally sound manner.

4.6.2

National Reporting of Hazardous Wastes
Each country that is a Party to the Convention is required to report information on

the generation and movement o f hazardous wastes. Every year, a questionnaire is sent out to member countries, requesting information on the generation, export and import o f hazardous wastes covered by the Convention. This information is reviewed and compiled by the Secretariat and is presented in an annual report, which includes statistical tables and graphic representations o f the data (United Nations Environment Program 2001).

43

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

4.6.3

Technical Assistance Offered by the Convention
In order to assist countries (as well as interested organizations, private companies,

industry associations and other stakeholders) to manage or dispose o f their wastes in an environmentally sound way, the Secretariat cooperates with national authorities in developing national legislation, setting up inventories o f hazardous wastes, strengthening national institutions, assessing the hazardous waste management situation, and preparing hazardous waste management plans and policy tools. It also provides legal and technical advice to countries in order to solve specific problems related to the control and management o f hazardous wastes. In the case o f an emergency, such as a hazardous waste spill, the Secretariat cooperates with Parties and relevant international

organizations to provide rapid assistance in the form o f expertise and equipment.

4.6.4

Training in the Management and Minimization of Hazardous

Wastes
An integral part o f implementing the Basel Convention is building the capability to manage and dispose o f hazardous waste. Through training and technology transfer, developing countries and countries with economies in transition gain the skills and tools necessary to properly manage their hazardous wastes. To this end, the Basel Convention has established Regional Centers for Training and Technology Transfer in the following countries: Argentina, China, Egypt, El Salvador, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Senegal, Slovak Republic, South Africa, Russian Federation, Trinidad & Tobago and Uruguay. The role o f the centers is to help countries implement the Basel Convention. Important activities include providing guidance on technical and technological issues as

44

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

well as advice on enforcement aspects o f the Convention. The Centers also encourage the introduction o f cleaner production technologies and the use o f environmentally sound waste management practices.

4.7

Milestones in the Convention's History

1999 Protocol on Liability and Compensation - The Protocol on Liability and
Compensation, adopted in December 1999, established rules on liability and

compensation for damages caused by accidental spills o f hazardous waste during export, import or during disposal.

1999 Ministerial Declaration - The Basel Declaration, also adopted at COP-5 meeting,
set out the agenda for the next decade, with a special emphasis on minimizing hazardous waste (United Nation Environment Programme 2001).

199H Classification and Characterizations o f Wastes - The Technical Working Group o f
the Basel Convention agreed on lists o f specific wastes characterized as hazardous or nun-hazardous. These lists were later adopted by the Parties to the Convention, thereby clarifying the scope o f the Convention.

1995 Ban Amendment - The Amendment calls for prohibiting exports o f hazardous
wastes (for any purpose) from countries listed in a proposed new annex to the Convention (Annex VIII - Parties that are members o f the EU, OECD, Liechtenstein) to all other Parties to the Convention. In order to enter into force, the Ban amendment has to be rat Itied by 62 o f the Parties present at the time o f adoption.

45

Reproduced witti permission of ttie copyrigfit owner. Furtfier reproduction profiibited witfiout permission.

1992 Basel Convention enters into force.

1989 Adoption - After a public outcry against the indiscriminate dumping o f hazardous
wastes in developing countries by developed-world industries, a diplomatic conference held in Basel, Switzerland, adopted the Convention.

46

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 5
HZARDOUS WASTE TRANSPORTATION
1

I

5.1

Introduction
There are regulations and proper management's practices to manage and regulate

'

the hazardous waste transportation. But there still risk involved during their transportation. The ultimate risk is for the human. Therefore, certain techniques and advance technologies are used to ensure safety o f the hazardous wastes transport. Three modes o f transport: motor carrier, rail carrier, and water carrier are used for the transportation o f hazardous waste materials. Different models for the risk analysis and highway routing are developed (Douglas et al. 1990, Chung-Kuo 1990). This chapter presents modes o f transport, developed models, and advance technologies used for the hazardous wastes transportation.

5.2

Modes of Transportation
Ensuring a safe transportation o f hazardous materials is a complex activity. The

accidental release o f hazardous materials poses serious threats to human safety and property and to the environment. During transportation, classification o f hazardous substance affects packaging, marking, labeling, and placarding. Each transportation department has list o f transported material in their regulations. required packing given in the regulation. Shippers follow the

If the material is not listed, however, the

shipper must determine if it is hazardous or not and classify it according to the universal definitions in the regulations.

i
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Hazardous wastes are often accumulated in drums and containers. Historically, these waste drums have been stored to eventually corrode and pose a threat to human health and the environment. EPA has drum and container regulations to better manage industry practices in handling hazardous wastes. Under these regulations, all hazardous wastes must be placed in drums and containers that are good in conditions. The hazardous wastes must be compatible with the drum and container. Inspections must be periodically carried out to assess containers being used to store the hazardous wastes. Any wastes in the drum that are either damaged or leaking must be recontainerized. The drum reconditioning industry uses the hazardous waste industry as a potential source of drums, but there is a long-term risk in supplying used drums to reconditioners (Charles 1989). The modes o f transport are discussed in the following sections.

5.2.1

Highway Transport
Cargo tanks are the main carriers o f bulk hazardous materials over the roads.

Cargo tanks are usually made o f steel or aluminum alloy but can be constructed o f other materials, such as titanium, nickel or stainless steel. They range in capacity from about 4000 to 12,000 gallons. Federal road weight laws usually limit motor vehicle weights to 80,000 pound gross. Some States, however, allow higher weights, and in those states cargo tanks can have capacities larger than 112,000 gallons. The bulk trucking business differs from rail or water bulk transport in that there are many more small carriers, including interstate and intrastate carriers. The quality o f the equipment varies within each o f these groups, but generally the large private interstate tankers have newest tankers. And the small private carriers have the older equipment.

48

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Many o f the most serious discharges o f hazardous wastes during bulk transport over the highway are caused by vehicle accidents, the result o f driver error and/or equipment failure. Both improving equipment safety and providing driver training could thus reduce the number o f accidents. Various hazardous material transportation regulations and motor carrier safety regulation parts govern the trucking industry. Basel Convention Regulation subpart A o f part 173 requirements include: Compliance with Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, State and local laws, ordinance and regulations. Attendance and surveillance o f motor vehicles. Parking, Routes, Fires, Smoking, Fuelling, Tires, Instructions and documents, and Marking o f vehicles operated by private carriers. According to Hazardous Materials Transportation Regulations (HMTR) under 49 Code o f Federal Regulations (CFR) part 177, motor carriers may accept for transportatioh only those shipments prepared in accordance with the marking, labeling and placarding requirements under CFR Part 172 (Arthur 1990).

5.2.2

Rail Transport
Rail shipment account for about 5 percent o f the tonnage o f hazardous wastes

transported annually. All rail containers must be o f the proper specification, regardless o f tiie origin, destination, or duration o f the trip or characteristics o f the shipper or carrier. About 80 % o f hazardous materials involve tank cars, which have useful lives o f 30 to 40 years. W ith regard to the transportation o f hazardous materials/wastes by rail, the HMTR require that shipments be prepared in accordance with parts 171, 172 and 173 o f Title 49 CFR before acceptance by any carrier. Before accepting a shipment o f hazardous material/wastes for transport, each carrier must also: Obtain the proper shipping paper

49

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

manifest from the shipper and inspect the shipment to make sure it conforms to the shipping paper/manifest. Carriers transporting by rail are also required to forward shipments to destinations specified as quickly as possible.

5.2.3

Water Transport
The largest bulk containers for water transport are ships, tankers, and tank

barrages; together they account for about 91 % o f all marine shipping o f hazardous material/wastes. Tank barges range in capacity from 30,000 to 600,000 gallons, and tankers can be 10 times larger. Marine shipments typically involve very large quantities, and fewer trips are required to move a given amount o f product by water than by the other modes. Bulk marine shippers and recipients o f product by water than by other modes. Bulk marine shippers and recipients are generally large companies, well aware of the potential liability they assume with each shipment. Because o f the substantial economic investment these shipments represent, the companies expend the necessary resources to ensure safe transport. In addition, the vessels travel slowly. For all these reasons, the water is statistically the safest, both in absolute numbers o f accidents and spills per-ton-mile. Although when a spill does occur, the damage is enormous. All vessels carrying bulk hazardous materials/wastes are subject to Federal regulations. Records kept by the government list every vessel in commerce in US water. The coast guard also regulates tank barges and tankers. All new vessels to be used to transport bulk hazardous cargoes must meet the design requirements o f 46 and 49 CFR. Shipments o f hazardous materials/wastes being transported by vessel must be accompanied by the proper shipping paper/manifest. The proper DOT shipping name, the

50

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

hazard classification, and the total quantity o f the material/waste being shipped must appear on the paper.

5.2.4

Air Transport
Because the amount o f hazardous waste transported by air is quite small, specific

industry knowledge about such transport is very limited. Hazardous waste transport by air is extremely limited due to its expense, but the amount o f all hazardous materials shipped by air is small. Samples o f hazardous waste are sometimes air-shipped to disposal facilities for laboratory analysis prior to transporting the bulk wastes for disposal. The existing regulations and standards for the transport o f hazardous materials by air are much more stringent than those for other modes. For passenger aircraft, the only allowable hazardous materials are certain radioactive materials, dry ice, liquid nitrogen, magnetized materials and more ecological agents. Flammable liquids, irritants and corrosive materials are restricted to one-quart containers. Container drums o f hazardous malcrials are no longer required (Arthur 1990).

5.2.5

Pipeline Transport
In general, pipeline transport in USA is extremely limited. Pipeline eompanies

that transport erude oil or other raw material or produet does not carry hazardous waste
for

several reasons: Most pipelines are not designed for hazardous waste transport. It is

impractical and uneconomical to transport both types o f materials (waste and products), and existing pipelines, being stationary, don't ordinarily link hazardous waste generators to treatment, storage or disposal facilities. Thus, hazardous waste transport by pipeline is

51

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

confined to a few concentrated industrial areas in the USA. Pipelining o f waste may be economically attractive where a disposal site is located in the midst o f a heavy industrialized area.

5.3

Risk Management in Hazardous Waste Transport
There are many formulas to describe the concept o f risks. The most common is

the probability o f an unwanted event weighted by the consequences o f that event. For hazardous wastes, the unwanted event is the accident release o f the product; the consequences o f an uncontrolled release (both potential and real) are the effects o f the nature o f the danger or hazard posed (i.e. flammability, toxicity) in terms o f damages and losses incurred. During transport the risk may be even more pronounced due to uncertainty o f not only when, but also where an accident release o f product may occur. The only assurance o f achieving zero risk for the transport o f hazardous wastes is to reduce on o f the two components, probability or consequence, to zero. Reducing the probability o f a transportation accident to zero requires prohibition o f the movement (Marjorie 1990). Eugene (1990) conducted a study in Kansas State University to develop a methodology for developing high-risk scenarios and counter measure ideas. The study developed a set o f prioritized, extreme-risk scenarios, a set o f feasible, practical, and implementable protective systems. Eugene (1990) also summarized the guidelines on the use o f these protective systems to mitigate potential, extreme-risk situations that could occur during the transport o f hazardous materials (hazmat) on our highway system. The study came up with only one type o f protective system that could be called "preventive".

52

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

that was found to be most effective. This type consists o f various barriers to contain a hazmat vehicle on or within the roadway to prevent it going o ff an overhead facility, o ff a ramp, into a schoolyard, etc. Various types o f barrier rail designed to contain large trucks would be typical o f this category. Richard (1990) discussed the evolution and current status o f the Hazardous Materials Incident Report System (HMIRS) that is maintained by the Research and Special Programs Administration (RSPA) o f the U.S Department o f Transportation (DOT). The basis for study was to review the collected information by Federal on hazardous materials incidents, and to improve the collection and use o f incident information. Richard (1990) presents the results o f a survey o f connective fire chiefs and discusses how their perceptions o f risk affect their attitudes towards risk preparedness and risk management practices. The results indicate that support for the hazmat transport system is a function o f risk perception, population size, and low ratings o f system effectiveness. Public especially nearby residents who may be exposed to highway spills involving gasoline, propane or sulfuric acid encourages fire chiefs to support more aggressive intervention on the part o f local governments. Fire chiefs also favored restricted routing if they deem the current regulatory system to be relatively ineffective and if population size is taken into account. The ultimate goal o f any risk management information system (RMIS) is to provide a tool for reducing uncertainty in decision-making ensuring that decision is not made in ignorance. Douglas et al. (1990) developed a computerized model, which local jurisdictions can pursue to manage the risks related to hazardous waste transportation. The model was developed as a part o f the first risk assessment. It contains several data

53

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

banks and analytical components, including route-specific accident rates, conditional spill probabilities for different types o f containers, and estimated consequences if an accidental release occur. Subsequent risk assessments are then built into the same model. The overall model and data can be revised as required to account for changes in the transport system over time. The model can be used to estimate the risk associated with various transportation modes, various transportation routes, and various hazardous materials. Based on the results o f the model route restrictions, route improvements, and procedural and technological improvements policies can be improved for the safe movement o f hazardous materials. Chung-Kuo (1990) developed a model to assess the safety o f a community through which hazardous material will be transported. The model is predictive and can be used even thee is no past data o f incidents in that area. It draws on selective measure for both risk and community preparedness to meet that r i ^ . Risk measure includes various characteristics o f drivers, vehicles, and roadways, and the exposure o f population and property. The proposed model is developed with two sub-models. First is community risk (CR) such as the likelihood o f an incident (fire, spillage, or explosion) and the relative exposure to death, injury, or property damage. Second is community preparedness (CP), emergency response capability and preparedness, such as personnel, equipment, public awareness, and evacuation plans. The model is,
L O S = C P /C R [ 5 .1 ]

Where, LOS = Community Level o f Safety (Ranges from A to F), CP = Community Preparedness Level Index (Values from 1 to 100) and CR = Community Risk Level Index (Values from 0.1 to 1.0).

54

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

The model for CR focus on roadway transportation (where 90 percent o f hazardous materials accidents occur), but its methodology can be adapted for other transport modes (Chung-Kuo 1990). The evaluation o f community risk model is based on three elements within some defined project area (often a half-mile to either side o f a transportation corridor): the risk o f a motor vehicle accident, the risk that such an accident will involve a carrier o f hazardous materials, and the community exposure. The community risk (CR) is modeled as, CR = R l (HMV) X (P d + Py + N e + Ns) x 7> Where,
R l

[5.2]

(HMV) = Risk level index o f an incident involving a motor vehicle carrying

hazardous materials
Pd

= Population density factor

Pv = Property value factor N e = Condition and number o f hazardous materials establishments Ns = Type and numbers o f sensitive facilities (schools, hospitals, etc., in the vicinity o f transport routes) Tp = Forms o f threat resulting from an incident: fire, spillage, explosion, or combination R l (HMV) is separately modeled as sub-model as, Rl (HMV) = RL (MV) x (P e x + P c g + P f l + P f s + Po + Where,
P ex P cg P fl

+ Pc + Pm )

[5.2]

= % Explosives vehicles in ADT = % Compressed gas vehicles in ADT - % Flammable liquid vehicles in ADT

55

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

P fs -

% Oxidizers and organic peroxides vehicles in ADT

?o = % Poison vehicles in ADT Pp = % Radioactive vehicles in ADT Pc = % Corrosive vehicles in ADT
Pm =

% Miscellaneous or unknown class vehicles in ADT

RL (MV) = Risk level o f index o f a motor vehicle incident. (Converted to values 1 to 10) RL (MV) is also modeled in sub-model as, RL (MV) = Tl x (Dl + V l + R i) x Sl T l = Traffic volume level index D l = Driver level index V l = Vehicle level index
Rl

[5.4]

- Roadway geometry/environment level index

Sl - Average vehicle speed level index Traffic volume T l Is rated 1 to 10. The second sub-model for community preparedness (CP) was seen as the sum o f the emergency response capability index (ER) and the regulation compliance index (RC) as, CP = ER + RC [5.5]

Where, CP - Community preparedness level index, ER = emergency response capability index (0-50), RC = regulation compliance index (0-50).

5.4

GIS and Transportation
Geographic Information System (GIS) represents a technology with considerable

potential for important application in transportation engineering. GIS is a computerized

56

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

database management system for the capture, storage, retrieval, analysis and display o f

I
I

spatial data. A GIS contains two broad classifications o f information: geocoded spatial I data and attribute data. Geocoded data defines objects that have an orientation and relationship in two or three-dimensional space. Each object is classified as a point (such as an accident or a signal location), a line (for example highway), or polygon (number o f
i

j

^
I

I

people living within a block) and is tied to a geographic coordinate system. These objects have precise definitions and are clearly related to each other according to the rules o f

I

I I

mathematical topology. Moreover, a GIS contains the same attribute data that are found in traditional databases. Attributes associated with a street segment might include its width, number o f lanes, construction history, pavement conditions, and traffic volumes (Simkowitz 1989).

I

5.4.1

GIS Applications in Routing Planning
GIS is a powerful technology in the analysis and design o f transport routing

networks. The key contribution o f GIS technology is that it adds a major degree o f intelligence and sophistication to a transportation database that is inherently geographical in nature. The interaction between the transportation system and its surrounding environment makes GIS technology ideally suited for solid and hazardous waste routing design, risk analysis, and decision-making. GIS technology combines information on the transport network configuration, social and demographic factors, weather conditions, topography, and geology to assess the likelihood o f a hazardous spill and its probable consequences. GIS can also be integrated with sophisticated mathematical options and policies (Hadi et al. 1995).

57

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

GIS graphical display capabilities allow not only visualization o f the different routes but also the sequence in which they are built, which allows the understanding o f the logic behind the routing network design. For a segment on a road, a GIS system knows what routes cross it and whether there is an actual physical intersection. It knows the position o f roadside features along the segment and can tell which census block are to the right and to the left o f the segment within any distance o f it. Rather than being limited to textual queries, it is possible to perform geographical queries in a straightforward, intuitive fashion. For example, a GIS with the appropriate routing algorithm and data can easily compute and display the route that will result in the minimum population exposure to a shipment o f hazardous material. With the route drawn on the computer screen, the analyst can see immediately how the logic o f the model has bypassed certain population centers. The analyst can create a detour by pointing to a road segment and deleting it from the network and then watching the routing algorithm redraw the path.

5.4.2

GIS Risk Analysis of Hazardous Materials Transport
GIS has been used in the risk analysis o f hazardous materials transportation in

Arizona. The main objective o f that research was to assess the risk and vulnerability o f transporting hazardous materials and wastes on the Arizona Highway System. A general GIS called Geographic Information Management System (GIMS) were used. The risk assessment model used was based on four factors: accident rate by segment, shipment frequency by highway segment, population density along the routes, and response time. Each component was evaluated and presented on the GIS map (Charles and James 1990).

58

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Although this study was one o f the earliest and most basic research studies in this area, it lacks a strong modeling o f risk assessments and routing evaluations. The data were entered in Geographic Information Management System (GIMS). GIMS is a comprehensive vector and raster based system conceived, applied, and evolved in over 100 geographic analysis projects during the last 15 years. Five models were constructed based on the generic evaluation o f four spatially varying components (Charles and James 1990). The components were accident rate, shipment frequency, population affected, and response time and their respective evaluations were incident probability, hazard, risk, and vulnerability respectively. The generic formula (Charles and James 1990) for the evaluation consisted o f the following.

Absolute hazard = (R) (F) ' Population at risk = (R) (F) (P) Vulnerability = (R) (F) (P) (T) Where, R table 1

[5.6] [5.7] [5.8]

Accident rate by sub-segment, these data are drawn directly from the accident rate

Shipment frequency by highway segment, these data are drawn from the previous

survey data. R Population affected, determined by nearness o f fire stations as modeled over the

principal highway network.

59

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

5.5

Use of Advanced Technologies for Improving Hazmat

Transportation Safety
The transportation industry is undergoing major change. The "information age" promises to have a dramatic impact on the way transportation function is being performed today and is likely to be performed in the future. Over the past few years, a variety o f new products and services have been available, and more are being developed each year. These products and services reduce the capital and manpower requirements o f the transportation infrastructure, and improve the quality and safety o f transportation. These developments are particularly significant to the transportation o f hazardous materials/wastes. As a society we are becoming increasingly aware o f the risk involved in hazardous waste/material transportation. We want to protect lives and property, as well as our environment, and as we exercise tighter control on the movement o f hazardous waste/material, we can use all the help we can get. Advanced technologies provide such help. However, we need to recognize that advanced technologies are not the answer to all o f the problems, because transportation safety can be enhanced through operational improvements as well. For example, improved routing, greater control over the allowable time o f travel, and better training can also reduce risk significantly. In these instances, technologies play more o f the complementary role.
The risks involved in the transportation o f hazardous waste/m aterials arise

primarily from release o f such materials caused by accidents. A whole chain o f events takes place before people are exposed to the harmful effects o f hazardous

material s/wastes - i.e. the accident takes place, material is released, it spreads (or

60

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

explodes) and people caught in the way. To combat this risk, the safety can be improved by, · · · · Reduce the likelihood o f the accident Reduce the likelihood o f a release in a given accident Reduce the likelihood o f severe consequences given a release, or Reduce the likely impact on people given a consequence. There are various ways in which advanced technologies can help reduce the likeliness o f and accident. Some advanced technologies dealing with vehicle control, driver information system, driver/vehicle performance measurement and heavy truck detection are discussed as follows (Ashok 1990). Vehicle C ontrol; The technologies in this area assist the driver in controlling the vehicle. One o f the more promising developments is a collisions avoidance system. This involves tracking a vehicle in front using radar or a laser. The distance between two vehicles and their relative speeds are measured. I f an imminent collision is expected, the system can alert the driver or apply brakes automatically. Although these types o f devices have been available for quite sometime but they have not been further improved to the point that both false positive and false negative indications are completely eliminated. D river Inform ation Systems: A variety o f technologies are being developed to improve the quality o f information being provided to the driver. One major group o f technologies relates to the informing the driver where he is in relationship to his objective. This requires finding the vehicle's location (In an absolute term), and superimposing this location on an electronic map to locate with respect to the destination.

61

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

There are five technologies that fit into the category o f automatic vehicle location (Ashok 1990).

·

Dead-reckoning system: The orientation and distance traveled are monitored,
and, given an initial position, the system can find the vehicle's current location.

·

Ground-based radio-determination system: An example o f this type is
LORAN-C, which has been available for navigating in coastal waters for quite a few years, and is now available for navigation over land. This system is used extensively in services offered by firms such as Motorola, Geostar etc and employs the principle o f triangulation.

·

Low-earth orbit satellite-based system: The technology used in this category is
Global Positioning Systems (GPS/Navigator). Radio determination satellite systems (RDAA) these systems use distance from two satellites in

geosynchronous orbit to determine location.

·

Proximity system: In this system, fixed devices en route are used to determine
the location o f trucks carrying transporters (often called tags). The readers can be mounted on signposts, traffic lights or in the ground. The only problems with such a system are that the location is known only at the points where readers are located.

·

Driver/Vehicle Performance: The trucks can now be equipped with on-board
computer/vehicle management system (OBCA/^MS) to monitor the performance o f trucks and drivers. Parameters such as hours on the road, vehicle speed, and time since last break can be measured and recorded. The vehicle maintenance parameters can also be measured and recorded i f so desired. This information can

62

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

be conveyed in real time to a dispatch center in order to monitor the performance o f the driver/vehicle continuously. · Heavy T ru ck Detection: One potential cause o f unsafe operation is truck carrying more loads than it should. Such overweight trucks can be detected using a weigh-in-motion (WIM) system. This system is installed in pavement. In most cases WIM is installed together with an automatic vehicle classification (AVC) system. The two systems working together cannot only weigh a truck but classify it and determine if the truck can operate safely on a bridge (Ashok 1990).

The consequence o f some types o f hazardous waste/material spill can be kept to minimum if immediate and correct actions are taken. For this to happen, the driver may need to communicate immediately With his dispatcher or an emergency response center. Technologies that provide two-way communications can help under these circumstances. In order to make educated decisions on whether advanced technologies should be deployed or not, it helps first to quantify the potential benefits. Most o f these technologies provide other benefits besides improving safety. The wide use o f these technologies has reduced the dangers but has not eliminated it.

63

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

CHAPTER 6
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 6.1 Conclusions
The following conclusions are concluded based on literature review o f hazardous waste transportation, 1- It is estimated that only 25 percent o f people in the emergency response network have adequate training to meet a hazardous materials emergency (Terry 1990). Therefore, a registration fee should be fix for trucking firms involved in this industry for the sake o f training and equipment o f hazardous materials response teams. These funds can be distributed among the various localities in some proportion to the degree o f risk their populations face from such transportation. 2- There is lack o f centralized tracking s y s te m fo r all en-route shipments o f hazardous materials. This leads to the inability to timely identify the products involved in incidents, which is also one o f the major problems o f emergency responders. Major transportation routes can be shut down unnecessarily. Therefore, there is need to develop a centralized tracking system to provide information to emergency responders about the shipment involved in incident. 3- Hazardous wastes are real threat to human life both in developed and developing countries. Developed countries have stringent laws and penalty systems for the negligence o f handling o f hazardous waste. Unfortunately this is not the case in third world countries. In these countries, along with the lack o f law enforcement there are no proper hazardous waste management systems. Therefore, United

64

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Nation should organize hazardous waste management system in developing countries. There is also need to establish emergency system to be control by local authorities to prevent and mitigate major hazardous waste accidents in the industrial sector, in transportation, and in storage o f hazardous waste. 4- The effects o f hazardous wastes can be very dangerous. The inhaling o f hazardous wastes vapors can cause swelling o f the respiratory tract, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and respiratory failure. Therefore, human resource reduction, developing o f new technologies for on-site treatment and handling o f hazardous should be emphasized. 5- Transportation routes to send hazardous wastes to the dumping site should be chosen very carefully. The distance from the generation to the hazardous waste treatment center should be'minimized. Traffic modeling and studies should be made before employing those trucks on the highways to see the vulnerability o f innocent people. Risk assessment should be made carefully. The emergency response team in the case o f accidents should consist o f well-prepared and trained people. The response time should be minimized.
6

- Use o f the latest technologies is very effective in reducing accident risk during transportation o f hazardous waste materials. But still it is required to develop models for different scenarios and evaluate the effectiveness o f various technologies. Intelligent transportation system (ITS) can be used effectively for safe movement o f hazardous waste transportation. The devices can be for automated information o f accident notification to local emergency offices for immediate response o f incident.

65

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

6.2

Recommendations

1- There is need to improve the implementation o f Basel Convention especially in third-world coimtries. The local regulations should be compatible with the Basel Convention. Some useful recommendations for the improvement o f regulations are (United Nations Environment Programme 2001): · The ports should have emergency response team to tackle the spillage in the sea if there is an accident or if ships get stuck in sand due to bad weather conditions. · Ships that carry oil/hazardous wastes should not be more than 15-year old. If somebody was found bypassing the law to save few bucks, this individual should be punished and the supporting department should be made liable to pay for the consequences. · The shipping companies should also be held accountable if they use old ships to carry oil/hazardous wastes. · · The UN should force third-world countries to implement Environmental laws. Regular research should be made to evolve new technologies to avoid the accidents/spillage on highways/seas, at the generation plants and at the dumping sites. · The fear o f law has to be brought into the hearts o f these company's officials who are involved in this trade. · Learn from previous accidents and plans should be chalked out to avoid the scenario, which brought the disaster. · Every company should have trained staff/ drivers who could immediately react in the case o f accidents.

66

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

·

Illegal trade o f hazardous wastes between the companies o f developed countries and the underdeveloped country's pirates should be abolished.

·

Some times the third world countries are made a dumping ground without even notifying those countries officials. These companies bribe the local people who live around the coastal belt. These multinational companies then dump hazardous wastes without any safety measures. If any company/individuals found doing that they should be penalized heavily and asked to clean up the mess, which they created without following environmental laws.

2- New simulation models should be developed for the simulation o f hazardous waste materials transportation. There are a lot o f applications o f simulation in this research area. The reconstruction o f incidents and their possible impacts on the surrounding communities can be simulated to have an idea o f possible measures. 3- The design o f vehicles and ships used for the transportation o f hazardous waste materials should be included in simulation models. This will help improve their design for the safe movement o f transportation o f hazardous wastes. 4- Accident models for hazardous waste transportation should be developed region wide considering local data o f accidents and highway geometric design. 5- Routes for hazardous waste transportation should be designed in such manner that they should pass through corridors away from local communities. Since the main cause o f accidents is speeding, the speeds o f the vehicles carrying hazardous wastes should be restricted. If possible they should be assigned a specific lane and overtaking should be restricted. This requires the development o f new traffic rules for hazardous waste transportations.

67

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

REFERENCES
Ashok B. Boghani, 1990, "Use o f Advanced Technologies for Improving Hazardous Waste Transportation Safety", Transportation of Hazardous Waste Materials,

Proceedings o f the National Conference on Hazardous Materials Transportation 1990. pp. 262-270.

Alaska Department o f Enviroiunental Conservation, 1986. Disposal Directory for Small Quantities o f Hazardous Waste Prepared for the Municipality o f Anchorage. Anchorage, Alaska.

Barry Johnson, 1999, "Impacts o f Hazardous Waste on Human health " book edition 1999.

Arthur D Little, Inc, 1990, "Guidance manual Characterization o f hazardous waste transportation and economic impact assessment o f hazardous waste transportation regulations, EPA", EPA/DOT hazardous Waste Transportation Interface.

Arthur D Little, Inc, 1990, "Characterization o f hazardous waste transportation and economic impact assessment of hazardous waste transportation regulations".

Environmental Protection Agency.

Canadian Petroleum Association, 1984. Disposal Guidelines for the Petroleum Industry Prepared for the Environmental Planning and Management Committee.

Carpenter, Bill, 1990. Bowspringer Kennels and Veterinary Clinic Ltd. Personal Communication. Yellowknife, NWT.

Chung-Kuo Chiang, Edmund J. Cantilli, and Stephen T. Ying, 1990, " Assessing community safety for hazardous materials transport" Transportation o f Hazardous Waste Materials, Proceedings o f the National Conference on Hazardous Materials

Transportation 1990. pp. 134-147.

68

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Canadian Council o f Resources and Environment Ministers, 1986. "The PCB Story" . Fact sheet. Toronto, Ontario.

Charles A Wentz, 1989, "Hazardous waste management" Transportation o f Hazardous Waste Materials, Proceedings o f the National Conference on Hazardous Materials Transportation 1990. pp. 104-119.

Charles Anders and James Olsten, 1990 " Risk analysis o f Hazardous Materials Transport" Transportation o f Hazardous Waste Materials, Proceedings o f the National Conference on Hazardous Materials Transportation 1990. pp. 52-61.

Citizens Environmental Coalition, 1991, "Managing Medical W aste", Fact Sheet No. Citizens Environmental Coalition, Albany, New York, 1991.

6

,

Deyle, Robert E., 1989. Hazardous Waste Management in Small Businesses: Regulating and Assisting the Smaller Generator Greenwood Press, Inc. W estport Connecticut.

Douglas K, Anthony, AlCP and John Peirson 1990, "Managing Risks o f Hazardous Materials Transportation in Santa Barbara Country " Transportation o f Hazardous Waste Materials, Proceedings of the National Conference on Hazardous Materials

Transportation 1990. pp. 120-133.

Environment Canada, 1988. "Household Hazardous Wastes." Fact Sheet. Edmonton, Alberta.

Environment

Canada,

2001.

"Hazardous

Wastes

Management

in

Canada."

(http://www.ec.gc.ca/press/2002/020709-2 b e.htm).

Environment Canada, 2001, "Transportation o f Dangerous Goods Act & Regulations, Federal Legislation." http://www.on.ec.gc.ca/pollution/fpd/hazwaste/intro-e.html.

69

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Eugene R. Russell, Sr, 1990, "Developing High-Risk scenarios and Countermeasure Ideas for Mitigation o f Hazardous Materials Incidents" Transportation o f Hazardous W aste Materials, Proceedings o f the National Conference on Hazardous Materials Transportation 1990. pp. 38-51.

Heinke, G.W. and Jeff Wong, 1990. Solid Waste Composition Study for Iqualuit, Pangnirtung, and Broughton Island o f the Northwest Territories Prepared for the Department o f Mimicipal and Community Affairs, GNWT. Yellowknife, NWT.

Helfrick, Donald,

1990. Hazardous Waste Specialist, Department o f Renewable

Resources, Pollution Control Division, GNWT. Personal Communication. Yellowknife, NWT.

Lavalin Engineers Inc., 1984. Study to Develop a Uniform Strategy for Handling Solid Wastes in the Beaufort Region Prepared for Environmental Protection Service, Environment Canada. Yellowknife, NWT.

Ministry o f Environment, Ontario, 2001, "Hazardous Waste Management in Ontario" http://www.ene.gov.on.ca/.

Marjorie K. Matthews 1990, "Risk Management in the Transportation o f Dangerous Goods- the Influence o f Public Perception" Transportation o f Hazardous Waste Materials, Proceedings of the National Conference on Hazardous Materials

Transportation 1990. pp. 34-37.

M Hadi Baaj, Suleiman Ashur, Miguel and David Fijawka, 1995, "Design o f routing networks using GIS: Applications to solid and hazardous Transportation planning". Transportation research record No. 1497. pp. 140-144.

70

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Pruss A., Giroult E., Rushbrook P, 1999, "Safe Management o f Wastes from Health-Care Activities", World Health organization, Geneva, 1999.

Richard C. Hannon, 1990, "Hazardous Materials Data: A Federal Perspective" Transportation o f Hazardous Waste Materials, Proceedings o f the National Conference on Hazardous Materials Transportation 1990. pp. 62-73.

Reid, Crowther and Partners Limited, 1980. Hazardous Wastes in Northern and Western Canada, Vol. I & II Prepared for Environment Canada.

Rutala W.A., Mayhall C.G, 1993, "Control and Hospital Epidemiology", Society for Hospital Epidemiology o f America, Printed in Leach Bisson, 1993.

Scanlon,

Raymond

D.,

1987,

"Hazardous

Materials,

Hazardous

Waste:

Local

Management options." International City Management Association, Washington, D C.

Strecher, Paul G., 1968. "The Merck Index, Eighth Ed." Merck and Company, Inc., Rahquay, N.J., USA.

Simkowitz H.J, 1990, "Adaptation o f Geographic Information Systems to Highway management". Journal o f Transportation Engineering, vol. 116, May/June 1990.

Stanley Associates Engineering Ltd., 1986. Waste Management in the North: A Discussion Paper Prepared for Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, Northern Environment Directorate. Hull, Quebec.

Stephen Paul, 1983 "Hazardous Waste Transportation" Wall Street Journal, March 1, 1983, pp. 72-80.

71

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Terry L. Novak, 1990, "Local Government Views Hazardous Materials Transport Legislation" Transportation o f Hazardous Waste Materials, Proceedings o f the National Conference on Hazardous Materials Transportation 1990. pp. 2-8.

Thompson, Neil, 1990. Department o f Renewable Resources, Pollution Control Division, GNWT. Personal Communication. Yellowknife, NWT.

Technology Resources Inc., 1989. Hazardous Waste Management Practices for Small Quantity Generators in Canada Prepared for the B.C. Ministry o f Environment. Vancouver, B.C.

United Nations Environment Programme 1989, "Basel Convention on the control o f Trans boundary movements o f hazardous wastes and their disposal adopted by the conference o f the plenipotentiaries on 22 marches 1989. (http://www.basel.int/text/cone.htm).

United

Nations

Environment

Programme

2001, . "Goal

o f Basel

Convention".

http://www.unepie.org/.

United Nations Environment Programme 2001, "Reporting o f Hazardous Wastes". http://www.basel.int/.

Wilson, David C. and Fritz Balkan, 1990. "Adapting Hazardous Waste Management to the Needs o f Developing Countries. An Overview and Guide to Action." Waste Management and Research Vol. 8 , pp. 87-97.

72

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

APPENDIX: A
The following are the hazardous wastes along with their impact on human health (Scanlon 1987, Stecher 1968),

·

Ammonia: A substance used for copying o f blueprints. Inhalation o f the
concentrated vapours cause swelling o f the respiratory tract, which can result in suffocation.

·

Arsenic: A heavy metal, which is highly toxic in most forms. Swallowing can
result in nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that can progress to shock and death. Prolonged exposure to small concentrations can result in liver and kidney damage.

·

Asbestos: A mineral fiber used as an insulating material. It can cause cancer or
asbestosis if inhaled or swallowed.

·

Barium: A substance that can be present in waste oil. All water-soluble or acidsoluble barium compounds are poisonous.

·

Benzene: A solvent that, may be a contaminant in waste oil. Exposure by
swallowing or inhalation can cause irritation o f mucous membranes, restlessness, convulsions, excitement, or depression. Death may follow from failure. Chronic exposure through skin contact may cause leukemia. respiratory

·

Benzo-pyrene: A contaminant sometimes present in waste oil. It is a potential
carcinogenic agent.

·

Beryllium: A metal that can be hazardous to human health when inhaled. Death
may result from relatively low exposures to extremely low concentrations o f the element and its salts. It is discharged by machine shops, ceramic and propellant plants, and foundries.

·

Cadmium: A heavy metal element that can accumulate in the environment.
Ingestion can result in increased salivation, choking, vomiting, abdominal pain
and diarrhea. Inhalation can result in throat dryness, coughing, headaches,

vomiting, chest pains, and extreme restlessness and irritability.

·

Caustic soda: Sodium hydroxide (Noah) is a strong alkaline substance used as
the cleaning agent in some detergents. It is corrosive to all tissues. Ingestion may

73

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

cause vomiting, and collapse. Inhalation o f the dust or mist may cause damage to the respiratory tract.

Chloroform: A solvent that is believed to cause cancer. Chromium: Chromium is a heavy metal that can cause skin irritation when
contacted. Inhalation can cause nasal irritation. Violent intestinal irritation with vomiting and diarrhea result from swallowing the substance.

Contact pesticide: A chemical that kills pests when it touches them, rather than
by being eaten (stomach poison).

Creosote: A substance commonly used as a wood preservative. Large doses may
cause intestinal irritation, cardiovascular collapse and death.

Dichlorodifluoromethane: A contaminant that may be present in waste oil. It has
little toxic action but can form toxic substances when burned.

DDT: The first chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticide (chemical name: 1, 1, 1traitorous 2, 2-bis (p- chloroprene) -ethane.). It has a half-life o f 15 years and can collect in fatty tissues o f certain animals. Poisoning results from swallowing, skin contact or inhalation. Death occurs within 24 hrs o f receiving a fatal dose o f 500mg/kg body weight. Solvents such as kerosene increase its toxicity.

Ethylene Glycol: This substance is used as antifreeze. When swallowed it can
cause depression, vomiting drowsiness, fatigue, respiratory failure, and

convulsions, which may proceed to death.

Fluorocarbons: A gas used as a propellant in aerosols. They are believed to be
modifying the ozone layer in the stratosphere thereby allowing more harmful solar radiation to reach the Earth's surface.

Heavy Metals: Metallic elements such as mercury, chromium, cadmium, arsenic,
and lead, with high molecular weights. They can damage living things at low concentrations and tend to accumulate in the food chain.

High density polyethylene: A material used to make plastic bottles that produces
toxic fumes when burned.

Hydrocarbons: Compounds found in fossil fuels, which contain carbon and
hydrogen and may be carcinogenic.

74

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

H ydrogen Sulphide (H 2 S): The gas emitted during organic decomposition that smells like rotten eggs. It is also a by-product o f oil refining and burning. It is extremely hazardous and can cause collapse, fatigue or death from respiratory failure within a few seconds after inhalation. Headaches, dizziness and nausea may appear after exposure to low concentrations. K erosene: A fuel used in lamps and stoves. Inhalation o f high concentrations can cause headaches, drowsiness, and coma. Swallowing causes vomiting, and diarrhea. Lead: Lead is a heavy metal, which is a major contaminant in waste oil. It is also present in some paints. Acute exposure may result in permanent brain damage. Chronic lead poisoning can result in weight loss, weakness and anemia. M ethyl Alcohol: Ingestion o f this substance can result in poisoning; headaches fatigue nausea or complete blindness. Phenols: Organic compounds that are by-products o f petroleum refining, tanning, textile, dye and resin manufacture. Low concentrations can cause taste and odour problems in water, higher concentration can kill aquatic life. Phosphates: Chemical compounds containing phosphorous. High concentrations in water bodies can stimulate the growth o f algae causing depletion o f oxygen in the water. Polyvinyl chloride: A commonly used plastic that releases hydrochloric acid when burned. P ropane: A compound that may be present in discarded gas cylinders. It can be a narcotic at high concentrations. S u lp h u r dioxide (SO 2 ): A heavy, pungent, colorless gas formed primarily by the combustion o f fossil fuels. It may be intensely irritating to the eyes and respiratory tract.
S u lp h u ric acid: The m ost com m only used acid in batteries. It is corrosive to all

body tissues. Inhalation o f concentrated vapor can cause serious lung damage. Contact with eyes may result in total loss o f vision. Swallowing may cause severe injury and death.

75

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Tetrachioroethylene: A solvent, which may be present in waste oil and
considered to be the most toxic o f the common chlorinated hydrocarbons. Poisoning can occur by inhalation, ingestion or skin contact. Symptoms are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headaches and liver and kidney damage.

Toluene: This is a solvent that can be present in waste oil. It may cause anemia. It
is a narcotic at high concentrations.

1 ,1 ,1-TrichIoroethane: A solvent that may be present in waste oil. It is irritating
to the eyes and mucous membranes and a narcotic at high concentrations.

Trichloroethylene: This is a solvent which is sometimes used in dry-cleaning,
and may be a contaminant in waste oil. It is a narcotic at high concentrations. Deaths have occurred after heavy exposures.

Turpentine: A commonly used solvent that is irritating to the skin and mucous
membranes. It can also cause severe kidney irritation.

Vinyl chloride: A chemical compound used in producing some plastics. It may
be a narcotic at high concentrations. It is also believed to be carcinogenic.

Xylene: A solvent that may be a contaminant in used oil. It may be a narcotic in
high concentrations.

Zinc: A contaminant that may be present in waste oil. Inhalation can cause throat
dryness, coughing, weakness, generalized aching, chills, fever, nausea, and vomiting. Ingestion may cause nausea, and vomiting.

Mercury: Mercury can be present in some paints. It is a heavy metal, which can
accumulate in the environment. Acute exposure to soluble mercury salts can cause violent corrosive effects on skin and mucous membranes, severe nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, kidney damage and death usually within
10

days.

Methylene Chloride: Used as paint thinner. It can be a narcotic in high
concentrations.

Mineral Spirits: Also called petroleum spirits. Inhalation o f high concentrations
can cause headaches, drowsiness, and fatigue. Swallowing may causes vomiting and diarrhea.

76

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

N aphtha (Petroleum Benzin): Naphtha is a commonly used solvent. Inhalation o f high concentrations can cause headaches, drowsiness, and coma. N aphthalene: Naphthalene is used in mothballs. It is also a contaminant in waste oil. Poisoning can occur from swallowing large doses, inhalation or skin adsorption. Symptoms are nausea, vomiting, headaches, fever, convulsions and fatigue. N itric oxide (NO): A gas formed by combustion under high temperature and high pressure in a gas or diesel engine. It changes into nitrogen dioxide in the ambient air. N itrogen dioxide (N 02): It is one o f the most insidious gases. Exposure can cause inflammation o f the lungs. This will only cause slight pain but the resulting tumor several days later may result in death. exposures and
200 100

ppm is dangerous for even short

ppm may be fatal.

Ozone (O3 ): A pungent, colorless, toxic gas. High concentrations cause severe irritation o f the respiratory tract and eyes. PC B 's (Polychlorinated biphenyls): A group o f toxic, persistent chemicals used in transformers and capacitors. Extensive exposure can cause chloracne, a painful and disfiguring skin condition, similar to adolescent acne. Liver damage can also result. Brief exposures may cause skin rashes, swelling eyelids, headaches or vomiting. Long exposure to PCB's in animals can severely affect reproduction, and cause cancer (Canadian Council 1986). Pentachlorophenol (penta, PC P): This is commonly used as a wood

preservative. It causes lung, liver, and kidney damage. It is more toxic in organic solvents. PE R C (Perchioroethylene): A commonly used dry-cleaning substance. It is harmful to the liver and kidneys in humans if swallowed. It may also be carcinogenic. P ersistent pesticides: Pesticides that do not break down chemically and remain in the environment after a growing season.

77

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.


