Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Industrial Engineering Publications and Research Industrial Engineering

1-1-2006

Ergonomics and effective productions systems ­ moving from reactive to proactive development. Experience from a collaboration between the Swedish National Institute for Working Life and Volvo Powertrain
W. Patrick Neumann
Ryerson University, pneumann@ryerson.ca

J. Winkel

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/ie Part of the Ergonomics Commons, Industrial Engineering Commons, and the Systems Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Neumann, W.P., Winkel, J. Ergonomics and effective productions systems ­ moving from reactive to proactive development. Experience from a collaboration between the Swedish National Institute for Working Life and Volvo Powertrain (2006). Skövde, Sweden. National Institute for Working Life popular report. `INFO 2005:7'.

This Popular Press is brought to you for free and open access by the Industrial Engineering at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Industrial Engineering Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Faculty of Engineering, Architecture and Science

Industrial Engineering Publications and Research
______________________________________________________________________________ Ryerson University Year 2006

______________________________________________________________________________

Ergonomics and effective production systems
Moving from reactive to proactive development

-

Human Factors Engineering Lab, Ryerson University www.ryerson.ca/hfe

W. Patrick Neumann And J. Winkel

For a more in depth look on this subject, please see: Neumann, W.P., Ekman, M. And Winkel, J. (2009) Integrating ergonomics into system development ­ The Volvo Powertrain Case. Applied Ergonomics, v40(3):527-537 Neumann, W.P., Winkel, J., Medbo, L., Magneberg, R. and Mathiassen, S.E., 2006. Production system design elements influencing productivity and ergonomics - A case study of parallel and serial flow strategies. International Journal of Operations & Production Management, 26(8): 904-923. Neumann, W.P., 2004. Production Ergonomics: Identifying and managing risk in the design of high performance work systems, Lund Technical University, Lund, 159 ISBN 91-628-6287-1

Ergonomics and effective production systems
­ moving from reactive to proactive development
Experience and results from a collaboration between the Swedish National Institute for Working Life and Volvo Powertrain in Skövde, Sweden

National Institute for Working Life

The National Institute for Working Life is a national centre of knowledge about working life issues. The Institute is commissioned by the Swedish government to carry on research and development, disseminate information, and hold advanced, specialised training courses. The institute's prime objective and mission is to contribute actively to a working life that offers good conditions and development opportunities for women and men. We work to promote a healthy working environment that is adapted to people's different physical and mental needs and capacity. This we do in collaboration with the social partners and professionals who are actively involved in issues concerning working life. Our research focuses on areas such as occupational health, the labour market and employment, labour legislation, work organisation, ergonomics and strain, physical and chemical health risks, integration and diversity, and development processes in working life. We endeavour to ensure that our research is multidisciplinary and benefits people in their working lives. Please visit www.arbetslivsinstitutet.se for more information. Here you can read about current research, subscribe to our newsletters, borrow books and other literature from our library, order books or download reports. You will also find the addresses to our offices and e-mail links to our 400 staff. Since 2002, the production ergonomics research team at the Institute for Working Life, in close collaboration with Volvo Powertrain in Skövde and Chalmers University of Technology, has investigated the opportunities for creating industrial workplaces that are both effective and healthy. This project, which is funded by Vinnova, has resulted in a series of research reports as well as a doctoral thesis. ­ see reference list on page 11.

Contents

3

Ergonomics and effective production systems

5

Production development within Volvo Powertrain

6

Experiences of the transition from parallel to serial production

8

Simulation as a tool Material exposure and packaging

9

Advice for practitioners

11

References

Ergonomics and effective production systems
The competitiveness of Swedish

manufacturing industry is crucial for our current and future welfare. To follow the development within production technology and other productivity-related fields is an important task for every manager. Automation is one type of measure, changing work organization is another. The main issue is to maximize the working time that generates added value while eliminating or reducing operations that do not generate value. During the past decade, a change or return to serial production has become apparent in Sweden. In the same period we have seen improvements in productivity, but also increased reporting of occupational health problems. Disorders and illness give rise to costs related to loss of competence, production and quality deficits, as well as the hiring and training of new staff. This has led to an increased focus on ergonomics and other work environment factors. However, these are usually limited to management at the individual level including workstation redesign.

Corporate Strategy MANAGERS

Design ENGINEERS

Production System

Risk Factors OPERATORS Quality Productivity Disorders

Occupational Safety and Health Service

Fig. 1. Strategic and design based decisions are of importance for productivity and quality as well as disorders. The line organization in itself deals with issues about productivity and quality, while illhealth lies within the companies' Occupational Safety and Health Service sector. In an ideal situation, even the ergonomic risk factors behind ill-health are considered in production strategy, design and the layout of the production system.

3

For several years, the National Institute for Working Life has monitored work at Volvo Powertrain in Skövde. During 2002, a reorganization was carried out with which the earlier model with 'docks' for parallel production (left picture) with an assembly worker in each one, was replaced by a serial production system with an assembly line (right picture).

The concept that strategic decisions about production have implications for work environment is getting increased support.
The production system design is

determined in a process with several stages (see fig 1 page 3). First to be discussed are production strategies, which are transformed into a production design and finally into a production system. By this process, the main features of the work environment and ergonomics are determined. Feed-back regarding quality and productivity in the production system is managed within the line organization. On the other hand, there is often a lack of tools for both predicting and solving ergonomic problems

during the design phase. Emerging shortcomings ­ leading to disorders in some form ­ are solved, when possible, reactively by the occupational safety and health service. This process does not necessarily have any organizational connection to production system design. Vital experience does not reach those that design the systems and significant improvements are not realised proactively.
The challenge is to integrate ergono-

In several studies, the National

mics into every phase in the design of the production system and thus to give ergonomics a proactive role in planning. In this way, the impact of production system design on ergonomics can be predicted and adjusted before changes are implemented.

Institute for Working Life in collaboration with Volvo Powertrain, have investigated how ergonomics can and should be integrated into a company's daily development work. Thus production and ergonomics may be combined to develop a sustainable production system. Thanks to Volvo Powertrain, much of the experience and knowledge gained from our co-operation can now be published and discussed from a more general perspective.

4

Production development within Volvo Powertrain

During 2002, Volvo Powertrain in Skövde carried out a redesign of production. This involved changing earlier parallel assembly of engines to a serial production system, a so-called line. There were several reasons for the company changing the production system, and in many respects these were the same as those guiding other companies. Material supply might be facilitated, train-

ing times shortened, and future changes might be facilitated as these then only have to be carried out at one workstation. In addition, it was assumed the cost per unit could be reduced. In this context, a research project was carried out at the car engine factory in Skövde with the aim of investigating how ergonomics can be integrated into the company's development process.

The purpose of the project was to investigate approaches to helping companies develop their own capacity in the design of sustainable production systems considering both ergonomics and efficiency.

Fig. 2. The Volvo Corporation has developed a `Global Development Process' GDP, which describes development processes with regard to new products and production systems. The built-in check-points, `gates', cannot be passed until all demands at the previous level have been met. Volvo Powertrain in Skövde, in the light of the described research project, has begun to integrate ergonomics and working environment in the GDP.

5

Experiences of the transition from parallel to serial production
Volvo Powertrain in Skövde manufactures diesel engines for trucks. A production system with a number of parallel workstations, or 'docks', was replaced in 2002 by serial line production. The National Institute for Working Life in collaboration with Chalmers University of Technology has monitored these changes and documented their advantages and disadvantages in terms of ergonomics and productivity.

The trend in Sweden today is towards

more serial organized production. The parallel systems have potential for a higher effectiveness, but sometimes it appears that this is difficult to achieve. Thus, a serial flow is generally chosen. Parallel and serial productions each have advantages and disadvantages. There are also hybrids of these organizational models, but for the sake of clarity the more pure forms are presented. A change from parallel to serial production involves opportunities and pitfalls for both productivity and ergonomics. On the negative side there is an increased risk for the development of musculoskeletal disorders as well as reduced autonomy for operators. Work along the line is split up into station cycle times of equal duration. However, the division of such is never perfect. This leads to `balance losses' through assembly stations that become bottlenecks. Furthermore, the operators' natural variation in

the performance of their work cycles also leads to system losses ­ when a worker that has finished a quick cycle has to wait for another that has a slow cycle. These system losses can involve considerable waiting times and require extra personnel. The parallel flow system, on the other hand, is less vulnerable to these losses. Unplanned interruptions along the line occur due to the `system' and `balance' losses. Operators regard these interruptions negatively even if they, in physiological, terms may imply an opportunity for recuperation.
With a parallel-organized production the same operator carries out several tasks, and thereby attains a more varied work content, greater competence and a better overview of the system. In contrast, when the same tasks are spread along a line the resulting cycle time becomes much shorter. The cycle time is often reduced from hours to minutes or even seconds. Furthermore there may be

uneven distribution of workload between stations along the line resulting in different risk levels at each station (see fig 3). In parallel production, the controlsystem may allow for operators to work ahead of schedule. When the production quota is reached, time can be used for other things, for instance, administration, training or a longer break. This means there can be an incentive for higher work pace under these circumstances. The same incentive is not found in a system organized so that work continues until the shift has ended.
In the earlier parallel production at

Volvo Powertrain the operators worked alone, each one with a dock of his/her own. The new line system allowed opportunities for operators to communicate and support each other, even as their actual control over work pace was reduced. It is important to remember that the social work environment depends on both the organization and flow of work.

6

Parallel Serial
Number of repetitions Antal rep et itioner Work-stations

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13 14 15

16 17

18

Fig. 3. The distribution of repetitive tasks (nut running) becomes uneven with a transition to a serial flow ­ a risk factor that is a consequence of a production engineering decision.

The staffing of the two systems was about the same in the transition from parallel to serial production. The personnel responsible for picking material kits in parallel production were no longer needed in the serial system. On the other hand, there arose a need for extra operators along the line to accommodate disturbances. These two personnel needs largely cancelled each other out at Volvo Powertrain.

50 %

Fellowship Stimulating work Independence Work-load Breaks Variation Working posture

Worse

No difference

Better

Fig. 4. The operators' ergonomic assessments about the change from parallel to serial production system.

Table 1. Advantages and disadvantages experienced by Volvo Powertrain in moving from parallel dock to serial line production.
CHANGE

PRODUCTIVITY
+ ADVANTAGES ­ DISADVANTAGES Inflexible and vulnerable to disturbances. More system, handling, balance and variant losses. Extra operators needed to handle disturbances. Many product variants can create space shortages and extra material handling. Less flexible, more space, buffers and work stations needed.

ERGONOMICS
+ ADVANTAGES System disturbances may offer physiological rest. None. ­ DISADVANTAGES System disurbances are not perceived as pauses. Reduced physical variation and increased repetitiveness Reduced work content. Reduced job control. More walking. More difficult getting parts from big crates

SERIAL ORGANISATION

Easier to control and manage work. Less training needed per station. Operators work throughout the shift. Conventional continuous supply which often implies reduced cost. Complete assembly equipment not needed at each workstation.

SHORTER CYCLES

WORK ORGANISATION/ WORK FLOW MATERIAL SUPPLY

No incentive to rush. Teamwork is encouraged. Easier to introduce part specific lift assists.

FACTORY LAYOUT

Some stations have lower work loads.

Some stations have higher work loads.

7

Simulation as a tool
Computer aided simulation can be a tool for studying the productivity and ergonomic aspects of a proposed flow strategy in the earliest phases of production system design. The simulation studies conducted in this project included both productivity and ergonomics aspects. For example, the effect of an operator working at half-speed; a comon practical situation when rehabilitating injured operators. Another ergonomic-related goal that was tested is the possibility for the operators to decide for themselves when to take a break (see fig. 5). The figure shows a comparison between a hybrid-system (a mixture of line and dock designs), with six operators working in a team, and a serial production system where the operators move themselves along the line during the assembly work. The concept of taking a `break as desired' included a limitation of maximum 10 minutes per break. The study shows that the hybrid-system achieves the best results, irrespective of the break taking patterns or if an individual operator works at half speed. It can also be seen that the serial system is more vulnerable for other disruptions. A hybrid solution has now been implemented for the assembly of Volvo Powertrain's new diesel engines.
Produc tion c apacity Hybrid system

Serial system

Scheduled breaks Break as desired opportunity

Fig. 5. Ergonomics in simulated flows. A comparison of production systems when a 'break as desired opportunity' is introduced.

Material exposure and packaging
Traditionally the materials used by the operators lie exposed in large packages, often on pallets along the line. With an increased number of product variants this has led to a problem of space, bad working postures in order to pick up some components and a lot of walking time (time-losses) including load carrying. In Japanese industry, the size of the packages are often smaller and the frontages narrower but deeper. A study carried out at Volvo Powertrain showed great advantages of the Japanese model with regard to effectiveness and flexibility. The resource consumption for handling the materials could be reduced by half. In addition, the workload on the back and shoulders could be considerably reduced. Thus, the study demonstrates a material supply approach that yields advantages for both production and ergonomics ­ a `win-win' situation (see Fig 8, page 10).

Fig. 6. Current material exposure with broad material frontages induces extensive walking time, in this example more than 30 m per cycle, with following losses in value-adding time.

Fig. 7. Alternative material exposure after Japanese model with narrower and deeper frontages gives shorter walking-time, in this example 16 m per cycle, less load carrying, and less losses in value-adding time.

8

Advice for practitioners
Practical solutions that work well at one workplace may not work at another. A solution that works well today may not work tomorrow. There are no simple answers. Good ergonomics is a 'perishable' commodity that must always be placed on the agenda as an integrated part of the continuous improvement of the production system.

Our studies at Volvo Powertrain and other places emphasise some prerequisites for generating competitive production systems with good work environments. These recommendations require first and foremost a desire on the part of the company to develop a sustainable production system in which production and ergonomics are optimised.
Create a process of change that is rooted in the entire organization. It is especially important that management is integrated in this process. Avoid a process based on separate ergonomic teams as these are vulnerable to organisational changes. The process needs support. It takes

Emphasize the process, not the pro-

blem. Don't get too caught up in particular design problems ­ focus instead on improving a design process that can handle both this and future problems better. Think long-term.
Workshops and training appear to be good methods for involving those that have to act in the decisionmaking process. Give priority to training about the effective integration of production system design and working environment. Shift the responsibility for the practi-

tion and integration of ergonomics in the development of production systems. There are many tools that facilitate this integration and new ones are continually being developed.
Specify goals that can be quantified

with the measurement tools related to known risk factors. Proposed changes should then reflect specified goals.
Varied tasks are of central impor-

cal work on work environment from the occupational health service to the line organization and production planning department.
Measurements provide information.

time to find the right way of working that supports the development of a production system that is both effective and ergonomic. This process needs continuous internal support.

Quantification of risk factors provides concrete information that can be used as support for the communica-

tance. If effectiveness is increased by reducing the `porosity' of a work task then work will become more intensive (see box page 10). Under these circumstances any gains may ultimately be lost through increased sick-leave (see fig 8, page 10: `Phantom profits') . A variety of tasks can help ensure that no single body part becomes overloaded.

9

Navigate wisely between different

goals in order to create a system that is sustainable in the long term. This sometimes means balancing between ergonomics and productivity goals (see fig 8). This process is facilitated by a `navigator' within the company that is widely accepted among the majority of the groups involved. `Navigating' is all about re-evaluating situations, finding new ways, new partners and systematically building up an understanding for the importance of integrating ergonomics in the regular development process.
Hybrid solution. The transition from

+
Productivity

'Phantom Profits'

Synergy/ 'win-win'

a non-team based parallel system to a serial team-based line implies both advantages and disadvantages regarding productivity and work-environment/ergonomics. The actual consequences for the individual company depend on the local circumstances. It is possible that hybrid solutions with teamwork and a mix of serial and parallel flow elements have the greatest potential today.
Working proactively by integrating

­

Loss

Hidden Gains

­
Ergonomics

Fig. 8. A simple two-dimensional model of the navigator's maneuvering space. Synergy effects are achieved if both the ergonomic and production aspects are optimized together. Good ergonomics can give rise to 'hidden gains' that are not immediately visible in the productivity statistics. Efforts to improved productivity that result in poorer ergonomics may not reach their anticipated profits ('Phantom Profits').

+

Facts Porosity A work period includes time that increases the value of the product (valueadding time) and time that does not increase the value of the product. The latter, for instance, applies to the handling of product components and tools as well as walking time and breaks of various kinds. Often this non-value adding time involves opportunities for recovery. This is usually called the `porosity' of the workday. Our studies show that work at the assembly line involves greater `porosity' than that in the dock due to interruptions. From this perspective the line thereby offers an ergonomic improvement. However, this may change with time as production engineers successively succeed in eliminating losses along the line. One can thus end up with a `phantom profit' (top left square, see fig. 8).

ergonomic concepts in the design process, offers better, cheaper and more effective solutions. This advice aims at reducing troublesome and costly reactive measures in your company through proactive initiatives.

10

References
Neumann W P. "Production Ergonomics: Identifying and managing risk in the design of high performance work systems". Doctoral Thesis, Lund Technical University, Lund. ISBN 91-628-6287-1. 2004. www.arbetslivinstitutet.se/biblioteket Neumann W P, Winkel J, Medbo L, Mathiassen S E, Magneberg R. Design Elements Influencing Productivity and Ergonomics in a Case Study of Parallel and Serial Flow Production Strategies, submitted. Neumann W P, Ekman Philips M, Winkel J. Integrating Ergonomics into Production System Development ­ Moving from Reactive to Proactive, submitted. Palmerud G, Forsman M, Mathiassen S E, Neumann P, Winkel J. Postures and movements in line-based and parallel motor assembly systems. Fifth International Scientific Conference on Prevention of Work-related Musculoskeletal Disorders. ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Abstract Book Vol II, pp 519-520, 2004. Medbo P, Neumann W P. Samband mellan ergonomi och teknisk prestanda. Exempel på en diskret händelsestyrd simuleringsstudie. Teknisk Rapport, Chalmers tekniska högskola, 2005. Neumann W P and Medbo P. Can assembly performance and work environment be jointly optimized? An example discreet event simulation study in Human aspects of advanced manufacturing: Agility and Hybrid Automation. 2005. San Diego, USA. Neumann W P and Winkel J. Organisational design and the (dis)integration of human factors in production system development in Human aspects of advanced manufacturing: Agility and Hybrid Automation. 2005. San Diego, USA. Neumann W P, Kadefors R, Winkel J. Symposium Introduction: Corporate strategy, production system design, and musculoskeletal health. IEA, Korea, August 2003, Proceedings, 4 pages, 2003. Neumann W P, Winkel J, Magneberg R, Mathiassen S E, Forsman M, Chaikumarn M, Palmerud G, Medbo P, Medbo L. (2003) Ergonomics and productivity consequences in adopting a line-based production system. IEA, Korea, August 2003, Proceedings, 4 pages, 2003. Neumann P W, Ekman Philips M, Winkel J. Initiation of an Evidence Based Process for Joint Optimisation of Ergonomics and Productivity in Engine Assembly. In: H. Luczak and K. J. Zink (Editors), Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium on Human Factors in Organizational Design and Management, Aachen, Germany, October 1­2, pp 741-46, 2003. Oxenburgh M, Neumann P, Winkel J. Integrating health costs within production economics. Fifth International Scientific Conference on Prevention of Work-related Musculoskeletal Disorders. ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Abstract Book Vol II, pp 527-528, 2004. Neumann W P, Winkel J. Workshop: Making ergonomic intervention research effective. Fifth International Scientific Conference on Prevention of Work-related Musculoskeletal Disorders. ETH Zurich, Switzerland. Abstract Book Vol II, pp 629-630, 2004. Wänström C, Medbo L. The impact of material feeding on assembly systems performance ­ a comparative study between Japan and Sweden. 18th International Conference on Production Research, Salerno, Italy, 2005. Edberg K U. Neumann W P, Medbo L. Materialfasader och förpackningar vid manuell montering i japansk och svensk fordonsindustri (Material facades and packaging for manual assembly in Japanese and Swedish automotive industry). Produktionslogistik 2005 ­ PLAN networks annual research and applications conference, Borås, SE. ISBN 91-631-7468-5.

Ergonomics and effective production systems ­ moving from reactive to proactive development This brochure can be ordered for free from the National Institute for Working Life, phone: +46 8-619 69 00, or e-mail: forlag@arbetslivsinstitutet.se Kindly refer to 'Info 2005:07'. The brochure can be downloaded as a pdf file at: www.arbetslivsinstitutet.se/publikationer/ Contact: Jørgen Winkel, professor National Institute for Working Life phone: +46 31-50 16 00 e-mail: jorgen.winkel@arbetslivsinstitutet.se Patrick Neuman, Ph.D., Eur.Erg. Ryerson University phone: +1 416-979-5000 e-mail: pneumann@ryerson.ca

© National Institute for Working Life 2005 Photo: Patrick Neumann and Jørgen Winkel Production: AGADEM AB, Göteborg Graphic design: Johanna Åkerberg Print: Lenanders Tryckeri AB, Kalmar Info 2005:07

Is it possible to create workplaces that are effective, profitable and healthy at

the same time? Studies carried out jointly by the Swedish National Institute for Working Life, Volvo Powertrain and the Swedish Agency for Innovation Systems supports this. This brochure is about research results, experiences and possible tools.

