The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

Susan Ferguson
Ryerson University

digital.library.ryerson.ca/object/253

Please Cite: Ferguson, S. (1999). The radical ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft. Canadian Journal of Political Science, 32(3), 427-450. doi:10.1017/S0008423900013913

library.ryerson.ca

The RadicalIdeas of Mary Wollstonecraft

SUSAN FERGUSON

Ryerson Polytechnic University

Introduction According to the standard narrative of feminist intellectual history, modem feminism in the English-speaking world begins with Mary Wollstonecraft's bold appeals for women's inclusion in a public life overwhelmingly dominated by men. Specific attention is drawn to her theories of character-formation and the importance of public education for women in nurturing the female faculty for reason.' More recent scholarship, however, suggests this portrait of Wollstonecraft is unduly narrow, since it inspires a somewhat facile categorization of the first modem feminist as a liberal reformer and thus fails to elucidate the breadth of her social vision and the extent to which her ideas threatened to destabilize the ruling elite in late-eighteenth-century Britain. Rooting their analyses in a wide range of Wollstonecraft's writings, feminist scholars now maintain a greater sensitivity to the historical and biographical context informing her work. As a result, a richer, more nuanced portrait of this early feminist emerges, one that convincingly attributes to her ideas a spirit of radicalism-that is, a commitment to push beyond the limited legislative reforms traditionally associated with the label "liberal feminism."2
1 on Wollstonecraft's Between 1951 and the early 1970s, many of the commentaries in the movementfor radicaldemocracybut stressedher life noted her participation reformist aspirations, ignoring her radical socio-economic critique. See, for A CriticalBiography(Lawrence: example,RalphM. Wardle, Mary Wollstonecraft: A Universityof KansasPress, 1951); G. R. Stirling Taylor,Mary Wollstonecraft: Studyin Economicsand Romance (1911; New York:HaskellHouse, 1969); H. R. A Sketch(New York:HaskellHouse, 1971); and Edna James,Mary Wollstonecraft: Her Life and Times(London:Dent, 1971). Nixon, Mary Wollstonecraft: See, for example, BarbaraTaylor,Eve and the New Jerusalem (London: Virago, 1983); Elissa Guralnick, "Radical Politics in Mary Wollstonecraft'sA Vindication of the Rights of Woman," in Mary Wollstonecraft,A Vindication of the Rights of Woman,edited by Carol Poston (2d ed.; New York: W. W. Norton, 1988), 308-16; and VirginiaMuller, "WhatCan LiberalsLearnfrom MaryWoll-

2

Susan Ferguson,8 Howie Ave., Toronto,OntarioM4M 2J1.
CanadianJournal of Political Science / Revue canadienne de science politique XXXII:3 (September/septembre 1999) 427-50 ? 1999 CanadianPolitical Science Association (1'Associationcanadiennede science politique) and/et la Societe qu6becoisede science politique

428

SUSANFERGUSON

These revised accountsgenerallyattribute radical Wollstonecraft's her and condemnationof the pervadingeconomic spirit to recognition and social inequitiesof her day. In linkingthe projectof women's emancipationto a broadersocio-economic critique,they suggest, Wollstonecraftpoliticizestwo institutions centralto liberaltheory:class andfamily. In the process, she not only distinguishesherself from otherswithinthe classical liberaltradition butalso challengesthe very separation of public For some, and privatespheresaroundwhich thattradition is constructed. this featureof Wollstonecraft's thoughtis evidence of the radicalpotential thatliberalismholds for feminism;for othersit opens the doorto subTaylor vertingthe liberalparadigmaltogether.In fact, historianBarbara considersWollstonecraft's treatmentof class and family to be evidence of a socialist subtext,and creditsher with paving the way for the emergence of the utopianbrandof socialistfeminismsome 30 yearslater.3 Efforts to draw attention to Wollstonecraft's rebelliousness and the distance between her ideas and classical liberalism are long overdue, and prove a valuable point of departurefor discussions of lateeighteenth-centuryfeminism. But, in their enthusiasmto highlightthe potential subversivenessof Wollstonecraft'sfeminism, many scholars have lapsed into an uncritical celebration of the possibilities of that feminism. As a result, some have attributed to Wollstonecraftpolitical commitments she did not hold while obscuring the limits of the feminist ideals she did promote. This article assesses Wollstonecraft'spoliticization of family and class through an exploration of her (incipient) critique of political economy. That critique, I suggest, rests squarely on what is, essentially, a liberal socio-economic model: the free-marketactivities of independentcommodity producers(or, in Marxist terminology,a model of petty-bourgeois economic competition).4This model is predicated
stonecraft?"and Wendy Gunther-Canada, "MaryWollstonecraft's'Wild Wish': Confounding Sex in the Discourse on Political Rights," in Maria J. Falco, ed., Feminist Interpretationsof Mary Wollstonecraft(University Park:The Pennsylvania State UniversityPress, 1996) 47-60; 61-84, respectively. Taylor,Eve and the New Jerusalem, 5-6. Admittedly,the proto-socialistposition on Wollstonecraftrepresentsa relativelythin currentof feminist thought,but it is a currentthat has passed without challenge. Nor are its representatives insignificant: BarbaraTaylor, for example, is widely accepted as the authorityon nineteenth-centurysocialist feminism. As well, it can be argued, casting Wollstonecraft's work in this light reinforcesa more pervasiveclaim that the demandfor women's equality is, in itself, always and everywheredestabilizing-a position articulated early on by Zillah Eisenstein(The Radical Futureof LiberalFeminism [New York: Longman, 1981]) but evident in more recent scholarship.See, for example, Pamela GrandeJensen, ed., Finding a New Feminism:Rethinkingthe Woman Rowman& Littlefield,1996). Question for LiberalDemocracy(Lanham: For a discussion of the "petty-bourgeois"model and its centralityfor both Classical Political Economy and early critics of that tradition, see David McNally, Against the Market (London:Verso, 1993).

3

4

Abstract. Recent scholarshipon Mary Wollstonecraftportraysher as either a liberal who disruptsthe boundariesbetween public and privatespheres or as a proto-socialist paving the road for a class-based feminism. Neither of these characterizationsadequately captures the radical quality of her work. A close study of her views on class and family place her squarely within the liberal traditionof political economy. While she politicizes these institutions and, in so doing represents a threat to the lateBritish ruling classes, she neither disruptsthe basic tenets of libernineteenth-century alism nor seriously anticipatesthe class insights of socialist feminism. Resume. Les 6tudes recentes consacrees a Mary Wollstonecraft la decrivent, soit comme une critique des theses liberales sur la separation des spheres priv6e et publique, soit comme une proto-socialiste ayant pos6 les jalons d'un f6minisme de classe. Or ni l'une ni l'autre de ces conceptions ne rend compte ad6quatementde la veritablesignification de son oeuvre. Une analyse plus approfondiede ses id6es sur les classes sociales et la famille d6montreque ces dernieresappartiennent clairementa la traditionde l'economie politique lib6rale. Bien que cette auteureait mis en lumiere la dimension politique de ces institutions, ce qui constituait en tant que tel un discours inquietantpour les classes dirigeantesbritanniquesde la fin du 19e siecle, elle n'a, ni le caracterede remis en cause les principes fondamentauxdu lib6ralisme,ni discernm classe du f6minismesocialiste.

on the sanctity of private property and a concomitant naturalization of the distinction between private and public realms. While welcoming the general point that Wollstonecraft is no mere liberal in the classical sense, I propose two qualifications to the more recent interpretations of her radicalism. First, Wollstonecraft's critique of class and familyshort of though trenchant and politically explosive in her day-stops these institutions the of to liberalism; second, the challenging centrality and the feminism of between Wollstonecraft's feminism relationship the utopian socialists 20 years after her death is marked as much by rupture as by continuity. To develop these points we need, first, to clarify a few essential terms. Property, Family and Society: Liberal and Socialist Views5 Classical liberalism developed in response to the quintessentially capitalist era differentiation of economic power from political power. That is, economic power came increasingly to depend upon private property and its utilization in the market, not on public title and office.6 Classical liberalism sought to explain and justify an economic sphere composed

5

6

The discussion that follows is necessarily, if regrettably,brief. I have tried to elucidate the key distinctionsbetween socialism and liberalism, as they apply to the issues I raise around Wollstonecraft'spolitics. For more in-depth analysis, see StuartHall, "The State in Question" and David Held, "CentralPerspectiveson the Modem State" in GregorMcLennan,David Held and StuartHall, eds., The Idea of the Moder State (Philadelphia:Open University Press, 1984) 1-28; 29-79, respectively. See Ellen Meiksins Wood, "The Separationof the 'Economic' and the 'Political' in Capitalism,"New Left Review 127 (1981), 66-95.

430

SUSANFERGUSON

of (competitive) individualpropertyowners who were also male heads of households. It begins by defining the economy and family as unchanging universal features of human life; these are, in other words, natural spheres. The activities each encompasses are treated as selfregulating, with the economy operating in accordance to the laws of competition based on privatepropertyand the family adheringto the moral-social code of patriarchal authority. Individual freedom is expressed in and throughthese economic and familial relations,or civil society. That freedom, however, needs to be protected-the task of a thirdinstitution,the state. Early liberaltheory thus presentsthe state as the guarantor of rights and liberties appropriateto ownership and exchange. Whereas the state is a public authority,freedom can only be guaranteed,from the liberal point of view, if the essentially private natureof the economy and the family is respected.7 Two distinguishing features of classical liberal thought can be highlighted. First, liberalism is premised on the distinction between public and private realms of activities. In fact, the liberal project of emancipation depends entirely on maintaining the optimal balance between the two; whateverthe nature of the interaction,without both sides of the equationtherecan be no freedom. The second definingfeature of classical liberalismflows from the first:because the family and the economy are private and self-regulating, the social relations (of gender, class and race) that comprise these institutions are either ignored or are presumedto be manifestationsof individualpreference or ability. As such, they may be subject to a moral critique, but any challenge to inequality in the private sphere that fails to respect and preserve the private, self-regulating,natureof these relations is essentially illiberal. On the other hand, classical socialism as it developed in the nineteenth century rejects both the privatizationand naturalizationof the family and the economy.8 It points instead to the essentially historical natureof each set of social relations, and in so doing uncovers the inequality on which each is premised. That is, family and economy are conditionedby, and representative of, changing social relationswhich develop, in turn, according to the ongoing conflicts and compromises of class forces. Ratherthan expressions of naturallaws, class, gender
7 See C. B. MacPherson, The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke (London:Oxford University Press, 1962). As critics of liberalism have convincingly argued, the state is also instrumentalin reinforcing the structureand relations of the family (see Carole Pateman,The Sexual Contract [Stanford:StanfordUniversityPress, 1988]). Classical socialism here refers to the nineteenth-centuryutopian and scientific socialists. See George Lichtheim,The Origins of Socialism (London:Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1968).

8

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

431

and race relations (and their inequalities) broadly express the socioeconomic interestsof the dominantclass of propertyowners. The state, far from being the neutralprotectorof freedom, works to reproducethe conditions of that domination.In historicizingthe economy and family in this way, classical socialism challenges the liberal thesis of selfregulation,9thereby rejectingthe notion that the privatesphere is free, or even fully distinct, from the public sphere. The very dichotomy of state and civil society on which liberal thought is based must be transcended if the socialist definition of emancipation is to prevail. And this can only occur if the basis of that distinction in private property and class exploitationis transcendedas well. Where Does Wollstonecraft Fit In? SituatingWollstonecraftwithin the movementfor radicaldemocracyat the end of the nineteenthcentury,BarbaraTaylor,VirginiaMuller and others point to the political economic critique that underwrote that movement. As with her contemporaries,they suggest, at the heart of Wollstonecraft'segalitariansocial vision stands a hostility to the dominant forms of property.In fact, some contend, she pushes beyond the limits of her contemporaries'political radicalismby extending that critique to the family. Wollstonecraftis portrayedin these accounts either as a liberal who disrupts the public/privatedichotomy (and thereby proves the elasticity and, some argue, the inherentlysubversivepotential of the liberal paradigm);or, as a sort of proto-socialist-a postliberal who incorporatesaspects of socialism into her work and ultimately bridgesthe two paradigms.10 Neither of these characterizations,however, accurately captures the essence of Wollstonecraft'sradicalism. While attributing the subversive quality of her work to her critiqueof political economy, current accounts offer surprisinglylittle detailed explorationof thatcritique.In taking a closer look at Wollstonecraft'seconomic views, I place particular emphasis on the ways in which she qualifies her hostility to prop9 Not all feminists agree that socialism offers a critical analysis of the family. Many reject it as inherentlyhostile to women's interests-more of an obstacle than an avenue to liberation.Others,however, criticize socialists for incorporating sexist assumptionsand ignoring the issue of women's oppression,but remain convinced that the basic principles and methodology developed within socialism have a great deal to offer women. These feminists have done ground-breaking work on analyzing women's oppression from a socialist perspective in a nonreductionistmanner,and have immeasurablyenrichedthe socialist tradition.See, for example, the work of Dorothy Smith, Pat and Hugh Armstrong,Stephanie Coontz and Himani Bannerji. Taylor, Eve and the New Jerusalem, 5-7, 17; Muller, "What Can Liberals "The Same Subject Continued," 211Learn?"49, 55-56; and Gunther-Canada, 12.

10

432

SUSANFERGUSON

erty. Her target is not property in general but aristocratic forms of property.She in fact endorses moderatelysized privateholdings (along with the class divisions underwritingthese). This advocacy of private propertyand class reflects the economic and social priorities of competitive independentcommodity producers,the social class at the heart of the classical liberaleconomic model. But Wollstonecraft's liberalism is not "merely" economic. The competitive, capitalist economy has historically rested on a particular configurationof domestic relations: a nuclear household headed by a male breadwinnerand managedby a female caretakerin the dual roles It is precisely this domestic structure that informs of wife and mother."l Wollstonecraft's work. Rather than politicizing class and family in a way that challenges the separationof public and private spheres, her programme for female emancipation assumes these institutions are of the family necessary, good and, indeed, natural.Her naturalization leads her to argue, despite an openness to women's economic independence, that freedom is fundamentallyabout middle-class women fulfilling their duties as wives and mothers. And, against those who claim she speaks for and to all women, I suggest that Wollstonecraft's of class leaves her no feminism is in fact class-based;her naturalization the women. for of strategy emancipation working-class Despite egalitarian sentiments, Wollstonecraft ends up advocating the very oppressive conditions working-class women must struggle against. The class limits of such an approach are most clearly grasped when her views are compared to those of a near-contemporary,the earlynineteenth-century utopiansocialist, William Thompson.Thus, in economic and social relations,this early feminist remainsfirmly withinthe liberaltradition.Her radicalismis based neitherin a peculiarlysocialist critiqueof political economy nor in any disruptionof the public/private dichotomyon which liberalismrests.12
11 The literature on the historical and theoretical relationship between nuclear households and capitalism is vast. While early articles were often marredby an uncriticalfunctionalism,more recent work is better attunedto the contradictory natureof social processes. Still, the most convincing accountsof this relationship are historical; even if capitalism does not, strictly speaking, require a nuclear household and sexual division of labour, such domestic relationsonly developed with the beginning of capitalism.Many of the seminal articleson households and capitalismare reproducedin RosemaryHennessy and Chrys Ingraham,eds., Materialist Feminism: A Reader in Class, Difference, and Women's Lives (New York: Routledge, 1997). For an excellent historical account see Bonnie J. Fox, "The FeministChallenge:A Reconsiderationof Social Inequalityand Economic Development," in Robert J. Prym and Bonnie J. Fox, eds., From Culture to Power: The Sociology of English Canada (Toronto:Oxford University Press, 1989), 120-77. I am not suggesting Wollstonecraftdoes not politicize both class and family, but simply that she politicizes them by way of a moral critique.However significant

12

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

433

While I position Wollstonecraftsquarely within the liberal paradigm, I am not merely reasserting the standardaccount of her work. Indeed, I am challenging overly rigid readings of liberalism, though from a differentperspective than those I criticize. Wollstonecraftdoes liberal views on the issues of famhave strong ties to paradigmatically ily and political economy; but such positions can, and do, co-exist with a certainkind of radicalism.That radicalismis based neitherin a peculiarly (proto-)socialisteconomic critique, nor in a potentialto collapse the distinctionbetween public and privatespheres;it is based in what I will terma social radicalism-a radicalpolitics thatdisruptsstatusquo notions of governanceand authority.The political economic critiqueof element of this radicalismas aristocratic propertyforms is an important it pushes liberalismtowardthe logical limits of its premises. But it does so in a period politically unripe for such a logic-unripe because the liberal ruling class (the bourgeoisie), althougheconomically powerful, has not yet gained political ascendancy over the old ruling class, the aristocracy.It is radical to call for equality of propertyand women's education in a period when these demands would, if granted,seriously upset the ruling classes' hold on power.'3Far from seeing Wollstonecraft as a "mere liberal," I affirm the radical scope of her social critique, but argue that her radicalism is best understoodhistorically, as part of a liberal-democraticpolitics of resistance in late-eighteenthcenturyBritain. A Radical Democratic Feminism The Britishradicalreformers in the 1790s, with whomWollstonecraft associated, were broadlygroupedaroundthe republicanideals articulated in ThomasPaine'sRightsof Man. They blamedthe arbitrary and disprothe aristocratic few the of for politicalpower misery and povportionate the Men included in of some women this (and erty many. designation) were rationaland deservedto be ruledby reasonratherthanmight. They were thus entitled by naturalright to equal political representation. If the of could be institutions aristocratic only privilege swept away, corrupt humannature'spotentialfor perfectioncould be realized. to this political analysis was an economic critique Corresponding that shunnedexcessive wealth and the inheritancerules of primogenia development within liberalism, her critique does not challenge the structural division between public and privatesphereson which liberalismdepends. Barbara Taylorhints at this meaningof radicalismin arguingthatthe utopianvision of a world free of all oppressionruns up againstthe reformistlimits of bourgeois democracy(Eve and the New Jerusalem,95-96). For an informeddiscussionof the natureof ruling-classpower in the 1790s, see E. P. Thompson,The Makingof the Class (London:Penguin, 1963); and Roger Wells, Insurrection: English Working TheBritishExperience1795-1803 (Gloucester: Alan Sutton,1983).

13

434

SUSANFERGUSON

ture. Aristocraticprivileges,Paine and othersinsisted, stood in the way of a family-basedeconomy of artisansand farmerswith relativelyequal In otherwords,they presumedan economic holdingsof privateproperty. model of independentcommodity producerswhich, despite its implied attackon the existing politicaland economic elite, was largelyconsistent with the premisesof AdamSmith's Wealth ofNations.14 Because Wollstonecraftlived and worked alongside Paineite radicals, she was far removed from the respectable circles of bourgeois life-a fact used to advantageby her detractors. Publishedin the heated aftermathof the French Revolution, A Vindicationof the Rights of Womanwas identifiedby political and religious counter-revolutionaries as a Jacobindocument,and Wollstonecraft's"degenerate"lifestyle (her first daughterwas illegitimate and her second was bor only a few monthsafter she marriedWilliam Godwin)was proclaimedproof of the dangerousimplicationsof its arguments."Viewedthroughthe smoke of the Bastille," writes BarbaraTaylor, "Wollstonecraftloomed like a blood-stained Amazon,the high priestessof 'loose-tonguedLiberty.'"15 Although its contents offended middle-class sensibility, it is precisely with the middle layer of society-those women in the "most naturalof states"-that Wollstonecraftis concerned,depictingthem in what, at first glance, appearsto be a surprisinglyharsh light.16In their current state, writes Wollstonecraft, women are weak and artificial: "Taughtfrom their infancy that beauty is a woman's sceptre, the mind shapes itself to the body, and, roamingroundits gilt cage, only seeks to adornits prison."17 They are ignorantof virtueand largely incapableof fulfilling their duties as mothers and wives with any degree of competence: they either neglect or spoil their children while their frivolity causes husbandsto look elsewhere for companionship.AlthoughWoll14 E. P. Thompson provides a wonderful social history of radical politics in the 1790s in Making of the English WorkingClass. For an insightful account of the links between popularpolitical economy and the traditionof bourgeois political economy, see McNally,Against the Market,43-61. Taylor,Eve and the New Jerusalem, 11. Accordingto R. M. Janes,A Vindication of the Rights of Womaninitially passed largely unnoticed. It was not until Wollstonecraft's lifestyle was made public (with the appearanceof Godwin's Memoirs in 1798) and the reaction against the French Revolution was in full swing that the book and its author were subjected to such vehement denunciation (R. M. Janes, "On the Reception of MaryWollstonecraft'sA Vindicationof the Rights of Woman,"Journal of the History of Ideas 39 [1978], 293-302). For other accounts of A Vindicationof the Rights of Woman'sreception see Wardle, Mary Wollstonecraft,158-60; Hal Draper, "JamesMorrisonand Working-Class Feminism," in Hal Draper,ed., Socialismfrom Below (Atlantic Highlands,N.J.: HumanitiesPress, 1992), 226-27. Wollstonecraft,Vindication,9. Hereafter,the word "women" will refer specifically to middle-class women. Referencesto women from other social classes will be made explicit. Ibid., 44.

15

16 17

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

435

stonecraft portrays the isolation of women's lives as oppressive, the dominantimage she evokes speaks less of hardshipand denial than it does of the (corrupting)privileges thatresultfrom the refined and pampered world women inhabit.Although women are in a state of "slavish dependence," she means only "in a political and civil sense; for, indirectly, they obtain too much power, and are debased by their exertions Yet, for Wollstonecraft,this scathing portrayalof women is not just moral patter.Her harsh words are not simply directed at women; they are meant more as a lever of social criticism and, in fact, indict a whole society. Like that of her radical contemporaries, Wollstonecraft's work is informedby a firm conviction that people are the products of their environment.Women are not predisposed to be petty and self-indulgent. These traits develop only because political and social forces deny them the expression and development of the defining feature of humanity:the capacityto reason. Wollstonecraft's conviction that rationality is equally present in men and women is arguedin part on theological grounds. Because all people owe their existence to a rational deity, they must share in the faculty of reason to an equal extent: "the natureof reason must be the same in all, if it be an emanationof divinity, the tie that connects the Thus it follows that a just society is one creaturewith the Creator."19 based on reason. And the rationalorganizationof relations on earth is nothingmore thanthe unfoldingof God's will:
I love man as my fellow; but his scepter, real, or usurped,extends not to me, unless the reason of an individual demands my homage; and even then the submission is to reason, and not to man. In fact, the conduct of an accountable being must be regulatedby the operationsof its own reason;or on what foundationrests the throneof God?20 to obtain illicit sway."
18

Herein lies the fundamentalcontradictionof the political organization of society: it extends the rationalsceptreto middle-class men but not to women. Men's civil superiorityis, Wollstonecraftargues, nothing but the residue of an era markedby inequality and force. It is a vestige of that "pestiferous purple which renders the progress of civilization a
drawsan analogybetweenwomen and the very 18 Ibid., 167. She consistently of just how far fromher mind the plightof reminder wealthy-an important women oftenwas.See, forinstance, andpeasant 7, 60, 57. working-class 19 Ibid., 53. Withoutreason,Wollstonecraft argues,women would be animals or moral thanpersons (rather beings)wholive by theruleof bruteforce.But,she founhas an eternal therecanbe butone ruleof right,if morality states,"surely she writes,is to be guidedby "a Andthatone ruleis reason. dation." Mankind, will thatbowsonlyto God"(36). rational 20 Ibid.,37.

436

SUSANFERGUSON

curse, and warps the understanding."21 Insisting that it is entirely inconsistent for men to fight against aristocratic privilegeamongstthemselves while maintainingsimilardistinctionswith respect to theirwives and daughters,she suggests the task is to eliminatethe hypocrisywhich denies women are fully human (rationalbeings) and to raise men and women to a level at which they areable to relateto each otheras equals. Wollstonecraft'sprogrammefor reformclearly places the emphasis on the self-development of the individual woman: "It is time to effect a revolution in female manners-time to restore to them their lost dignity-and make them, as a partof the humanspecies, labourby This requiresthatwomen reformingthemselvesto reformthe world."22 be permittedto participatein all areas of political, economic and cultural life. And, as so much of the scholarship on Wollstonecraft emphasizes, the key to "reformingthemselves" is education.Lamenting thatthe "grandsource of misery [is] the neglected educationof my fellow-creatures,"she offers a detaileddiscussion of what an appropriate educationfor girls (and boys) should entail.23 These passages serve view of Wollstonecraftas a bourgeois liberal to reinforcethe traditional campaignerfor reform. Any portraitof the first modem feminist that comes to rest here, however, is incomplete; for Wollstonecraft,issues of feminism do not for simply revolve aroundthe question of women's denied opportunity education and their restricted access to civil society. Reform of the education system is impotent in face of the general lack of freedom which characterizes late-eighteenth-century Britain. "Till society be differently constituted," she insists, "much cannot be expected from education."24 Specifically, Wollstonecraftattacksthe system of representationwhich excludes most men (in additionto all women) fromthe franchise. But her criticism is not limited to the constitution.Rather, she indicts the system of unequal representationfor upholding damaging socio-economic arrangements-arrangements which work to perpetuatethe inequalitybetween the sexes. The British system of representation, she notes, is nothing less than "a convenient handle for despotism" which keeps the majorityof humanityin the bondage of It serves only to maintainthe idle rich by taxing the poor. ignorance.25 Withouta total transformation of society in which people relateto each

21 22 23 24 25

Ibid., 18. Ibid., 45; emphasis added. Ibid., 7. For the discussion of educationreformsee 157-78. Ibid., 21. Ibid., 147. Interestingly,she does not outrightly advocate female suffrage,but only hints that it might not be as preposterousa proposal as she assumes her readershipbelieves.

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

437

other as equal partners(in politics and in all else), women's emancipation is impossible. The egalitarianthrustof Wollstonecraft'swork is not a frivolous addition,but an integralelement of her feminism. Women simply cannot be free and rationalin an irrationalworld. Elissa Guralnickis thus correct to stress that for the eighteenth-centuryfeminist: "all will be right [only when the whole of] society has undergonea radicalreordering. In the promise of that reorderinglies the extreme political radicalism that is at once the premise and the sine qua non of A Vindicationof the Rights of Woman."26 The Radical Edge to Economic Liberalism It is certain that Wollstonecraft'sattack on the broaderpolitical order distinguishes her feminism as a radical social critique. The nature of the threatit representsto the social order,however, is not clearly established. Guralnick and Taylor point to the fact that Wollstonecraft's socio-economic critiquerevolves aroundan attackon privateproperty. But they both slide too easily from this observationto the claim that Wollstonecraftopposes fundamentalfeatures of capitalist social relations-a claim they back with assertionsaboutthe inclusiveness of her emancipatoryproject. Guralnick,for instance, writes that Wollstonecraft "closely associates the bettermentof woman's plight with the rise of the classless society." And, referring readers to Wollstonecraft's plea for equality, she contends that the eighteenth-centuryfeminist's vision of a rational society translatesinto a "total leveling of distinction among men (and women)."27 Taylor, for her part, agrees with this assessment and applauds Wollstonecraftfor beginning to overcome "the narrowclass assumptions on which so much of the radical traditionwas based." She, too, suggests Wollstonecraft'sprogrammewas directed to "the social and political liberation of 'the people' as a whole," locating in her egalitarianism "the ideological roots of Socialist feminism."28It is not, Taylor believes, that Wollstonecraftconsciously articulatesa socialist perspective.Rather,its presence in A Vindicationof the Rights of Men is embryonic.Evidence for this kernelof socialist thoughtcan be found not only in the threatto propertyrepresentedby the demandsof radical democracy, but also in Wollstonecraft's repudiation of commercial society and her condemnationof the inhumanityof industry'sdrive for profit. As well, Taylor highlights a passage from A Vindicationof the Rights of Men in which, she claims, Wollstonecraftputs forward "a
26 27 28 Guralnick,"RadicalPolitics," 317. Ibid., 314; emphasisadded.Guralnick'ssource is questionedbelow. Taylor,Eve and the New Jerusalem,6, 5 and 1.

438

SUSANFERGUSON

which proposal for a communalistsociety of small peasant-producers all the estates in be could established... simply by expropriating large the land across the entire population"29For Britain and redistributing Guralnickand Taylor, Wollstonecraft's radicalism has its roots in an economic critique of property which, if pursued politically, would emancipate women and men from class exploitation. By this reading, Wollstonecraftis indeed a proto-socialist,at least in political economic terms. The hostility Wollstonecraftexpresses toward certain forms of propertycannot be denied. In A Vindicationof the Rights of Men (her reply to Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France30), she castigates those modems who claim to speak for the rights of all but "bow down to rank, and are careful to secure property."Liberty has yet to be realized anywhereon the globe, she writes, because "the demon of property has ever been at hand to encroach on the sacred rights of men, and to fence round with awful pomp laws that war with justice."31Two years latershe compares it to a poisoned fountainfrom which flows "most of the evils and vices which renderthis world such a dreary scene to the contemplative mind."32These are undeniably powerful indictmentsof the British system of propertyownershipand, viewed in isolation, could foster the belief thatWollstonecraft'sgoal is the elimination of private property and the economic leveling of all within the context of Wollwealth. But this conclusion is not warranted stonecraft'swork as a whole. Ratherthan attacking class distinctionand the a for socialist of politics feminism,Wollstonepossibly setting stage craftremainsweddedto the basic framework of a liberalcritiqueof political economy. As with her radical democratic associates, her ire is directedat the very rich,those who comprisethe old authoritative order. The specific plea for a returnto equality and naturewhich Guralnick cites goes out, not to propertyowners in general, but specifically to "kings and nobles," to whom Wollstonecraftappeals to "throwoff theirgaudy hereditarytrappings."The navy and the clergy come under attack alongside "the sacred majesty of kings" because within these professions men, who are themselves trainedto a blind submission to
29 Ibid., 6-7; emphases added.The passage to which Taylorrefers is found in Wollstonecraft,A Vndication of the Rights of Men... (2d ed.; London, 1790) reproduced in The PickeringMastersseries, JanetTodd and MarilynButler,eds., The Vol. 5 (London, 1989), 57, hereafter,Men. TayWorksof Mary Wollstonecraft, is criticizedbelow. lor's interpretation Edmund Burke,Reflections on the Revolution in France, edited and introduced 1968). by Conor Cruise O'Brien (Penguin:Harmondsworth, Wollstonecraft,Men, 60, 9. To be clear, Wollstonecraftdoes not include Burke amongst the modems she condemns. See also Moira Ferguson and Janet Todd, (Boston:Twayne, 1984), 46. Mary Wollstonecraft Wollstonecraft,Vindication,140.

30 31 32

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

439

authority,wield power by virtue of the same irrationalimpulse. The main instrumentof class distinction and social oppression is not property itself, but excessive wealth, perpetuatedby the unequal system of inheritance.Thus Wollstonecraft's egalitarianismis not an argument for classlessness; rather, it is an indictment of precapitalist British social relationsin which distinctionis inheritedratherthan "earned."33 But the critique of inheritance is less radical than might be expected: Wollstonecraftdoes not call for an end to inheritedwealth, but for a reformin its practice and an end only to inheritedhonours. Property passed down the generations is objectionable only if it is tied to rules of primogeniture.Further,contraryto Taylor's suggestion, Wollstonecraftdoes not advocate the communalizationof large estates but calls insteadfor theirparcelization. The text reads: "Why cannot large estates be divided into small farms? these dwellings would indeed Her vision here is of a certainform of privatepropgrace our land."34 moderate erty-the holdings of independentcommodity producers.It is a form she also advocatesin her discussion of enclosure;engaging in the essentially liberal discourse of improvementwhich originates with the agrarianconcerns of seventeenth-century British liberalism, Wollof common land into individual stonecraftcalls for the transformation The above passage continues: privatefarms.35
Why are huge forests still allowed to stretchout with idle pomp and all the indolence of Easterngrandeur?Why does the brown waste meet the traveller's view, when men want work?But commons cannotbe enclosed withoutacts of parliament to increasethe propertyof the rich! Why might not the industrious peasantbe allowed to steal a farmfrom the heath?

Unlike others in her day who respondedto poverty and despair of the dispossessed by arguing for the preservation of common land, Wollstonecraftis more interestedin establishing rights to privateproperty. She arguesfor theirconsolidationin a particular, albeit relativelyegaliIn form. other she tarian, words, although challenges the liberal rights claim to unlimitedaccumulation,Wollstonecraftdoes not advocate interferencewith the fundamentalpreconditionof that claim-the right to privateproperty.The proximityof her views to those of the classical liberal political economists is striking.While they did not go so far as
33 Ibid., 22; emphasis added; 17-18, 44, 140-41. Guralnickgives two references: Poston, ed., Vindication,22, 38 or pages 38 and 74 of an unspecified early edition, markedLondon, 1792, of which I found two publications (a 1929 Everyman's Libraryedition and a 1970 Gregg Internationaledition). Searching the second referenceyields nothing that substantiatesGuralnick'sthesis. Wollstonecraft, Men, 57. The centralityof the "improvementdiscourse" to early liberaltheory is ably discussed by Neal Wood in John Locke and Agrarian Capitalism (Berkeley: University of CaliforniaPress, 1984), 15-30.

34 35

440

SUSANFERGUSON

to advocate an absolute equality of property,many (including Adam Smith) believed that the competitive system, by its own accord, would result in precisely the relative equality of condition Wollstonecraft endorses-that is, an economy of moderatelyprosperousindependent
producers.36

Moreover, Wollstonecraftsupportsthis economic liberalism with correspondingsocial values. Her endorsementof improvementthrough enclosure has already been noted; she also embraces the quintessentially liberal notion of rewardaccordingto merit. Moira Ferguson and Janet Todd suggest Wollstonecraft'sideas are "potentiallyrevolutionary," but they impute a peculiar meaning to this phrase-one that has little to do with a socialist critique of society. Rather,it refers to Wollstonecraft's desire to replace the currentsystem not with classless or communalsocial relations,but with "a system based on individualtalent and reason."37Wollstonecraftsingles out royalty, the military and noblemen for criticism precisely on the basis thatthey hold no virtuous (rational)justification for their rank. Distinctions of rank corrupt,she holds, "because respectabilityis not attached to the discharge of the relative duties of life, but to the station."38That merit (measured in accordancewith the performanceof duties), ratherthan station, should be the basis of distinctionis not a view that sits easily with the classical socialist concept of equality in which wealth is distributedaccordingto need. s criticism of the Thus, while it is indisputablethatWollstonecraft' is sometimes forms of of certain bitter, she is property sacrosanctity not opposed to it in all its manifestations.Far from underminingrights to privateproperty,like her radical contemporariesshe assumes their presence and argues for their continuity on a relatively egalitarian basis-but an egalitarianismthat is, in fact, limited to a certainclass of people: propertyowners. The class basis of Wollstonecraft'seconomic model is confirmedand elaboratedin her discussion of women's work, working-classwomen and freedom. Women's Work, Working-Class Women and Freedom Wollstonecraftdescribes the ideal situationas that in which the family is moderatelywealthy, able to sustain itself in comfort (although not luxury) with some funds remaining for charitableallowances and the
36 This is the model Smith develops in the earlychaptersof Book I of The Wealthof Nations. Although this model was popularizedin the political economy tradition, in later chapters Smith introduces a more complex model. On this point, see David McNally, Political Economy and the Rise of Capitalism:A Reinterpretation (Berkeley:Universityof CaliforniaPress, 1988), 215-16. 118. Fergusonand Todd,Mary Wollstonecraft, Wollstonecraft,Vindication,144.

37 38

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

441

purchase of books. Women find fulfillment as wives and mothers and their education is primarilyjustified as a means to that fulfillment. Their husbands,who are also their best friends (passionate love is not, she believes, a stable basis for a relationship)and intellectual equals, arrivehome from work to a clean and contentedhousehold. In fact, the scenario of domesticity Wollstonecraftpaints is nothing short of idyllic. She reflects, "I have thought that a couple of this description, equally necessary and independent of each other, because each fulfilled the respective duties of their station,possessed all that life could give."39 This vision is not very far removed from the life to which the middle classes actually aspired (which, according to Wollstonecraft,was simply a more frivolous version of the same basic structuresand relations). And, like the period's middle-class households, Wollstonecraft's ideal rests squarely on a given class relation. Sustaining a household in a moderatedegree of comfort, she claims, necessitates the employmentof a female servant.For a woman to discharge "the duties of her station" she requires "merely a servant maid to take off her hands the servile partof the household business."40Women's emancipation, then, is utterlydependentupon the prior existence of a class of women whose labour power is available to perform the more menial and mundanehousehold chores of the middle classes. It is emancipation of the few at the expense of the many. More often than not, however, feminist scholars ignore or explain away this assumption of class exploitation in an effort to claim for Wollstonecrafta radical legacy. Zillah Eisenstein, for example, agrees Vindicationdoes not directly addressthe needs of working-class women. Still, she claims, Wollstonecraft'segalitarianismextends to all and thereby successfully provides the conditions of emancipationfor poor women, although she fails to explain how Wollstonecraft'sappeal for equalityoverridesher assumptionof an economic class of labourers.4 Indeed, in a period when most young women worked as domestic servants,Wollstonecraftoffers comparativelylittle discussion of their plight. An importantexception is her novel, The Wrongsof Woman,or Maria.42 Here she portraysJemima,a young servantwoman, as lacking the escapes available to the middle-class Maria. Commenting on this novel, Fergusonand Toddwrite "the tale from beginning to end indicts society, as women's social conditioning,their social (lack of) possibili39 40 41 42 Ibid., 143; emphasisadded. Ibid., 142. See also 66. Eisenstein,The Radical Futureof Liberal Feminism,98. Mary Wollstonecraft, The Wrongs of Woman,or Maria, in Gary Kelly, ed., Mary, A Fiction & the Wrongsof Woman(London: Oxford University Press, 1976).

442

SUSANFERGUSON

ties, and the inabilityto work for a decent living reappearin a reformulation of the laboring class."43Ferguson and Todd do not suggest that the authorharboursanythingmore than sympathyfor the poor, pointing out that "she eschewed concrete proposals for the ameliorationof [servants'] condition."44Moreover, in Jemima's case, oppression is not resolved througheconomic independence,but throughthe heroism s of individualstrengthof character.This, coupled with Wollstonecraft' attachmentto the principle of reward for merit, suggests that Wollstonecraft may believe working-class women do not enjoy financial securitybecause they have not earnedit. Her commitment to a class-divided society is reinforced in her comments on women's duties within the household and on education reform.On women's duties, Wollstonecraftwrites, "To renderthe poor virtuous they must be employed, and women in the middle rank of life ... might employ them, whilst they themselves managedtheirfamilies, instructed their children, and exercised their own minds." She lists gardening, experimental philosophy and literature as pursuits And on education, although appropriateto the middle-class woman.45 ahead of her day in advocating schooling for all members of society, her proposals are not free of class bias: children from all classes were to begin school at the age of five and pursue a common curriculumto age nine, at which point they are to be "streamed"accordingto class. Those from the middle class or, as Wollstonecraftcalls them, "the young people of superiorabilities, or fortune," would study academic subjects, while working-classchildrenwould learn the skills appropriate to their station.46 Feminists often overlook this importantqualification to the democratizingof education,and thus exaggeratethe degree to which Wollstonecraftstretchesa more conventionalliberalapproach to education. VirginiaMiller, for instance, writes, "Progress and education are linked, as for all liberal thinkers, but Wollstonecraft broadenstheir scope to insist that all citizens be educated.It is significant that she does not exclude the lower classes from this argument either."47
43 44 110. Fergusonand Todd,Mary Wollstonecraft, Ibid., 122. They write: "In more general terms, Wollstonecraftseems to be saying that an individual, from whatever class, has an internal, events-motivated power that can bring about or at least allow for the possibility of personal,if not economic, autonomy" (111). Wollstonecraft,Vindication,75. Ibid., 169. Wollstonecraft's willingness to advance those of superior abilities softens the nakedclass bias thatunderwrites her system to advancethose of superior fortuneregardlessof ability-but only in a mannerthatis consistent with the liberalprinciplesof merit. Muller, "WhatCan LiberalsLear?" 53.

45 46

47

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

443

I argue above that at the heart of Wollstonecraft'semancipatory project is the nuclearhousehold. But how does she reconcile this commitmentto the household with her insistence that women be allowed to use their education to gain economic independence? For Wollstonecraft, after all, it is essential to humanityand consistent with a rational society that women be permitted access to all the occupations. She advocates that they be allowed to work as physicians and nurses or midwives; to study politics and history;to enter into business relationships.48These two prescriptionsare at odds with one another,for how can a woman be both responsiblefor the domestic sphereand economically independent? To what degree Wollstonecraft's individualism contradicts her assumptionof traditionalsex roles is a question that could feasibly be asked of all liberal theoristswho preceded her and many of those who followed. Carole Patemanexplores this issue specifically in the work of social contracttheoristsin The Sexual Contract.For these thinkers, the confrontationof the autonomousindividualwho enjoys rights and freedoms beyond the household with the assumption of household labour and child-rearingis resolved at the level of gender, where it becomes clear that the category "individual" is not intended for For Wollstonecraft,this conflict resides within the indiwomen at all.49 vidual woman. The standard resolutionto this conflict is to invokethe liberalconof of cept equality opportunity.Wollstonecraft,it is claimed, actually intends women to have the option to search for satisfying employment outside the home. And while she fails to explain how this can co-exist with their household duties, "presumablywomen who wantedto work and contributionwould necessarily would do so, and theirparticipation the level of civilized society."50 But the equal opportunity improve Wollstonecraft endorses is not that simple. First, a whole class of women have been cut off from exercising the right to economic independence: the schooling she proposes for working-class women falls well short of that requiredto practise medicine or business. Second, Wollstonecraftstresses that althoughwomen should be given access to careers, she wants to ensure that access is exercised only by the very
48 49 50 Wollstonecraft,Vindication,147-49. Neither is it intendedfor working-classmen, although Patemansuggests (I think unconvincingly) that they ultimately are implicated through a fraternityof male power. Fergusonand Todd,Mary Wollstonecraft,122. See also Wardle,Mary Wollstonecraft, 154; Gary Kelly, RevolutionaryFeminism: The Mind and Career of Mary Wollstonecraft(London: Macmillan, 1992), 130; and Syndy McMillen Conger, and the Language of Sensibility (Toronto:Associated UniMary Wollstonecraft versity Press, 1994) 123.

444

SUSANFERGUSON

few. Women who work outside the home are likely to be single or at least childless, and of "exceptionaltalent."51 Moreover, for the "equal opportunity" thesis to be convincing, the essence of female emancipationfor Wollstonecraftwould be found neitherin motherhoodnor careers,but in the opportunityfor women to choose to live as they will. But this completely misses the moral thrust of libertyhas little to do of Vindication.Wollstonecraft'sunderstanding the more modem liberalprinciple with the negative concept implied by of equality of opportunity.Rather,she suggests, a free society must be a virtuous society. Freedom is a positive phenomenon corresponding with a specific code of ethics, which she believes emanates from a rational deity. The moral imperativeto do one's duty is definitive of rationalityand thus of freedom. RalphWardleobserves thatWollstonecraft's feminism is informedby a strongsense of ethics: "to Marypolitics was always subservientto religion.... Unlike most of her fellow radicalsshe was a devoutbeliever, convinced thatthe perfectionattainable in this world was not the ultimatetowardwhich man should strive, but only a pale shadow of the perfection which God had reserved for him in heaven."52 Women, in her view, should be grantedequal opportunity,but not in orderto do as they will. Equal opportunitymust serve a greaterend: "the only methodof leading women tofulfill theirpeculiar duties, is to in the inherfree them from all restraint by allowing them to participate That is, while women should be free to be ent rights of mankind."53 individualsin the so-called public sphere,they are most trulyfree when they are fulfilling their rationalnatures.And for all but the exceptional women, that nature (or "their peculiar duties") is found in their roles as wives and mothers:"I consider that women in the common walks of life are called to fulfil the duties of wives and mothers,by religion and reason, I cannot help lamenting that women of a superiourcast have not a road open by which they can pursuemore extensive plans of usefulness and independence."54For the vast majority of middle-class
51 Wollstonecraft,Vindication,64. The whole discussion linking work to economic independence is far removed from the reality of working-class women's lives. While plenty of women worked,female wages in the 1790s were not sufficientto provide women with a meaningful level of independence-an issue Wollstonecraftdoes not consider. Wardle,Mary Wollstonecraft,164. See also Carolyn W. Korsmeyer, "Reason and Morals in the Early Feminist Movement: Mary Wollstonecraft,"in Poston, ed., Vindication,285-97. Wollstonecraft,Vindication,175; emphasis added. Ibid., 146-47. She is, on this point, unequivocal: "whatevertends to incapacitate the maternalcharacter,takes woman out of her sphere" (177). Wollstonecraft's suggestion that careerwoman would be "exceptional" is indicative of an elitist predisposition. Although all persons may be equally capable of great achievements, only a few, those of a "superiourcast," can and should fulfill that poten-

52 53 54

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

445

women, then, motherhood informed by reason is and must be the essence of emancipation. This is not simply the most rational arrangement, it is also the most virtuous. Dichotomy in Wollstonecraft's Feminism A number of studies of Wollstonecraft suggest that her critique of the family is in fact a challenge to the very structures which define it as a private, self-regulating, institution. Guralnick, for instance, argues that the connection Wollstonecraft draws between the public and private spheres is inherently radical. She cites Wollstonecraft's analogy of the family and the state ("A man has been termed a microcosm; and every family might also be called a state") as well as her contention that the virtue of the public domain is largely dictated by that of the private as evidence that Wollstonecraft challenges the distinction between the two spheres.55 Dorothy McBride Stetson agrees: "Wollstonecraft had an organic view of the interdependence of all social institutions; separation of public and private spheres was artificial and the root of the sorry state of women in the aristocratic circles she observed."56 The claim that Wollstonecraft challenges the structural distinction between public and private realms, however, is difficult to accept. She clearly politicizes the family insofar as she mounts a moral critique of the unequal gender relations therein. And because she attributes that inequality to the "irrational" organization of society at large, drawing a link between private and public realms, her moral critique leads to advocacy of structural change: increase women's access to education and careers, and establish a relative equality amongst property holders. But this manner of politicizing the private realm does not, in itself, disrupt the structural separation of public and private spheres that is at the heart of liberalism. First, although she suggests the two spheres do not exist in isolation from each other, in her mind the relationship between them is not particularly problematic. She simply proposes that
tial. Beneathpeople's apparentlyequal natures,then, dwells a critical variationin abilities which possibly explains not only the division within the middle class between career women and mothers, but also the division between working- and middle-class women. For her explicit statementson humannature,see 9-10, 23, 42, 51-57. The same elitist predisposition can be traced in John Stuart Mill's work as well. See Paul Smart,Mill and Marx: IndividualLibertyand the Roads to Freedom(Manchester: ManchesterUniversityPress, 1991). Guralnick, "Radical Politics," 314. She cites Wollstonecraft,Vindication, 177, 192. Dorothy McBride Stetson, "Women's Rights and Human Rights: Intersection and Conflict," in Falco, ed., Feminist Interpretations, 172; emphases added. Similarly, VirginiaMuller contends that it is the structureof the family and the institutionof marriagethat Wollstonecraftidentifies as the "linchpins of women's problems" ("What Can LiberalsLear?" 55; emphasisadded).

The Public/Private

55 56

446

SUSANFERGUSON

the other.To be they are mutuallyinfluentialwith one spheremirroring consistent, Guralnick,McBride Stetson and others would also have to argue that the sixteenth-centurypolitical theorist Jean Bodin, for one, shares this radical quality, since he posits exactly the same relation between householdand state as Wollstonecraft. Second, despite endorsing certain types of structuralchanges, Wollstonecraft sees no reason to blur the distinction between the household and civil society. In fact she argues for its consolidation by In theirreformedstate, confirminga naturalsexual division of labour.57 the household becomes the fundamentalsocial unit, morally and economically, of the new society: the preservationof "privatevirtue" (by which she means a marriagebetween equals that accepts the traditional sexual division of labour) is "the only security of public freedom and universalhappiness."58 Her criticism of domestic arrangements,then, is limited to the effect marriageand the household have on women's characterformation.As a result, the reforms she suggests are directed to improvingthe quality of the individualswithin what is consideredto be an essential and natural social unit. She would like women to be capable of moving more easily between the household and civil society, but withoutjeopardizingthe sanctityof the former.It is, in fact, not at all clear that Wollstonecraft'sideal rationaldomestic sphere would be any more politicized or any less isolated from the economic realm, thanthe irrational sphere she wants it to replace. In politicizing familial relations in this manner, Wollstonecraft undoubtedly pushes liberalism in a particular,arguably progressive, direction. And in drawing attentionto the inequalities of gender, she highlights the fundamentalcontradictionof liberalism so aptly analyzed by Carole Pateman.But to suggest that she resolves (or points to a resolution of) that contradictionby challenging "the structureof the family and the institution of marriage" or that she "confronted and bridged" the public/private dichotomy is to misreadher work and attributeto her a more radicalposition thanshe in fact held.59 For a glimpse at a feminist radicalismthat can be tracedto a chalcrilenge to all forms of privatepropertyand class, and to a structural tique of the public/privatedichotomy, it is useful to turnto the work of William Thompson, a leading Owenite and one of the movement's most able proponentsof women's equality.Thompsonadvocates more than a broadsocial equality of propertyholders.He demandsthe elimination of private property on which the system of individual competition is based. This vision of human liberationis informed by an ap57 58 59 Wollstonecraft,Vindication,7, 150-52. Ibid., 6. Muller, "WhatCan LiberalsLearn?"55; emphases added;and McBride Stetson, "Women's Rights," 172.

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

447

preciation for the implications of women's biology in relation to the critical appraisal of competition he outlines in his 1824 work, An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth.... 60 The arena in which these economic and biological considerationsintersect is the privatehousehold unit. And it is in their respective comments on the household thatthe fundamentalincompatibilityof Thompson's and Wollstonecraft's conceptions of female (and human) liberation is thrownmost clearly into relief. Thompson is highly critical of the inhumanity of the isolation women suffer within the household. He writes of the "state of barbarous exclusion of domestic imprisonment,in which women have been kept." Women are "cut off" from sources of knowledge and "confined" to a home which he describes as "the eternal prison-house of the wife." He calls theirdomestic labour "so wicked a projectof isolation."61The scathing tenor of these comments is not diminished in his reflections on the legal institutionat the base of the household-marriage. He vilifies the marriagecode as "that disgrace of civilization." Marriagesets up a false contract, "all of whose enjoyments... are on the one side, while all of its pains and privationsare on the other!"62 The contrastwith Wollstonecraftis immediately apparent.Undeniably critical of domesticity undercurrentarrangements,her moral and economic attachmentto the householdmakes it highly improbablethat she would have joined Thompson in this vitriolic condemnation of marriage and the privatehouseholdunit. Thompson extends his condemnation of the household to a critique of sexuality in which he stresses the sensuality of women as well as of men: "An adult human being, though a woman, and though a wife, is possessed of all the senses, the appetites, the faculties and capabilities of enjoyment, of any other adult human being."63In fact, Thompson sees the repression of women's sexuality (women, he writes, "cannot even murmurabout neglect") as a fundamentalsocial problem.64Wollstonecraft, embracing the mind/body dualism that characterizesmuch liberal thought, eschews the bodily side of existence for the most part. It representsour commonality with all animals and is in direct opposition to our rational mental capacity which, because it is unique to humans, she designates as the essence of humanityand the fountainheadof morality. She associates sensuality
60 WilliamThompson, An Inquiryinto the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth... (London:printedfor Longman,Hurst,Rees, Orme,Brownand andWheatly andAdlard, Green, Paternoster-Row; 1824). the HumanRace, Women..., intro61 WilliamThompson, Appealof One-half duced Pankhurst (London: 1983),122, 17,79, 133. by Richard Virago, 62 Ibid.,56, xxx. 63 Ibid.,70; emphasis added. 64 Ibid.,78.

448

SUSANFERGUSON

with both the repressive and retrogradearistocracyand the "weak and common herd." It is a force to be overcome. The sensualist is "the most dangerous of tyrannts," and women have too long been its
slaves.65

Wollstonecraftargues for women to aspire to a "decent personal reserve," a modesty based on knowledge ratherthan ignorance. The hierarchyof intellect over sensibility is most explicit in her remonstration against passionate love within marriage.She urges that "tumultuous passion" be restrained and not "allowed to dethrone superior powers." Her criticism of the forces which teach women as a matterof course to satisfy men sexually do not lead her to challenge the existing balance in sexual relations. The ideal is "the chaste wife, and serious mother" who "only consider[s]her power to please as the polish of her virtues."66 to the rationalorderof Sexuality then must be subordinated relations which, as we have seen, finds its locus in the single family household unit. But the most significant difference between Wollstonecraftand Thompson is that Thompson's moral critiqueis situatedwithin a structuralexplanationof society thatchallenges both class rule and the public/privatedichotomy. He attributeswomen's sexual repressionto the prevailing system of marriagewhich is itself a result of competition. Because poverty forces women into maritalrelations with men, sexual enjoymentis, "just like every thing else in society, a matterof trade."67 But he objects to the terms of the exchange. Women gain limited and imperfect security and are expected in return,among other things, to gratify their husband's sexual desire. Meanwhile the pursuitof sexual pleasure for themselves is hypocriticallydeemed a vice. Alternatively, in conditions of full security(in which privatepropertyhas been communalized), economic necessity would no longer be determinantand men and women could engage in sexual enjoyment freely and by mutual assent. Furthermore, because they are each others' equals, the numberof potentialpairingsis increased considerably-the attraction between individualsgrows, he believes, as they become more alike. In
65 66 Wollstonecraft,Vindication,52. Ibid., 27-28. On the sublimationof the sensual in Wollstonecraft'swriting see Cora Kaplan, "Wild Nights," in Cora Kaplan, ed., Sea Changes: Cultureand Feminism (London: Verso, 1986); Diana Coole, Women in Political Theory (Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1988). Jean Grimshaw disagrees ("Mary Wollstonecraft and the Tensions in Feminist Philosophy," in Sean Sayers and Peter Osborne,eds., Socialism, Feminismand Philosophy [London:Routledge, 1990], 9-26). Grimshaw insists that Wollstonecraftargues for a balance of rationality and female sexual pleasure.But the most textualevidence she can cite for this is that Wollstonecraftfinds value, in her novel Maria, in the heroine's empathyand to reason. tenderness;emotions arenot to be totally subordinated Thompson,An Inquiryinto the Principles, 556. See also 41, 61, 189.

67

The Radical Ideas of Mary Wollstonecraft

449

co-operative societies, sexual pleasure for both men and women, Thompsonpredicts,will multiply.68 Thompson challenges the traditionaldomestic unit and raises the possibility of different patterns of human relationships. Despite an assumed heterosexuality and an arguable predisposition for monogamy, he resists designing an ideal form of sexual relations.This is to be decided democraticallyby the community: "with the length, or terms, of the connexion we have nothing here to do; that matterfalling under the head of generallegislation."69 Nonetheless, he does discuss how co-operation makes feasible certain arrangementsthat are either illegal or impracticalunder competitive conditions. Because the community as a whole cares for nursing women and children,divorce is an accessible alternativeand there is no reason to deny eitherpartythe opportunityto remarry.Thompson is also confident thatenlightenedpublic opinion will prevail,removing the humiliationand illegitimacy of co-habitationand childbirthoutside marriage.70 Addressing the issue of birth control, he suggests that "prudentialforesight" or "manualand physical restraintsand expedients" provide a means to increase sexual (as well as moraland intellectual) pleasure.71 Thus, "private"mattersof marriage,childbirthand child-rearing and even sexual pleasure,are not presumedto be self-regulating.They are clearly circumscribed,in Thompson's view, by the structuralconditions of a competitivemarketeconomy. And to improveupon them it is essential to reject the self-regulation thesis of liberalism and alter those structuralconditions by challenging private property,class and the public/private divide in a way thatWollstonecraftwould never have imaginedpossible or desirable. Conclusion does politicize class and family by advocating AlthoughWollstonecraft radical social re-organization as a preconditionof women's emancipation and drawingattentionto unequal gender relations within the family, she neither harboursa proto-socialist feminist politics nor a propensity to disruptthe essential distinction between private and public spheres inherentto the liberal tradition.These claims, however, do not
68 Thompson writes, "inasmuchas they would be strippedof all theirgrossness and associated with intellectual and expansive sympatheticpleasures" sexual pleasures would be increasedone hundredfold"(ibid., 300). Laterin the book, he increases this estimatetenfold (558).

69
70 71

Ibid.,556.

Ibid., 157, 150. William Thompson,Labor Rewarded: The Claims of Labor and Capital Conciliated ... (London:printedfor Hunt and Clarke, 1827), 112; andInquiry, 549.

450

SUSANFERGUSON

diminishthe radicalqualityof her politics. Indeed,the viciousness with which the radical democratic movement was suppressed in the late 1790s (along with the fact that the repression was spearheadedby an economic liberal, William Pitt) is a telling indication of the extent to which such ideas posed, or were perceived to pose, a real threatto the existing order.72 Moreover, Wollstonecraft'sradicalismis based in her politicization of class and family. But we have to be carefulto explain the nature of thatpoliticization.Wollstonecraft'seconomic and moral egalitarianism are radical insofar as they confront the sociohistoric limits of the ruling ideas of her day. It was radical to argue for women's essential rationality,their right to education and careers, and to tie those demands to an argumentfor a relative equality of property in a period when the dominantliberal ideas were heavily influenced by notions of aristocraticprivilege and inheritedhonours. Such demands, like those of her fellow radical democrats,were beyond the historic possibilities imaginedby a ruling class composed of those from bourgeoisand aristocratic backgrounds. But her radicalismdid not threatenthe very existence of class and family as institutions.The author of Vindicationis unabashedlycommittedto the sanctityof privateproperty,and it is this commitmentthat leads her to endorse the distinction between the private and public spheres as necessary and desirable.In other words, despite an inherent radicalism,Wollstonecraft'sfeminism is shaped by some of the most fundamentalmoral and economic principles of liberalism. One needs only to perusethe tractsof the Owenite socialists,writtensome 30 years later,to gain a sense of a feminist politics thatdevelops out of a theoretical framework which rejects class, private property and a public/ privatedichotomy.
72 This attackon the establishedorder was predominantly posed in political, rather than economic, terms, with most of the radical democratseither ignoring questions of political economy or endorsing a "petty-bourgeois"model. This, howof the FrenchRevoever, in the context of aristocratic privilege and the aftermath lution, was sufficient to unleash the full power of the state's repressivearm.That is, the radical democrats were vilified because the authorities feared political democracywould lead to economic leveling (see Wells, Insurrection).


