THE  MATTHEW  R.  ISENBURG  COLLECTION:     THE  DISSEMINATION  OF  INFORMATION  ON  A  PRIVATE  PHOTOGRAPHIC  COLLECTION,   1972  -  2012   by   Heather  Courtney,     Bachelor  of  Fine  Arts,  OCAD  University,  Toronto,  2008   A  thesis     presented  to  Ryerson  University   in  partial  fulfillment  of  the     requirements  for  the  degree  of     Master  of  Arts     in  the  Program  of     Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management   Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014   ©  Heather  Courtney  2014     

  

Author's  Declaration  
   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  thesis,   including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.   I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or  by  other   means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of   scholarly  research.   I  understand  that  my  thesis  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.      Heather  Courtney     

  

  

ii  

THE  MATTHEW  R.  ISENBURG  COLLECTION:    THE  DISSEMINATION  OF  INFORMATION  ON  A   PRIVATE  PHOTOGRAPHIC  COLLECTION,  1972  -  2012      HEATHER  COURTNEY   Master  of  Arts,  2014   Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management     Ryerson  University    

  
  

Abstract  
   This  thesis  examines  how  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  of  nineteenth-century   photography  and  photographica,  assembled  between  1972  and  2012,  was  used  by  researchers,   scholars,  and  photography-enthusiasts,  and  how  information  about  it  was  disseminated  to  the   public,  prior  to  its  sale  to  the  Archive  of  Modern  Conflict,  Toronto,  in  2012.    The  private   collection  focused  on  five  areas  from  early  photography  (1830s  ­  1860s):  the  Southworth  &   Hawes  photography  studio  (Boston,  1843  ­  1863),  images  of  and  information  about  the   California  Gold  Rush  (1848  ­  1855),  photographic  technology  (including  cameras,  lenses,  and   studio  equipment),  daguerreotype  and  ambrotype  cases,  and  nineteenth-century  literature   (featuring  technical  manuals  and  sales  catalogues).  This  thesis  features  a  literature  survey,   documentation  of  how  Isenburg  displayed  his  collection  within  his  home,  a  description  of  the   experience  of  visiting  his  collection,  an  annotated  bibliography  of  publications  that  feature  the   collection,  and  an  analytical  chapter  describing  how  the  reputation  of  the  collector  and   collection  evolved.        

  

  

iii  

Acknowledgements  
   I  would  like  to  thank  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  for  amassing  a  collection  that  demanded  such  a   thesis  be  written,  for  graciously  speaking  to  me,  and  for  providing  me  with  photographic   documentation.    I  am  grateful  to  Jill  Offenbeck,  Mike  Robinson,  and  Amanda  Shear,  at  the   Archive  of  Modern  Conflict,  Toronto  for  granting  me  unrestricted  access  to  the  Matthew  R.   Isenburg  Collection,  providing  me  with  photographic  documentation,  relaying  their  own   experiences  with  Isenburg  and  his  collection,  and  encouraging  me  to  pursue  my  topic.    Thank   you  to  M.  Susan  Barger,  Richard  S.  Field,  Nicholas  Graver,  Mark  Johnson,  Weston  Naef,  and   John  Wood  for  their  memories  of  visiting  the  collection,  and  Robert  Lonsdale  for  photographic   documentation.    Above  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  David  Harris,  my  thesis  advisor,  for  his  gracious   and  unwavering  encouragement,  invaluable  direction  and  thorough  editing.    Thank  you  also  to   Don  Snyder,  my  second  reader,  for  his  helpful  and  careful  review  of  the  manuscript,  and  Marta   Braun,  the  PPCM  programme  director.        

  

  

iv  

Table  of  Contents  
Author's  Declaration  ......................................................................................................................  ii   Abstract  .........................................................................................................................................  iii   Acknowledgements  .......................................................................................................................  iv   List  of  Illustrations  .........................................................................................................................  vi   Introduction   ....................................................................................................................................  1   Literature  Survey  ............................................................................................................................  7   The  Room  at  the  Top  ....................................................................................................................  15   The  Visitor's  Experience  ...............................................................................................................  54   Annotated  Bibliography  ...............................................................................................................  61   Reflections  on  the  Annotated  Bibliography  .................................................................................  95   Conclusion  ..................................................................................................................................  106   Bibliography   ................................................................................................................................  109           

  

  

  

v  

List  of  Illustrations  
   1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. Mike  Robinson.  Portrait  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  2004.    Half-plate  daguerreotype.   Collection  of  Mike  Robinson,  Century  Darkroom,  Toronto.   Ken  Nelson.  Portrait  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  sitting  in  front  of  house,  2000.  Quarter-plate   daguerreotype.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.   View  of  Isenburg's  living  room,  1978.  Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.   View  of  Isenburg's  den,  1978.  Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Hand-drawn  sketch  for  renovations  in  Isenburg's  attic,  1987.     Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Second  library  in  Isenburg's  garage,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,   Hadlyme.   Second  library  in  Isenburg's  garage,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,   Hadlyme.   Outside  view  of  Isenburg's  house,  date  unknown.    Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Main  library  in  Isenburg's  home,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg.   Isenburg  in  his  main  library,  date  unknown.    Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Collection  of  nineteenth-century  camera  lenses  above  shelves  in  Isenburg's  main  library,   date  unknown.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  1,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  2,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  3,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  4,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  5,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  6,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  7,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  8,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,   Toronto.   Stairway  and  hallway  leading  to  second-floor  landing  in  Isenburg's  house,  2012.  Digital   image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Flat-file  drawers  on  second-floor  landing  in  Isenburg's  house,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy   of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Flat-file  drawers  on  second-floor  landing  in  Isenburg's  house,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy   of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   vi  

  

23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42.      

Author's  own  schematic  diagram  of  the  attic  layout,  2013.   View  of  Isenburg's  attic,  after  renovations,  date  unknown.    Digital  image  courtesy  of   Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Two  desk  areas  along  west  wall  in  Isenburg's  attic,  date  unknown.  Digital  image  courtesy   of  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   View  of  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  east,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,   Hadlyme.   View  of  display  bays  in  Isenburg's  attic,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.   Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  1,  May  2012.    Digital  mage  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  2,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  3,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  4,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  5,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  6,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  7,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.   False  wall  in  Isenburg's  attic  containing  HVAC  unit,  date  unknown.    Digital  image  courtesy   of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Southworth  &  Hawes  seating  area  in  Isenburg's  attic,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of   AMC,  Toronto.   Oversized  and  prized  items  in  Isenburg's  attic,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew   R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   View  of  flat-file  drawers  in  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  west,  date  unknown.  Colour   photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Flat-file  drawers  in  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  southeast,  date  unknown.    Digital  image   courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Panorama  view  of  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  west,  July  2011.  Digital  image  courtesy  of   Robert  Lonsdale.   Southworth  &  Hawes.  Portrait  of  girl  with  hand  on  shoulder,  c.  1850.    Full-plate   daguerreotype.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.   Ken  Nelson.  Portrait  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  sitting  outside  of  house,  2000.  Quarter-plate   daguerreotype.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.     

  

vii  

Figure  1  -  Mike  Robinson.  Portrait  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  2000.    Half-plate  daguerreotype.  Collection  of  Mike  Robinson,   Century  Darkroom,  Toronto.  

  

viii  

Introduction  
   Matthew  R.  Isenburg  (born  1927)  began  his  foray  into  collecting  photographica1  in  the  

late  1960s  after  he  was  given  a  Leica  camera  in  lieu  of  payment  for  photographing  a  wedding.     After  purchasing  another  model,  Isenburg  became  fascinated  by  the  differences  and  similarities   between  the  two  cameras,  an  interest  that  propelled  him  to  amass  his  first  photographic   collection  of  over  1000  twentieth-century  Leica  items,  including  200  camera  bodies,  along  with   lenses,  accessories  and  trade  literature.    This  early  collection  not  only  shows  an  interest  in   collecting  photographica,  instead  of  focusing  on  prints,  but  also  is  an  example  of  the  ferocity   that  Isenburg  brought  to  collecting.    The  bulk  of  this  Leica  collection  was  sold  in  the  early  1970s,   and  Isenburg  shifted  his  focus  to  a  more  challenging  and  under-collected  area  at  the  time,  the   first  four  decades  of  photography  (late  1830s  ­  1860s)  with  an  emphasis  of  photographs  and   photographica  produced  in  North  America.       Collecting  with  intensity,  initially  with  little  competition,  Isenburg  developed  and  refined   this  collection  over  forty  years  (1972  ­  2012),  before  he  sold  it  to  the  Archive  of  Modern   Conflict  (AMC)  in  Toronto,  Canada2.    The  sale  of  the  collection  was  propelled  by  Isenburg's   increasing  age  and  health  concerns  (Isenburg  suffered  a  heart  attack  in  2009),  and  his  desire  to    

                                                                                                                 1   "Photographica"  is  an  all-encompassing  term  that  refers  to  the  ephemera,  such  as  cameras,   studio  equipment,  and  advertisements,  directly  related  to  the  history  of  photography.   2   The  Archive  of  Modern  Conflict  is  a  privately  owned  collection  with  branches  in  London,   England  and  Toronto,  Canada.    The  sale  of  the  collection  was  announced  by  Mike  Robinson,   president  of  The  Daguerreian  Society  in  2012,  and  then  newly  appointed  Director  of  Education   and  Research  at  the  AMC  in  "The  President's  Message"  article  in  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  24,  No.  2,  (April-June,  2012):  2,  14.      1  

see  the  collection  continue  to  be  used  by  researchers3.    Isenburg  worked  with  private   photographic  dealer  Greg  French,  spending  countless  hours  familiarizing  French  with  his   collection,  who  ultimately  brokered  the  deal  with  the  AMC.    It  was  imperative  to  Isenburg  that   his  collection  was  sold  in  its  entirety,  to  maintain  the  interconnectedness  of  many  items  within   the  collection4.    This  stipulation  greatly  narrowed  the  number  of  institutions  who  could  afford   to  acquire  such  a  large  collection.   Isenburg's  own  particular  interests  and  his  eagerness  to  share  his  knowledge  defined   both  his  collection  and  his  persona  as  a  collector.    The  collection  of  approximately  21,500   items5  is  best  known  for  five  subgroups  that  account  for  the  majority,  though  not  all,  of  the   collection.  Firstly,  Isenburg  amassed  the  finest  Southworth  &  Hawes6  collection  in  private   hands7.    The  collection  includes  daguerreotypes,  cartes  de  visite,  family  albums,  business   records,  and  chairs  from  the  studio,  amongst  other  items.    Secondly,  the  collection  is  noted  for  

                                                                                                                 3   See  French,  Greg.  "Miracle  on  City  Avenue:  "The  Many  Faces  of  Daguerre"."  The  Daguerreian   Society  Newsletter.  20,  No.  4,  (October  ­  December,  2009):  10-11.   4   One  example  of  the  relationship  between  subgroups  is  found  in  the  California  Gold  Rush  and   Southworth  &  Hawes  material.    From  1849  to  1851,  Albert  S.  Southworth  left  the  Boston  area   and  prospected  in  the  California  Gold  Rush.   5   At  the  time  of  my  thesis'  completion,  the  Archive  of  Modern  Conflict  in  Toronto  was   cataloguing  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection,  including  the  library.    As  such,  any  numbers  in   reference  to  the  quantity  of  items  within  the  collection  are  approximations  given  by  AMC,   Toronto.   6   The  Boston  studio,  operated  by  the  partnership  of  Albert  Sands  Southworth  (1811  ­  1894)  and   Josiah  Johnson  Hawes  (1808  ­  1901)  was  in  operation  from  1843  to  1863.   7   Other  comparable  collections  of  Southworth  &  Hawes  photographs  and  ephemera  are  found   in  major  institutions,  primarily  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art  in  New  York,  the  Museum  of   Fine  Arts  in  Boston,  and  George  Eastman  House  International  Museum  of  Photography  and  Film   in  Rochester,  as  documented  in  the  exhibition  catalogue  Young  America:  The  Daguerreotypes  of   Southworth  &  Hawes  (Steidl:  2008)  (bibliography  136).    See  also  Anne  E.  Havinga's  article  "The   Collection  of  Southworth  and  Hawes  Daguerreotypes  at  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston"  The   Daguerreian  Annual  1995  (bibliography  39).      2  

the  largest  private  collection  of  daguerreotypes,  both  scenes  and  occupational  portraits8,  of  the   California  Gold  Rush  of  the  1850s.  Thirdly,  Isenburg's  technology  collection  was  primarily   comprised  of  nineteenth-century  cameras  with  more  than  two  dozen  daguerreotype  cameras   and  more  than  thirty  wet-plate  collodion  cameras,  most  of  which  are  American.    This  subgroup   also  contains  a  selection  of  the  various  apparatuses  and  accessories  related  to  taking  and   printing  photographs  at  the  time.  Fourthly,  approximately  2000  daguerreotype  and  ambrotype   cases  (late  1830s  ­  1860s),  some  still  containing  photographs,  were  collected  for  their  historical   value  and  for  their  rarity.9    All  of  these  first  four  categories  are  supported  by  ephemera10  that   contextualize  the  photographs  within  the  collection.    One  example  amongst  many  is  of  two   letters,  one  from  the  miner  and  a  later  one  from  his  wife,  that  relate  to  the  daguerreotype   occupational  portrait  of  the  miner  William  McKnight  (also  in  the  collection).  Finally,  Isenburg's   library  of  approximately  1500  volumes  comprises  the  fifth  subgroup.    This  collection  includes   approximately  350  nineteenth-century  primary  sources,  including  annuals,  catalogues,  and   technical  manuals,  and  approximately  1100  twentieth-  and  twenty-first  century  secondary   research  material,  including  periodicals,  newsletters,  technical  manuals,  monographs,   photography  auction  catalogues,  and  general  and  regional  histories.     Isenburg  understood  that  the  procurement  and  development  of  a  private  collection   provided  him  with  a  wealth  of  historical  knowledge  that  he  was  eager  to  share.    Isenburg,  who                                                                                                                    8   An  "occupational"  refers  to  a  daguerreotype  portrait  that  shows  the  sitter  with  the  tools  of  his   or  her  trade.    E.g.,  a  miner  is  shown  with  a  pickax  and  a  pan  of  gold.    Portraits  of  soldiers  posing   with  their  weapons  are  often  included  in  this  category,  as  are  other  more  unusual  occupations.   9     For  example,  the  collection  includes  a  full-plate  mother  of  pearl  case,  a  rare  material  for  cases   that  were  usually  made  from  thermoplastic.     10   "Ephemera"  refers  to  paper  documents  that  are  now  considered  to  hold  historical   significance,  but  which  were  not  originally  considered  valuable,  such  as  newspaper   advertisements,  and  personal  letters.      3  

owned  Ford  auto  dealerships,  was  an  autodidactic  historian  and  described  himself  as  a   "disseminator  of  historical  information"  by  nature11.    Isenburg  regarded  the  display  of  his   collection  as  "a  story  that  [he]  put  together  in  a  room  that  was  exciting  [because  people]  could   learn  something  that  they  couldn't  at  major  museums."    The  extent  to  which  Isenburg  made  his   collection  known  and  available  to  photographic  and  social  historians,  curators,  and  fellow   collectors  is  exceptional,  and  it  is  not  generally  known  how  widespread  the  efforts  of  Isenburg   were.       In  the  summer  of  2012,  the  AMC  purchased  the  MRI  Collection  as  a  whole  for  15  million   American  dollars12.  Willing  to  forgo  a  comprehensive  inventory  prior  to  a  price  being  set,  this   act  of  faith  is  indicative  of  the  quality  of  the  collection  that  was  understood  by  the  small   community  of  avid  collectors,  curators,  and  historians  of  nineteenth-century  photography.   While  it  is  not  uncommon  for  a  private  collector  to  purchase  individual  photographs  from  a   larger  collection  and  even  smaller  collections,  a  transaction  of  this  magnitude  from  one  private   collector  into  the  hands  of  another  private  collection,  in  this  case  the  AMC,  is  rare.       In  this  thesis,  I  provide  an  analysis  of  how  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  (MRI   Collection)  was  known,  how  it  was  used  (and  by  whom),  prior  to  its  sale.  In  this  way,  the  thesis   will,  from  a  larger  perspective,  contribute  to  our  understanding  of  history  and  social  use  of                                                                                                                    11   This  and  the  following  quotation  are  from  my  telephone  interviews  with  Isenburg  in   September  2013.    See  footnote  35  for  further  details.   12   The  sale  of  the  MRI  Collection  received  almost  immediate  coverage.    For  example,  The  British   Photographic  History  website  first  posted  a  blog  entry  on  June  27,  2012  that  was  later  removed   because  the  sale  had  not  been  publicly  announced.  Approximately  one  week  later,  the  website   posted  a  detailed  entry  about  the  sale  and  the  collection,  comparing  it  to  the  sale  of  The   Gernsheim  Collection  to  the  Harry  Ransom  Centre.   http://britishphotohistory.ning.com/profiles/blogs/isenburg-collection-of-early-photography- sells-for-15-million      4  

private  photographic  collections  in  North  American  in  the  second  half  of  the  twentieth  century.   I  have  approached  this  analysis  in  five  separate  but  complementary  ways  to  illustrate  the   complex  and  multi-leveled  interaction  with  researchers,  curators,  and  collectors,  and  the   resulting  reach  of  the  collection.    First,  my  literature  survey  demonstrates  a  lack  of  research  on   twentieth  century  private  collectors  of  photography  and  how  their  collections  were  known  and   used  before  they  were  dispersed  through  sale  at  auction  or  acquisition  by  other  private   collectors  or  public  institutions.    Secondly,  to  better  understand  how  Isenburg's  collection  not   only  supported  his  own  research  but  also  contributed  to  that  of  other  collectors,  historians  and   curators,  I  have  devoted  the  chapter,  "The  Room  at  the  Top",  to  a  description  of  the  physical   layout  of  the  collection  within  Isenburg's  home  and  how  researchers  interacted  with  and  used   the  collection  for  their  own  study.  In  the  third  chapter,  "The  Visitor's  Experience",  I  examine  the   relationships  that  Isenburg  developed  with  fellow  enthusiasts  of  nineteenth-century   photography.    By  conducting  interviews  about  their  experiences  of  visiting  the  Isenburg   collection  in  his  home  with  a  small  number  of  people,  including  a  scientist,  fellow  private   collectors,  historians,  and  curators  who  used  the  collection,  a  sense  of  this  interaction  emerges.   This  is  obviously  not  intended  to  be  a  comprehensive  record,  but  merely  to  give  a  sense  of  how   the  collection  was  used  over  time.  In  the  fourth  chapter,  I  have  compiled  an  annotated   bibliography  that  reveals  how  the  collection  became  known  through  the  variety  and  range  of   more  than  136  general  and  scholarly  publications.  For  each  entry  I  provide  a  synopsis  of  the   contents,  the  reference  to  Isenburg,  and  the  number  and  type  of  images  from  the  MRI   Collection  that  are  included.  The  fifth  chapter  comprises  an  analytical  essay  that  draws  upon   the  annotated  bibliography  and  identifies  trends  and  patterns  in  the  use  and  dissemination  of   5  

  

the  MRI  Collection  over  the  forty-year  period  of  time.    Approaching  my  subject  from  different   angles,  as  outlined  above,  provides  a  documented,  well-rounded,  and  insightful  portrait  of  the   impact,  uniqueness,  and  reputation  of  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection.        

  

  

6  

Literature  Survey     
One  could  argue  that  throughout  the  history  of  photography,  private  collections  have   exerted  an  enormous  influence  on  public  collections  of  photography,  as  private  collections  have   often  constituted  the  core  upon  which  public  collections  were  subsequently  built.    The  interests   and  decisions  of  private  collectors  have  had  a  significant  impact  on  what  we  understand  as  the   history  of  photography.    Despite  this  key  role  in  identifying  and  preserving  the  material  that   now  comprises  the  history  of  photography,  few  profiles  and  even  fewer  academic  studies  and   historical  overviews  of  collectors,  institutional  curators,  collecting  practices,  and  major  private   and  public  photographic  collections  exist.     The  Museum  of  Modern  Art's  Department  of  Photographs  former  Director  John   Szarkowski  defined  the  ideal  character  of  a  collector  as  being  "an  amateur,  a  critic,  a  curator,  a   magpie,  and  an  adventurer"  in  his  short  and  pioneering  essay  "Photography  and  the  Private   Collector"  (1970).    Szarkowski  further  defines  each  of  these  traits  to  paint  a  portrait  of  a  person   who  unabashedly  loves  photography,  but  collects  with  astuteness  and  discernment,  while  still   remaining  open  to  new  possibilities  of  interest.    While  this  description  may  have  been  informed   by  his  knowledge  of  the  art  community  and  his  own  experiences  as  a  curator,  Szarkowski's   approach  remains  deliberately  general  and  does  not  offer  specific  examples  of  collectors  who   fit  this  model,  though  the  psychology  he  presents  of  photographic  collectors  is  still  very  much   relevant  today.   John  Pultz's  pioneering  essay  "Collectors  of  Photography"  (1985)  offers  a  more  defined   structure  with  which  to  analyze  the  history  and  evolution  of  European  and  North  American   private  collectors  by  classifying  them  as  distinct  types,  utilizing  the  available  sources  at  the   7  

  

time.13    Pultz  divides  collectors  historically  into  four  broad  groups  (documentary,  aesthetic,   cultural,  and  modernist)  that,  he  argues,  evolved  chronologically  from  the  1850s  to  the  1980s.     In  contrast  to  the  nineteenth-century  collector  who  thought  of  collecting  as  a  means  to   document  the  emergence  of  the  new  medium  as  a  technology,  the  most  recent  collector,  the   modernist,  believes  that  "neither  the  evocation  of  the  past  nor  technology  alone  should  define   a  collection"  (Pultz,  18).    Though  Pultz  uses  well-known  collectors  as  representative  examples  to   illustrate  his  categories,  he  offers  a  simplified  categorization  of  collectors,  likely  due  to  limited   knowledge  available  on  the  subject  at  the  time,  and  space  limitations  within  the  publication.     While  such  analyses  posit  the  characteristics  and  motivations  of  collectors,  neither  Szarkowski   nor  Pultz  apply  their  ideas  to  any  one  collector  in  depth,  and  Pultz's  more  recent  essay  is  now   nearly  30  years  old.   Publications  that  do  pay  homage  to  the  efforts  of  private  collectors  in  building  public   collections  are  often  included  in  institutional  histories.  George  Eastman  House  International   Museum  of  Photography  and  Film  offers  an  example  of  the  effect  that  the  efforts  of  private   collectors  have  had  in  establishing  that  museum's  collection,  a  common  practice  for  large   institutions.    Imagining  Paradise14  (2007)  acknowledges  the  collectors  and  patrons  who   contributed  to  the  formation  and  development  of  the  research  library,  and  A  Collective   Endeavour  ­  The  First  Fifty  Years  of  George  Eastman  House  (2009)  outlines  how  the   photographic  collection  was  built  from  a  number  of  private  collections.                                                                                                                    13   Pultz's  essay  was  included  in  the  catalogue  for  an  exhibition  that  featured  the  private   collection  of  Paul  F.  Walter  at  the  Museum  of  Modern  Art.    The  collection  was  later  sold  to  the   museum.     14   Shiela  J.  Foster  and  Rachel  Stuhlman  provide  further  historical  analysis  of  the  Richard  and   Ronay  Menschel  Library  at  George  Eastman  House  in  their  essay  "Portrait  of  a  Library"  in   Imagining  Paradise  (2007).      8  

When  major  private  collections  are  sold  or  donated  (or  a  combination  of  the  two)  en   masse  to  an  institution,  there  is  traditionally  a  celebratory  exhibition,  often  accompanied  by  an   exhibition  catalogue  or  publication  to  mark  this  important  event.    For  example,  the  1963  sale  of   The  Gernsheim  Collection  to  the  University  of  Texas  at  Austin's  Harry  Ransom  Center  was   marked  by  a  small  exhibition  in  1965.    The  modest  accompanying  catalogue,  limited  to  1000   copies,  features  a  brief  list  of  the  86  items  included  in  the  exhibition  with  a  mere  25  black  and   white  illustrations,  along  with  a  mere  half-page  biography  of  the  two  collectors,  Helmut  and   Alison  Gernsheim.      The  Ransom  Center  has  also  recently  published  two  substantial  books   (2010,  2013)  that  provide  a  substantial  overview  of  the  collection  as  a  whole  and  honour  the   efforts  of  the  original  collectors15.  Roy  Flukinger's  detailed  essay  "A  Historiography:  Helmut  and   Alison  Gernsheim  and  The  Gernsheim  Collection"  in  The  Gernsheim  Collection  (2010)  in   particular  pays  homage  to  the  collectors16.    However,  this  level  of  detail  in  analyzing  the  legacy   of  photography  collectors  is  extremely  rare.    The  Ransom  Center  also  maintains  a  website  that   highlights  many  of  the  individual  collections  it  has  acquired,  and  provides  biographical   overviews  of  the  collectors  (the  Gernsheims  included)  that  have  made  a  significant  contribution   to  the  institution's  holding17.  These  publications  add  to  our  overall  knowledge  of  collections  and                                                                                                                    15   Numerous  books  and  articles  were  also  published  that  use  the  Gernsheim's  collection  prior  to   its  sale,  the  majority  of  which  were  written  by  the  Gernsheims.    These  publications  were   instrumental  in  establishing  the  reputation  of  the  collection.    For  an  exhaustive  listing,  see   "Selected  Bibliography"  in  The  Gernsheim  Collection  (University  of  Texas  Press:  2010).   16   Flukinger's  essay  traces  the  chronological  development  of  the  Gernsheims'  collection  from   their  first  meeting  in  1944  with  Beaumont  Newhall,  who  was  enormously  influential  and   encouraging  in  what  they  collected,  to  the  sale  of  the  collection  in  1965.    Flukinger's  extensive   research  is  evident  in  the  prolific  footnotes  that  cite  letters,  unpublished  manuscripts,  and   documentation  about  the  collection  by  the  Gernsheims  themselves.   17   The  Harry  Ransom  Center's  online  overview  of  its  collections  can  be  found  at   http://www.hrc.utexas.edu/collections/guide/      9  

collectors  in  a  scattered  and  disjointed  way.    The  individual  examples  still  need  to  be  shaped   into  larger  narratives  about  collecting  and  taste  to  clarify  whether  they  are  representative,   unusual,  or  merely  eccentric.     While  these  private  collectors,  both  at  George  Eastman  House  and  The  Ransom  Center,   are  acknowledged  in  the  context  of  how  their  respective  contributions  substantially  helped   shape  larger  public  institutions,  it  is  much  more  common  for  parts  of  a  private  collection  to   remain  in  private  hands,  once  divided  and  sold  through  auction  or  commercial  dealers.      Private   collectors  often  sell  off  portions  of  their  collections  in  order  to  continue  developing  and  shaping   their  collection  according  to  their  own  interests  and  vision.  In  such  instances,  auction  houses   regularly  sell  material  from  a  number  of  private  collections18.    The  accompanying  auction   catalogues  offer  enough  provenance  information  to  authenticate  and  add  value  to  an  item,  but   the  emphasis  is  not  on  the  collector,  or  the  history  of  the  object,  but  rather  on  the   photographer  and  individual  photograph.       On  occasion,  however,  auction  catalogues  dedicated  to  selling  a  private  collection  from   a  sole,  well-known  collector  are  produced,  and  these  also  constitute  a  permanent  record  and   add  considerably  to  our  knowledge  of  collecting.    Beginning  with  the  sale  of  the  "important   collection"  of  Albert  E.  Marshall  (Swann,  1952),  collectors  of  photography  have  been  more   regularly  featured  in  auction  sales19.    Some  recent  examples  include  the  auction  catalogues  of   collections  assembled  by  André  and  Marie-Thérèse  Jammes  (1999,  2002,  and  2008),  Jack  Naylor                                                                                                                    18   Examples  of  this  type  of  sale  are  plentiful  as  they  occur  often.  For  example,  see  Photographs,   Christie's  London,  15  May  2008,  when  79  photographs  from  several  private  collections  were   offered  at  auction.       19   Another  early  example  of  an  auction  featuring  a  private  photography  collection  is  the  William   C.  Darrah  collection  of  stereo  views,  sold  in  1979  through  Hastings  Galleries  in  New  York  City.          10  

(2007),  and  Henry  M.  Buhl  (2012)20.  Again,  these  publications  offer  little  biographical   information  about  the  collectors  or  the  formation  of  the  collection,  and  instead  focus  on  the   photographers  and  photographs  being  sold  by  providing  bibliographic  and,  more  recently,   detailed  provenance  information  for  individual  items.    Though  such  publications  offer  us  a   glimpse  into  the  taste  and  focus  of  the  collector,  they  offer  little  biographical  information  about   the  collector(s),  and  scant  analysis  of  the  motivations  and  reasoning  behind  the  formation  and   development  of  a  private  collection.   It  is  rarer  still  for  exhibition  catalogues  to  exclusively  feature  private  collections  prior  to   an  institution  acquiring  the  collection.  The  few  examples  that  do  exist  include  the  Gernsheims,   who  produced  a  catalogue  in  1963  for  their  travelling  exhibition  Creative  Photography  1826  to   the  Present:  An  Exhibition  from  The  Gernsheim  Collection.    The  catalogue  gives  evidence  of  not   only  the  breadth  and  quality  of  items  from  their  collection  shown  (the  catalogue  includes  a   detailed  list  of  over  1000  items,  700  of  which  were  photographs,  included  in  the  exhibition)  but   also  suggests  that  there  was  an  audience  with  an  interest  in  historical  photography21.  An  essay   written  by  the  Gernsheims,  in  which  they  provide  a  condensed  history  of  photography,   accompanies  the  catalogue.    It  is  not  until  the  end  of  the  essay  that  the  collectors  acknowledge   their  own  role  in  amassing  "the  most  important  photo-historical  collection  in  existence"   assembled  by  "private  individuals."  (10)  Other  later  examples  include  The  Collection  of  Graham                                                                                                                    20   La  photographie,  collection  Marie-Thérèse  et  André  Jammes.  (London:  Sotheby's,  1999.),  La   photographie  II  :  collection  Marie-Thérèse  et  André  Jammes  :  exposition  à  Paris  du  vendredi  15   au  mercredi  20  mars  2002.  (Paris:  Sotheby's,  2002.),  La  photographie  IV:  collection  Marie- Thérèse  et  André  Jammes.  (Paris:  Sotheby's,  2008.),  The  Naylor  Collection:  The  Complete  History   of  Photography.  (New  York:  Guerney's,  2007.),  and  A  Show  of  Hands:  Photographs  from  the   Collection  of  Henry  Buhl.    (New  York:  Sotheby's,  2012.)   21   This  particular  exhibition  was  shown  in  varying  configurations  at  10  venues  in  6  European   countries  over  a  12  year  period,  before  being  shown  in  Detroit.      11  

Nash  (1978)22,  a  limited  edition  publication  produced  for  an  exhibition  at  the  de  Saisset  Art   Gallery  and  Museum  at  the  University  of  Santa  Clara  in  California,  (which  does  not  provide  any   details  about  Nash  himself),23  and  Speaking  with  Hands:  Photographs  from  the  Buhl  Collection   (2004),  an  exhibition  of  175  photographs  that  was  shown  at  the  Solomon  R.  Guggenheim   museum  in  New  York  (though,  as  mentioned  previously,  the  entire  collection  was  eventually   sold  at  auction)24.    In  each  of  these  cases,  an  exhibition  in  a  museum  validated  the  value  of  the   collection  prior  to  its  public  sale.   Sometimes,  though  quite  rarely,  private  collectors  will  publish  a  book  that  features  and   promotes  their  collection  and  consequently  themselves  as  collectors.      For  example,  George   Gilbert,  in  his  book  Collecting  Photographica:  The  Images  and  Equipment  of  the  First  Hundred   Years  of  Photography  (1976)  showcases  his  collection,  but  as  illustrated  examples  within  a   guide  for  the  would-be  collector.  To  provide  further  models  for  the  aspiring  collector,  Gilbert   also  profiles  twenty  collectors  in  a  section  titled  "Meeting  the  Collectors".    Each  collector   profiled  receives  a  title  reflective  of  his  or  her  status  as  a  collector,  at  least  in  Gilbert's  opinion.     Here  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  is  the  first  collector  presented  as  "American's  Most  Remarkable   Collector"  and  is  heralded  "for  having  built  what  is  possibly  the  most  significant  collection  in  the   United  States"  and  for  his  willingness  "to  share  his  vast  knowledge  with  collectors  across  the   country."  (202).  Other  collectors  are  described  with  similar  superlative  adjectives;  but  only  half  

                                                                                                                 22   The  Graham  Nash  collection  was  also  later  sold  at  auction  in  1990.   23   Another  example  is  The  Stephen  White  collection,  which  was  exhibited  at  the  New  Orleans   Art  Museum,  who  published  a  substantial  catalogue  despite  the  museum  not  being  the   collection's  final  destination.    The  Tokyo  Fuji  Art  Museum  in  Japan  was  the  eventual  recipient  in   1990.   24   The  Buhl  Collection  sold  for  12.3  million  dollars  total  in  2012.      12  

a  page,  with  a  portrait  of  the  collector  amongst  his  collection,  is  allotted  for  each  profile.  In  the   accompanying  text  few  details  are  provided,  about  either  the  collectors  or  their  collections.     Such  superficial  profiles  of  collectors  also  appear  sporadically  in  promotional  and   adulatory  articles  in  magazines  and  journals.    For  example,  an  article  titled  "50  Most  Important   Collectors  in  the  World"  from  American  Photo  (March/April  1995)  provides  a  listing  of   prominent  private  collectors  of  photography  dotted  with  portraits  of  a  handful  of  the  collectors.     Each  collector  is  afforded  a  brief  entry  of  biographical  and  collection  information  under  the   subheadings  Who,  Collects,  and  Background.     All  of  these  different  types  of  publications  consistently  demonstrate  that  there  is  still  a   lack  of  information  and  analysis  of  how  private  collectors  are  understood  and  how  private   photographic  collections  were  amassed,  recognized  and  used,  both  prior  to  and  after  their   dispersal  (in  the  case  of  the  Jammes  collection)  or  acquisition  by  larger  institutions  (in  the  case   of  the  Gernsheim  collection).      Consistently,  publications  draw  upon  the  efforts  of  private   collectors  to  showcase  the  contents  of  their  collections  and,  though  acknowledging  the   collectors,  place  far  greater  emphasis  on  specific  items  from  the  collection.       The  categories  that  Pultz  applies  to  collectors,  and  the  assumptions  that  can  be  made   about  the  various  motivations  to  collect  laid  out  by  Szarkowski,  both  need  further  study.  In   order  to  differentiate  one  collector  from  another,  and  to  point  to  certain  patterns  in  motivation   and  execution  --  e.g.,  the  use  of  the  collection  as  a  reflection  of  a  sensibility  or  idea,  as  is   evident  in  the  Buhl  collection25;  or  the  use  of  a  collection  to  record  the  history  of  photography,   as  seen  in  the  Jammes  and  Gernsheim  collection;  or  the  use  of  a  collection  to  inspire  other                                                                                                                    25   The  Buhl  Collection  exhaustively  explored  the  theme  of,  and  featured,  the  human  hand.      13  

collectors,  as  with  Gilbert  --  more  descriptions  and  analyses  about  specific  collectors  need  to  be   compiled  and  written.   This  lack  of  analysis  continues  to  hinder  our  understanding  of  the  important  role  that   private  collectors,  and  their  collections,  have  had  throughout  the  history  of  photography.    A   case  study  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  provides  a  rare  opportunity,  because  so  often  the  distancing   factors  of  time  (the  sale  of  the  MRI  Collection  is  quite  recent),  wide  dispersal  (the  MRI   Collection  was  sold  intact),  and  access  (though  the  AMC  is  also  a  private  collection  I  was  given   open  access)  hinder  research.  The  sheer  number  of  publications  that  used  Isenburg's  collection,   coupled  with  documentation  of  how  his  collection  was  made  available  in  private  and  exhibited   in  public,  provide  a  multi-faceted  portrait  of  the  collector.         

  

  

14  

The  Room  at  the  Top  
On  November  9  2012,  Matthew  Isenburg  gave  his  purportedly  last  public  presentation,   "The  Story  of  the  Isenburg  Collection,  1970-2012"  at  the  annual  Daguerreian  Society   Symposium  in  Baltimore  (November  7-11,  2012).    During  the  hour-long  presentation,  Isenburg   reminisced  in  his  New  England  drawl  to  the  audience  of  daguerreotype  enthusiasts  about  his   collection  before  explaining  his  decision  to  sell  his  collection  and  the  bittersweet  experience  of   parting  with  a  collection  he  had  spent  four  decades  building.  As  part  of  his  talk,  Isenburg   described  the  physical  layout  of  his  home,  how  his  collection  was  physically  housed  and   intellectually  organized  within  it,  and,  as  a  result,  the  kind  and  quality  of  interaction  he  had   specifically  created  for  his  visitors  and  researchers26.      Isenburg's  1780  post  and  beam  house  (figure  2)  is  nestled  in  the  historic  district  of  East  

Haddam,  in  Hadlyme,  Connecticut  on  a  seven  acre  (28328  square  metres)  pie-shaped,  wooded   lot  with  a  total  of  six  buildings.27  The  house  was  the  centre  of  activity  for  Isenburg's  collection,   though  how  the  collection  was  displayed  evolved  over  time.  This  evolution  can  be  loosely   charted  through  Isenburg's  own  recollections  and  photographic  documentation.    In  1978,   Isenburg's  camera  collection  was  kept  in  the  living  room  and  adjoining  den,  which  was   accessible  through  the  French  doors  of  the  living  room  (figure  3).    In  a  1978  photograph,  the                                                                                                                    26   Much  of  my  understanding  of  the  overall  layout  of  the  collection  within  Isenburg's  house  was   gleaned  from  this  presentation.   27   More  specific  information  about  the  organization  and  display  of  the  collection  in  Isenburg's   home  came  from  my  own  conversations  with  Isenburg  himself  in  September  2013,  and  several   interviews  of  researchers  familiar  with  the  MRI  Collection  in  September  ­  October  2013.  See   footnotes  35  and  36  for  details.  Some  general  information  was  taken  from  interviews   conducted  and  recorded  by  Parker  Kay  in  Baltimore  during  the  Daguerreian  Symposium  in   November  2012,  and  with  Elizabeth  Isenburg,  Isenburg's  second  wife,  during  the  disassembling   of  the  collection  in  May  2012.      15  

den  in  particular  (figure  4)  shows  hints  of  a  burgeoning  collection:  nineteenth-century  cameras,   lenses  (in  the  top  left),  studio  equipment  (in  particular  two  buffing  paddles  used  to  shine   daguerreotype  plates  before  exposure),  and  reference  books  (in  the  bottom  right),  are  visible   on  the  shelves.  
  

Figure  2  -  Ken  Nelson.  Portrait  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  sitting  in  front  of  house,  2000.  Quarter-plate  daguerreotype.  Collection   of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

     

  

16  

Figure  3  -  View  of  Isenburg's  living  room,  1978.  Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.  The  French  doors,  visible  in  the   centre,  lead  to  the  den.     

  

  

Figure  4  -  View  of  Isenburg's  den,  1978.  Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

  

17  

As  Isenburg's  collection  expanded,  his  need  for  space  to  house  and  display  his  collection   did  as  well.    In  1987,  Isenburg  hired  contractors  to  renovate  his  622  square  foot  (57.8  square   metres)  attic  space,  which  was  originally  unused  and  unfinished  when  he  bought  the  house  in   1966,  to  his  specifications  (figure  5).    This  more  formally  separated  the  bulk  of  Isenburg's   photographic  collection  from  his  research  and  reference  library,  establishing  the  third  floor  attic   and  the  ground  floor  library  as  the  two  primary  areas  for  the  storage  and  display  of  the   collection.       

Figure  5  ­  Matthew  Isenburg.  Hand-drawn  sketch  for  renovations  in  Isenburg's  attic,  1987.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew   R.  Isenburg.     

  

      18  

  

The  library  had  a  second  location:  metal  shelves  placed  in  a  room  connected  to  a  six-car  

garage,  where  Isenburg  kept  his  collection  of  antique  cars,  that  was  the  only  storage  of  the   collection  set  apart  from  the  house  (figures  6  and  7).    The  material  kept  in  the  garage  included   twentieth-century  photography  auction  catalogues,  journals  from  photographic  historical   societies,  photocopies  of  important  nineteenth-century  texts  that  Isenburg  did  not  own,  and   duplicate  copies  of  nineteenth-century  journals.28         

Figure  6  -  Second  library  in  Isenburg's  garage,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.  

  

                                                                                                                    28   The  boxes  labeled  by  AMC  staff  during  disassembling  the  collection  at  Isenburg's  house  as   either  "ML"  for  Main  Library  or  "G"  for  Garage  confirm  this  division  of  material  between  the   two  libraries.        19  

Figure  7  -  Second  library  in  Isenburg's  garage,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.  

  

      The  hub  of  the  collection,  both  for  Isenburg  and  for  researchers,  was  the  ground  floor   library  that  housed  nineteenth-  and  twentieth-century  publications  located  in  the  throughway   that  connected  the  house  to  the  solarium  (figure  8).    This  room  was  lined  on  one  side  by  eight   wood  shelving  units  of  3  ­  5  shelves  each  (figures  9  ­  19).    A  large  table  was  centred  in  the  room   that  acted  as  a  study  area  for  both  Isenburg  and  visitors.    Opposite  the  bookshelves  were   windows  and  a  glass  door  to  the  backyard  deck  that  basked  the  space  with  natural  light.  
           

  

20  

  

Figure  8  ­  Outside  view  of  Isenburg's  house,  date  unknown.    Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.    The  library  in  the   house  was  located  in  the  building  in  the  center  of  this  image.    The  space  acted  as  a  throughway,  connecting  the  house  and  the   solarium.                

  

Figure  9  ­  Main  library  in  Isenburg's  home,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.  Note  the  large  table   in  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  the  large  bay  windows  to  the  right  in  the  image.         

  

  

21  

Figure  10  -  Isenburg  in  his  main  library,  date  unknown.    Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

     

Figure  11  ­  Collection  of  nineteenth-century  camera  lenses  above  shelves  in  Isenburg's  main  library,  date  unknown.  Digital   image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.  

  

      Volumes  in  the  house  library  were  arranged  thematically  to  loosely  mirror  the  main   subject  areas  of  Isenburg's  photographic  collection,  alongside  more  general  histories  of   photography,  primarily  from  the  nineteenth  century.    From  left  to  right  (and  top  to  bottom   within  each  unit),  when  facing  the  library  shelves,  the  books  were  organized,  at  the  time  of   dismantling  in  2012,  as  indicated  in  the  following  pages.29        

                                                                                                                 29   AMC  photographed  the  library  prior  to  dismantling  in  May,  2012.      22  

  Figure  12  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  1,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.     

  

   Bookshelf  1.  This  contained  nineteenth-century  annuals.  The  top  two  shelves  contained  a   complete  set  of  The  American  Annual  of  Photography,  and  Photographic  Times  Almanac  (1887   to  1907)  and  The  American  Annual  of  Photography  (1908  to  1953).    The  two  bottom  shelves   (not  shown)  contained  numerous  35mm  slides  taken  by  Isenburg  of  his  collection.  

  

23  

Figure  13  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  2,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.     

  

Bookshelf  2.  This  contained  nineteenth  and  twentieth-century  volumes.    The  top  shelf   contained  volumes  of  the  Saint  Louis  Photographer  (1851  to  1861).    The  second  shelf  contained   boxes  with  presently  unknown  contents.    The  third  shelf  contained  mainly  twentieth-century   general  histories  of  photography.       

  

24  

Figure  14  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  3,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

   Bookshelf  3.  This  contained  nineteenth-century  annuals  and  a  mixture  of  both  nineteenth  and   some  twentieth-century  publications.  The  top  shelf  contained  volumes  of  The  Photographic   News  (1860  to  1894)  and  The  Year-Book  of  Photography  (1870  to  1898).    The  second  through  

  

25  

fifth  shelves  contained  nineteenth-century  volumes  focused  on  subjects  of  chemistry,  light,   optics,  and  studio  practices,  such  as  retouching  of  photographs.     

  

26  

Figure  15  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  4,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.     

  

Bookshelf  4.  This  contained  nineteenth-century  annuals  and  reference  books  with  some   twentieth-century  publications.  The  top  shelf  contains  set  of  the  American  Journal  of   Photography  annual  (1854  to  1881)  and  other  nineteenth-century  annuals.    The  second  shelf   contained  several  books  by  the  English  photographer  and  scientist  Robert  Hunt  (1807  to  1887)   and  other  general  reference  books.    The  third  and  fourth  shelves  contained  nineteenth-century  

  

27  

volumes  focused  on  subjects  of  chemistry,  light,  and  optics,  as  well  as  general  histories  of   photography.        

  

28  

Figure  16  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  5,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.        

  

Bookshelf  5.  This  contained  nineteenth  and  twentieth-century  volumes.  The  top  shelf  contained   The  Journal  of  the  Photographic  Society  of  London  (1864  to  1881).    The  second  shelf  contained   twentieth-century  reference  manuals  for  nineteenth-century  photographic  processes.    The   third  and  fourth  shelves  contained  histories  of  the  daguerreotype  in  both  Europe  and  America,      29  

and  general  histories  of  photography.    The  bottom  shelf  also  contained  various  documents  and   guides  to  collecting  nineteenth-century  cameras.          

  

30  

Figure  17  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  6,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.        

  

Bookshelf  6.  This  contained  nineteenth  and  twentieth-century  volumes.    The  top  two  shelves   contained  reference  books  about  the  California  Gold  Rush.    The  third  shelf  contained  books   about  early  photography  practices  in  North  America,  and  a  glass  chalice.    The  bottom  shelf   contained  more  reference  books  about  the  California  Gold  Rush  and  life  in  America  during  the   nineteenth  century.         31  

  

Figure  18  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  7,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.        

  

Bookshelf  7.  This  contained  nineteenth  and  twentieth-century  volumes.  The  top  two  shelves   contained  reference  books  about  the  California  Gold  Rush.    The  third  shelf  contained  French   nineteenth-century  publications,  Graham's  Magazine  (1847  to  1852),  and  firearms  reference   material  that  related  to  the  California  Gold  Rush.  The  bottom  shelf  contained  books  about   settling  the  western  regions  of  the  United  States.    

  

32  

Figure  19  -  Isenburg's  main  library:  Bookshelf  unit  8,  May  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.        

  

Bookshelf  8.  This  contained  nineteenth-century  reference  books.  The  top  shelf  contained   oversized  items,  such  as  atlases  and  albums.    The  second  shelf  contained  mid-nineteenth- century  magazines,  including  Gody's  Lady's  Book  (1856  to  1859)  and  business  directories  for  the   Boston  area.    The  third  shelf  contained  miscellaneous  nineteenth-century  volumes  and  more  

  

33  

business  directories.    The  bottom  shelf  displayed  a  bronze  bust  of  L.J.M.  Daguerre  and  a  frame   with  a  hand-written  letter  by,  and  1850s  photograph  of,  Daguerre.        

  

34  

From  the  main  library,  guests  would  begin  their  ascent  through  the  house  in  order  to   gain  access  to  the  rest  of  the  collection.    The  hallways  and  stairway  were  lined  with  framed   paper  ephemera  and  photographs  (figure  20).    On  the  second  floor  landing  there  was  a  set  of   large,  flat-file  wooden  drawers  that  housed  the  majority  of  Isenburg's  collection  of   approximately  2000  daguerreotype  and  ambrotype  cases  (figures  21  and  22)30.    The  destination   most  guests  had  in  mind,  however,  was  the  attic,  often  fondly  referred  to  as  the  room  at  the   top  (figure  23).     

Figure  20  ­  Stairway  and  hallway  leading  to  second-floor  landing  in  Isenburg's  house,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew   R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.  Note  the  framed  paper  ephemera  covering  the  walls.  

  

                                                                                                                 30   Many  of  these  cases  still  contained  daguerreotypes  and  ambrotypes  but  were  collected  for   their  reference  value.      35  

Figure  21  ­  Flat-file  drawers  on  second-floor  landing  in  Isenburg's  house,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg.   Drawers  contained  daguerreotype  and  ambrotype  cases.        

  

  

Figure  22  -  Flat-file  drawers  on  second-floor  landing  in  Isenburg's  house,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,   Hadlyme.  Drawers  contained  daguerreotype  and  ambrotype  cases.  

  

  

36  

Figure  23  ­  Author's  own  schematic  diagram  of  the  attic  layout,  2013.           

  

  

Visitors  entered  the  space  by  a  narrow  27  inch  (68.6  centimetres)  wide  staircase  at  the  

west  end  of  a  room  with  sloped  ceilings  that  measured  37  feet  by  16  feet  and  eight  inches  (11.3   by  16.7  metres)  overall  (figure  5).    The  room  was  carpeted  not  only  underfoot  (with  a  neutral   beige)  but  also  on  the  walls  with  a  striking  green  reminiscent  of  billiard  table  felt,  a  colour  that   Isenburg  referred  to  as  "money  green31."    After  the  attic  was  initially  renovated  in  1987,  the   area  looked  rather  sparse  when  compared  to  its  packed  state  prior  to  AMC  dismantling  it,   standing  as  proof  that  how  Isenburg  displayed  his  collection  evolved  as  his  collection  grew   (figure  24;  compare  with  figure  40).        Two  desks,  with  wooden  shelves  also  holding  photographic  items,  occupied  the  space  

along  the  west  wall  (figure  25).    To  view  the  collection,  guests  would  turn  and  choose  to  walk   down  one  of  two  parallel  aisles,  running  from  west  to  east,  towards  the  other  (eastern)  end  of   the  space.                                                                                                                        31   Isenburg  insisted  on  buying  a  rich  carpet  for  the  space  to  indicate  to  guests  that  they  were   visiting  a  quiet,  refined  space.    He  also  chose  a  darker  colour  that  would  allow  mirrored   daguerreotype  images  to  be  easily  seen.        37  

Figure  24  ­  View  of  Isenburg's  attic,  after  renovations,  date  unknown.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Note  the  narrow  staircase  in  the  center  of  the  room,  and  the  lack  of  green  wall  covering.               

  

Figure  25  ­  Two  desk  areas  along  west  wall  in  Isenburg's  attic,  date  unknown.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,   Hadlyme.  

  

  

38  

  

The  north  wall  held  the  first  four  of  seven  thematic  display  bays  (the  other  three  were  

along  the  south  wall  in  the  south-east  corner),  each  measuring  approximately  four  feet  (1.2   metres)  square  and  lined  with  the  same  green  carpet  fabric  found  on  the  walls32.  Below  each   bay  were  shallow  drawers  that  housed  daguerreotypes,  related  research  papers,  and  other   ephemera.  A  shelf  also  ran  along  the  top  of  the  bays,  just  below  eye  level,  acting  as  another   area  for  display  of  cased  photographs  (figures  26  and  27).       

Figure  26  -  View  of  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  east,  2012.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.  Note  the  narrow   staircase  (visible  in  bottom  right  of  image),  the  HVAC  unit  behind  the  staircase,  the  bays  along  the  north  wall  with  drawers   below  and  display  shelf  above,  and  the  Southworth  &Hawes  sitting  area  in  the  northeast  corner.    

  

                                                                                                                    32   The  bays  were  documented  by  photograph,  film  and  inventory  lists  by  the  AMC  during  the   packing  of  items,  so  there  is  a  detailed  permanent  record  of  what  each  vitrine  contained.      39  

Figure  27  -  View  of  display  bays  in  Isenburg's  attic,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.  Along  the   north  wall,  bay  2  is  in  centre  of  image,  with  partial  views  of  bays  1  and  3  visible,  including  the  shelf  displaying  daguerreotypes   above.  

  

      Though  reflective  of  Isenburg's  interests,  the  bays  do  not  follow  the  major  subgroups  of  

the  collection33.  Instead,  the  displays  within  the  bays  can  be  broken  down  as  indicated  on  the   following  pages.34                                                                                                                          33   The  cursory  overview  of  the  seven  bays  in  the  following  pages  indicates  their  overall  themes   and  objects  of  interest  but  does  not  provide  a  detailed  or  complex  inventory  and  explanation  of   the  sometimes  complex  relationships  among  numerous  objects.   34   The  AMC  thoroughly  documented  the  contents  of  each  bay  at  the  time  of  dismantling  in  May,   2012.      40  

Figure  28  -  Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  1,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

      Bay  1.  This  was  devoted  to  European  pre-photographic  and  early  photographic  equipment  and   materials,  and  comprised  approximately  50  items  from  England,  France,  and  Germany.    It   included  the  first  two  fasciles  of  William  Henry  Fox  Talbot's  Pencil  of  Nature  (1844-46),  three   cameras,  a  microscope  in  an  ornamental  bell  jar  and  at  least  six  daguerreotypes.     

  

41  

Figure  29  -  Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  2,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

   Bay  2.  This,  and  the  next  two  bays,  were  devoted  to  the  North  American  daguerreotype  studio,   including  equipment,  and  advertisements  for  daguerreotypes  and  daguerreotypists.  It   comprised  approximately  60  items,  including  coins,  documents,  buffing  paddles,  at  least  11   cased  images,  and  a  group  of  seven  glass  bottles  and  jars  of  chemicals  used  in  early   photography  processes.     

  

42  

Figure  30  -  Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  3,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

      Bay  3.  This,  together  with  the  previous  and  next  bay,  was  devoted  to  the  daguerreotype  studio.     It  comprised  approximately  40  North  American  items  (plus  an  unknown  number  of  cartes  de   visite  in  the  lower  left  of  image),  including  oversized  objects,  a  daguerreotype  camera,  buffing   paddles  and  other  studio  equipment,  framed  daguerreotypes,  and  cabinet  cards.        

  

43  

Figure  31  -  Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  4,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.     

  

   Bay  4.  This,  together  with  the  previous  two  bays,  was  devoted  to  the  North  American   daguerreotype  studio  production.    It  comprised  approximately  60  North  American  items,   including  20  plate  boxes  (on  glass  shelf),  nine  sensitizing  boxes,  one  camera,  daguerreotypes,   various  developing  equipment,  and  paint  boxes  for  tinting  photographs.     

  

44  

Figure  32  -  Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  5,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

      Bay  5.  This  was  devoted  to  cameras  and  accessories  and  comprised  approximately  60  European   items,  including  nine  cameras  (eight  wet-plate  and  one  dry-plate),  camera  accessories,  framed   cartes  de  visite,  and  paper  ephemera  such  as  advertising  broadsides.     

  

45  

Figure  33  -  Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  6,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

      Bay  6.  This  was  devoted  to  the  American  wet-plate  collodion  process  and  comprised   approximately  80  items,  including  26  chemical  bottles,  12  cased  images,  five  cameras,   preservers,  mats,  dipping  tanks,  and  lenses  for  cameras  used  in  wet-plate  processes.        

  

46  

Figure  34  -  Isenburg's  attic:  Bay  7,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

      Bay  7.  This  was  devoted  to  the  stereoscopic  process  and  comprised  approximately  50  items,   including  eight  stereo  cameras,  15  stereoscopic  viewing  devices,  11  stereo  daguerreotypes,   cases,  and  stereo  cards,  including  some  early  examples  mounted  with  salted  paper  prints  rather   than  albumen  prints.        

  

47  

  

In  the  centre  of  the  attic,  further  dividing  the  north  aisle  from  the  south  aisle  was  a  

heating,  ventilation,  and  air  conditioning  (HVAC)  unit,  used  to  cleanse  the  air  and  control  the   temperature  and  relative  humidity  within  the  space  and  to  protect  the  collection  from   deterioration.    The  HVAC  unit  was  hidden  by  a  false  green-carpeted  wall  upon  which  framed   daguerreotypes  were  hung  (figure  35).    Behind  the  HVAC  unit  was  a  display  table,  with  chairs,   for  displaying  and  studying  individual  daguerreotypes  (figure  37).     

Figure  35  ­  False  wall  in  Isenburg's  attic  containing  HVAC  unit,  date  unknown.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,   Hadlyme.  

  

     

  

48  

      In  the  north-east  corner  of  the  attic  sat  three  chairs  from  the  Southworth  &  Hawes  

studio  (two  for  posing  and  one  thought  to  be  from  the  women's  dressing  room),  cased  and   framed  daguerreotypes  from  the  firm,  and  various  over-sized  items  such  as  framed   photographs  and  apparatuses  for  displaying  photographs  (figure  36).    Adjacent  to  this  display   and  along  the  east  wall  was  a  display  area  for  oversized  and  highly  prized  items  (figure  37).    The   space  was  visually  anchored  by  a  sculpted  and  painted  wooden  eagle  with  an  American  flag,   featuring  a  daguerreotype  portrait  of  the  Warren  Light  Guard  soldiers  taken  during  the   American  Civil  War,  that  measured  an  impressive  eight  feet  and  five  and  three  quarter  inch  (2.6   metres)  across.  Considered  by  Isenburg  to  be  the  pièce  de  résistance  in  his  collection,  the  eagle   perched  above  the  entire  space.    Next  to  bay  7  was  a  set  of  labeled  flat-file  drawers  that  held   even  more  daguerreotypes  (figures  38  and  39).    Isenburg's  camera  collection  was  set  in  a  row   using  tripods  along  the  south  wall,  and  on  a  shelf  placed  on  the  staircase  railing,  which  ended   back  at  the  staircase  by  which  visitors  entered  (figure  40).              

  

49  

   Figure  36  -  Southworth  &  Hawes  seating  area  in  Isenburg's  attic,  May  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  AMC,  Toronto.           

Figure  37  ­  Oversized  and  prized  items  in  Isenburg's  attic,  2012.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  Hadlyme.   Reader  is  facing  east.    Southworth  &  Hawes  sitting  area  is  to  the  left  (north)  and  the  wooden  eagle  is  prominently  displayed  to   the  right  (east).  The  display  table  is  visible  in  lower  left  of  image,  with  stereoscopic  daguerreotypes  on  view.      

  

  

50  

Figure  38  -  View  of  flat-file  drawers  in  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  west,  date  unknown.  Colour  photograph.  Collection  of  AMC,   Toronto.  

  

     

Figure  39  -  Flat-file  drawers  in  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  southeast,  date  unknown.    Digital  image  courtesy  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,   Hadlyme.  Bay  7  is  visible  to  the  left  in  the  image.  

  

  

  

51  

Figure  40  -  Panorama  view  of  Isenburg's  attic,  facing  west,  July  2011.  Digital  image  courtesy  of  Robert  Lonsdale.    Isenburg  is   seated.  Row  of  cameras  is  visible  along  the  left  side  of  image  (south  wall  of  attic).    

  

           

A  comparative  study  of  other  private  collectors,  to  determine  the  uniqueness  of  how  

Isenburg  organized  and  displayed  his  collection,  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  thesis,  and  has  not   yet  been  carried  out.    However,  it  is  apparent  that  items  were  not  shown  as  a  museum  typically   would  design  an  exhibition  for  its  collection.    Isenburg  clearly  imposed  his  own  logic,  drawing   from  the  subcategories  of  his  collection,  and  arranged  the  material  to  maximize  the  amount   and  type  of  material  put  on  display  and  available  for  researchers.    The  presentation  of  his   collection  evolved  as  his  collection  grew,  from  more  humble  and  sparse  displays  in  the  1970s   and  1980s,  to  the  later,  thematically-dense  displays  which  Isenburg  determined  with  numerous   and  varied  related  objects  brought  together  (compare  figures  24  and  40).    This  form  of  display   not  only  lent  itself  to  a  constantly  expanding  collection,  but  also  was  designed  to  welcome   interaction,  both  with  the  objects  and  with  the  host,  from  guests.    Isenburg  and  others  could  

  

52  

easily  and  temporarily  remove  objects  from  the  displays  for  study  at  either  the  display  table,  or   the  two  work  desk  areas.    The  separation  of  the  main  photographic  collection  in  the  attic   created  a  space  akin  to  a  treasure  trove.             

  

  

53  

The  Visitor's  Experience     
   The  main  library  and  attic  in  Isenburg's  house  not  only  served  as  primary  locations  for   guests  and  researchers  to  interact  with  the  MRI  Collection,  but  also  for  Isenburg  to  converse   with  guests.    The  social  interaction  between  Isenburg  and  visitors  to  his  home  cannot  be   undervalued  or  separated  from  how  the  collection  was  organized  and  displayed  throughout  the   house.    When  researchers  were  asked  to  share  past  experiences  about  Isenburg,  they   repeatedly  spoke  of  the  generosity  and  hospitality  extended  to  them.    The  generosity  of  the   Isenburgs  was  a  trait  that  extended  to  the  time  and  attention  Isenburg  afforded  his  visitors   when  enthusiastically  sharing  his  intimate  and  encyclopedic  knowledge  of  his  collection.    The   experience  of  a  guest  interacting  with  both  the  collection  and  the  collector  in  an  intimate   domestic  setting  is  distinctive  of  private  collections,  but  the  uniqueness  of  visiting  Isenburg  can   only  be  fully  understood  through  guests  recounting  their  experiences.   Access  to  Isenburg's  collection  by  outside  researchers  grew  over  time,  parallel  to  the   development  of  his  collection.    On  April  25,  1972,  the  year  Isenburg  turned  his  attention  to   collecting  nineteenth-century  photography,  Isenburg's  son  gave  him  a  leather-bound  black   guestbook  with  a  gold  embossed  title  "Matthew  R.  Isenberg  Camera  Collection"  on  the  front   cover.      The  first  guest  entry  was  from  the  same  day  the  book  was  given,  and  the  last  was  from   February  19,  1988,  less  than  one  year  after  Isenburg  renovated  his  attic.    Each  entry  includes   the  visitor's  name,  the  date,  a  note  of  thanks  ranging  from  quite  brief  to  one  page  in  length,   along  with  a  scattering  of  business  cards  and  hand-written  notes  on  inserted  papers.    It  is   unclear  if  every  visitor  is  represented  in  the  book,  but  it  does  provide  a  testament  to  the  people   who  visited  the  collection  during  that  sixteen-year  period.    The  number  of  visitors  throughout   54  

  

the  span  that  the  guestbook  encompasses  ranged,  on  average,  from  1-4  per  month.    Some  days   there  were  many  visitors,  likely  groups,  and  some  months  there  were  no  visitors.    According  to   Isenburg,  the  majority  of  visitors  during  this  time  came  on  weekends  and  the  visits  were  more   leisurely  and  personal.   Such  a  record  does  not  exist  past  1988,  but  Isenburg  recollects35  that  the  rate  of  visitors   dramatically  increased  in  the  1990s,  after  two  events  in  1989:  the  exhibition  American   Daguerreotypes  From  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  (bibliography  131),  which  opened  at   the  Yale  University  Art  Gallery  in  November  1989,  and  the  formation  of  The  Daguerreian   Society,  also  in  1989.    The  majority  of  scholarly  researchers,  however,  visited  after  2000.     Eventually,  during  the  early  2000s,  Isenburg  decided  to  set  a  more  rigid  visitation  schedule  with   10  ­  15  people  visiting  during  three  designated  days  per  week.    This  limited  schedule,  is  still   very  generous,  and  does  not  imply  that  Isenburg  was  unwilling  to  accommodate  serious   researchers  at  other  times.    Isenburg  recalled  that  most  visits  began  with  a  telephone  call  from   the  potential  visitor,  inquiring  if  it  was  indeed  the  Matthew  Isenburg  they  were  speaking  with,   before  explaining  their  particular  wish  to  see  the  collection.    Isenburg  said  no  to  many  such   requests,  especially  to  those  who  did  not  have  a  clear  topic  of  research.    Thus,  this  era  of   visitors  to  the  collection  saw  a  shift  from  at  first  intimate  and  casual  visits  of  Isenburg's  friends,   who  sought  an  overview  of  the  collection,  to  later  more  professional  researchers,  who  had   specific  reasons  for  studying  the  collection.  

                                                                                                                 35   Matthew  R.  Isenburg  was  interviewed  on  September  13,  2013,  and  much  of  my  general   understanding  of  how  the  experience  of  visitors  evolved  from  1972  ­  2012  was  gleaned  from   this  conversation.      55  

The  visits  from  these  later  scholars  were  centered  within  the  library  and  mostly  used   Isenburg's  books  and  not  his  photographic  collection,  partly  due  to  the  volume  of  people  and   partly  due  to  Isenburg's  advancing  age.    Though  Isenburg  was  happy  to  pinpoint  information   found  in  his  reference  books,  often  found  within  the  nineteenth-century  commercial  catalogues   and  instruction  manuals,  these  visitors  were  mostly  left  with  unsupervised  and  unlimited  access   to  the  library.      This  more  ordered  approach  of  later  years  is  contrasted  by  testimonials   gathered  from  interviews,  conducted  in  September  and  October  2013  via  email  and  telephone,   with  six  individuals,  who  experienced  far  more  personal  and  extended  visits  with  Isenburg  and   his  collection,  largely  in  the  late  1980s  and  1990s36.    These  individuals  were  chosen  because   they  represent  a  range  of  scholarly  professions  and  interests.       John  Wood,  art  historian  and  author,  described  visiting  Isenburg's  collection  for  the  first   time  in  the  mid  ­  late  1980s,  prior  to  co-founding  the  Daguerreian  Society,  as  "mind  boggling   [and]  overwhelming."    During  his  many  visits,  Isenburg  usually  met  Wood  at  the  nearby  airport,   with  a  new  addition  to  his  collection  waiting  in  the  car  to  spur  on  their  conversation  back  to   Hadlyme.    After  lunch,  usually  at  a  local  diner,  the  pair  would  sequester  themselves  in   Isenburg's  attic  and,  with  a  break  for  dinner,  remain  examining  objects  until  3  ­  4  a.m.    Wood   described  one  of  Isenburg's  defining  features  to  be  his  "amazing  stamina"  and  the  experience   of  being  in  the  attic  together  was  "like  being  the  classroom  but  with  the  best  visual  materials,   [with]  things  being  pointed  out"  that  he  wouldn't  have  noticed  on  his  own.                                                                                                                        36   The  following  six  people  were  interviewed:  M.  Susan  Barger  (September  28  via  telephone),   Richard  S.  Field  (September  30  via  telephone),  Nicholas  Graver  (October  23  via  email),  Mark   Johnson  (September  24  via  telephone),  Weston  Naef  (September  23  in  person),  and  John  Wood   (September  28  via  telephone).  The  quotations  in  the  following  pages  are  drawn  from  these   interviews.      56  

Mark  Johnson,  former  president  of  the  Daguerreian  Society  and  long-time  editor  of  The   Daguerreian  Annual,  first  met  Isenburg  in  1988  in  Rochester  at  the  initial  membership  drive  for   the  society.    Soon  after,  Johnson  visited  Isenburg  on  several  occasions,  documenting  items  from   his  collection  for  the  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts-funded  database37,  which  afforded   Johnson  the  opportunity  to  see  the  majority  of  Isenburg's  daguerreotypes.    Johnson  recalls  that   "if  you  asked  [Isenburg]  for  any  subject,  he  would  have  10,  if  not  100  examples."    In  order  to   produce  such  results,  Isenburg  was  organized,  and  knew  where  everything  was,  acting  as  the   "Lord  of  the  collection"  and  often  keeping  Johnson  up  until  2  ­  3  a.m.    As  an  editor  for  the   Daguerreian  Annual,  Johnson  also  remembered  Isenburg's  willingness  and  deft  ability  to  quickly   locate  sources  for  articles  within  the  library.   In  January  1989,  M.  Susan  Barger,  whose  PhD  dissertation  had  focused  on  the   composition  and  conservation  of  daguerreotype  plates,  visited  Isenburg  for  2  ­  3  days,  staying   as  an  overnight  guest  at  Isenburg's  invitation.    Barger  recalls  that  her  visit,  which  was  not  linked   to  specific  research,  was  an  "overwhelming  experience,  seeing  so  many  items  within  only  a   couple  days"  and  that  she  decided  to  simply  let  Isenburg  show  her  what  he  wanted  her  to  see,   which  was  "stacks  of  daguerreotypes."    Isenburg  knew  Barger's  interest  in  the  composition  of   daguerreotypes,  and,  at  one  point,  he  generously  opened  a  nineteenth-century  colour  box,   used  for  tinting  daguerreotypes,  and  let  Barger  colour  a  daguerreotype  plate.    Barger  described   Isenburg  as  both  gracious  and  charming.   Richard  S.  Field,  then  Curator  of  Prints,  Drawings,  and  Photographs  at  Yale  University  Art   Gallery,  and  curator  of  American  Daguerreotypes  From  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  first                                                                                                                    37   The  Daguerreian  Society's  NEA  database  can  be  found  online  at   http://www.daguerre.org/nea/searchnea.php      57  

visited  Isenburg  on  February  23,  1988  for  2  ­  3  hours,  according  to  the  guestbook.    Over  the   next  18  months,  Field  visited  Isenburg  and  his  collection  between  10  and  20  times,  "look[ing]   through  everything  he  had,  [speaking]  to  him  about  nearly  everything."  Describing  the   experience  of  selecting  items  for  inclusion  in  the  exhibition  at  Yale  as  collaborative,  Field  recalls   that  Isenburg  had  already  "put  together  the  knowledge  and  the  object"  and  that  he  was   "absolutely  floored"  both  with  the  quality  of  the  collection  and  Isenburg's  willingness  to  show   his  collection.    Field  admits  that,  as  a  curator  responsible  for  the  acquiring  artwork  for  his   museum,  he  hoped  to  establish  a  relationship  with  Isenburg  that  would  potentially  lead  to  the   collection  moving  to  Yale  University,  a  mere  45  miles  (72  kilometres)  away  from  Hadlyme.   A  decade  later,  Weston  Naef,  former  senior  curator  in  the  Department  of  Photographs   at  the  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum38,  visited  Isenburg  twice,  in  1997  and  1998,  conducting  research   for  the  exhibition  The  Art  of  the  Daguerreotype  (bibliography  135)  at  the  J.  Paul  Getty   Museum39.    Ultimately,  Naef  chose  to  include  items  from  the  MRI  Collection  because  of  their   quality  and  uniqueness.      During  the  initial  visit,  Isenburg  treated  Naef  to  a  home-cooked  lunch   and  a  tour  of  the  property  and  house,  before  the  pair  ascended  to  the  attic.    The  layout  of  the   attic  struck  Naef  as  designed  to  be  a  living,  changing  display  for  three-dimensional  objects.   Unlike  the  majority  of  personal  visitors  during  the  1980s,  Naef  left  Isenburg  by  late  afternoon.     Naef  remembers  Isenburg  as  welcoming  and  confident.    Like  Field,  Naef,  approached  Isenburg   in  1998  with  the  request  that  the  museum  could  have  first  refusal  when  Isenburg  was  ready  to  

                                                                                                                 38   Naef  was  the  founding  curator  of  the  Department  of  Photographs  in  1984  and  held  the   position  for  nearly  25  years  before  retiring  in  2008.   39   Associate  Curator  Julian  Cox  also  visited  Isenburg  and  his  collection.      58  

sell  his  collection40.      Naef  recalled  that  Isenburg  was  not  averse  to  selling  the  collection,  but  did   not  want  to  take  on  the  task  of  creating  the  item-level  inventory  that  an  institution  requires   prior  to  determining  the  details  of  an  offer.       While  these  visitors  all  knew  Isenburg  during  shorter  periods  of  time,  Nicholas  Graver,  a   private  collector  of  nineteenth-century  photographs,  based  in  Rochester,  New  York,  knew   Isenburg  prior  to  Isenburg's  decision  to  shift  focus  from  collecting  twentieth  century  cameras  to   nineteenth-century  photography,  cameras,  and  photographica.    Graver  first  met  Isenburg  in   1969,  and  the  two  built  a  relationship  on  their  mutual  interests  in  history  and  collecting,  often   seeing  each  other  at  antique  shows  and  in  Rochester  at  the  PhotoHistory  symposium.    Graver   did  not  conduct  research  for  any  specific  purpose  during  his  several  overnight  visits  to  the   collection  from  the  1970s  onward,  instead  preferring  to  enjoy  the  "special  experience"  and   "show"  of  what  Isenburg  had  in  his  collection41.    In  the  early  1970s,  Graver  was  surprised  when   told  one  morning  that  a  highly  valuable  collection  of  daguerreotype  cases  were  being  stored   under  the  bed  he  had  slept  in.    During  another  memorable  visit  in  the  mid-1970s,  Graver   recollects  marveling  at  and  questioning  some  of  Isenburg's  choices  for  newly  acquired  items,  to   which  Isenburg  consistently  responded  "why  not?"    For  Graver,  this  seemed  to  perfectly   summarize  Isenburg's  attitude  towards  collecting.    When  Graver  returned  home  he                                                                                                                    40   Naef  thought  that  MRI  Collection  would  complement  the  Department  of  Photograph's   collection,  which  is  strong  in  nineteenth-century  material,  and  add  a  depth  of  cultural  and   historical  significance.   41   During  this  visit  in  the  mid-1970s,  Graver  helped  Isenburg  take  stereo  views  of  items  from  his   collection  and  of  the  collector.  Objects  were  arranged  and  lit  to  Isenburg's  high  standards,  with   Isenburg  all  the  while  sharing  with  Graver  the  history  of  each  item.    The  photo  session   concentrated  on  daguerreian  and  wet-plate  photographs  and  photographica.    Even  though  this   was  early  in  the  collection's  history,  the  activity  took  all  night  and  only  stopped  when  the  men   saw  the  sun  rise.        59  

commissioned  a  sign  which  read  "Why  Not?"  and  which  Isenburg  hung  framed  on  his  wall  until   at  least  2012.    Despite  the  increasing  size  and  significance  of  the  MRI  Collection  over  the  years,   during  the  more  than  four  decades  that  Graver  knew  Isenburg,  he  considered  Isenburg  to  be   the  real  attraction  and  reason  for  visiting.   Through  these  recollections  of  personal  visits,  there  are  some  common  experiences  that   emerge.    Consistently,  when  researchers  were  asked  to  share  their  thoughts  about  Isenburg,   they  spoke  of  the  generosity  and  hospitality  extended  to  them.  This  included  a  requisite  meal  of   lunch  or  dinner  usually  prepared  by  Isenburg's  wife,  either  before  or  mid-way  through  the  visit.     Isenburg  stated  during  his  November  2012  presentation  at  The  Daguerreian  Society  Symposium   that  "people  who  come  to  our  house  know  that  they  never  leave  hungry,  [that]  they  get  a  meal   no  matter  what."    The  defining  element  of  a  personal  visit  to  the  MRI  Collection  was,  for  some   visitors,  the  man  himself42.    Isenburg's  personality  and  passion  were  expressed  both  in  the   physical  environment43,  and  the  social  interaction  between  guest  and  collector.  Everyone  who  I   interviewed  commented  upon  Isenburg's  enthusiasm  and  generosity  for  sharing  his  intimate   and  encyclopedic  knowledge  about  his  collection.    Oddities  of  visiting  Isenburg,  such  as  the   night-owl  schedule  he  kept,  also  contributed  to  the  unique  experience  of  guests.    Isenburg   determined  what  was  shown  to  his  guests,  though  few  seemed  to  mind  given  the  rare   opportunity  to  interact  with  a  collection  of  such  quality.             

  

                                                                                                                 42   Graver  felt  that  "always,  it  was  [Isenburg]  that  was  most  unique,  the  stuff  was  secondary."   43   His  attic  space  in  particular  lent  itself  to  an  exciting  show-and-tell  atmosphere.          60  

Annotated  Bibliography     
This  is  a  bibliography  of  publications  that  reference  either  Isenburg  or  his  collection.       When  Isenburg's  library  was  transported  from  Hadlyme,  Connecticut  to  Toronto,  Ontario,  it  was   packed  in  165  banker  boxes.    As  the  library  was  unpacked  in  its  new  location  in  Toronto,  I   systematically  went  through  first  the  boxes,  and  later  the  library  shelves,  after  the  boxes  were   unpacked,  for  relevant  publications.  I  did  not  exclude  any  items  from  my  findings,  no  matter   how  seemingly  inconsequential  they  may  have  initially  appeared.  All  of  the  publications  are   now  found  in  the  Archive  of  Modern  Conflict  (AMC),  located  at  64  Queen  Street  West,  Suite   2400,  Toronto,  Ontario.      Arrangement   The  bibliography  is  divided  into  seven  main  sections,  with  each  section  further  sub- divided  into  two  sub-sections.  Within  each  section  and  sub-section,  the  publications  are   arranged  chronologically  by  date  of  first  publication44.                                                                                                                                 44   To  effectively  approach  the  material  in  my  research  of  publications,  it  was  necessary  to   organize  the  findings  in  a  logical  order  and  clear  format.    Drawing  upon  the  organization  in   Peter  E.  Palmquist's  The  First  Ten  Years:  A  Listing  of  my  Photographic  History  Obsession,  1973- 1983,  I  have  created  the  seven  subheadings  within  the  annotated  bibliography  to  reflect  the   dissemination  of  information  from  the  MRI  Collection.    Arranged  chronologically,  Palmquist   focuses  on  book  publications,  articles,  exhibitions,  lectures,  consultations,  workshops,  and   professional  memberships  to  indicate  his  involvement  in  the  historical  photographic   community.               61  

The  five  main  sections,  with  the  date  range  of  materials  appearing  in  parentheses,  are:   1. Photographic  Historical  Societies  (1972  ­  2011)   2. Newspapers  (1975  ­  2011)   3. Books:  Histories  of  Photography  (1978  ­  2005)   4. Specialized  Periodicals  and  General  Magazines  (1982  ­  2009)     5. Books:  Exhibition  Catalogues  (1989  ­  2005)   The  Newspapers,  Books,  and  Specialized  Periodicals  and  General  Magazines  sections  (2  ­  4)  are   subdivided  by  items:     1. Written  by  Isenburg   2. Written  about  Isenburg   The  Photographic  Historical  Societies  section  (1)  is  first  subdivided  by  society.    Societies  are   ordered  by  date  of  first  publication  for  each  society,  with  the  date  range  of  materials  appearing   in  parentheses,  then  further  subdivided  by  items:   1. Written  by  Isenburg   2. Written  about  Isenburg     If  a  subcategory  is  not  applicable  to  a  specific  society  it  is  simply  omitted.      Bibliographic  Entries   Bibliographic  entries  are  listed  chronologically  within  each  section  and  sub-section  of   the  bibliography,  unless  otherwise  noted.    This  order  was  chosen  to  reveal  how  the  collection   was  used  and  published  over  time.  

  

62  

Each  bibliographic  entry  is  given  its  own  number  to  allow  for  both  cross-referencing   within  the  bibliography  and  in  the  essay  that  follows.    Bibliographic  entries  follow  the  16th   edition  of  the  Chicago  Manual  of  Style.    Although  the  bibliography  is  as  complete  as  possible,   with  every  attempt  made  to  locate  and  evaluate  all  relevant  publications,  inevitably  it  should   not  be  considered  comprehensive.       The  annotations  in  the  bibliography  provide  evaluative  descriptions  of  each  publication,   and  note  what  is  included  from  Isenburg's  collection45.    Each  entry  states  the  number  of   reproduced  images,  and  whether  they  are  reproduced  in  colour  or  black  and  white,  but,  as   explained  below  in  the  section  "Titles  of  Photographs",  providing  individual  titles  was  beyond   the  scope  of  this  project.    If  there  are  no  images,  the  information  is  simply  omitted  from  the   annotation.      Name  Standardization  for  Matthew  R.  Isenburg   Matthew  R.  Isenburg's  name  appears  a  number  of  different  ways  throughout  the  40- year  span  of  publications  that  is  included  in  the  bibliography.    The  most  noticeable  variance  is   the  spelling  of  Isenburg's  last  name:    in  earlier  publications  he  is  frequently  referred  to  as   Isenberg,  with  an  e  instead  the  u  common  in  later  years.    The  shift  to  the  spelling  common   today  (i.e.  Isenburg)  occurred  in  the  1980s.  Isenburg  is  also  frequently  informally  referred  to  as   Matt.    To  insure  consistency  within  bibliographic  entries,  all  articles  written  by  Isenburg  use  his                                                                                                                    45   In  developing  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  annotations,  I  have  drawn  from  two  superb   annotated  bibliographies  in  two  publications,  Richard  Rudisill's  groundbreaking  book  Mirror   Image:  The  Influence  of  the  Daguerreotype  on  American  Society  (1971),  and  Jennifer  Roger's   thesis,  Era  of  Exploration  and  New  Topographics:  Annotated  Bibliographies  of  Two  Landmark   Exhibitions  (2007).  Roger's  thesis  was  useful  in  alerting  me  to  the  value  of  a  chronological   arrangement,  while  Rudisill  provided  a  style  template  for  brief  and  direct  annotations.        63  

full  name  that  was  attached  to  his  collection  at  the  time  of  its  sale  in  2012:  Matthew  R.   Isenburg.        Titles  of  Photographs   Nineteenth-century  photographs  were  rarely  titled,  and  are  often  informally  referred  to   and  published  using  titles  assigned  to  them  by  twentieth-century  owners,  curators  and   scholars.  For  example,  a  famous  daguerreotype  portrait  created  by  Southworth  &  Hawes,  from   the  MRI  Collection,  has  been  titled  in  publications  at  least  four  ways  (figure  41):   Hand-tinted  Image  of  a  Girl46   Portrait  of  a  Young  Woman47   Young  Girl  With  Hand  on  Shoulder48   Young  Girl  with  Hand  Raised  to  Shoulder49   Given  the  number  of  items  in  the  MRI  Collection,  it  was  beyond  the  scope  of  this  thesis   to  list  each  image  in  the  publications  and  to  link  them  to  specific  items  in  the  collection.     Instead,  images  are  listed  only  by  quantity,  and  whether  they  are  reproduced  in  colour  or  black   and  white.  

                                                                                                                 46   Ridgely,  Julia.  "Mirror  With  a  Memory."  John  Hopkins.  October,  1989:  32-37,  52.   47   Fondiller,  David  S.  "America  in  Amber."  Forbes.  September  12,  1994:  260-263.   48   Mikulski,  Lisa.  "The  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  of  American  Daguerreotypes:   Connections  of  Past  and  Present."  Ink.  November,  2009:  56-65.   49   Romer,  Grant  S.  and  Brian  Wallis,  ed.,Young  America:  The  Daguerreotypes  of  Southworth  &   Hawes.  Gottingen:  Steidl,  2005:  184.      64  

Figure  41  -  Southworth  &  Hawes.  Portrait  of  girl  with  hand  on  shoulder,  c.  1850.    Full-plate  daguerreotype.  Collection  of  AMC,   Toronto.  

  

  

  

  

65  

1.    PHOTOGRAPHIC  HISTORICAL  SOCIETIES  (Chronological  by  first  publication)      A. The  Leica  Historical  Society  of  America  (1972)   B. Photographic  Historical  Society  of  New  England  (PHSNE)  (1974  ­  1989)   C. The  National  Stereoscopic  Association  (NSA)  (1975)   D. Photographic  Historical  Society  of  New  York  (PHSNY)  (1978  ­  1979)   E. The  Western  Photographic  Collectors  Association  (WPCA)  (1980  ­  1981)   F. The  Daguerreian  Society  (1991  ­  2011)                 

  

66  

A.    The  Leica  Historical  Society  of  America        Viewfinder  (Chronological)   Written  by  Isenburg      1. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Suggestions  To  The  New  Collector."  Viewfinder.  5,  No.  1,  (January- March,  1972):  11.   A  one-page  article  containing  advice  to  the  novice  Leica  collector  on  how  to  avoid  being   taken  advantage  of  in  the  marketplace,  and  how  to  list  items  in  the  journal's  "Trader's   Corner"  section  to  full  effect.                                             

  

67  

B.    Photographic  Historical  Society  of  New  England  (PHSNE)      Membership  directories  from  1974,  1977,  1986,  1991,  and  1993  were  found  in  the  MRI   Collection's  library,  and  listed  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  as  a  charter  member.    The  1974  directory   indicated  that  Isenburg  was  Vice-President.      Photo-Nostalgia  (Chronological)   Newsletter  of  the  Photographic  Historical  Society  of  New  England      Written  about  Isenburg      2. Unknown.  "New  Officers,  Board  Elected."  Photo-Nostalgia.  7  (January  1974):  1.   Short  article  mentions  that  Isenburg  was  voted  Vice-President  and  Secretary  of  the   society.    Isenburg  is  described  as  a  "reformed  Leica  collector,  now  concentrating  on   building  a  representative  historical  collection  of  photographic  equipment."      3. Unknown.  "April  Show  &  Tell."  Photo-Nostalgia.  19  (April  1975):  4.   Black  and  white  image  of  Isenburg  holding  a  "glass  plate  movie  camera,  circa  1910."      4. Unknown.  "Show  &  Tell."  Photo-Nostalgia.  40  (June  1977):  2.   Black  and  white  image  of  Isenburg  holding  a  daguerreotype.      5. Unknown.  "Odds  and  Ends."  Photo-Nostalgia.  49  (April  1978):  back  cover.   Book  review  of  Photographica:  A  Guide  to  the  Value  of  Historic  Cameras  and  Images,  co- authored  by  Isenburg.  Reviewer  recommends  book  "for  the  novice  and  sophisticated   collector  alike."  (See  bibliography  90)      6. Unknown.  "Collectors  of  Wing  Cameras."  Photo-Nostalgia.  59  (April  1979):  front  cover,  8.   Tribute  article  to  the  legacy  of  Simon  Wing  (1827  ­  1911),  daguerreotypist  and  inventor.   Black  and  white  group  portrait  of  six  Simon  Wing  Multiple  Image  Cameras  and  their   owners,  including  Isenburg.      7. Unknown.  "At  the  Hartford  PHSNE  Show."  Photo-Nostalgia.  62  (August  1979):  6.   One  black  and  white  image  of  Southworth  &  Hawes  daguerreotype  portrait  with  caption   claiming  image  is  previously  unpublished  and  available  for  public  viewing  for  the  first   time  at  the  upcoming  antique  photographic  exhibition.      8. Unknown.  "At  the  Hartford  PHSNE  Show."  Photo-Nostalgia.  63  (September  1979):  front   cover.   One  black  and  white  image  of  Southworth  &  Hawes  daguerreotype  portrait  titled  "Mona   Lisa  of  Daguerreotypes."            68  

9.

  

Unknown.  Untitled.  Photo-Nostalgia.  70  (April  1980):  3.   Information  for  forthcoming  lecture  by  Isenburg,  "The  Daguerreian  Era  As  Seen  Through   the  Isenburg  Collection."    Lecture  was  to  last  for  one  and  one  half  hours  and  the  author   states  that  attendees  "will  not  be  disappointed."        

  

69  

The  Journal   New  England  Journal  of  Photographic  History      Written  by  Isenburg      10. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "The  One  and  Only  Sayonara  Party."  The  Journal.  142  and  143   (1994):  25-29,  52.   Article  describes  the  large  party,  after  the  sale  of  the  Jack  Naylor  photographic   collection  to  the  government  of  Japan  for  the  creation  of  a  national  photographic   museum.  Article  features  quotes  from  guests  and  captioned  colour  images  of  party   guests  and  of  the  collection  in  Naylor's  home.    The  last  page  of  article  shows  dramatic   before  and  after  images,  from  full  to  empty,  of  the  space  in  Naylor's  home  that  had   housed  his  collection.  (See  bibliography  11)      11. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Jack  is  Back.  No  Doubt  About  It.  Jack  is  Back!!"  The  Journal.  144   and  145  (1995):  54-58.   Follow-up  story  to  article  "The  One  and  Only  Sayonara  Party"  from  previous  issue  of   journal.  Article  poses  the  question  "when  does  a  collector  stop  being  a  collector?"  and   answers,  in  the  case  of  Jack  Naylor,  never.    Six  black  and  white  photographs,  taken  by   Isenburg,  of  space  before  and  after,  from  empty  to  full,  of  Naylor  amongst  his  new   collection.  (See  bibliography  10)      Written  about  Isenburg      12. Unknown.  "Show  and  Tell..."  The  Journal.  96  (February-March  1984):  front  cover.   One  black  and  white  image  of  Isenburg,  holding  a  book,  with  caption  "Matthew   Isenburg,  Southworth  and  Hawes  Daguerreotypes."      13. Naylor,  Jack.  "New  Books  for  Collectors."  The  Journal.  125  (Fall  1989):  8.   Book  review  for  John  Wood's  The  Daguerreotype.  One  black  and  white  image  of  book's   front  cover,  which  features  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection,  included  in  review.  (See   bibliography  92)                    

  

70  

C.    The  National  Stereoscopic  Association  (NSA)      Membership  directories  from  1974-75,  1975-76,  1980,  and  1993  were  found  in  the  MRI   Collection's  library,  and  listed  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  as  a  member.      Stereo  World  (Chronological)   Magazine  started  in  1974  and  is  still  published  as  of  2014.      Written  by  Isenburg      14. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "A  Closer  Look:  J.B.  Dancer's  Camera."  Stereo  World.  2,  No.  2,  (May- June  1975):  1,  11.   A  short  historical  article  regarding  J.B.  Dancer's  1856  stereo  camera  with  one  black  and   white  image  of  camera  reproduced  twice  in  publication.    The  article  was  intended  to  be   the  first  in  a  series  of  similar  articles,  though  the  series  appears  to  have  not  been   completed.          

  

71  

D.    The  Photographic  Historical  Society  of  New  York    (PHSNY)      Photographica  (Chronological)   Written  by  Isenburg      15. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Daguerreian  Vs.  Wet-Plate."  Photographica.  X,  No.  5,  (June,  1978):   6-8,  12.   Article  addresses  the  confusion  and  explains  differences  in  cameras  used  for  the  two   photographic  processes.  Five  black  and  white  images  from  the  MRI  Collection  included,   showing  seven  different  cameras.      Written  about  Isenburg      16. Reed,  Melissa.  "Tour  of  Collections  Presented  by  Matthew  Isenberg  at  February  Meeting."   Photographica.  VI,  No.  4,  (April,  1974):  3.   Brief  article  summarizing  Isenburg's  presentation,  of  over  200  slides,  for  the  society  in   February  1974  of  12  private  collections  "that  revealed  diversity  both  in  the  collector's   intents  and  in  their  methods  of  display."  Collections  featured  in  presentation  are  listed.   Five  small  black  and  white  images  of  display  areas  for  collections,  one  of  which  is  of   Isenburg's  living  room.      17. Gilbert,  George  and  Easton  S.  Lothrop,  Jr.  "Recent  Additions  to  the  Isenberg  [sic]   Collection  Enhance  Daguerreian  and  Wet-Plate  Knowledge."  Photographica.  IX,  No.  5,   (June-July,  1977):  8-9.   Authors  describe  some  of  the  photographic  treasures  they  saw  during  a  visit  to   Isenburg's  house.  Isenburg  is  described  as  "America's  most  dedicated  and  successful   collector."  Five  small  black  and  white  images,  one  of  a  portrait  of  Isenburg  and  four  of   objects  from  his  collection,  with  brief  captions.      18. Unknown.  "Plumbe  Photo  of  Capitol  in  1846  Sold  for  $14,000."  Photographica.  X,  No.  2,   (February,  1978):  front  cover,  4-6.   Author  heralds  Isenburg's  purchase  of  the  historically  significant  daguerreotype  for  the   "largest  cash  price  ever  paid  for  a  single  photograph  of  a  structure."    Article  provides   context  for  the  value  of  the  photograph.  Five  black  and  white  images,  including  three   reproductions  of  the  daguerreotype,  the  cheque  Isenburg  wrote  for  the  purchase,  and   an  image  of  Isenburg  posing  with  the  seller.                 

  

72  

19.

Unknown.  "Matthew  Isenburg  Gives  Society  First  Look  at  Historical  Southworth  &  Hawes   Papers."  Photographica.  XI,  No.  8,  (October,  1979):  front  cover,  4,  5.   Article  provides  summary  of  presentation  Isenburg  gave  in  September,  at  a  PHSNY   meeting  in  New  York,  about  his  recent  acquisition  of  some  of  the  business  papers  of   Southworth  &  Hawes  and  the  resulting  possibility  of  a  better  understanding  the   partnership.  Three  black  and  white  images,  including  a  portrait  of  Isenburg,  a   daguerreotype,  and  a  letter.        

  

73  

E.    The  Western  Photographic  Collectors  Association  (WPCA)      Membership  directories  from  1980,  1985,  1987,  and  1992  -  1993  were  found  in  the  MRI   Collection's  library,  and  listed  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  as  a  member.    The  1992  ­  1993  directory   indicated  that  Isenburg  was  a  member  for  at  least  20  years.      The  Photographist:  Journal  of  The  Western  Photographic  Collectors  Association   (Chronological)      Written  about  Isenburg        20. Unknown.  "The  Daguerreotypes  of  Southworth  and  Hawes  at  Photo  History  West,   Review."  The  Photographist.  48:7.      Review  of  Isenburg's  presentation  "The  Daguerreotypes  of  Southworth  and  Hawes"  at   Symposium  (May  16,  1980)  at  the  University  of  California  at  Riverside  campus.    Isenburg   is  described  as  a  "well  known  collector  and  Photohistorian"  and  "one  of  the  top   collectors  of  fine,  early  photographic  equipment  in  the  world".    Isenburg  reportedly   fascinated  the  audience  with  examples  from  his  collection.        21. Unknown.  "E  &  H.  T.  Anthony  Satchel  Camera."  The  Photographist.  49/50  (Fall/Winter   1981):  6.        Very  brief  article  announcing  Isenburg's  purchase  of  "one  of  the  rarest  of  the  rare"   cameras.                   

  

74  

F.    The  Daguerreian  Society        Isenburg  co-founded  the  society  with  John  Wood  in  1989,  served  as  Vice  President  (1989  ­   2004),  President  (2005  ­  2008),  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  (2008  ­  2010)  and  remains  a   member.          Written  by  Isenburg      22. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Reflecting  on  Daguerre:  Six  Items  From  The  Matthew  Isenburg   Collection."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1991:  75-78.      In  this  short  article,  with  extensive  image  captions  explaining  the  historical  significance   of  each  item,  Isenburg  writes  of  his  years-long  quest  to  assemble  a  small  collection  of   ephemera  connected  to  Daguerre.  Six  black  and  white  images  of  items  from  the  MRI   Collection  included.      23. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "The  Alchemy  of  Research:  How  To  Turn  The  Silver  Plate  Into  Pure   Gold."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1991:  146-151.      Article  emphasizes  the  importance  of  historians  in  reading  visual  clues  in   daguerreotypes.    Isenburg  provides  an  example  of  an  `unknown'  subject  in  a   daguerreotype  from  his  collection  being  confirmed  as  Billy  Bowlegs  (ca.  1810  ­  1859),   Chief  of  the  Seminole,  and  the  related  ephemera  items  that  Isenburg  was  able  to   subsequently  collect  as  a  result  of  this  identification.    Three  black  and  white  images  of   items  from  the  MRI  Collection  included.      24. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Don't  Forget  to  Check  Labels  for  Dating  Clues!"  The  Daguerreian   Annual,  1992:  100-101.      Short  article  that  features  five  black  and  white  images  of  labels  from  MRI  Collection  to   explain  how  labels,  found  with  daguerreotypes,  can  yield  a  wealth  of  information.      25. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "In  Search  of  the  "Elephant"."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1992:  121- 125.      Following  a  brief  introduction,  article  comprises  five  transcribed  letters  from  the  MRI   Collection  of  legal  contracts  and  personal  correspondence  around  the  1849  departure  of   Albert  Sands  Southworth  from  Boston  to  California  during  the  Gold  Rush.  No  images  of   documents  included.    One  black  and  white  portrait  image  of  Southworth  from  MRI   Collection  included.                           75  

26.   

   27.   

Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Early  Equipment."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1993:  201-254.   Through  this  detailed  article,  Isenburg  provides  details  about  early  daguerreian  studio   equipment  from  his  collection.    Five  pages  of  text  precede  section  "Photographs,  Cuts  &   Captions."  There  are  seventy-six  images,  seventy-four  of  which  are  extensively   captioned.    Images  include  line  drawings  by  Isenburg  illustrating  various  equipment   arrangements  and  black  and  white  images  of  equipment  and  ephemera  from  the  MRI   Collection.       Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "African-American  Daguerreotypes."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,   1994:  170-209.     Following  two  pages  of  introductory  text  concerning  the  rarity  and  historical  importance   of  portrait  daguerreotypes  of  "black  persons"  Isenburg  presents  a  portfolio  of   daguerreotype  images  that  are  extensively  captioned.    Of  thirty-seven  black  and  white   daguerreotype  images,  six  are  from  the  MRI  Collection.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  Advertisement.  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1995:  298.   In  this  advertisement,  Isenburg  provides  his  contact  information  and  states  he  collects   "Anything  Gold  Rush,  Occupations,  Outdoor  Scenes,  Early  Books,  Ephemera,  Broadsides,   Business  cards,  Western  Garb,  [and]  Unusual  Clothing."  One  black  and  white  image  of   illustration,  based  on  a  daguerreotype,  from  the  MRI  Collection.     Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  Advertisement.  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1998:  260.   In  this  advertisement,  Isenburg  provides  his  contact  information  and  states  he  collects  a   wide  range  of  ephemera  "that  relates  to  the  period  and  can  be  used  as  display  items  to   explain  the  process"  along  with  a  wide  range  of  daguerreian  equipment.    Advertisement   repeated  in  1999.    One  black  and  white  image  of  illustration,  based  on  a  daguerreotype,   included  in  advertisement.    (See  bibliography  30)   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  Advertisement.  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1999:  280.   One  black  and  white  image  of  illustration,  based  on  a  daguerreotype,  included  in   advertisement.    (Duplicate  advertisement  to  bibliography  29)        

   28.   

   29.   

   30.      

  

76  

Written  about  Isenburg      31. Palmquist,  Peter  E.  "The  Editor's  Fuming  Box."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1992:  vii.   One  black  and  white  image  from  MRI  Collection.      32. Unknown.  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1993:  ii.      One  colour  image  of  California  Gold  Rush  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection  used  as   frontispiece.      33. Unknown.  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1993:  288.      One  black  and  white  image  of  attendees  of  the  Fourth  Annual  Daguerreian  Society   Symposium  appears  on  last  page  of  publication,  giving  a  brief  history  of  the  society.     Isenburg  appears  in  the  image.      34. Hutslar,  Donald  A.  "Two  Early  Ohio  Daguerreians."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1994:  148- 149.      One  black  and  white  image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection  accompanies  brief   article.      35. Baty,  Laurie  A.  "Striving  For  Improvement."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1994:  237:248.      On  behalf  of  then-editor  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  Baty  provides  corrections  to  articles  that   previously  appeared  in  the  The  Daguerreian  Annual  in  1990-92.    Isenburg  appears  on   pages  242-243,  with  five  corrections  for  two  articles  listed.        36. Baty,  Laurie  A.  "The  Editor's  Fuming  Box."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1995:  vii.         One  black  and  white  image  of  broadside  from  MRI  Collection.      37. Erickson,  Bruce  E.  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1995:  120-125.         Author  contests  identity  of  a  woman  in  Isenburg's  1994  Daguerreian  Annual  article   "African-American  Daguerreotypes"  as  being  black.    Draws  upon  nine  images  to   establish  identity  of  woman  as  a  Hawaiian  princess.  (See  bibliography  27)      38. Taylor,  Maureen.  "Never  Give  Up;  It  is  Better  to  Hope  than  Once  to  Despair:  Providence,   Rhode  Island,  and  the  Daguerreotype."  The  Daguerrian  Annual,  1995:  126-7.      One  black  and  white  daguerreotype  image  of  item  from  MRI  Collection  accompanies   brief  article.      39. Havinga,  Anne  E.  "The  Collection  of  Southworth  and  Hawes  Daguerreotypes  at  the   Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston."  The  Daguerreian  Annual,  1995:  226-276.             Isenburg  is  listed  on  page  227  as  having  one  of  the  four  largest  collections  of   Southworth  &  Hawes  material,  alongside  The  International  Museum  of  Photography  and   Film  at  George  Eastman  House,  The  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  and  the  Museum  of   Fine  Arts,  Boston.         77  

The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter  /  The  Daguerreian  Society  Quarterly      Written  by  Isenburg      40. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "East  Meets  West."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  4,  No.  5,   (September,  1992):  5,  6.   A  personal  account  of  being  able  to  meet  members  of  the  Daguerreian  Society  when   travelling,  through  the  use  of  the  membership  booklet.      41. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "A  Word  From  Out  East"  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  5,  No.   2,  (March,  1993):  2,  3.   Notes  about  recent  and  upcoming  changes  to  the  society's  newsletter.      42. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Symposium  Update."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  5,  No.  5,   (September,  1993):  5,  6.   Reminders  and  updates  for  members  planning  to  attend  the  annual  symposium.        43. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  East."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  6,  No.   2,  (March/April,  1994):  7,  8.   Article  describes  the  controversy  surrounding  a  newly  discovered  alleged  daguerreotype   portrait  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  and  includes  well-known  portrait  image  of  the  president  for   comparison.      44. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  East:  Naylor  Collection  Goes  to  Japan,  A  Late   Breaking  Story."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  6,  No.  3,  (June/July,  1994):  3.   Isenburg  provides  details  about  the  sale  of  the  Naylor  Collection  to  the  Japanese   Government.    A  quantitative  analysis  of  the  collection  is  given,  as  are  details  about  the   forthcoming  "Sayonara"  party  for  photographic  enthusiasts  to  bid  farewell  to  the   collection.  (See  bibliography  10  and  45)      45. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  East:  The  One  and  Only  Sayonara  Party."  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  6,  No.  4,  (August/September,  1994):  16-19.   Article  provides  a  detailed  account  of  the  party  thrown  to  celebrate  the  Naylor   Collection,  and  its  recent  sale.  One  black  and  white  portrait  of  Isenburg  with  Naylor.   (See  bibliography  10  and  44)      46. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  East."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  7,  No.   1,  (January/February,  1995):  3,  4.   Isenburg  writes  about  three  daguerreian  exhibitions,  two  in  New  England  and  one  in   Massachusetts,  and  reproduces  six  black  and  white  photographs  he  took  in  the  spaces.                  78  

47.       48.       49.       50.   

Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  East:  Collection  of  Vance  Daguerreotypes  and   Ambrotypes  Bring  $114,400  at  Albany  Auction."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  7,   No.  4,  (March/April,  1995):  4-6.   Article  recounts  the  recent  auction  of  nineteenth-century  photographs  by  Robert  H.   Vance.    Includes  three  black  and  white  images  (acquired  from  the  auction)  now  in  the   MRI  collection.     Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "The  Daguerreotype  and  the  Digital  Image:  or  Dags  and  Macs."  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  7,  No.  2,  (March/April,  1995):  9.   Article  describes  Isenburg's  lexperience  with  learning  computer  technology  and  conveys   his  support  for  the  use  of  technology  in  photo-editing  programs  to  help  collectors  learn   more  about  objects  they  own.       Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  West:  Symposium  Event:  Special  Reception  at  The   Oakland  Museum  on  October  26,  1995."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  7,  No.  3,   (May/June,  1995):  3-5.   Article  describes  symposium  at  Oakland  Museum  and  features  daguerreotype  images   from  that  institution.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  East:  Secrets  of  the  Dark  Chamber."  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  7,  No.  4,  (July/August,  1995):  5-6.   Article  shares  the  success  of  the  opening  reception  of  the  exhibition  Secrets  of  the  Dark   Chamber:  The  Art  of  the  American  Daguerreotype  at  the  National  Museum  of  American   Art  in  Washington,  DC.    Overview  of  how  the  exhibition  was  installed  is  also  provided.   (See  bibliography  134)   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  East:  No  Doubt  About  It,  Jack  is  Back!!"  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  7,  No.  5,  (September/October,  1995):  3-5.   Article  poses  the  question  "when  does  a  collector  stop  being  a  collector?"  and  answers,   in  the  case  of  Jack  Naylor,  never.    Mere  months  after  shipping  his  photographic   collection  to  Japan,  Isenburg's  friend  Naylor  began  collecting  again.  Six  black  and  white   photographs,  taken  by  Isenburg,  of  space  before  and  after,  from  empty  to  full,  of  Naylor   with  his  collection.  (See  bibliography  10,  11,  44,  and  45)   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Timeline  Oakland  `95."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  7,  No.   6,  (November/December,  1995):  3-5.   Brief  article  with  several  black  and  white  images  showing  highlights  from  the  society's   annual  symposium.      Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "The  Daguerreotype  Comes  of  Age."  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  7,  No.  6,  (November/December,  1995):  13-15.   Article  on  the  increasing  monetary  value  of  daguerreotypes  at  auction,  citing  the   collection  of  Stanley  Yalkowsky  as  an  illustrative  example.      79  

   51.   

   52.    53.   

  

54.

   55.

Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "News  From  the  South:  Atlanta  `96."  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  8,  No.  2,  (March/April,  1996):  3.   Brief  summary  of  upcoming  annual  symposium,  including  a  call  for  southern  cased   images  for  an  exhibition  to  run  during  the  symposium  and  a  call  for  lectures  to  be  given   at  the  event.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "DC  `97."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  9,  No.  6,   (November/December,  1997):  3-5.   Summary  of  annual  symposium  including  quotes  from  attendees,  and  an  extensive  list   of  thanks.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "John  Dobron:  Legendary  Collector  Maintains  his  Strong  Hunger  for   Knowledge."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  13,  No.  2,  (March/April,  2001):  3.   Member  profile  of  John  Dobron.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "From  the  Office  of  the  President:  As  Things  Stand  Now."  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  19,  No.  2,  (April-June,  2007):  2,  4.   Isenburg,  who  had  become  president  of  the  society  in  January,  2007,  reminisces  about   the  first  two  years  of  the  society,  and  lists  some  its  key  accomplishments,  before   pondering  the  society's  future.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Meet  the  Newsletter  Editor."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.   19,  No.  2,  (April-June,  2007):  3.   The  society's  layout  editor,  for  newsletters  and  annuals,  is  profiled.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Antique  Camera  Brings  $800,000  at  Auction."  The  Daguerreian   Society  Newsletter.  19,  No.  2,  (April-June,  2007):  3,  21.   Short  article  about  a  gripping  auction  in  Vienna  in  May,  2007  for  a  full-plate   daguerreotype  camera.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "From  the  Office  of  the  President:  Changes  at  the  Office."  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  19,  No.  3,  (July-September,  2007):  2.   Isenburg  describes  the  recent  move  of  the  society's  administrative  headquarters  into  a   commercial  centre  in  suburban  Pittsburgh.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Jack  Naylor:  The  Man,  The  Collector,  and  now  The  Auction."  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  19,  No.  3,  (July-September,  2007):  16-18.   Article  provides  a  biography  of  the  private  photographic  collector  Jack  Naylor,  highlights   from  his  collection,  and  his  decision  to  sell  his  collection  at  auction.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "From  the  Office  of  the  President."  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  19,  No.  4,  (October-December,  2007):  2,  4.   Isenburg  lists  the  society's  accomplishments  for  2007.   80  

   56.    57.

   58.    59.

   60.

   61.

   62.      

63.

   64.    65.    66.    67.

Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "The  Naylor  Auction."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  19,  No.   4,  (October-December,  2007):  10-13.   Isenburg  provides  an  overview  of  the  auction,  including  a  description  of  the  setting,  the   bidding  system,  and  the  results  of  the  sale.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "From  the  Office  of  the  President."  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  20,  No.  1,  (January-March,  2008):  2,  16.   Isenburg  reviews  the  benefits  of  being  a  member  of  the  society.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "From  the  Office  of  the  President."  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  20,  No.  2,  (April-June,  2008):  2.   Isenburg  provides  updates  for  the  society  and  promotes  the  annual  symposium.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "From  the  Office  of  the  President."  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  20,  No.  3,  (July-September,  2008):  2.   Isenburg  provides  updates  for  the  society  and  promotes  the  annual  symposium.      Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "From  the  Office  of  the  President."  The  Daguerreian  Society   Newsletter.  20,  No.  4,  (October-December,  2008):  2.   Isenburg  explains  that  he  will  be  stepping  down  as  president  of  the  society,  moving  into   a  role  of  chairman  of  the  board,  and  thanks  society  members  for  "making  [him]  feel  [he   is]  part  of  something  special."   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Our  1988  Organization  Meeting  Caught  and  Preserved  on  Film."   The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  20,  No.  4,  (October-December,  2008):  3,  4.   Article  describes  the  first  meeting  of  the  society  in  1989  and  the  thrill  of  realizing,  as   membership  quickly  grew,  that  there  was  a  network  of  daguerreian  enthusiasts  across   North  America.  Isenburg  is  shown  in  each  of  the  four  black  and  white  images  of  the   event.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Connections."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  20,  No.  3,  (July- September,  2009):  10,  14.   The  first  article  in  a  proposed  series  by  Isenburg  to  discuss  how  items  tie  into  each   other.    Isenburg  recalls  a  fruitful  encounter  in  1970  with  a  dealer  that  influenced  the   direction  of  his  collection  (specifically  of  thermoplastic  cases  and  California  Gold  Rush   daguerreotypes).        

   68.

   69.

  

  

81  

Written  about  Isenburg        70. Unknown.  "Profiles  of  Board  Nominees."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  19,  No.  3,   (July-September,  2007):  7.   Biography  of  Isenburg  is  featured  alongside  four  other  nominees.      71. Unknown.  "Splendid  Symposium  Speakers."  The  Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  20,  No.   4,  (October  ­December,  2009):  4.   Isenburg  is  listed  amongst  the  symposium  speakers,  where  he  "absolutely  rose  to  the   occasion  and  fascinated  the  audience  with  "The  Many  Faces  of  Daguerre"--illustrating   his  collection  of  Louis  Daguerre  images  in  every  medium  of  Daguerre's  period  and  after,   and  making  a  point-by  point  comparison  among  the  known  daguerreian  portraits  of   him."      72. French,  Greg.  "Miracle  on  City  Avenue:  "The  Many  Faces  of  Daguerre"."  The  Daguerreian   Society  Newsletter.  20,  No.  4,  (October  ­December,  2009):  10-11.   Though  the  article  commends  Isenburg  for  his  extensive  research  on  images  of  Daguerre   in  various  media,  it  focuses  on  Isenburg's  determination  to  provide  the  November  2009   symposium's  audience  with  a  high-quality  presentation,  despite  having  suffered  a  heart   attack  during  the  symposium.    The  article  features  seven  black  and  white  images,   including  one  of  Isenburg  giving  the  lecture,  five  images  of  Daguerre  featured  in  the   presentation,  and  one  photograph  of  Isenburg  taken  in  the  hospital.      73. Unknown.  "The  Norwich  Historical  Society  ­  CT  Presents  Matthew  Isenburg"."  The   Daguerreian  Society  Newsletter.  23,  No.  1,  (January-March,  2011):  7.   Announcement  for  a  presentation  by  Isenburg,  on  March  28,  2011,  using  photographs   taken  during  the  Civil  War  found  in  his  collection.  One  black  and  white  portrait  of   Isenburg.           

  

82  

2.    NEWSPAPERS  (Chronological)      Some  of  the  articles  in  this  section  did  not  receive  full  annotations  because  the  length  of  article   did  not  necessitate  a  synopsis.      74. Unknown.  "Fotografos"  El  Universal.    Miercoles  22  de  Enero  de  1975.         Text-only  advertisement  placed  by  Matthew  Isenburg  in  Spanish  newspaper.          75. Marino,  Eugene.  "The  Hunt  for  African-Americana."    Democrat  and  Chronicle.    Sunday,   October  20,  1991.        76. Unknown.  "Come  Spend  the  Night  in  Nineteenth  Century  Norwich."  Norwich  Bulletin,   Bulletin  Board.  Tuesday,  October  13,  1992.   Advertisement  for  lecture  about  Norwich  in  the  nineteenth  century,  given  by  Isenburg.      77. Hall,  Nancy.  "Daguerreotypes  Open  Window  on  City's  Past"  Norwich  Bulletin.  Wednesday,   October  14,  1992.        78. Unknown.  "Vintage  Photos  Illustrate  How  Norwich  Has  (And  Has  Not)  Changed."  Norwich   Bulletin.  Thursday,  October  15,  1992:  C4.      79. Unknown.  "Slide  Show  Puts  City  in  Old  Light."  Norwich  Bulletin.  Thursday,  May  19,  1994.      80. Stroebel,  Ken.  "Window  on  the  Way  It  Was."  Norwich  Bulletin.    Friday,  May  20,  1994:  C1.      81. Bloemendaal.  Sharon.  "PhotoHistory  Addresses  The  Past,  The  Present,  And  The  Future."   The  New  York-Pennsylvania  Collector.  January,  1995:  B30-33      82. Ripp,  Bart.  "Camera  Action."  The  News  Tribune:  TGIF  Sound  Life.  Friday,  April  28,  1995:   SL3.      83. Grundberg,  Andy.  "Secrets  of  the  Dark  Chamber:  The  Art  of  the  American   Daguerreotype."  New  York  Times  Book  Review.  December  3,  1995.      84. Schuler,  Stanley.  "Matthew  Isenburg  Carries  on  for  Louis  Daguerre."  Main  Street  News.   September  5  ­  September  18,  1996:  15.   Profile  of  Isenburg  that  conveys  his  enthusiasm  for  collecting  daguerreotypes  and   learning  about  history.      85. Libow,  Gary.  "The  Next  Best  Thing  to  a  Time  Machine."  The  Hartford  Courant:  Town  News   Extra.  Sunday,  October  13,  1996:  H1-2            83  

86.

   87.    88.    89.

Knight,  Christopher.  "A  World  Captured  on  Silver."  The  Los  Angeles  Times.  Sunday,  April   26,  1998:  7,  65,  66.   Review  of  exhibition  "The  Art  of  the  Daguerreotype"  at  the  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum  refers   to  Isenburg  by  name  and  calls  the  display  of  vintage  equipment,  loaned  by  Isenburg,  as  a   "helpful  information  gallery"  that  helps  to  explain  the  daguerreotype  process.   Goldberg,  Vicki.  "Tiny  Windows,  On  the  Past,  Shutters  Open."  The  New  York  Times,  Arts  &   Leisure.    Sunday,  June  21,  1998:  AR  31-32.     Schenden,  Laurie  K.  "Gold  n'  History."  Los  Angeles  Times.  Thursday,  September  17,  1998:   Calendar  Weekend  section.    For  Gold  Fever!    Exhibition  (98-99)   Craven,  James.  "Civil  War  Photos  Shed  Light  on  History."  Norwich  Bulletin.  Volume  151,   Issue  86  (March  27,  2011):  Sunday  Bulletin  section  A1,  A7.   Article  features  profile  of  Isenburg  in  advance  of  a  presentation,  "A  Civil  War   Photographic  Essay"  at  the  Norwich  Free  Academy.  Seven  captioned  colour  images   taken  during  the  American  Civil  War  from  MRI  Collection.            

  

  

84  

3.    BOOKS:  Histories  of  Photography  (Chronological)      Written  by  Isenburg   90. Klamkin,  Charles  with  Matthew  R.  Isenburg.  Photographica:  A  Guide  to  the  Value  of   Historic  Cameras  and  Images.  New  York;  Funk  &  Wagnalls,  1978.   This  guidebook,  features  a  text  by  Klamkin,  and  images  of  a  variety  of  items,  with  a  clear   emphasis  on  cameras,  and  camera  accessories,  from  the  MRI  Collection.    The  book  is   one  in  a  series  of  books,  including,  among  others,  Railroadiana:  The  Collector's  Guide  to   Railroad  Memorabilia,  that  advise  on  investing  in  antique  collectibles,  all  written  by   Klamkin.    The  author  begins  his  text  in  the  first  chapter  by  offering  advice  to  the  novice   on  starting  a  photographic  collection.    The  subsequent  ten  chapters  offer  an   abbreviated  history  of  photography,  which  continuously  reference  the  MRI  Collection.     The  book  contains  360  black  &  white  images  "almost  all...are  drawn"  from  the  MRI   Collection,  each  with  a  brief  description  of  the  item  and  its  monetary  value  at  time  of   publication.  

   Written  about  Isenburg   91.

   92.

Gilbert,  George.  Photography:  The  Early  Years,  A  Historical  Guide  For  Collectors.    New   York:  Harper  &  Row,  1980:  24,  53,  126,  139.   Chapters  in  book  are  divided  by  process,  and  give  an  overview  of  the  technique,   prominent  practitioners,  and  social  impact  of  each  process.  Four  black  and  white  images   from  the  MRI  Collection  distributed  in  four  different  chapters  (The  Calotype,  The   Ambrotype,  The  Wet-Plate  Print,  and  The  Stereograph).   Wood,  John,  ed.  The  Daguerreotype:  a  Sesquicentennial  Celebration.  Iowa  City:  University   of  Iowa  Press,  1989:  9,  143,  144,  146,  147,  151,  166,  168,  172,  175,  201,  213.   Wood's  book  celebrates  the  daguerreotype's  introduction  to  the  public  150  years   previously  (in  1839).    Wood  approaches  the  daguerreotype  as  a  worthy  medium  of   artistic  expression  in  its  time  and  calls  for  readers  to  reexamine  these  photographs  as   fine  art.  The  book  features  nine  scholarly  essays,  by  as  many  respected  authors,  on   different  aspects  of  the  medium  and  the  public  reaction  to  it.  Illustrations  feature   extensive  notes.  Isenburg  writes  a  brief  four-page  chapter  Southworth  and  Hawes:  The   Artists  that  decodes  the  technical  and  studio  operations  of  the  Boston  partners.   Isenburg  draws  from  nineteenth-century  literature  in  his  text,  five  of  which  citations  are   noted  as  being  from  his  own  collection.    Eleven  of  the  100  illustrations  are  from  the  MRI   Collection.  One  additional  black  and  white  image  appears  in  Wood's  essay  "Silence  and   Slow  Time:  An  Introduction."  

           

  

85  

93.

   94.

Burns,  Stanley  B.,  Audrey  B.  Davis,  and  Richard  A.  Glenner.    The  American  Dentist:  A   Pictorial  History  with  a  Presentation  of  Early  Dental  Photography  in  America.  Missoula,   Montana:  Pictorial  Histories  Publishing,  1990:  np.   Book  describes  the  professionalization  of  the  practice  of  dentistry  through  photography,   with  detailed  captions  accompanying  each  photograph.    Two  black  and  white  images  of   daguerreotypes  from  the  Isenburg  Collection  included.   Wood,  John,  ed.  America  and  the  Daguerreotype.  Iowa  City:  University  of  Iowa  Press,   1991:  10,  24,  101,  209,  210,  214,  217,  234.   Wood's  highly  informative  and  thoughtful  book  focuses  on  the  daguerreotype's  ability   to  capture  the  individualistic  human  face  in  portraits,  and  the  varied  uses  of  such   momentos.    Book  features  eight  scholarly  essays,  each  on  a  different  aspect  of   daguerreotype  portraits,  and  extensive  notes  on  each  plate.  Five  of  the  100  black  and   white  plates  are  from  the  MRI  Collection.  Two  additional  black  and  white  images  appear   in  Wood's  own  essay  "The  American  Portrait"  and  one  additional  black  and  white  image   appears  in  David  E.  Stannard's  chapter  "Sex,  Death,  and  Daguerreotypes."   Unknown.  The  West  As  America:  A  Guide  for  Teachers.  Washington:  National  Museum  of   American  Art,  Smithsonian  Institution,  1991:  18,  19.   Published  in  conjunction  with  the  exhibition  The  West  As  America  to  help  teachers   develop  observational  skills  in  their  students.  Two  black  and  white  images  of   daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection,  including  two  excerpts  from  letters  from  William   McKnight  to  this  mother,  included  in  Lesson  3  "Mining  for  Gold."   Clarke,  Graham,  ed.  The  Portrait  in  Photography.  Washington:  University  of  Washington   Press,  1992:  179,  182,  183.     Book  compiles  ten  essays  on  portraiture  in  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  century.    Four   black  and  white  daguerreotype  images  from  MRI  Collection  included  in  Alan   Trachtenburg's  essay  "Likeness  as  Identity:  Reflections  on  the  Daguerreian  Mystique."   Jacob,  Michael  G.  Il  Dagherrotipo  A  Colori:  Tecniche  e  Conservazione.  Firenze:  Nardini   Editore,  1992:     Four  black  and  white,  two  of  daguerreotypes  and  two  of  daguerreotype  studio   equipment,  and  two  colour  images  of  daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection.   Burns,  Stanley  B.  Forgotten  Marriage:  The  Painted  Tintype  &  The  Decorative  Frame  1860- 1910.  New  York:  The  Burns  Press,  1995:  52,  53.   Book  explores  the  history  of  the  painted  tintype,  citing  Isenburg's  knowledge  of  the   application  of  colour  to  daguerreotypes.    One  black  and  white  image  of  a  daguerreotype   from  the  MRI  Collection  included,  along  with  a  reference  to  Isenburg  as  a  "prominent   collector  and  daguerreian  historian."  

   95.

   96.

   97.

   98.

           

86  

99.

   100. Rourke,  James  L.,  etc.,  The  American  Promise:  A  History  of  the  United  States.  Volume  I:  To   1877.  Boston:  Bedford  Books,  1997:  507.     Book  touches  on  multiple  facets  of  life  in  America  from  before  Christopher  Columbus'   voyages  (1492)  and  up  to  1877.    One  colour  image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI   Collection  used  to  illustrate  section  on  hydraulic  mining  in  "Technology  in  America"   chapter.      101. Severa,  Joan.  Dressed  for  the  Photographer:  Ordinary  Americans  &  Fashion,  1840-1900:   28,  30,  32,  34,  43,  122,  153,  550.   Book  provides  a  visual  analysis  of  changing  fashions  common  in  nineteenth-century   photographic  portraits  by  decade.  Seven  black  and  white  images  of  daguerreotypes   from  MRI  Collection.        102. Wood,  John.  The  Photographic  Arts.  Iowa  City:  University  of  Iowa  Press,  1997:  83,  86,  89,   90,  92,  93,  96-98,  101.   The  book  is  comprised  of  a  collection  of  six  essays,  beginning  with  the  daguerreian  era   and  ending  with  conceptual  art,  that  attempt  to  look  afresh  at  photography.    Ten   daguerreoptypes  from  MRI  Collection  are  reproduced  in  colour  in  "The  Plates"  section.      103. Appleby,  Joyce,  Alan  Brinkley,  and  James  M.  McPherson.    The  American  Journey.   Westerville,  OH:  McGraw-Hill,  1998:  371.   History  textbook  from  the  National  Geographic  Society.      One  colour  daguerreotype   image  from  MRI  Collection  illustrates  section  on  "Traveling  West  during  the  California   Gold  Rush",  in  the  "Manifest  Destiny"  chapter.      104. Frizot,  Michel,  ed.  A  New  History  of  Photography.  Cologne:  Könemann,  1998:  49.        An  encompassing  history  of  photography  at  over  700  pages,  drawing  upon  the  research   of  30  authors,  including  the  editor.    English  edition  (French  and  German  editions  also   published  concurrently).    One  colour  image  of  daguerreotype  included  in  chapter  3  "A   New  World  of  Pictures:  The  Use  and  Spread  of  the  Daguerreotype  Process".         87  

Wood,  John.  The  Scenic  Daguerreotype:  Romanticism  and  Early  Photography.  Iowa  City:   University  of  Iowa  Press,  1995:  128,  137,  143,  150,  156,  176.   Wood's  book  was  the  first  study  of  scenic  (or  landscape)  daguerreotypes  from  around   the  world,  and  featured  the  largest  grouping  of  them  presented  in  print  at  the  time.   Wood  sees  daguerreotypes  as  being  instrumental  in  establishing  our  modern  "camera   eye"  and  takes  us  beyond  the  portraits  that  the  daguerreotype  process  is  famous  for,  to   a  world  of  romanticism.    Isenburg  is  thanked  in  the  Preface  as  "know[ing]  more  about   the  daguerreotype  than  anyone  else  and  [someone]  who  is  always  willing  to  share  his   knowledge."  An  impressive  six  of  the  100  black  and  white  plates  within  the  book  are   from  the  MRI  Collection.    

  

105. Unknown.  Welcome  to  Addy's  World,  1864:  Growing  Up  During  American's  Civil  War.     Middletown,  WI:  Pleasant  Company  Publications,  1999.     One  colour  daguerreotype  image  from  MRI  Collection  included  in  the  "Fashion"  chapter.      106. Williams,  James.  Fugitive  Slave  in  the  Gold  Rush:  Life  and  Adventure  of  James  Williams.   Nebraska:  University  of  Nebraska  Press,  2002.   Reprint  of  memoir  of  James  Williams,  an  African  American  escaped  slave.    One  colour   image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection  featured  on  book's  front  cover.      107.   West,  Larry  J.  and  Patricia  A.  Abbott.    Tokens  of  Affection  and  Regard:  Antique   Photographic  Jewelry.    New  York:  Carl  Munz  Publishing,  2005.   Book  surveys  the  history  of  photographic  jewelry,  particularly  in  the  nineteenth  century.    One   colour  daguerreotype  image  from  MRI  Collection  included  as  frontispiece  in  book.      108. Zeller,  Bob.  The  Blue  and  Grey  in  Black  and  White:  A  History  of  Civil  War  Photography.     Westport,  CT:  Praeger  Publishers,  2005:  10.   Book  examines  the  events  of  the  American  Civil  War  through  the  work  of  photographers   on  both  sides  of  the  conflict.    One  black  and  white  daguerreotype  image  from  MRI   Collection  included.           

  

88  

4.    Specialized  Periodicals  and  General  Magazines  (Chronological)         Written  by  Isenburg      109. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Dying  Miner's  Farewell."  American  History.  October,  1994:  54-55.   Short  article  on  the  perilous  life  of  miners,  featuring  two  letters  to  a  miner's  mother,   one  from  miner  William  McKnight  and  one  from  his  widow.    Two  colour  images  of   daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection.      110. Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Photographic  Ephemera:  Broadsides,  Business  Cards,  Boxes,   Bottles  ­  and  Daguerre!"  Ephemera  News.  Fall  2003:  1,  11-16.      Article  explains  the  value  of  collecting  ephemera  by  providing  examples  from  Isenburg's   own  collection.  Fourteen  black  and  white  images  of  ephemera  items  from  MRI   Collection.          Written  about  Isenburg     111. Dickey,  Thomas.    "Legacy  of  Daguerre."  Americana.  March-April,  1982:  56-61.      Article  highlights  many  of  the  "old,  rare,  functional,  and  beautiful"  items  of  Isenburg's     daguerreotype  collection,  including  cameras.    The  author  gives  a  sense  of  Isenburg  as  a   collector  and  his  energetic,  enthusiastic  passion  for  nineteenth-century  photography,   including  his  commitment  to  sharing  his  scholarly  research,  making  him  an  authority  in   the  field.    Thirteen  colour  images  included  of  items  from  MRI  Collection,  including   groups  of  daguerreian  cameras,  and  two  portraits  of  Isenburg  amongst  his  collection.      112. Ridgely,  Julia.  "Mirror  With  a  Memory."  John  Hopkins  Magazine.  October,  1989:  32-37,   52.      Article  provides  a  brief  history  of  the  daguerreotype  and  features  the  groundbreaking   efforts  of  scientist  M.  Susan  Barger,  then  an  associate  research  professor  at  John   Hopkins  University,  to  understand  the  physical  properties  of  daguerreotypes  in  the   hopes  of  improving  their  conservation.    Four  colour  images  of  daguerreotypes  included   from  MRI  Collection.                        89  

113. Neill,  Mary  Gardner.  "Director's  Report  1989."  Yale  University  Art  Gallery  Bulletin  1990.   1990:  2-9.      Report  providing  a  summary  of  exhibitions  held  at  the  gallery  during  1989.    American   Daguerreotypes  from  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  is  described  as  the   "culmination  of  [the  gallery's]  celebration  of  photography's  sesquicentennial"  and  "a   masterful  installation  drawn  from  an  outstanding  Connecticut  collection"  before  giving   an  overview  of  the  contents  of  the  exhibition  and  the  accompanying  catalogue.  One   black  and  white  image,  taken  by  Isenburg,  of  the  exhibition  installation.  (See   bibliography  131)      114. Smith,  Robert  W.  "Guns  of  the  `49ers."  Man  at  Arms.  May-June,  1994:  21-27.      Article  describes  the  integral  part  firearms  played  in  the  daily  lives  of  California  gold  rush   miners.    One  colour  image  included  from  MRI  Collection  of  a  daguerreotype.      115. Fondiller,  David  S.  "America  in  Amber."  Forbes.  September  12,  1994:  260-263.      Article  features  Isenburg  and  his  collection  and  focuses  on  the  market  for  buying  and   selling  daguerreotypes.    Five  colour  images,  four  of  daguerreotypes  from  the  MRI   Collection  and  one  of  Isenburg  in  his  attic  with  his  collection,  are  included.      116. Anonymous.  "California  Gold."  American  History.  October,  1994:  45-53.   Article  features  abridged  recollections  from  a  forty-niner  that  originally  appeared  in  an   1860  issue  of  Harper's  New  Monthly  Magazine.  Isenburg  is  given  "special  thanks"  for   making  his  historic  photographs  available.    Seven  colour  images  of  daguerreotypes  from   the  MRI  Collection.      117. Wood,  John.  "The  Art  of  the  Landscape  Daguerreotype."  Antiques.  September  1995:  np.      Article  discusses  the  use  for  daguerreotypes  in  rendering  beautiful  landscapes,  as   opposed  to  the  more  popular  and  formulaic  indoor  studio  portraits.    Several   daguerreotypists  are  featured  in  text  with  examples  of  their  work  illustrated.    Three   colour  images  of  daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection  prominently  included.          118. Bolz,  Diane  M.  "A  Revolution  in  Art:  The  American  Daguerreotype."  Smithsonian.  October,   1995:  44,  46.      Short  article  alerting  readers  that  the  exhibition  "Secrets  of  the  Dark  Chamber:  The  Art   of  the  American  Daguerreotype"  is  on  view  at  the  Smithsonian.    Three  colour  images  of   daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection.  (See  bibliography  134)            90  

   119. Howarth,  William.  "Tools  of  the  Trade."  Civilization.  April,  1996:  62-73.      Article  on  the  subject  matter  of  "occupationals",  portraits  that  depict  sitters  with  their   hand  tools  of  trades  that  disappeared  with  industrialization.    11  colour  images  of   daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection.      120. Palmquist,  Peter  E.  "Robert  H.  Vance:  Pioneer  Photographer."  The  Argonaut:  Journal  of   the  San  Francisco  Historical  Society.  8,  No.1  (Spring  1997):  3-35.      Extensive  article  about  the  career,  and  subsequent  influence  of,  nineteenth-century   photographer  Vance.    One  black  and  white  image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection.      121. Cuarterolo,  Miguel  A.  "Una  Colección  de  20  Milliones  de  Dólares."  fotoZOOM.  April,  1997:   42-43.      Article  provides  profile  of  Isenburg  and  highlights  from  his  collection.    Three  black  and   white  images,  two  of  daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection  and  one  of  Isenburg  in  his   attic  surrounded  by  his  collection.      122. Stauffer,  John.  "Daguerreotyping  the  National  Soul:  The  Portraits  of  Southworth  and   Hawes,  1843  ­  1860."  Prospects:  An  Annual  of  American  Cultural  Studies.  22  (October,   1997):  69-107.      Extensive  article  on  the  portrait  practice  of  Southworth  &  Hawes.    Five  black  and  white   images  of  daguerreotypes  from  MRI  Collection.    Article  reprinted  in  Young  America:  The   Daguerreotypes  of  Southworth  &  Hawes.  (See  bibliography  136).        123. Bond,  Constance.  "The  Lure  of  Gold."  Smithsonian.  January,  1998:  82-85.        Heavily  illustrated  short  article  promoting  the  exhibition  "Silver  &  Gold:  Cased  Images   From  the  California  Gold  Rush."  One  colour  image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI   Collection.        124. Cutter,  Donald  C.  "The  Discovery  of  Gold  in  California."  California  Geology.  January- February,  1998:  3-9.      Article  provides  chronological  overview  of  Gold  Rush  events,  with  an  emphasis  on  how   the  influx  of  people  sped  efforts  to  map  the  new  state.    One  colour  image  of   daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection.               91  

   125. Hodder,  Harbour  Fraser.  "The  Eroticized  Child."  Harvard  Magazine.  March-April,  1998:  22- 23.      Article  juxtaposes  1845  daguerreotype  portrait  of  girl  with  a  Calvin  Klein  advertisement   featuring  Kate  Moss  to  illustrate  the  disappearance  of  childhood  innocence.    One  colour   image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection.          126. Ketchum,  Liza.  "Kids  in  the  Gold  Fields."  Storyworks.  April-May,  1998:  12-13.      Article,  geared  towards  children,  explains  the  daily  life  of  a  family  living  on  a  gold  mine   during  the  Gold  Rush.    One  colour  image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection.      127. Unknown.  "Gold  Rausch."  Geo  Lino.  August,  2001:  page  unknown.      Article,  geared  towards  children,  explains  the  daily  life  of  miners  during  the  Gold  Rush.     One  colour  image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI  Collection.      128. Pietschmann,  Richard  John.  "Distant  Mirrors."  Worth.  November,  2005:  118-121.      Article  focuses  on  the  rising  monetary  value  of  daguerreotypes.    MRI  Collection  is   featured  and  favourably  compared  to  the  holdings  of  major  photography  museums,   such  as  George  Eastman  House.    One  colour  image  of  daguerreotype  from  MRI   Collection.      129. Davidson,  Martha.    "Secure  The  Shadow  Ere  The  Substance  Fades."  American  Legacy:  The   Magazine  of  African-American  Culture  &  History.    Spring,  2007:  34-40.      Article  traces  the  importance  of  affordable  portraiture  made  available  to  the  public  with   the  invention  of  photography,  specifically  for  the  African-American  population.    One   colour  image  of  daguerreotype  portrait  from  MRI  Collection.      130. Mikulski,  Lisa.  "The  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  of  American  Daguerreotypes:   Connections  of  Past  and  Present."  Ink.  November,  2009:  56-65.      Heavily  illustrated  article  describes  both  Isenburg  and  his  collection  as  "national   treasures"  and  by  highlighting  items  from  the  MRI  Collection  and  statements  extracted   from  an  eight-hour  long  interview  with  Isenburg.  Extended  captions  are  included  for   each  image  featuring  collection.    Twenty  colour  images  from  MRI  Collection,  some   showing  several  objects  at  once,  in  addition  to  a  portrait  of  Isenburg.            92  

  

5.    BOOKS:  Exhibition  Catalogues  (Chronological)      131. Field,  Richard  S.  and  Frank,  Robin  Jaffee.    American  Daguerreotypes  From  the  Matthew  R.   Isenburg  Collection.  New  Haven,  CT:  Yale  University  Art  Gallery,  1989.   Catalogue  for  exhibition  of  same  name  at  Yale  University  Art  Gallery,  November  10,   1989  ­  January  3,  1990.    Features  an  introduction  by  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  an  essay  by   Alan  Trachtenberg,  and  a  preface  by  Field,  then  Curator  of  Prints,  Drawings,  and   Photographs  at  the  gallery.    MRI  Collection  is  divided  into  five  sections:  The  American   Scene,  The  California  Gold  Rush,  Americans  at  Work  and  Play,  Portraits  of  Southworth  &   Hawes,  and  The  Artifacts  of  the  Daguerreotype.    Catalogue  of  each  of  the  178  items   shown  in  the  exhibition,  with  illustrations  of  selected  objects  (47  black  and  white  and  19   colour  images  from  the  MRI  Collection).      132. Johnson,  Brooks.  The  Portrait  in  America.  [Norfolk,  VA]:  The  Chrysler  Museum  Inc.,  1990:   9,  21.   Catalogue  for  an  exhibition  at  The  Chrysler  Museum  of  Art  in  Virginia,  January  26  ­  April   8,  1990.  "Checklist  of  the  Exhibition"  lists  one  Southworth  &  Hawes  daguerreotype  lent   from  MRI  Collection.    Daguerreoptype  portrait  reproduced  in  colour.      133. Pierce,  Sally  and  Sloane  Stephens.  The  Daguerreotype  in  Boston:  Process,  Practitioners,   and  Patrons.  Boston:  Publisher  unknown,  1994:  60,  61.   Catalogue  for  an  exhibition  that  was  held  at  The  Boston  Athenaeum,  September  8  ­   November  10,  1994.    Exhibition  displayed  137  daguerreotype  portraits,  created  in   Boston,  selected  from  the  150  photographers  registered  in  the  city  between  1840  and   1860.    Two  Southworth  &  Hawes  daguerreotype  from  the  MRI  collection  listed  in  the   exhibition  checklist.      134. Foresta,  Merry  A.  and  John  Wood.    Secrets  of  the  Dark  Chamber:  The  Art  of  the  American   Daguerreotype.  Washington:  National  Museum  of  American  Art,  1995:  61,  63,  72,  111,   126  ­  129,  179  ­  182.   Catalogue  for  an  exhibition,  curated  by  Forresta,  that  was  held  at  the  National  Museum   of  American  Art,  a  Smithsonian  Institution,  from  June  30  ­  October  29,  1995.    Forresta's   essay  discusses  the  cultural  impact  of  the  daguerreotype  from  its  introduction  to  the   public  to  the  decline  of  its  popularity  at  the  beginning  of  the  Civil  War  .  Wood's  essay   focuses  on  the  nineteenth-century  literature  about  the  daguerreotype,  excerpts  from   which  also  appear  in  the  book.    Isenburg  is  thanked  in  the  Acknowledgements  for   lending  to  the  exhibition  and  providing  "scholarly  assistance."  Isenburg  lent  nine   daguerreotypes  total  to  the  exhibition:  three  portraits  by  Southworth  &  Hawes,  one   occupational  portrait,  two  landscapes,  one  portrait,  two  streetscapes,  one  of  which  is  by   Robert  H.  Vance.    Colour  images  of  all  nine  daguerreotypes  are  included  in  the   catalogue.         93  

  

135. Naef,  Weston.  The  Art  of  the  Daguerreotype.  Los  Angeles:  The  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum,   1998.   Double-sided  pamphlet  available  for  free  during  the  exhibition  at  the  J.  Paul  Getty   Museum,  April  14  ­  July  12,  1998.    Studio  items  used  in  the  production  of  the   daguerreotype  from  the  MRI  Collection  are  grouped  together  in  one  colour  image  in  the   section  "Making  a  Daguerreotype."          136. Romer,  Grant  B.  and  Brian  Wallis,  ed.,  Young  America:  The  Daguerreotypes  of  Southworth   &  Hawes.  Gottingen:  Steidl,  2005.   This  catalogue  was  for  a  major  exhibition,  at  the  George  Eastman  House  (GEH)  in   Rochester  (January  28  ­  April  2,  2006),  The  International  Center  of  Photography  in  New   York  (October  1,  2005  ­  January  6,  2006),  and  the  Addison  Gallery  of  American  Art  in   Amherst,  Massachusetts  (January  28  ­  April  2,  2006)  which  focuses  on  the  burgeoning   use  of  the  daguerreotype  process  in  America  through  the  revered  Southworth  &  Hawes   photography  studio.    The  MRI  Collection  loaned  72  plates  to  the  exhibition,  alongside   GEH,  the  Museum  of  Fine  Arts,  Boston,  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  and  items   from  private  collectors  who  had  obtained  their  daguerreotypes  from  the  Sotheby's   auction  of  the  Feigenbaum  Collection  in  April  1999.  The  catalogue  features  five  scholarly   essays  before  the  catalogue  of  1,997  daguerreotype  plates  (each  accompanied  by  a   small  black  and  white  reproduction),  followed  by  five  appendices  in  the  form  of  shorter   essays.  Of  the  107  items  included  in  the  catalogue's  "Checklist  of  the  Exhibition"  16   were  lent  from  the  MRI  Collection,  including  15  daguerreotypes  and  one  studio  chair.          The  MRI  Collection  was  also  prominently  featured  in  two  of  the  appendices:  Michael   (Mike)  Robinson's  technical  essay  "An  Investigation  into  the  Techniques  of  Southworth   &  Hawes"  included  two  images  of  non-daguerreotype  items,  a  studio  chair  and  a   business  card,  from  Isenburg's  Southworth  &  Hawes  collection,  and  made  frequent   reference  to  the  Southworth  &  Hawes  business  papers  found  in  the  MRI  Collection.     Isenburg  himself  also  contributed  an  essay,  "A  Family  Album"  that  provided  a  personal,   thoroughly  researched  and  documented  history  of  the  two  partners'  families,  which   were  linked  by  marriage50.    The  comprehensive  essay  features  55  small  black  and  white   portraits  from  the  MRI  Collection  of  not  only  the  two  photographers,  from  youth  to  old   age,  but  also  their  families,  in  various  photographic  formats.                    

                                                                                                                 50   In  1849  Hawes  married  Nancy  Stiles  Southworth,  Albert's  sister.      94  

Reflections  on  the  Annotated  Bibliography     
From  its  start  in  1972  to  its  sale  in  2012,  how  Matthew  R.  Isenburg's  collection,  and  by   extension  Isenburg  as  a  collector,  became  known  to  a  wider  public  audience  can  be  traced  in   large  part  through  an  analysis  of  the  various  publications  written  by  and  about  Isenburg.  These   publications  both  mirrored  and  affected  the  development  and  quality  of  the  collection's   reputation,  and  each  of  the  four  decades  that  the  collection  was  in  Isenburg's  hands  had  a   distinct  characterization.      1970s:  Prolific  Local  Efforts   Isenburg  and  his  collection  began  to  receive  recognition  initially  at  the  local  level   through  journals  produced  by  regional  photographic  historical  societies  in  the  early  1970s  with   limited  circulation  among  members.    After  joining  the  Photographic  Historical  Society  of  New   England  (PHSNE)  (founded  by  private  collector  Jack  Naylor)  in  1974,  Isenburg  was  quickly   elected  as  Vice-President  and  Secretary  of  the  society  (bibliography  2),  showing  his  early   commitment  to  such  societies.    He  and  items  from  his  collection  were  mentioned  seven  times   during  this  decade  (bibliography  3  ­  8)  in  PHSNE's  journal  Photo-Nostalgia.    Similarly,  Isenburg's   collection  was  featured  in  five  articles  in  The  Photographic  Historical  Society  of  New  York's   (PHSNY)  Photographica  journal  (bibliography  16  ­  19),  one  of  which  Isenburg  wrote   (bibliography  15).  The  1970s  also  saw  Isenburg  write  his  first  short  articles  for  similar   publications:  The  Leica  Historical  Society  of  America's  Viewfinder  journal  (bibliography  1),  and   The  National  Stereoscopic  Association's  Stereo  World  journal  (bibliography  14).    The  first  of   these  articles,  "Suggestions  to  the  New  Collector"  appeared  in  1972  in  Viewfinder,  positioning   95  

  

Isenburg  as  an  authority  on  collecting,  having  collected  Leica  cameras  previously.  Two  further,   brief  articles,  both  written  in  1975  and  each  2-3  pages  (bibliography  3  and  14),  offered  advice  to   the  burgeoning  collector  of  historical  photographs.   These  articles  presented  Isenburg  as  an  astute  collector  of  photography,  based  not  only   on  the  quality  of  his  earlier  foray  into  collecting  (of  Leica  cameras)  but  his  increasing  focus  on   the  under-collected  area  of  nineteenth-century  photography  and  photographica.    They  also   situated  Isenburg  early  on  as  a  figure  willing,  and  knowledgeable  enough,  to  give  advice  to   others.    In  1978,  the  MRI  Collection  was  featured  in  Charles  Klamkin's  book  Photographica:  A   Guide  to  the  Value  of  Historic  Cameras  and  Images  (bibliography  90).    Isenburg's  exact  role  in   the  creation  of  the  publication  is  not  clear,  but  it  is  likely  that  Klamkin  drew  upon  Isenburg's   expertise  not  only  for  what  to  include  in  such  a  guide,  given  the  burgeoning  practice  of   collecting  nineteenth-century  photography  in  the  1970s,  but  also  for  the  descriptive  captions   and  market  price  information  accompanying  the  objects  included  as  representative  examples.     This  publication  reveals  Isenburg  early  on  as  an  authoritative  collector  willing  to  share  his   knowledge  with  others.      1980s:  Fruits  of  Labour   The  1980s  was  a  decade  of  transition  for  the  MRI  Collection,  marked  by  a  decrease  in   the  number  of  publications  that  reference  and  feature  the  collection.    There  was  no  marked   increase  in  Isenburg's  involvement  either  in  local  photographic  historical  societies  or  in  outside   scholars  using  his  collection  (bibliography  9,  12,  13,  20,  and  21).    Indeed,  only  two  books   featured  images  of  items  from  Isenburg's  collection  (bibliography  91  and  92).    George  Gilbert's   96  

  

Photography:  The  Early  Years,  A  Historical  Guide  For  Collectors  (bibliography  91)  was  a  similar   publication  to  Klamkin's  book  Photographica,  though  less  emphasis  was  placed  on  the  market   value  of  early  photography.    The  other  book  that  featured  items  from  the  MRI  Collection  in  the   1980s  was  John  Wood's  The  Daguerreotype:  a  Sesquicentennial  Celebration,  1989  (bibliography   92).    This  book,  published  amongst  a  number  of  books  and  exhibition  catalogues  celebrating  the   150  year  anniversary  of  the  introduction  of  the  daguerreotype  to  the  public,  featured  100   reproductions  (including  eleven  from  the  MRI  collection),  and  nine  essays,  each  touching  on  a   different  aspect  of  the  daguerreotype's  social  and  artistic  impact.    Isenburg  contributed  one   essay  on  the  studio  practices  of  Southworth  &  Hawes,  placing  him  amongst  experts  in  their   field,  including  Alan  Trachtenberg,  Susan  M.  Barger,  and  Grant  Romer.    Isenburg's  relationship   with  Wood  would  prove  to  a  fruitful  one  for  both  men  and  is  discussed  further  below.       The  defining  moment  for  public  exposure  of  the  collection  came  in  1989  at  the  Yale   University  Art  Gallery  through  the  exhibition  American  Daguerreotypes:  From  the  Matthew  R.   Isenburg  Collection  (bibliography  131).  This  marked  the  first  time  that  items  from  Isenburg's   collection  were  shown  in  an  exhibition,  and  one  at  a  major  art  institution.    It  was  also  only  the   second  time  that  his  collection,  and  he  as  a  collector,  was  featured  in  a  book,  but  one  quite   different  from  Klamkin's  publication.    The  exhibition  ran  for  two  months  and  was  accompanied   by  a  publication  of  126  pages,  which  provided  information  on  178  items  featured  in  the   exhibition,  and  included  66  reproductions  of  objects  from  the  MRI  Collection.    The  quality  of  the   cloth-bound  publication,  with  high  quality  image  reproductions  and  design,  featured  scholarly   essays  by  two  recognized  academics,  and  a  detailed  catalogue  of  daguerreotypes  cameras  and   ephemera  included  in  the  exhibition.    The  publication  undoubtedly  piqued  the  interest  of   97  

  

scholars,  who  may  have  been  considering  photography  as  a  serious  area  of  cultural  research,  as   well  as  curators  of  photography,  not  only  about  the  specialized  contents  of  Isenburg's  collection   but  also  about  Isenburg  himself51.       Richard  S.  Field,  the  Curator  of  Prints,  Drawings,  and  Photographs  for  21  years  at  the   Yale  University  Art  Gallery,  had  become  aware  of  Isenburg  through  a  local  art  dealer,  and,  from   his  initial  visit  in  1986,  was  immediately  impressed  with  the  quality  and  historical  richness  of   Isenburg's  collection.    Field  viewed  the  exhibition  as  a  collaborative  effort  and  visited  Isenburg's   home  a  further  10-20  times  over  the  next  three  years52.    The  two  men  ultimately  chose  the   contents  of  the  exhibition  together,  and  Isenburg  largely  paid  for  the  catalogue  to  ensure  that   the  museum  could  produce  a  high  quality  publication.    Isenburg  considered  this  exhibition  a   major  turning  point  in  the  public  recognition  and  institutional  acknowledgment  of  his   collection,  with  Field  choosing  to  feature  highlights  from  a  single  private  collection  and  Isenburg   choosing  to  invest  both  time  and  money  in  the  production  of  the  exhibition  and  catalogue53.       If  the  1970s  saw  Isenburg  position  himself  as  an  authoritative  collector,  the  1980s  saw  a   decrease  in  some  aspects  of  this  activity.    The  relatively  small  number  of  publications,  however,   is  not  reflective  of  the  active  role  Isenburg  took  conversing  with  other  collectors,  attending  local   photo-historical  society  meetings,  and,  perhaps  most  importantly,  building  his  collection.    This   growth  in  the  collection  is  supported  by  his  membership  in  numerous  societies  during  this  time,                                                                                                                    51   1989  marked  the  150th  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  photography,  and  there  were  a  large   number  of  exhibitions  and  publications  that  year,  which  drew  attention  to  photography  and  in   particular  its  early  history.   52   During  my  interview  with  Field  he  could  not  recall  a  more  exact  number  of  visits  he  paid   Isenburg  but  said  it  was  "undoubtedly,  not  enough."     53   Mary  Gardner  Neill,  then  director  of  the  Yale  University  Art  Gallery,  acknowledges  Isenburg's   financial  support  of  the  exhibition  catalogue  in  her  forward  to  the  publication.      98  

and  the  extensive  attic  renovations  in  1987,  which  Isenburg  deemed  necessary  to  house  and   display  his  growing  and  increasingly  valuable  collection54.    The  recognition  that  the  MRI   Collection  received  from  the  American  Daguerreotypes  exhibition  and  catalogue  coincided  with   a  second  major  event  (described  below)  that  solidified  Isenburg's  reputation  as  a  leader  in   nineteenth-century  photography,  and  in  particular  daguerreotypes,  a  trajectory  that  would   dramatically  increase  throughout  the  1990s.      1990s:    The  Daguerreian  Society   The  1990s  saw  an  explosion  in  the  MRI  Collection  being  featured  in  articles  in   photographic  historical  societies'  publications  (both  written  about  and  by  Isenburg),  histories  of   photography,  and  exhibitions  at  major  museums.    This  increase  in  exposure  is  undoubtedly   linked  to  Isenburg's  co-founding,  along  with  John  Wood,  of  The  Daguerreian  Society  in  1989.     Isenburg's  reputation  and  knowledge  of  his  collection  reached  a  far  greater  audience  through   the  Daguerreian  Society's  publications.  Fellow  collectors,  photographic  historians,  and  museum   curators  received  its  quarterly  newsletter  for  members,  and  its  annual  scholarly  publication,   which  featured  extensively  illustrated  articles  written  by  members  and  chosen  by  an  editorial   board.    The  annual  in  particular,  along  with  the  society's  annual  symposium,  was  intended  for  a   broader,  more  scholarly  audience,  beyond  just  its  membership,  and  is  found  in  art  institutions,   universities,  and  with  other  private  collectors  and  history  enthusiasts.      Isenburg  penned  six  articles  during  this  decade  for  The  Daguerreian  Annual  

(bibliography  22  ­  27),  with  an  additional  nine  articles,  often  with  the  inclusion  of  a                                                                                                                    54 Isenburg  also  had  many  visitors  to  his  collection  in  the  1980s.    This  is  explored  further  in  the   earlier  chapter  "The  Visitor's  Experience".      99  

reproduction  of  a  daguerreotype,  on  the  MRI  Collection  (bibliography  31  ­  39)  written  by  other   authors.  Isenburg  wrote  16  articles  for  the  society's  newsletter,  which  was  more  informal  than   those  found  in  the  Annual  (bibliography  40  ­  55).    The  majority  of  the  articles  are  updates  of   upcoming  and  past  events  for  members,  and  significant  sales  at  auction,  with  titles  such  as   "East  Meets  West",  "A  Word  From  Out  East",  and  ""News  From  the  East",  though  a  few  are   geared  towards  applied  education,  such  as  "The  Daguerreotype  and  the  Digital  Image"   (bibliography  48),  an  article  written  to  help  members  realize  the  potential  of  computer   technology  to  aid  them  in  learning  more  about  and  dispersing  information  about  their   collections.    The  informal  articles  for  the  society's  newsletter  reinforced  the  longstanding   personal  relationships  found  among  the  society's  membership.        Authors  outside  of  The  Daguerreian  Society  also  prominently  featured  and  credited  the  

MRI  Collection  in  14  specialized  periodical  and  general  magazine  articles  during  the  1990s   (bibliography  113  ­126).    The  majority  of  articles  were  written  about  the  California  Gold  Rush,   one  of  Isenburg's  main  collecting  concentrations,  and  reproduced  scenic  and  portrait   daguerreotypes  from  that  era,  along  with  ephemera  from  the  MRI  Collection.       The  thirteen  books  devoted  to  other  aspects  of  nineteenth-century  photography   (bibliography  93  ­  105),  which  reproduced  items  from  the  collection,  were  more  varied  in   focus,  including  a  pictorial  history  of  dentistry,  a  history  of  the  painted  tintype,  and  on   nineteenth-century  fashion.    Isenburg's  relationship  with  John  Wood,  an  art  historian  who  co- founded  the  Daguerreian  Society  with  him,  continued  to  be  productive,  as  Wood  published  

  

100  

three  additional  books  that  featured  the  MRI  Collection55  (bibliography  94,  99,  and  102),  all   with  high  quality  reproductions56.    Wood's  books  covered  the  heart  of  the  photographic  arts:   the  scenic  daguerreian  landscape,  the  portrait,  and  the  beauty  often  found  in  fine  art.  The  wide   interest  generated  by  these  publications  certainly  broadened  the  public  awareness  and   scholarly  potential  of  the  MRI  Collection,  and  shows  that  Wood,  a  respected  historian  of  early   photography,  consistently  found  material  in  the  MRI  Collection  that  was  worthy  of  inclusion   amongst  other  private  collectors  and  institutions.   Items  from  the  collection  were  shown  in  at  least  four  exhibitions  during  the  1990s.   Though  three  of  these  exhibitions  only  featured  minor  contributions  from  Isenburg   (bibliography  132  ­  134),  the  fourth,  The  Art  of  the  Daguerreotype,  featured  a  significant  loan   from,  and  institutional  acknowledgment  of,  the  MRI  Collection,  which  was  the  sole  lender  to   the  exhibition  (bibliography  135).  Shown  at  the  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum  in  Los  Angeles  for  three   months  in  1998,  it  was  the  first  photography  exhibition  in  the  newly  built  museum,  and  was  a   celebration  of  the  Getty's  own  collection.    A  double-sided  pamphlet  "The  Art  of  the   Daguerreotype,"  which  featured  items  from  the  MRI  Collection  that  were  originally  used  in  the   studio  production  of  a  daguerreotype,  was  available  for  free  during  the  exhibition.    Items  from   Isenburg's  collection,  which  echoed  those  found  in  the  pamphlet,  were  featured  in  display   cases  in  a  room  positioned  adjacent  to  the  main  exhibition  space,  and  were  labeled  "From  the   Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection."    Isenburg's  contribution  to  the  exhibition  was  also   acknowledged  in  the  wall  text  placed  at  the  exhibition's  entrance.                                                                                                                        55   Wood  also  wrote  a  magazine  article,  "The  Art  of  the  Landscape  Daguerreotype,"  in  1995  that   included  three  full  colour  reproductions  of  MRI  Collection  daguerreotypes  (bibliography  117).   56   It  is  worth  noting  that  Wood  gradually  withdrew  from  the  Daguerriean  Society  during  the   1990s  and  focused  on  his  own  academic  publications.      101  

The  increase  in  exposure  of  the  collection  and  of  Isenburg  as  a  collector  in  the  1990s   seemed  to  solidify  the  MRI  Collection  as  a  serious  and  authoritative  resource  that  researchers   could  readily  draw  upon.    This  sentiment  can  be  found  in  the  prefaces  of  a  number  of  books   from  this  time.    Richard  S.  Field  had  acknowledged  Isenburg's  indispensable  role  as  early  as   1989  in  creating  the  American  Daguerreotypes  exhibition  and  catalogue  through  aiding  and   inspiring  the  curator  in  "every  possible  way":   Not  only  is  one  astonished  by  the  quality  and  breadth  of  what  he  has   gathered,  from  the  daguerreotypes  and  their  documentation  to   every  conceivable  kind  of  contemporary  apparatus  and  publication,   but  equally  by  the  knowledge  and  deep  commitment  that  he  brings   to  the  study  of  his  chosen  field57.   Field's  recognition  of  not  only  Isenburg's  collection  but  also  his  knowledge  of  the   material  was  echoed  six  years  later  when  John  Wood  recognized  Isenburg's  authority  and   generosity  by  stating  that  he  is  "someone  who  knows  more  about  the  daguerreotype  than   anyone  else  and  is  always  willing  to  share  his  knowledge."58  To  select  one  further  citation,  in   1998,  Bates  Lowry  and  Isabel  Barrett  Lowry  acknowledged  Isenburg  in  the  introduction  for  their   book  for  The  Silver  Canvas:   Our  work  was  greatly  rewarded  by  many  long  sessions  with  Matthew  R.   Isenburg.  His  generous  sharing  of  both  his  knowledge  and  his  outstanding   collection  and  library  benefited  our  work  on  innumerable  instances,                                                                                                                    57   Field,  Richard  S.  and  Frank,  Robin  Jaffee.    American  Daguerreotypes  From  the  Matthew  R.   Isenburg  Collection.  New  Haven,  CT:  Yale  University  Art  Gallery,  1989.   58   Wood,  John.  The    Daguerreotype:  Romanticism  and  Early  Photography.  Iowa  City:  University   of  Iowa  Press,  1995:  3.      102  

especially  when  he  used  original  equipment  to  teach  us  how   daguerreotypes  were  created59.   Isenburg's  reputation,  of  generosity,  knowledge,  and  commitment,  continued  through   the  2000s,  despite  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  publications  that  featured  the  collection.        2000s:  A  New  Era      The  2000s  saw  Isenburg  take  a  central  and  leading  role  in  the  Daguerreiann  Society,  

continuing  his  long-standing  commitment  to  the  society  he  had  co-founded.    From  2004  ­  2008   Isenburg  was  its  President,  a  leadership  role  that  he  had  not  taken  on  previously.    Isenburg   continued  his  warm,  personable  style  of  communication  with  the  society  through  thirteen   newsletter  updates  of  individual  members  and  symposium  plans,  much  akin  to  the  newsletter   articles  he  had  written  in  the  1990s  (bibliography  56  ­  69).    His  collection,  and  Isenburg  himself   as  a  society  member,  was  also  featured  in  four  articles  written  by  others,  most  of  which   compliment  Isenburg  on  his  public  lectures  (bibliography  70  ­  73).    Perhaps  the  most  dramatic   example  of  Isenburg's  commitment  to  sharing  his  knowledge  to  the  society  came  in  2009,  when   after  suffering  a  heart  attack,  Isenburg  checked  himself  out  of  hospital  to  give  a  presentation  at   the  annual  symposium  (bibliography  72).       The  2000s  also  saw  an  overall  reduction  in  the  number  of  publications  featuring  the  MRI   Collection:  three  histories  of  photography  (bibliography  106  ­  108)  and  four  magazine  articles   (bibliography  127  ­  130).  Though  it  is  doubtful  that  the  average  reader  was  aware  of  the  

                                                                                                                 59   Lowry,  Bates  and  Isable  Lowry.  The  Silver  Canvas:  Daguerreotypes  Masterpieces  from  the  J.   Paul  Getty  Museum.  Oxford  University  Press:  1998.      103  

images'  source,  it  does  show  that  the  MRI  Collection  continued  to  be  regarded  as  a  rich   resource.     The  Young  America:  The  Daguerreotypes  of  Southworth  and  Hawes  exhibition  and   accompanying  hefty,  356  page  publication  (2005)  acknowledged  the  quality  of  Southworth  and   Hawes  material  in  the  MRI  Collection,  this  being  the  sole  private  collection  featured  amongst   the  three  public  collections  in  the  associated  travelling  exhibition  (bibliography  136)60.    The   catalogue  was  a  comprehensive  resource  on  the  influential  business  partners,  covering  the   cultural  significance,  historical  impact,  and  technical  operation,  of  the  studio.  The  publication   features  beautiful  reproductions  in  a  150-image  colour  portfolio  and  the  catalogue  provides   details  on  close  to  2000  works,  each  accompanied  by  a  black  and  white  thumbnail  illustration.     Isenburg  contributed  an  essay  that  drew  heavily  on  his  own  collection  of  nineteenth-century   technical  manuals  and  literature.    Photography-enthusiasts  and  research  libraries  alike   enthusiastically  acquired  the  publication.      The  Legacy        

In  the  1970s  Isenburg  swiftly  became  an  acknowledged  authority  at  the  local  level,  

primarily  amongst  other  private  collectors,  on  nineteenth-century  photography  within  local   photographic  historical  societies.    The  1980s  saw  a  "behind  the  scenes"  re-grouping  of  sorts,   during  which  Isenburg  decreased  his  involvement  in  publications,  and  focused  instead  on  the   development  of  his  collection.    These  efforts  were  rewarded,  beginning  in  1989,  with  the  MRI                                                                                                                    60   Prior  to  this  extensive  publication  there  had  only  been  one  catalogue  providing  an  overview   of  Southworth  &  Hawes,  The  Spirit  of  Fact,  in  1976.  Young  America  is  the  current  source  of   authoritative  information  on  the  work  of  Southworth  &  Hawes.        104  

Collection's  first  inclusion  in  an  exhibition  at  a  major  institution,  and  the  co-founding  of  The   Daguerreian  Society,  a  national  and  well-organized  photographic  historical  society  that  offered   both  the  personable  interaction  among  members  through  newsletters,  and  the  more  scholarly   interaction  through  its  annual  symposium  and  published  annual.    By  the  end  of  the  1990s   Isenburg  had  become  a  nationally  recognized  authority  in  particular  areas  of  nineteenth- century  photography,  chiefly  Southworth  &  Hawes  and  California  Gold  Rush.    His  reputation  of   generosity  and  knowledge  would  carry  his  collection  into  the  2000s,  culminating  in  its  sale  in   2012.        

  

  

105  

Conclusion  
Matthew  R.  Isenburg's  enthusiasm  for  collecting,  and  his  natural  penchant  for  sharing   the  knowledge  that  could  be  procured  from  a  collection  of  depth  and  high  quality,  culminated   in  a  legacy  as  unique  as  the  man  himself.    This  passion  was  apparent  not  only  in  the  physical   display  of  his  collection,  reflecting  Isenburg's  taste  and  understanding  of  early  photography,   within  his  home,  but  also  within  the  recollections  his  many  visitors  had  of  his  generosity,   encyclopedic  knowledge,  sharp  mind,  and  generous  spirit.    This  desire  to  allow  access  was   evident  in  the  welcoming  environment  he  created  in  the  main  library  in  his  house  and  his   decision  in  1987  to  renovate  his  attic  to  his  specifications  to  maximize  the  physical  access   guests  could  have  with  the  photographs  and  photographic  equipment              It  is  clear  that  Isenburg  made  a  lasting  impression  on  those  who  met  him  and  used  his   collection,  especially  through  The  Daguerreian  Society,  and  public  exhibitions  at  institutions  of   renown.    Like  the  Gernsheims,  the  MRI  Collection  has  spurred  numerous  scholarly  and  general   publications  while  the  collection  was  still  private.    A  major  difference  though  is  that,  while  the   Gernsheims  were  the  dominant  users  of  their  own  collection  for  the  two  decades  it  was  in  their   possession,  Isenburg  made  his  collection  accessible  to  many  individuals  studying  a  range  of   topics  over  a  period  of  forty  years.    Isenburg  positioned  himself  from  the  start  to  share  his   collection,  initially  with  friends  and  collectors,  and  subsequently  with  scholars  and  curators.     Though  Isenburg  also  concentrated  on  nineteenth-century  photography,  he  did  not  set   out  to  create  an  overview  history  of  early  photography,  like  the  Gernsheims.    A  more  suitable   parallel  could  be  drawn  between  the  Jammes'  national  focus  (France)  during  a  specific  time   period  (the  1840s  and  1850s)  and  Isenburg's  focus  on  North  American  photographica  during   106  

  

the  late  1830s  through  1860s.      Also,  both  the  Jammes  and  Isenburg  similarly  amassed  not  only   masterworks,  but  images  that  were  less  known,  along  with  supporting  textual  material  and   paper  ephemera.     Such  comparisons  raise  more  questions  for  further  study.    For  example,  what  was  the   extent  of,  and  nature  of,  access  granted  to  researchers  to  the  collections  of  the  Gernsheims  and   Jammes  while  they  were  still  in  private  hands?    Also,  what  other  private  collectors  contributed   to  photohistorical  societies  prior  to  the  founding  of  The  Daguerreian  Society?    It  is  clear  from   these  two  questions  that  arise  (from  wanting  to  understand  more),  and  my  preliminary   observations  (from  comparing  and  contrasting  Isenburg  with  two  other  well-known  private   collectors  and  their  collections),  that  there  is  a  need  for  a  greater  research  into  the  impact  and   practices  of  private  photographic  collections.          

  

107  

Figure  42  -  Ken  Nelson.  Portrait  of  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  sitting  outside  of  house,  2000.  Quarter-plate  daguerreotype.  Collection   of  AMC,  Toronto.  

  

  

  

  

108  

Bibliography  
   This  selective  bibliography  does  not  duplicate  publications  found  in  the  annotated  bibliography   about  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection.    This  bibliography  largely  comprises  publications   discussed  in  the  literature  survey  and  relating  to  private  collecting  and  collections.        Historical  and  Theoretical  Context  of  Private  Photographic  Collections   Arranged  in  chronological  order.      1. Newhall,  Beaumont.  "History  of  Photography"  review,  Image,  vol.  5,  no.  3  (March  1956),   p.68.        2. Szarkowski,  John.  "Photography  and  the  Private  Collector."  Aperture  15,  no.  2  (Summer   1970),  np.      3. Newhall,  Beaumont.  "A  Chronology  for  the  Years  1900-1940  of  Certain  Publications,   Collections,  Museums  and  Exhibitions  Pertaining  to  the  History  of  Photography,"  Antique   Book  Monthly  Review  (December  1978),  pp.  544-45.      4. Clark,  Walter.  "George  Eastman  House:  Its  Technology  Collections."  Image,  vol.  24,  no.  2   (December  1981),  p.  1-3.      5. Pultz,  John.  "Collectors  of  Photography,  "  in  A  Personal  View:  Photography  in  the  Collection   of  Paul  F.  Walter,  11-24.  New  York:  The  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  1985.      6. Unknown.  "50  Most  Important  Collectors  in  the  World"  from  American  Photo  (March/April   1995),  p.  48-51.      Photographic  Collections,  Including  Exhibition  Catalogues   Arranged  in  chronological  order.      1. Gernsheim,  Helmut  with  Alison  Gernsheim.  Creative  Photography  1826  to  the  Present:  An   Exhibition  from  The  Gernsheim  Collection.  Detroit:  Wayne  State  University  Press,  1963.      2. The  Gernsheim  Collection.  Austin:  The  University  of  Texas,  1965.      3. Gilbert,  George.    Collecting  Photographica:  The  Images  and  Equipment  of  the  First  Hundred   Years  of  Photography.  New  York:  Hawthorn  Books,  1976.      4. Naef,  Weston  J.,  The  Collection  of  Alfred  Stieglitz:  Fifty  Pioneers  of  Modern  Photography.   New  York:  The  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art/Viking,  1978.      5. Nash,  Graham.  The  Collection  of  Graham  Nash.  Nash  Press,  1978.   109  

  

   6. Palmquist,  Peter  E.,  The  First  Ten  Years:  A  Listing  of  my  Photographic  History  Obsession,   1973-1983,  1983.      7. "Gernsheim  on  Gernsheim,"  Image,  vol.  27,  no.  4  (December  1984),  p.  2-8.      8. A  Collective  Endeavour  ­  The  First  Fifty  Years  of  George  Eastman  House.  New  York:  David   Krut  Publishing,  1999.        9. Blessing,  Jennifer  et  al.  Speaking  with  Hands:  Photographs  from  the  Buhl  Collection.  New   York:  Solomon  R.  Guggenheim  Museum,  2004.      10. Heiting,  Manfred,  et  al.  Imagining  Paradise:  The  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library  at  The   George  Eastman  House,  Rochester.  Göttingen:  Steidl,  2008.      11. Flukinger,  Roy.  "A  Historiography:  Helmut  and  Alison  Gernsheim  and  The  Gernsheim   Collection"  The  Gernsheim  Collection.  Austin:  University  of  Texas  Press,  2010,  p.  11-65.      Auction  Catalogues  For  Private  Photographic  Collections   Arranged  in  chronological  order.      1. Photography:  a  panoramic  history  of  the  art  of  photography  as  applied  to  book  illustration,   from  its  inception  up  to  date:  the  important  collection  of  the  late  Albert  E.  Marshall.  New   York:  Swann  Auction  Galleries,  February  14,  1952.      2. The  Darrah  Collection.  New  York:  Hastings  Gallery,  1979.      3. Photographs  from  the  Collection  of  Graham  Nash.  New  York:  Sotheby's,  1990.      4. La  photographie,  collection  Marie-Thérèse  et  André  Jammes.  London:  Sotheby's,  1999.      5. La  photographie  II  :  collection  Marie-Thérèse  et  André  Jammes  :  exposition  à  Paris  du   vendredi  15  au  mercredi  20  mars  2002.  Paris:  Sotheby's,  2002.      6. The  Naylor  Collection:  The  Complete  History  of  Photography.  New  York:  Guerney's,  2007.      7. La  photographie  IV:  collection  Marie-Thérèse  et  André  Jammes.  Paris:  Sotheby's,  2008.      8. A  Show  of  Hands:  Photographs  from  the  Collection  of  Henry  Buhl.    New  York:  Sotheby's,   2012.        

  
  

110  


