      "Highlights  Of  A  Trip  To  Hell"      Contextualizing  the  Initial  Reception  of  Larry  Clark's  Tulsa               by        William  T.  Green         A  thesis  project  presented  to  Ryerson  University  and  George  Eastman  House,   Intentional  Museum  of  Photography  in  Film         In  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  in  the   program  of  Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management         Rochester,  New  York,  United  States  and     Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2013               ©  William  T.  Green  2013  

Author's  Declaration            I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the   thesis,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      William  T.  Green         I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or   by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  thesis  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.        William  T.  Green  

  

ii  

Abstract            Released  in  1971,  Tulsa,  American  artist  Larry  Clark's  career-launching  first   photobook,  is  today  remembered  as  marking  a  watershed  moment  in  American   photography.  This  paper  travels  back  to  the  era  that  Tulsa  was  first  published  to   examine  the  book's  initial  critical  reception  and  significance  within  that  specific   cultural  and  artistic  climate.  It  presents  an  abbreviated  overview  of  Tulsa's  gradual   creation;  illustrates  the  ways  in  which  the  book  was  both  similar  to  and  different   from  other  commonly  cited  contemporaneous  works;  and  surveys  its  evolving   status  and  reputation  throughout  the  1970s  and  into  the  early  1980s,  when  its   second  edition  was  published.  This  paper  ultimately  argues  that  Tulsa's  critical   success  and  current  iconic  cultural  status  was  neither  as  immediate  nor  as   consistent  as  previous  accounts  have  led  us  to  believe,  but  was  instead  the  result  of   both  Clark's  unrelenting  perseverance  and  the  exciting  time  period  in  which  it  came   of  age.    

  

iii  

Acknowledgements            First,  I  would  like  to  thank  Alison  Nördstrom,  whose  initial  guidance  in   conceptualizing  this  paper  was  invaluable  and  instructive,  and  Don  Snyder,  my   primary  advisor,  whose  encouragement,  advice,  and  input  throughout  the  research   and  writing  of  this  paper  proved  absolutely  vital  to  its  completion.  Additionally,  I  am   endlessly  grateful  to  the  staff  at  Ryerson  University  and  George  Eastman  House  for   all  of  the  advice  and  knowledge  they  have  so  generously  shared  with  my  colleagues   and  me  throughout  our  time  at  their  excellent  institutions.      I  would  also  like  to  thank  my  peers,  Sean  Corscadden,  Heather  Courtney,  Suman   Guram,  Molly  Kalkstein,  Krista  Keller,  Ross  Knapper,  Robin  O'Dell,  Trish  Odorico,   and  Meghan  Shaw  for  their  friendship  and  constant  encouragement.        Most  importantly,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  family  for  their  unwavering  support.  

  

iv  

Table  of  Contents            Author's  Declaration      Abstract                  Acknowledgments   List  of  Appendices      Introduction                                                                                                                           1   6   12   21   36   41   44   58   Chapter  I:  A  Short  History  of  Tulsa  and  its  Development      Chapter  II:  Tulsa  Within  the  Period     Chapter  III:  Tulsa's  Initial  Reception   Chapter  IV:  Tulsa's  Legacy      Conclusion        Appendices      Bibliography                                                                                                                                                ii   iii   iv   vi   vii  

List  of  Illustrations     

  

v  

List  of  Illustrations            1   2   3      4      5   6   Front  cover  of  Tulsa's  first  edition      Larry  Clark,  Untitled,  1971.      knows."     Bill  Eppridge,  photograph  from  "We  are  animals  in  a  world   no  one  knows."     Larry  Clark,  Untitled,  1963.                             19   24   Front  cover  of  Camera  Mainichi,  February  1972.         19                                    9   11   16  

Opening  Spread  of  "We  are  animals  in  a  world  no  one       

  

vi  

List  of  Appendices            Appendix  1:  Exhibitions,  1971  ­  1983                                             44   46   48      Appendix  2:  Institutional  Collectors,  1971  ­  1983     Appendix  3:  Annotated  Bibliography  of  Reviews  and        Mentions  of  Tulsa,  1971  ­  1983        

  

vii  

Introduction              American  artist  Lawrence  "Larry"  Donald  Clark's  (b.  1943)  first  photobook,   Tulsa,  is  widely  regarded  as  the  work  that  launched  his  now  lauded  career.  First   published  in  the  fall  of  1971,  Tulsa  chronicled  the  lives  and  deaths  of  a  group  of  drug   addicts  ­  a  group  that  Clark  himself  was  intermittently  an  active  member  of   throughout  the  1960s  and  `70s  ­  in  Tulsa,  Oklahoma,  the  artist's  hometown,  over  an   8-year  period.  The  book's  short  introduction,  photographs,  filmstrips,  and  sparse   captions  tell  a  tragic  narrative  of  drug  use,  violence,  and  death  in  white  Middle   America  from  the  perspective  of  an  insider  and  participant.  This  paper  will  return  to   Clark's  early  career  to  reexamine  Tulsa's  early  history  by  first  summarizing  the   book's  gradual  creation;  then  contextualizing  the  book  within  the  era  that  it  was   produced  and  first  published;  and,  finally,  chronicling  its  critical  reception   throughout  the  1970s  and  early  `80s,  the  era  that  largely  shaped  its  ultimate   meaning  and  legacy.      My  interest  in  Tulsa  began  with  the  back  cover  of  the  2000  Grove  Press   edition  of  the  book,  which  featured  a  reproduction  of  an  article  originally  written  in   October  1971  by  Dick  Cheverton  entitled  "A  Devastating  Portrait  of  an  American   Tragedy."1  Upon  seeing  this  article,  I  was  first  struck  by  the  visceral  response   Cheverton  had  to  a  book  that  I,  as  a  young  viewer,  did  not  immediately  find  shocking   or  particularly  affecting.  Moreover,  the  article's  presence  on  the  Grove  Press   edition's  back  cover  suggested  a  controversial  reception  surrounding  the  book's   release  in  1971  that  I  was  entirely  unaware  of.  Upon  researching  the  topic,  however,   I  found  that,  to  my  dismay,  relatively  little  has  been  written  on  Tulsa's  reception  and   the  few  texts  that  do  mention  it  often  oversimplify  its  story.  In  almost  all  cases,   Tulsa's  history  is  presented  as  one  of  two  largely  contradictory  stories:  the  first   presents  Tulsa  as  an  instantly  celebrated  classic  that  has  sustained  its  status  up  to   the  present  day  while  the  other  account,  conversely,  presents  the  book  as  creating  a                                                                                                                    1  Dick  Cheverton,  "A  Devastating  Portrait  Of  An  American  Tragedy,"  Detroit  Free   Press,  November  7,  1971,  5B.      1  

widespread,  largely  unprecedented  controversy  that  needed  time  to  be  fully   understood  and  appreciated  by  the  art  world.  Through  my  research,  then,  I  hope  to   construct  a  more  nuanced,  detailed  account  of  the  book's  initial  critical  reception   and  perhaps  determine  which,  if  either,  of  these  nearly  opposite  accounts  holds   more  truth.        Due  to  Clark's  broad  popularity,  the  literature  surrounding  him  is  incredibly   diverse  and  far-reaching.  These  texts  can  be  found  in  books,  on  the  web,  or  in   periodicals  and  can  frame  him  within  discourses  ranging  from  popular  culture  to  art   and  fashion.  Beginning  my  research,  I  started  by  focusing  on  two  self-published   books  that,  despite  being  flawed  in  their  own  ways,  focus  on  and  attempt  to  distill   the  wide  range  of  literature  on  Clark.  First,  Billa  Harden's  Larry  Clark:  Bibliography   is  a  relatively  comprehensive  bibliography  of  texts  on  Clark  that  features  an   additional  essay  in  German.2  While  Harden's  book  assisted  me  in  digging  deeper   into  Clark's  broad  bibliography,  it  proved  incomplete  and  littered  with  factual   errors.  Additionally,  Chelsea  Spengemann's  The  Tulsa  Reader:  1971-2010  is  another   useful  bibliographic  resource  devoted  solely  to  literature  on  Tulsa.3  However,  the   publication  itself  is  a  strange  one.  Branded  as  an  anonymously  produced  artist  book   ­  Spengemann's  name  never  appears  within  the  text  ­  the  publication  features   Xerox  photocopies  of  various  interviews,  articles,  press  releases,  and  gallery  memos   in  a  style  reminiscent  of  Clark's  constant  use  of  archival  documents  and  ephemera   within  his  own  artistic  practice.  Although  I  agree  with  photography  critic  Jeffery   Ladd's  assertion  that  "the  [book's]  'collage'  aspect  that  seems  to  be  touting  an  artist   book  flavor  seems  a  stretch,"  it  nonetheless  reproduces  difficult-to-find  texts  on   Clark  and  Tulsa,  although  it  misses  other  significant  ones  and  exerts  no  effort  to   interpret  or  contextualize  them.4  This  paper  will  also  offer  a  bibliography  on  Tulsa,   albeit  one  that  covers  a  shorter  range  of  time,  and  will  include  texts  missed  by  both                                                                                                                    2  Billa  Hayden,  Larry  Clark:  Bibliography  (n.l.:  Billa  Hayden,  2005).   3  Chelsea  Spengemann,  The  Tulsa  Reader.  (New  York:  Chelsea  Spengemann,  2010).   4  Jeffrey  Ladd,  "Kiss  The  Past  Hello  by  Larry  Clark,"  5B4:  Photography  and  Books,   March  22,  2011.  http://5b4.blogspot.com/2011/03/kiss-past-hello-by-larry- clark.html.      2  

Harden  and  Spengemann  along  with  an  interpretation  of  these  texts  and  what  they   mean  to  Tulsa's  ultimate  story  and  legacy.      Despite  the  wide  array  of  literature  on  Clark,  there  are  surprisingly  few   serious  publications  or  texts  devoted  exclusively  to  him,  let  alone  the  history  and   interpretation  of  Tulsa.  A  reason  for  the  overall  lack  of  serious  texts  on  Clark  was   hypothesized  in  The  Art  Newspaper  as  being  a  result  of  the  difficulty  institutions   often  face  when  gathering  funds  to  publish  scholarly  exhibition  catalogues  on  work   that  many  consider  shocking  and  outright  offensive.5  This  was  allegedly  the  case   with  the  International  Center  of  Photography's  2005  retrospective  exhibition  on   Clark,  which  only  gathered  enough  funding  to  produce  a  small  booklet  that  was   much  more  reminiscent  of  a  takeaway  brochure  than  a  traditional  exhibition   catalogue.6  Furthermore,  the  few  catalogues  that  do  feature  texts  on  Clark,  such  as   Musée  d'Art  Moderne's  Kiss  the  Past  Hello,  tend  to  feature  very  general  writings  that   do  not  go  into  the  specifics  such  as  Tulsa's  initial  critical  reception.7  Furthermore,   while  there  have  been  extended  studies  on  other  classic  photobooks  in  recent  years,   such  as  Sarah  Greenough's  indispensible  Looking  In:  Robert  Frank's  The  Americans   or  the  titles  in  Errata  Editions'  ongoing  "Books  on  Books"  series,  Tulsa  has  yet  to   receive  a  similar  extended  critical  and  historical  analysis.  Although  this  paper  will   not  entirely  fill  that  void,  it  aims  to  at  least  help  occupy  a  small  part  of  it.      While  no  books  other  than  Spengemann's  have  been  devoted  specifically  to   Tulsa  and  its  history,  various  articles  have  mentioned  the  book's  status  and   reception  throughout  the  1970s,  although  it  is  typically  secondary  to  the  author's   central  topic  and,  as  previously  mentioned,  is  often  presented  in  an  oversimplified   manner.  Clark  gave  the  first  mention  of  Tulsa's  history  in  1979,  less  than  a  decade   after  its  release,  in  Thomas  Dugan's  book  of  interviews,  Photography  Between  the   Covers.8  In  Dugan's  book,  Clark  gave  valuable  information  about  the  conception  and   production  of  Tulsa,  but  only  provided  a  few  sentences  about  its  reception,  which                                                                                                                    5  "Larry  Clark's  Non-Existent  Catalogues,"  The  Art  Newspaper,  April  2005,  36.   6  Larry  Clark,  Larry  Clark  (New  York:  International  Center  of  Photography,  2005).   7  Larry  Clark,  Kiss  the  Past  Hello  (New  York:  Luhring  Augustine,  2011).   8  Thomas  Dugan,  Photography  Between  the  Covers:  Interviews  With  Photo- Bookmakers  (Rochester:  Light  Impressions,  1979),  65-77.      3  

painted  an  over-generalized  and  slightly  contradictory  story.  Early  in  the  interview,   Clark  vaguely  stated,  "the  Tulsa  book  caused  such  a  sensation  in  Tulsa  and  all  over,"   but  in  a  later  question  claimed  "everybody  wrote  about  it,  everybody  liked  it  [...]  it   was  amazing."9  In  many  respects,  the  vague  accounts  of  Tulsa's  history  begun  by   Clark  in  Dugan's  book  have  persisted  through  the  present  day.      For  example,  Vince  Aletti,  in  his  popular  Artforum  column,  "First  Break,"   which  provided  brief,  one-page  accounts  of  an  artists'  first  major  work,  devoted  an   installation  to  Tulsa.  In  the  article,  Aletti  presented  a  brief  description  of  Clark's   early  life  and  the  various  stages  of  photographing  for  the  book,  but  only  quoted  one   positive,  early  review  by  A.  D.  Coleman  and  concluded  that  all  later  commentators   generally  agreed  with  Coleman's  judgments.10  Likewise,  A.  D.  Coleman,  when   writing  about  Clark  in  1990,  simplified  the  work's  reception  and  Clark's  activity   throughout  the  1970s:  "the  book  was  an  immediate  success  and  made  Mr.  Clark's   reputation  overnight;  Tulsa  was  at  once  an  important  social  documents,  a  brutally   frank  personal  testament  and  a  brilliant  exploration  of  book  form.  As  a  result  of  the   acclaim,  Mr.  Clark  lectured  and  exhibited  widely."11  Conversely,  however,  Mary   Warner  Marien,  in  her  widely  read  history  of  photography  survey,  Photography:  A   Cultural  History,  merely  asserted  that  Tulsa  "provoked  negative  reactions."12  This   simplified  story  continues  on  through  2011,  when  Sebastien  Gokalp,  writing  in  Kiss   the  Past  Hello,  framed  Tulsa  simply  as  a  "bombshell"  of  early  1970s  photography.13  It   seems,  then,  that  although  many  writers  find  it  necessary  to  briefly  frame  and   introduce  Tulsa  within  the  time  of  its  release  and  mention  how  contemporary   audiences  first  received  it,  there  appears  to  be  little  consensus  as  to  what  these   audiences  actually  thought  of  the  book.  In  this  paper  I  hope  to  shed  some  light  onto   their  varied  reactions  and  ultimately  demonstrate  that  while  none  of  the                                                                                                                    9  Ibid,  72,  75.   10  Vince  Aletti,  "First  Break:  Larry  Clark,"  Artforum  40:9,  May  2002,  27.   11  A.  D.  Coleman,  "Highly  Charged  but  Mute  Parade  of  Social  Ills,"  The  New  York   Observer,  October  8,  1990,  28.   12  Mary  Warner  Marien,  Photography:  A  Cultural  History  (Upper  Saddle  River:   Pearson  Hall  Inc.,  2011),  353.   13  Sebastien  Gokalp.  "The  Savage  Eye,"  in  Kiss  the  Past  Hello  (New  York:  Luhring   Augustine,  2011),  9.      4  

aforementioned  accounts,  or  ones  similar  to  them,  are  entirely  untrue,  they  all   manage  to  oversimplify  the  story  of  Tulsa's  reception  and,  by  extension,  Clark's   history  and  that  of  American  photography  in  the  1970s.      It  is  therefore  the  aim  of  this  paper  to  create  a  more  thorough  account  of   Tulsa's  initial  reception  than  previous  literature  has  managed  to  provide.  In  this   paper's  first  chapter,  I  will  briefly  summarize  Clark's  early  life,  the  periods  he  spent   making  Tulsa,  and  close  with  a  brief  overview  of  the  book.  The  second  chapter  will   highlight  some  popular  works  and  prevailing  trends  in  both  American  culture  and   photography  during  in  the  late  1960s  and  early  `70s  that  relate  in  various  ways  to   Tulsa's  predominate  themes,  style,  and  rhetoric.  Through  this,  I  hope  to  demonstrate   the  discourses  that  Clark  would  have  been  inserting  Tulsa  within  and  the  ways  in   which  contemporary  readers  may  have  framed  or  understood  the  book  upon  its   release  in  1971.  In  the  third  chapter,  I  will  survey  reviews  of  the  book  that  appeared   in  print  between  its  release  in  1971  and  1983,  the  year  Clark  self-published  Tulsa's   second  edition.  Furthermore,  in  this  chapter  I  will  also  provide  a  brief  overview  of   the  various  exhibitions  of  the  work  held  throughout  the  decade,  an  aspect  of  the   Tulsa's  story  that  is  often  disregarded  by  historians.  By  analyzing  if  or  how  writers   framed  and  used  Tulsa  as  the  decade  progressed,  partly  in  relation  to  Clark's   personal  life  throughout  the  period,  I  hope  to  show  how  the  book  became  the  classic   we  recognize  it  as  today.  In  the  fourth  and  final  chapter,  I  will  analyze  Tulsa's  legacy   and  current  status.  I  will  also  briefly  survey  some  of  the  many  artists  whose  work   has  been  overtly  influenced  by  Tulsa  in  the  years  since  its  release.  Finally,  the   paper's  conclusion  section  will  summarize  the  previous  chapters  and  give  a  final   summary  of  Tulsa's  early  history.  

  

5  

Chapter  I:  A  Short  History  of  Tulsa  and  its  Development              The  production  of  Tulsa  largely  mirrored  Clark's  personal  life  throughout  the   1960s  and  early  `70s  and  was  marked  with  stages  of  both  focused  activity  and   complete  inactivity.  These  periods  mostly  coincided  with  various  "hot"  and  "cold"   stretches  within  Tulsa's  drug  scene,  in  which  Clark  had  been  a  participant  since   1959,  when  he  was  first  introduced  to  drugs  by  friends  Billy  Mann  and  David  Roper,   both  of  whom  became  the  book's  two  main  protagonists.  Also  around  this  time,   Clark  began  learning  photography  when  he  started  assisting  his  mother,  who   photographed  newborns  for  a  living;  a  practice  Clark  often  refers  to  as   "kidnapping."14  This  chapter  will  provide  a  short  summary  of  how  these  early   activities  in  Clark's  life  ­  "shooting"  and  "shooting  up"  ­  merged  in  the  early  1960s   to  ultimately  produce  the  body  of  work  that  would  become  Tulsa.      A  major  early  event  in  Tulsa's  pre-history  occurred,  unusually,  when  Clark   left  his  hometown  of  Tulsa  for  the  first  time  to  attend  college.  Upon  graduating  high   school  ­  an  accomplishment  neither  Mann  nor  Roper  achieved  ­,  Clark  was   desperate  to  leave  the  monotony  of  Oklahoma  and  enrolled  in  Layton  School  of  Art's   photography  program  in  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.  Once  there,  however,  he  failed  to   connect  with  the  program's  students  and  ended  up  befriending  art  students  in  the   school's  painting  and  sculpture  departments  and  quickly  adopted  their  avant-garde   attitudes.  Around  this  time,  Clark  describes  coming  to  the  revelation  that  he  didn't   "have  to  be  photographing  baby  pictures  door  to  door.  [...]  I  didn't  realize  you  could   use  photography  for  other  things."15  At  Layton,  Clark  was  introduced  not  only  to  an   avant-garde  attitude  that  complemented  his  already  rebellious,  narcotic-using   persona,  but  also  to  the  realization  that  he  could  focus  his  camera  on  alternative   subject  matter,  including  his  own  life.                                                                                                                    14  Larry  Clark,  Teenage  Lust  (New  York:  Larry  Clark,  1987),  n.p.;  Dugan,  Photography   Between  the  Covers,  66.;  Paul  Schrader,  "Babes  in  the  Hood,"  Artforum  33,  May  1995,   76.   15  Dugan,  Photography  Between  the  Covers,  67.      6  

  

Upon  leaving  Layton  School  of  Art  in  1963,  Clark  briefly  assisted  his  former  

teacher,  Walter  Sheffer,  in  Milwaukee  while  photographing  for  local  magazines,  such   as  Let's  See,  before  returning  to  Tulsa.  Although  he  had  been  casually  photographing   his  friends  and  their  lifestyle  since  1961,  it  was  not  until  his  return  home  in  1963   that  he  began  to  treat  the  practice  as  a  serious,  sustained  project.  However,  this   period,  which  would  eventually  make  up  Tulsa's  opening  chapter,  came  to  a  halt  in   1964  when  Clark  went  to  New  York  City  after  his  friend,  Tom  Zimmerman,  invited   him  to  show  a  selection  of  work  from  his  ongoing  project  for  the  first  time  at  the   Heliographer's  Gallery  in  the  Upper  East  Side.  Although  there  is  little  documentation   of  the  exhibition,  Vince  Aletti  cryptically  writes:  "a  number  of  the  gallery's  members   resigned  in  protest;  otherwise  the  show  went  unnoticed."16  In  addition  to  displaying   his  work  in  the  gallery  setting,  Clark  was  also  published  in  that  year's  Photography   Annual  with  a  photograph  he  made  as  a  student  entitled  The  Bridge.17  While   productive,  Clark's  time  in  New  York  City  was  not  long  lasting  ­  four  months  after   his  arrival  to  the  city,  he  was  drafted  at  the  age  of  21.  For  the  following  two  years,   Clark  served  in  the  military,  training  first  in  the  American  South  for  a  year  and  then   fighting  in  Vietnam  the  next.      Upon  his  discharge  from  the  military  and  return  to  civilian  life  in  1967,  Clark   moved  back  to  Manhattan.  During  this  period,  he  began  to  play  rock  `n'  roll  music   and  collaborated  with  many  musicians,  including  Steve  Marcus,  the  famous  jazz- rock  fusion  saxophonist.  Clark  contributed  vocals  to  three  tracks  on  Marcus'  1969   album,  The  Lord's  Prayer,  including  renditions  of  The  Troggs'  "Wild  Thing"  and  Bob   Dylan's  "Just  Like  Tom  Thumb's  Blues."18  Also  during  this  time,  Clark  met  Ralph   Gibson  at  photographer  Philip  Perkis'  house,  a  popular  meeting  place  for   photographers  at  the  time.  The  two  became  close  friends  within  days,  founding  a  

                                                                                                                 16  Aletti,  "First  Break,"  27.   17  Bruce  Downes,  ed.,  Photography  Annual  1964:  A  Selection  of  the  world's  finest   photographs  compiled  by  the  editors  of  Popular  Photography  (New  York:  Ziff-Davis,   1964),  128.   18  Steve  Marcus,  The  Lord's  Prayer,  Vortex  Records.  Vinyl  LP.  1969.      7  

friendship  that  would,  unbeknownst  to  both  of  them,  prove  instrumental  to  the   production  of  Tulsa  four  years  later.19      In  the  summer  of  1968,  Clark  left  New  York  and  returned  to  Tulsa,  this  time   with  a  Bolex  16mm  camera  and  tape  recorder,  to  make  what  would  become  the   book's  middle  chapter.  Remembering  this  stage  in  the  project,  Clark  recounted:   "Originally,  I  had  wanted  to  do  a  film.  I  had  all  the  early  photographs  and  couldn't   see  it  happening  as  a  book  because  the  scene  was  just  so  crazy  [...]  I  actually   borrowed  a  movie  camera  and  a  tape  recorder  with  the  idea  of  doing  a  one-man   movie,  which  was  totally  impossible."20  Though  filmmaking  at  the  time  proved   impractical,  the  filmstrips  made  during  this  1968  trip  were  ultimately  included  in   Tulsa's  second  chapter  and  marked  the  first  of  many  future  film  projects  Clark   would  embark  on  decades  later.      Once  the  scene  in  Tulsa  began  to  slow  down  later  that  year,  Clark  briefly   returned  to  New  York  before  hitting  the  road  with  a  girlfriend,  eventually  settling  in   New  Mexico  by  1969.  During  this  time,  though,  Clark  continued  to  make  trips  back   to  New  York,  where  he  met  with  Gibson,  who  eventually  persuaded  him  to   conceptualize  the  project  as  a  book  and  create  a  dummy  for  it.  Later  in  1970,  once  a   workable  dummy  had  been  created,  Clark's  sister  Elizabeth,  then  part  of  the  Tulsa   drug  scene,  visited  him  in  New  Mexico  with  news  that  the  scene  was  once  again  in   motion.  When  Clark  retuned  to  Tulsa,  however,  he  encountered  a  changed   atmosphere  ­  Mann  had  died  of  an  overdose  that  October  and  Roper  had  grown  to   become,  in  Clark's  words,  the  "old  man  of  the  drug  scene."21  This  final  period  of   photographing  for  Tulsa  allegedly  came  naturally  to  Clark,  who  by  that  time  had  a   solid  grasp  on  the  structure  that  the  book  would  take  and  the  photographs  he   needed  to  complete  it.  "Back  in  1971,"  Clark  modestly  recounts,  "I'd  say  I  was  the   best  photographer  in  the  world.  For  a  few  months  there  I  was  hot."22                                                                                                                    19  Dugan,  Photography  Between  the  Covers,  69.   20  Mike  Kelley,  "Larry  Clark:  In  Youth  Is  Pleasure,"  Flash  Art  25:164,  May-June  1992,   83.   21  Larry  Clark,  Teenage  Lust,  n.p.   22  Ashely  Heath,  "Conversation  on  Thompson  Street,"  Arena  +  Homme  18,   Autumn/Winter  2002-2003,  310.      8  

  

By  the  spring  of  1971,  Clark  was  done  shooting  and  back  in  New  York,  where  

he  finalized  Tulsa's  sequence  and  layout  in  Gibson's  Bowery  apartment.  Funding  for   the  book's  printing,  the  book's  last  crucial  detail,  came  from  photographer  Daniel   Seymour,  who  had  been  introduced  to  Clark  through  Robert  Frank,  a  friend  of   Gibson's.  Seymour  had  also  recently  completed  a  dummy  for  his  autobiographical   photobook,  A  Loud  Song,  and  was  ready  to  publish.  He,  however,  unlike  Clark  or   Gibson,  had  the  money  to  do  so  and  agreed  to  front  the  bill  for  both  books.  Late  that   summer,  Tulsa  and  A  Loud  Song  went  to  press  in  Los  Angeles  under  the  auspices  of   Gibson's  recently  launched  independent  publishing  house,  Lustrum  Press,  which  he   had  founded  the  previous  year  to  self-publish  his  first  book,  The  Somnambulist.   Roughly  2,700  of  the  desired  3,000  copies  were  printed  due  to  a  California  law   allowing  publishers  to  go  10%  over  or  under  their  estimated  volume.23  Finally   actualized,  Tulsa  was  distributed  by  Bill  Edwards  and  Lionel  Suntop  of  Light   Impressions  in  Rochester,  New  York,  the   era's  most  popular  photobook  distributor.        On  sale  at  bookstores  and  galleries   for  $5  by  the  fall  of  1971,  the  first  aspect  of   Tulsa  that  readers  would  have  encountered   was  its  now  iconic,  boldly  designed  cover.   The  cover  is  adorned  with  a  photograph  of   Billy  Mann  sitting  shirtless  atop  an  unmade   bed,  casually  brandishing  a  pistol,  finger  on   trigger,  with  a  brazen  smirk  across  his  face.   A  heavy  black  border  surrounds  the   photograph,  one  that  Dick  Cheverton,   within  weeks  of  Tulsa's  release,  astutely   observed  as  creating,  "a  picture  book  bound   ­  most  appropriately  ­  in  black."24  The                                                                                                                    23  Dugan,  Photography  Between  the  Covers,  71.   24  Cheverton,  "A  Devastating  Portrait,"  5B.      9  
Figure  1:  Front  cover  of  Tulsa  (New  York:   Lustrum  Press,  1971)  

cover's  only  text  announces  only  the  book's  title,  which  is  printed  in  black  over  of   the  photograph's  upper-left  corner.  Upon  handling  the  book,  readers  manage  a   roughly  9''  x  12''  object  that  is  small  enough  to  easily  cradle  in  one's  hands,  yet  large   enough  to  allow  8''  tall  vertical  photographs  to  be  reproduced  around  a  generously- sized  white  border.  Upon  opening  the  cover  and  flipping  past  publishing  and   copyright  information,  readers  find  a  two-page  spread  that  establishes  the  context   in  which  to  interpret  the  work.  The  left-hand  page  presents,  in  descending  order,  the   book's  title,  Clark's  last  name,  and  Lustrum  Press'  signature  star  logo.  The  right- hand  page  shows,  in  Clark's  now  signature  all-under-case  type,  Tulsa's  opening   statement:        "i  was  born  in  tulsa  oklahoma  in  1943,  when  i  was  sixteen  i  started  shooting   amphetamine.  i  shot  with  my  friends  everyday  for  three  years  and  then  left   town  but  i've  gone  back  through  the  years.  once  the  needle  goes  in  it  never   comes  out.  /    L.  C."      Immediately  following  this  introductory  spread,  the  first  chapter  of  Tulsa's  

     

photographic  sequence  begins  by  introducing  Roper  and  Mann,  the  book's  two  main   protagonists,  by  name  along  with  the  year  the  first  chapter  was  set,  1963.  This   section  begins  by  framing  both  characters  as  all-American,  clean-cut  looking  boys,   shown,  for  example,  hunting  in  the  woods.  However,  the  book's  upcoming  turmoil  is   also  foreshadowed  with  photographs  that  suggested  latent  inner  dramas,   exemplified  with  particular  directness  in  a  photograph  of  Roper's  face  reflected   through  a  broken  mirror.  In  this  section,  additional  nameless  characters  are   introduced  alongside  photographs  illustrating  the  highs  and  lows  of  drug  use.  While   underlying  violence  can  be  detected  throughout  this  first  chapter,  death,  which   some  claim  to  be  Tulsa's  primary  subject,  does  not  creep  into  the  narrative  until  its   final  spread.  The  spread  shows,  on  the  left-hand  page,  Mann  lying  on  a  bed,   awkwardly  cradling  a  baby  while  smoking  a  cigarette.  Across  from  him,  on  the  right- hand  page,  is  a  photograph  of  a  nameless  woman,  who  we  now  know  as  his  then   wife,  Deanna  Mann,  age  19,  above  the  straightforward  and  all-telling  caption:   "dead."  

  

10  

  

The  book's  next  chapter,  1968,  primarily  reproduces  filmstrips  from  Clark's  

16mm  film  work  that  year.  These  filmstrips  appear  over  four  pages  and  show  scenes   of  drug  use  alongside  additional  acts  of  violence  in  rough,  grainy,  and  aggressive   style.  The  section  closes  with  its  only  still  photograph:  the  cover  image  of  Mann,   captioned  "dead  1970,"  across  from  a  quote  by  him  that  Clark  recorded  that  year,   repurposed  in  the  book  as  an  epitaph:  "death  is  more  perfect  than  life."        By  the  time  readers  reach  Tulsa's  final  and  longest  chapter,  1971,  darkness   and  hopelessness  dominate  the  book's  narrative.  The  chapter  opens  with  a  crude   and  threatening  message  from  Roper,  the  book's  surviving  and  rapidly  aging   protagonist,  to  Tulsa's  police,  written  on  a  piece  cardboard  in  front  of  his  home.  The   proceeding  photographs  illustrate  incidents  such  as  an  accidental  gunshot  wound,   the  beating  of  a  police  informer,  a  pregnant   woman  shooting  up,  and,  immediately   following,  her  newborn  baby,  dead,  laid  out   in  a  coffin.  The  book  ends,  however,  on  its   most  chilling  note,  not  with  the  ultimate   demise  and  death  of  Tulsa's  remaining   characters,  but  with  the  introduction  of  the   next  generation  of  the  city's  drug  scene   who  Clark,  by  then  a  self-proclaimed  "old   man"  of  the  scene,  had  met  that  year.  The   book's  final  photograph  shows  a  young   man  leaning  over  and  attempting  to  locate   a  vein  on  his  arm  to  shoot  up,  presumably   for  the  first  time.  
Figure  2:  Larry  Clark,  Untitled,  1971.   Courtesy  of  the  artist  and  Luhring  Augustine,   New  York.  

  

  

11  

Chapter  II:  Tulsa  Within  the  Period            While  many  aspects  of  Tulsa  were  innovative,  perhaps  even  groundbreaking,   the  book  was  not  produced  within  a  cultural  or  artistic  vacuum  and  existed   alongside  many  other  comparable  works  at  the  time  of  its  release  in  1971.  This   chapter  will  briefly  highlight  a  few  of  these  works  and  the  period  in  which  they  and   Tulsa  were  produced  and  first  appeared.  By  doing  this,  I  hope  to  show  not  only  ways   in  which  Tulsa  could  have  been  described  as  pioneering,  but  also  demonstrate   existing  trends  within  American  culture  and  photography  that  the  book  would  have   then  mirrored  and  created  a  dialogue  with.      First,  the  pessimism  and  fatalism  that  propels  Tulsa's  narrative  sequencing   was  widespread  by  the  late  1960s,  particularly  within  the  era's  rock  `n'  roll  music,   which  Clark  notably  played  towards  the  decade's  end.  As  George  Lipsitz  writes:         Popular  [rock  'n'  roll]  songs  routinely  projected  fatalism  and  dread  about   political  crises.  Even  in  personal  matters,  despair  and  cynicism  reigned,  as   evidence  by  Jefferson  Airplane's  1967  `Somebody  to  Love,'  which  begun,   `When  the  truth  is  found  to  be  lies,  and  all  the  joy  within  you  dies.'  [...]  Bob   Dylan's  insistence  that  `When  you  ain't  got  nothing,  you  got  nothing  to  lose'  in   `Like  a  Rolling  Stone'  articulated  the  resignation  and  fatalism  of  a  generation   that  saw  itself  caught  between  warring  factions  at  home  and  abroad.  Its   strongest  impulse  was  neither  to  defend  nor  to  attack  the  American  empire,   but  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  the  confrontation.25  

   Like  Clark,  many  of  the  genre's  musicians  saw  drug  use  as  an  escape  mechanism   against  the  era's  overarching  political  strife  and  were  similarly  blunt  in  their   presentation  of  it  in  their  work.  As  Phillip  Monk  notes,  Tulsa's  frank  introduction,   which  closes  with  "once  the  needle  goes  in  it  never  comes  out,"  captures  the  same   cultural  zeitgeist  famously  observed  by  Lou  Reed  and  The  Velvet  Underground  in   their  1967  hit,  "Heroin,"  which  concludes:  "Wow,  that  heroin  is  in  my  blood  /  And                                                                                                                    25  George  Lipsitz,  "Who'll  Stop  the  Rain?:  Youth  Culture,  Rock  `n'  Roll,  and  Social   Crises"  in  The  Sixties...:  From  Memory  to  History,  ed.  David  Farber  (Chapel  Hill  &   London:  The  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1994),  221.      12  

the  blood  is  in  my  head  /  Yeah,  thank  God  that  I'm  good  as  dead  /  Oh,  thank  your   God  that  I'm  not  aware  /  And  thank  God  that  I  just  don't  care  /  And  I  guess  I  just   don't  know  /  And  I  guess  I  just  don't  know."26        The  impulse  to  narrate  from  a  personal  and  subjective  point  of  view  can  also   be  detected  far  beyond  Tulsa,  perhaps  most  notably  in  a  literary  genre  that  emerged   throughout  the  1960s  that,  by  the  end  of  the  decade,  had  been  dubbed  "new   journalism."  The  genre  emerged  with  newspaper  and  magazine  writers  who  began   to  create  increasingly  self-driven  assignments  that  applied  traditional  literary   techniques  to  journalistic  writing,  often  utilizing  a  first-person  point  of  view.27   Writers  associated  with  new  journalism  approached  a  huge  variety  of  topics,   including  drug  use.  While  Tom  Wolfe's  1965  collection  of  essays,  The  Kandy-Kolored   Tangerine-Flake  Streamline  Baby,  was  an  early  foray  into  drug  culture,  Hunter  S.   Thompson's  Fear  and  Loathing  in  Las  Vegas:  A  Savage  Journey  to  the  Heart  of  the   American  Dream  is  the  new  journalism  work  that  relates  most  closely  to  Tulsa.  First   published  as  a  two-part  feature  in  Rolling  Stone  in  1971  and  collected  into  a  novel   the  following  year,  Fear  and  Loathing  not  only  intersects  Tulsa  in  its  time  of  release   and  frank  presentation  of  drug  use  through  a  participatory,  first-person  narrative,   but  also  sketched  a  similarly  despondent  account  of  contemporary  culture.   Throughout  his  drug-fueled  roman  à  clé,  Thompson  constantly  refers  to  the  horrors   of  the  Vietnam  War  and  the  failed  utopianism  of  the  1960s  as  the  backdrop  for  the   new  decade.  "But  that  was  some  other  era,"  he  writes  of  the  1960s,  "burned  out  and   long  gone  from  the  brutish  realities  of  this  foul  year  of  Our  Lord,  1971."28  Like  much   now  iconic  music  and  writings  of  the  late  1960s  and  early  `70s,  Tulsa  also   represented  the  bleak  worldview  that  was  prevalent  during  the  time,  one  that  was   markedly  different  from  the  "All  You  Need  is  Love"  counterculture  of  years  past.                                                                                                                    26  Phillip  Monk,  The  American  Trip  (Toronto:  The  Power  Plant,  1996),  17;  The  Velvet   Underground,  "Heroin,"  on  The  Velvet  Underground  &  Nico,  Verve  Records.  1967.   Vinyl  LP.   27  Tom  Wolfe,  an  early  participant  in  this  genre,  outlines  its  history  in:  Tom  Wolfe,   The  New  Journalism  (New  York:  Harper  &  Row,  1973).   28  Hunter  S.  Thompson,  Fear  and  Loathing  in  Las  Vegas.  New  York:  Random  House,   1998.  23.      13  

  

The  impulse  to  move  towards  an  increasingly  personal  and  subjective  

approach  to  storytelling  extended  far  beyond  new  journalism  and  into  other   disciplines  as  well,  including  photography.  Summarizing  this  trend  in  photography,   Jonathan  Green  writes:         It  was  consistent  with  the  social  and  psychological  upheavals  of  the  sixties   that  a  documentary  focus  should  emerge  that  looked  at  the  less  newsworthy,   internal  aspects  of  the  new  culture.  [...  The]  work  was  "personal  journalism":   it  evoked  the  pretense  of  reportage  while  in  fact  describing  the  world  from  a   significantly  personal,  subjective  viewpoint.29  

   While  this  broad  move  towards  the  subjective  in  American  photography  took  on   many  forms,  as  demonstrated  in  such  different  exhibitions  as  Nathan  Lyons'   Contemporary  Photographers:  Toward  a  Social  Landscape  (1966  ­  `67),  Thomas  H.   Garver's  12  Photographers  of  the  American  Social  Landscape  (1967),  or  John   Szarkowski's  New  Documents  (1967),  a  predominant  strain  that  Tulsa  most  closely   related  to  focused  on  the  autobiographical.  Certain  aspects  of  this  autobiographical   impulse  are  often  traced  back  to  Robert  Frank's  seminal  The  Americans  (1959),   republished  in  its  second  American  edition  in  1969.  Not  coincidentally,  Lustrum   Press  published  the  first  American  edition  of  Frank's  autobiographical  The  Lines  of   My  Hand  in  1972  and  is  today  largely  remembered  as  a  notable  supporter  of  this   approach.30  Therefore,  if  Tulsa  alone  was  not  immediately  seen  as  existing  within   this  emerging  and  nuanced  contemporary  discourse  that  Green  dubs  personal   journalism,  its  publisher's  reputation  may  well  have  situated  its  position  within  it.      While  many  photobooks  of  the  era  exemplified  this  personal  mode  of   working,  including  Bruce  Davidson's  Brooklyn  Gang  (1959)  or  East  100th  Street   (1970)  and  Seymour's  A  Loud  Song,  Danny  Lyon's  The  Bikeriders,  released  in  1968,   was  in  many  ways  closest  to  Tulsa.  The  book  featured  photographs  of  and   interviews  with  Lyon's  Chicago  motorcycle  gang,  The  Outlaws.  Although  the  actual                                                                                                                    29  Jonathan  Green,  American  Photography:  A  Critical  History,  1945  to  Present  (New   York:  Harry  N.  Abrams,  Inc.,  1984),  118-119.   30  Parr  and  Badger's  sole  mention  of  Lustrum  is  as  fitting  "firmly  in  the   documentary,  stream  of  consciousness  mode."  The  Photobook,  A  History,  vol.  1,  237.      14  

degeneracy  of  the  group  has  been  questioned  throughout  the  years,  Lyon,  like  Clark,   was  keen  to  show  his  deviant  lifestyle  while  making  his  subjectivity  and  personal   involvement  overtly  clear.  While  Clark  used  Tulsa's  introductory  text  to  establish  his   relationship  with  his  book's  subjects,  Lyon  instead  chose  to  do  this  by  placing  a   photograph  of  himself,  casually  leaned  over  his  Triumph  motorcycle  while  sporting   a  sleeveless  leather  jacket,  on  the  book's  back  dust  jacket.  Throughout  the  1960s,   then,  a  variety  of  artists,  including  Clark,  were  becoming  increasingly  drawn  to   describing  their  own  personal  experiences  from  subjective,  sometimes   autobiographical  points  of  view  while  refusing  to  turn  away  from  any  difficult   subject  matter  their  lives  may  have  entailed,  including,  in  Clark's  case,  drug  use.      Despite  a  growing  number  of  personally  driven  projects  by  photographers   during  the  late  1960s  and  early  `70s,  the  bleak  drug  culture  so  famously  described   by  Lou  Reed  in  1967  had  yet  to  be  fully  explored  photographically.  Curiously,  the   most  lasting  view  of  adolescent  drug  addiction  previous  to  Tulsa  was  published  in   Life  Magazine.  First  introduced  in  1936,  Life  was  the  brainchild  of  Time  founder   Henry  Luce  and  was  initially  conceptualized  as  a  major,  all-American  picture   magazine  for  the  masses.  By  the  time  Clark  was  a  child,  the  magazine  was  one  of  the   country's  dominant  forms  of  media  and  entertainment,  reaching  unprecedented   levels  of  popularity  ­  the  magazine  was  consumed  by  about  22.5  million  readers,  or   roughly  21%  of  the  American  population  above  10  years  old,  by  the  late  1940s.31   Most  issues  of  Life  featured  approximately  200  photographs,  many  of  which  were   carefully  arranged  into  linear  and  clearly  legible  photo-essays  that  followed  familiar   narrative  structures  that  included  a  clearly  defined  beginning,  middle,  and  ending.   Life's  didactic  narrative  impulse  became  a  dominant  form  of  photographic   communication  during  the  mid-twentieth  century  and  spread  to  practices  well   beyond  the  picture  magazine,  perhaps  most  famously  to  Edward  Steichen's   blockbuster  exhibition,  The  Family  of  Man,  which  opened  at  New  York's  Museum  of   Modern  Art  in  1955  and  went  on  to  travel  widely  throughout  the  world.                                                                                                                    31  Erika  Doss,  Looking  at  Life  Magazine  (Washington  D.C.:  Smithsonian  Institution   Press,  2001),  3.      15  

  
Figure  3:  Opening  Spread  of  "We  are  animals  in  a  world  no  one  knows."  Life,  February  26,  1965,   p.  66-67.  Photograph  ©   Bill  Eppridge,  Time/Life  Collection,  Getty  Images.  

     

It  was,  oddly,  within  this  context  that  "We  are  animals  in  a  world  no  one  

knows,"  the  photo-essay  that  most  famously  depicted  pre-Tulsa  drug  culture,  was   consumed.  This  work  was  featured  within  the  first  of  a  two-part  feature  in  Life's   February  26  and  March  5,  1965  issues  and  featured  photographs  by  Bill  Eppridge,   texts  by  James  Mills,  and  a  design  by  Bernard  Quint.32  In  the  photo-essay,  Eppridge   followed  two  young,  white  adults,  Karen  and  John,  both  of  whom  were  heroin   addicts  in  New  York's  Needle  Park  (Sherman  Square,  located  at  the  intersection  of   Broadway  and  72nd  Street).  The  essay  began  by  introducing  the  subjects  with  an   image  of  them  crossing  a  boulevard  that,  without  the  article's  ominous  title,  could   have  easily  illustrated  any  young  couple,  including  the  Life's  mostly  white,  middle   class  audience's  children.  However,  the  following  page  spreads  quickly  familiarized   readers  with  the  daily  horrors  of  Karen  and  John's  lives,  including  scenes  of  them   shooting  up,  resorting  to  illegal  activities  to  support  their  habit,  being  jailed  for   those  activities,  and  a  nearly  fatal  overdose.  The  photo-essay  ended,  however,  with  a   moment  of  calm  desperation,  an  image  of  Karen  cradling  Johnny  and  his  brother  in  a  

                                                                                                                 32  Bill  Eppridge,  "We  are  the  animals  in  a  world  no  one  knows,"  Life,  February  26,   1965,  66-81.      16  

motif  undoubtedly  borrowed  from  Dorothea  Lange's  iconic,  Madonna-inspired   Migrant  Mother.      Tulsa  and  Eppridge's  photo-essay  both  depict  drug  use  in  a  similar  style  and   are  today  frequently  compared  to  one  another.33  However,  despite  these   comparisons,  the  two  bodies  of  work  remain  more  dissimilar  than  alike.  Firstly,  the   productions  of  these  projects  were  markedly  different.  Clark,  throughout  his  career,   has  often  cited  W.  Eugene  Smith,  initially  one  of  Life's  great  photo-essayists  and  later   one  of  its  great  detractors,  as  a  primary  influence.  In  his  often-cited  interview  with   Mike  Kelley,  Clark  explained:         Eugene  Smith  had  quit  Life  because  they  wouldn't  give  him  enough  time  to  do   the  assignments.  He  was  always  writing  these  diatribes  about  the  truth,  and   how  he  wanted  to  tell  the  truth,  the  truth,  the  truth.  It  was  a  real  rebel   position.  It  was  kind  of  like  a  teenager's  position:  why  can't  thing  be  like  they   should  be?  Why  can't  I  do  what  I  want?  I  latched  on  to  that  philosophy.34  

   Many  of  Smith's  public  grievances  with  Life  stemmed  from  the  production  of  their   photo-essays,  which  were  heavily  collaborative  and  often  included  up  to  7  people   contributing  to  a  single  project.35  Ultimately,  as  Glenn  Willumson  writes,  "the   photographer  acted  more  like  a  thesaurus  than  an  author.  It  was  the  photo  editor   who  selected  the  pictorial  `words,'  combined  and  arranged  them  into  double-page   `paragraphs,'  and  sequenced  them  in  a  coherent  `essay.'"36  Clark,  aware  of  these   procedures,  felt,  "[the  editors]  crop  it,  and  they  mess  it  up;  they  pick  the  wrong   pictures  and  you  have  no  control.  [...]  I  got  over  working  for  the  magazines.  Since   then  I've  just  been  out  photographing  on  my  own,  doing  my  own  thing."37  Eppridge,                                                                                                                    33  The  most  explicit  example  of  this  comparison  is  in  Joseph  Marshall,  "The  Moral   Issue  of  a  Pregnant  Woman  Shooting  Up,"  Photo  Review  16:1.  (Winter  1993):  2-9.   34  Kelley,  "In  Youth  is  Pleasure,"  82   35  Maitland  Edey,  Great  Photographic  Essays  from  Life  (Boston:  New  York  Graphic   Society,  1987),  5.  Edey  explains  that  certain  stories  could  have  up  to  7  staff   members  assigned  to  them:  photographer,  departmental  editor,  photo  editor,   negative  editor,  designer,  managing  editor,  and  researcher.   36  Glenn  Willumson,  W.  Eugene  Smith  and  the  Photographic  Essay  (Cambridge  &  New   York:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1992),  23.   37  Dugan,  Photography  Between  the  Covers,  67-68.      17  

on  the  other  hand,  was  handpicked  by  Life's  editors,  partly  due  to  the  fact  he  looked   like  "someone  whose  friends  dropped  acid,"  to  photograph  the  story  that  Mills  had   already  proposed  and  coordinated.38  Therefore,  while  creating  Tulsa,  Clark,   following  Smith's  search  for  "the  truth,"  knowingly  broke  away  from  then  common   systems  involved  with  creating  and  publishing  photographs  in  favor  of  a  much  more   self-driven  project  that  would  allow  him  autonomous  authorship  and  control.      Additionally,  another  photo-essay  by  Eppridge,  made  for  the  second  part  of   Life's  two-part  feature,  appeared  in  the  following  week's  issue  and  greatly  affected   the  overall  rhetoric  of  his  project.  Building  off  of  the  defeat  and  desperation  that   ended  his  previous  photo-essay,  this  second  one  presented  optimistic  solutions  by   highlighting  drug  rehab  facilities  and  support  groups,  ultimately  giving  the  overall   project  an  entirely  different  tone  than  Tulsa's  bleak  and  hopeless  dénouement.39   Typically,  Life  was,  as  John  Gennari  writes,  "more  than  happy  to  accommodate  new   social  trends  that  appeared  to  pose  no  grave  threat  to  the  old  order."40  By   highlighting  the  ways  in  which  the  nation's  wayward  youth  would  recognize  their   wrongs,  receive  help,  and  eventually  become  reintegrated  back  into  society   represents  only  one  of  many  examples  of  Life's  stubborn  optimism  that  the   traditional  values  it  promoted  would  in  the  end  win  out.  On  the  other  hand,  Tulsa,   along  with  other  works  of  its  era,  blatantly  challenged  and  disrupted  this  optimism.      Furthermore,  the  contexts  in  which  these  projects  were  consumed  vary   tremendously.  Eppridge's  photographs  were  seen  within  Life's  familiar  format:   staple  bound,  printed  on  lightweight  paper  alongside  other  articles  and   advertisements.  For  example,  the  spread  before  Eppridge's  first  photo-essay   featured  a  full-page,  color  advertisement  for  Sunkist;  the  final  paragraphs  of  an   article  on  colorful,  pop  art  inspired  fashion;  and  an  advertisement  for  Contac  sinus   pills  that  urged  consumers  to  "Help  free  America  of  stuffy  noses."  Comparatively,   Tulsa  was  a  relatively  self-contained  work  of  art  that  was  not  compromised  by                                                                                                                    38  Edey,  Great  Photographic  Essays  of  Life,  239.   39  Bill  Eppridge,  "'I  told  them  not  to  go  home,'"  Life,  March  5,  1965,  92-103.   40  John  Gennari,  "Bridging  the  Two  Americas:  Life  Looks  at  the  1960s,"  in  Looking  at   Life  Magazine,  ed.  Erika  Doss.  (Washington:  Smithsonian  Press,  2001),  273.      18  

advertisements,  was  printed  on  heavyweight,  slightly  glossy  paper,  and  was  free   from  the  editorializing  and  rhetoric  that  Clark  saw  as  being  damaging  to  the   integrity  of  photography  commissioned  by  picture  magazine  like  Life.      Despite  Clark's  insistence  on  making  Tulsa  different  from  picture  magazine   photo-essays,  similarities  remain.  For  example,  certain  commentators  have  accused   the  book  of  echoing  the  didacticism  that  dominated  many  Life  photo-essays,   including  those  by  W.  Eugene  Smith.  "Though  Tulsa's  photographs  are  only   sporadically  captioned,"  writes  Zoë  Chan,  "they  could  nonetheless  be  linked  with   Life  magazine's  `overt  educational  imperative  (`to  see  and  be  instructed')'  through   their  famous  photo-essay  format.  Through  a  strategic  ordering  of  its  featured   imagery,  Tulsa  ensures  a  hyper-legibility  of  content  and  narrative."41  Additionally,   photographs  from  both  projects,  if  removed  from  the  contexts  in  which  they  were   consumed  ­  and  with  their  iconic  statuses  magically  erased  ­  begin  to  look  more   similar  to  one  another  than  different.  Their  handheld  style,  grainy  quality,  and  deep   blacks,  along  with  their  similar  subject  matter,  make  them  look  remarkably  alike.   Ultimately,  however,  despite  these  formal  similarities,  the  distinguishing  differences   between  them  lie  in  their  productions,  contexts  of  presentation,  and,  importantly,   conclusions  about  their  subject  matter.       
   (left)  Figure  4:   Photograph  from  "We   are  animals  in  a   world  no  one  knows."   Life,  February  26,   1965,  p.  69.   Photograph  ©   Bill   Eppridge,  Time/Life   Collection,  Getty   Images.        (right)  Figure  5:   Larry  Clark,  Untitled   1963.  Courtesy  of  the   artist  and  Luhring   Augustine,  New  York.     

            

        

                                                                                                                 41  Zoë  Chan,  Wild  Boys:  Primitivism  and  Male  Youth  in  Larry  Clark's  Photography  and   Films  (MA  Thesis,  Concordia  University,  2008),  58.      19  

  

On  July  13,  1971,  less  than  two  months  before  Tulsa  was  printed,  the  film  The  

Panic  in  Needle  Park  was  released.  Joan  Didion,  herself  an  author  associated  with   new  journalism,  along  with  husband  John  Gregory,  adapted  the  film's  screenplay   from  James  Mills'  book  of  the  same  name,  which  was  an  extended,  allegedly   fictionalized  version  of  his  articles  that  originally  appeared  alongside  Eppridge's   photo-essays  in  Life.  The  film  starred  a  young  Al  Pacino  in  his  first  leading  role  as   Bobby,  a  drug  addict  who  frequented  Needle  Park  with  his  girlfriend,  Helen.   Unofficially  considered  by  many  to  be  the  first  mainstream  film  to  show  actual  drug   use,  Panic  proved  much  more  like  Tulsa  than  its  Life  counterpart.  Most  notably,  the   film  depicted  a  despondent  post-1960s  drug  culture  that  lacked  Life's  quick  and   easy  solutions.  The  film  ended,  unlike  the  Life  article  or  Mills'  book,  without  rehab   facilities  or  happy  endings,  implying  that,  as  Clark  wrote,  "once  the  needle  goes  in  it   never  comes  out."  As  James  Bell  notes,  the  film's  ending  presented  "no  fairytale   redemption,  suggesting  that,  like  their  city,  their  dope-ravaged  lives  were  only  going   to  slide  into  oblivion."42  Released  only  months  before  Tulsa,  Panic's  film  adaptation   mirrored  Clark  and  others'  sentiments  much  more  than  its  1965  Life  predecessor's.      In  many  respects,  Tulsa  was  similar  to  many  contemporaneous  works  of  its   era.  The  book  was  able  to  draw  on  its  author's  personal  experiences  to  show  a   lifestyle  that  at  the  time  was  largely  under-  and  misrepresented.  Although  Bill   Eppridge's  Life  photo-essay  is  a  lasting  precursor  for  photographic  depictions  of   adolescent  drug  use  in  the  1960s,  its  optimistic  pandering  largely  sets  it  apart  from   Tulsa.  As  the  political  turmoil  of  the  1960s  carried  over  into  the  1970s,  Life's   unrelenting  optimism  was  one  of  many  features  that  began  to  increasingly  alienate   readers  until  it  ceased  publication  as  a  weekly  in  1972,  just  a  year  after  Tulsa  was   released.43  Ultimately,  Clark,  along  with  other  contemporaries  outlined  here,   described  a  specific  contemporary  social  scene  in  a  manner  that  was  much  different   from  the  way  Life  chose  to,  adopting  instead  a  personal,  participatory  role  while   making  work  that  presented  no  easy  solutions  or  reassuring  qualities.                                                                                                                    42  James  Bell.  "Love  and  other  drugs."  Sight  and  Sound,  21:10  (October  2011):  84.   43  For  Life's  editorializing  in  the  area  of  photography,  see  A.  D.  Coleman  "Life  May   Have  Died,  But  Photography  Lives  On."  The  New  York  Times,  January  14,  1973.      20  

Chapter  III:  Tulsa's  Initial  Critical  Reception            The  first  two  reviews  of  Clark's  completed  project  appeared  late  in  the   summer  of  1971  and  were  drawn  not  from  the  book,  which  had  yet  to  be  printed,   but  from  an  exhibition  of  the  work  held  at  the  San  Francisco  Art  Institute.  While   Leland  Rice,  writing  for  Artweek,  and  Alfred  Frankenstein,  writing  for  The  San   Francisco  Chronicle,  both  reviewed  the  show,  it  was  the  latter's  conclusions  that   proved  lasting.44  In  his  review,  Frankenstein  remained  completely  unaffected  by   Clark's  work,  asserting  that  his  images  were  unconvincing  and  his  subjects  looked   "no  more  in  the  grip  of  a  lethal  addiction  than  so  many  baseball  fans  drinking  beer."   Ultimately,  he  concluded,  "the  wages  of  sin  is  boredom;  so  it  is,  at  least,  in  Tulsa,   according  to  this  show."45  In  a  1992  interview  with  Jutta  Koether,  Clark  recalled  his   reaction  upon  first  reading  Frankenstein's  review:  "[I  saw  it]  just  before  I  went  in   the  printing  plant.  And  I  wanted  to  shoot  myself  in  the  head  and  burn  all  the  fucking   pictures  and  negatives.  [...]  I  said,  `Oh,  my  god.  What  have  I  done?'"46  Discouraged,   Clark  nonetheless  made  his  way  to  Los  Angeles  the  following  the  week,  where  Tulsa   and  Seymour's  A  Loud  Song  were  printed  by  printer  Tom  Jones.      Weeks  later,  back  in  New  York  City,  advanced  copies  of  Tulsa  were   distributed  around  the  photography  world.  One  copy  was  given  to  prominent  critic   and  friend  of  Ralph  Gibson,  A.  D.  Coleman,  who  gave  the  first  official  mention  of  the   work  in  its  finalized  book  format.  Coleman's  text  appeared  in  a  mid-September   installation  of  his  New  York  Times  column,  "Latent  Image."  While  this  particular   article  also  discussed  other  subjects,  Clark's  book  received  mention  alongside  A   Loud  Song  and  Neal  Slavin's  Portugal,  which  was  also  released  by  Lustrum  Press   that  fall,  and  received  the  bulk  of  Coleman's  praise.  Nearly  immediately,  Coleman                                                                                                                    44  Leland  Rice,  "Larry  Clark"  Artweek,  September  4,  1971;  Alfred  Frankenstein,  "'The   History  of  My  Life':  Romanticism  to  Reality,"  San  Francisco  Chronicle,  August  17,   1971,  46.   45  Frankenstein,  "The  History  of  My  Life,"  46.   46  Jutta  Koether,  "Larry  Clark,"  Journal  of  Contemporary  Art  5:1  (Spring  1992):  37.         21  

framed  Tulsa  as  "a  major  work,  almost  too  good  (coming  from  a  young  and  relatively   unknown  photographer)  to  be  true."  While  Frankenstein  remained  unmoved  by   Tulsa  the  previous  month,  Coleman  was  deeply  touched,  asserting  that  "in  the  midst   of  all  this  death  the  characters  are  in  life;  and,  harrowing  and  painful  though  Clark's   images  are,  the  very  involvement  they  create  and  the  intense  emotionality  they   extract  from  anyone  (and  everyone)  who  encounters  them  are  affirmations  of  the   viewer's  own  life  urge."47      Like  Coleman,  many  other  early  reviewers  of  Tulsa  grouped  the  book  in  with   Lustrum's  other  fall  titles,  including  Gene  Thornton  in  his  early  October  article,  "This   Publisher  Dares."  Though  Thornton's  article  focused  on  Gibson  and  Lustrum,  Tulsa   was  highly  praised  and  a  photograph  from  it  was  used  as  the  article's  sole   illustration.  Thornton  noted  Tulsa's  beauty  despite  its  difficult  subject  matter  and   ended  by  comparing  it  to  the  work  of  Robert  Frank  and  Diane  Arbus,  of  which  he  felt   was  the  highest  possible  praise.48  Additionally,  David  Vestal,  who  concluded  "Not   nice;  real"  when  writing  for  The  New  York  Times  in  December  1971,  Margot  Kernan,   writing  for  The  Washington  Post  almost  exactly  a  year  later,  and  A.  D.  Coleman,   writing  again  for  the  New  York  Times,  all  also  praised  Tulsa  while  contextualizing  it   alongside  other  Lustrum  titles  and  recently  published  photobooks.49      Although  Tulsa  did  not  immediately  receive  critical  attention  on  its  own,   extended  reviews  did  begin  to  appear  by  the  end  of  1971  and  continued  on   throughout  1972.  The  first  article  devoted  solely  to  the  book  was  Dick  Cheverton's   "A  Devastating  Portrait  Of  An  American  Tragedy,"  published  on  November  7,  1971.   Below  a  large  reproduction  of  a  photograph  of  Roper  laughing  in  front  of  a  framed   print  of  Jesus  Christ,  Cheverton  quickly  summarized  the  book's  narrative  and  its                                                                                                                    47  A.  D.  Coleman,  "Latent  Image:  The  life-death  drug  paradox,"  Village  Voice,   September  16,  1971,  24.   48  Gene  Thornton,  "This  Publisher  Dares,"  The  New  York  Times,  October  3,  1971,   D33.   49  David  Vestal,  "Photographs  and  Photography,"  The  New  York  Times,  December  12,   1971;  Margot  Kernan,  "Writing  with  Light,"  The  Washington  Post,  Times  Herald,   December  3,  1972;  A.  D.  Coleman,  "Gibson:  Masterful  Maker  of  Images,"  The  New   York  Times,  February  25,  1973,  138.        22  

photographs,  which  he  found  "[shimmered]  with  ferocious  honesty."50  Although   longer,  more  detailed  reviews  of  Tulsa  would  come  in  the  following  months,   Cheverton's  has  remained  widely  cited  due  perhaps  to  the  novelty  of  technically   being  the  "first"  to  focus  only  on  the  book  in  addition  to  its  later  placement  on  the   back  cover  of  Grove  Press'  2001  edition  of  the  book.  Other  articles  devoted  only  to   Tulsa  followed.  L.  M.  Kit  Carson,  writing  for  Rolling  Stone  in  March  1972,  astutely   noted  the  boldness  of  presenting  recreational  drug  use  outside  of  the  urban,   minority-populated  areas  it  was  often  depicted  as  taking  place  within  and  concluded   that  the  book  marked  the  death  of  the  longstanding  tradition  of  the  American   Outlaw.51  The  longest  and  most  ambitious  writing  on  Tulsa  during  this  period,   however,  appeared  in  the  second  issue  of  the  Visual  Studies  Workshop's  journal,   Afterimage,  and  was  written  by  Workshop  student  Alex  Sweetman.  In  his  six-page   article,  Sweetman  gave  an  extensive  interpretation  of  Clark's  image  pairings  and   overall  photographic  sequencing.  He  compared  the  book  with  Frank's  The   Americans  in  the  sense  that  it  too  was  able  to  articulate,  quoting  Szarkowski,  "the   background  hum"  of  America,  which  he  asserted  was,  in  that  era's  case,  death.52   First  examined  within  the  context  of  Lustrum  Press,  Tulsa  quickly  began  to  be   discussed  on  its  own.  Almost  immediately,  art  world  commentators  praised  the   book  for  its  frank  presentation  of  then  antisocial  behavior  while  frequently  aligning   it  with  Frank's  The  Americans  and  the  work  of  Diane  Arbus,  who  had  committed   suicide  only  months  prior  to  Tulsa's  release,  leaving  behind  an  oeuvre  that,  among   other  things,  presented  viewers  with  a  social  panorama  that  challenged  popular   notions  of  normalcy  and  socially  deviancy.      Interestingly,  while  discussions  regarding  Tulsa  were  active  in  the  United   States,  the  book  was  also  receiving  attention  internationally.  In  February  1972,  the   popular  Japanese  magazine  Camera  Mainichi  ran  Tulsa's  cover  image  on  its  cover   and  devoted  an  additional  16  pages  to  the  work.  In  the  article's  short  text,  Mainichi's                                                                                                                    50  Cheverton,  "A  Devastating  Portrait,"  5B.   51  L.  M.  Kit  Carson,  "Books:  Tulsa  by  Larry  Clark,"  Rolling  Stone,  March  16,  1972,  68.   52  Alex  Sweetman,  "'Tulsa':  Death  is  the  Unconscious  Goal,"  Afterimage  1:2  (April   1972):  8-10.      23  

editor  explained  that  he  first  encountered  the  book  while  in  New  York  the  previous   Christmas  and  contextualized  it  as  "a  report  made  entirely  from  inner  experience"   by  a  photographer  coming  to  awareness  of  themselves  and  society.53  Additionally,   Fotografia  Italiana,  a  Milan-based  magazine,  also  published  work  from  Tulsa  the   following  May.54  Although  a  global   photography  syndicate  certainly  existed   by  this  time,  it  remains  notable  that   such  a  young,  previously  unknown   photographer  could  so  quickly  receive   such  overwhelmingly  positive  attention   both  within  his  home  country  and   abroad.      However,  while  many  of  the   aforementioned  early  writings  on  Tulsa   came  from  established  critics  and   appeared  in  art  sections  within  major   newspapers  or  specialized  magazines,   Camera  35's  feature  on  Tulsa  in  their   January-February  1972  issue   introduced  the  work  to  a  much  broader,   general  photography  audience  for  the  
Figure  6:  Front  Cover  of  Camera  Mainichi,   February  1972.  

first  time.  The  article  was  introduced  in  the  issue's  table  of  contents  as  "a  full-blown   classic  of  contemporary  photojournalism"  and  opened  with  a  crudely  written  note   by  Clark  in  all  lower  case  type.  The  article  reproduced  11  photographs  and  one   filmstrip  from  Tulsa,  but,  unlike  the  book,  laid  them  out  multiple  items  to  a  page,  a                                                                                                                    53  "Special  Feature:  Tulsa,"  Camera  Mainichi,  February  1972,  2-16,  31.  Although   Clark  was  the  only  American  in  that  particular  issue,  Mainichi,  who  in  their  early   years  co-published  material  with  American  magazine  Popular  Photography,  had   many  connections  with  Western  photography  and  often  published  emerging,   American  photographers.  For  example,  Lee  Friedlander's  "Self-Portrait"   photographs  appeared  in  the  previous  month's  issue.   54  Italo  Zannier,  "Larry  Clark:  Tulsa,"  Fotografia  Italiana  (Milan),  May  1973,  35-36.      24  

design  strategy  used  in  many  Life  photo-essay,  and  sequenced  them  to  ultimately   create  a  much  different  narrative  from  the  book,  one  that  had  a  clear,  more   definitive  ending:  the  cover  image  of  Billy  Mann  above  the  quote  "'Death  is  more   perfect  than  life'  ­  Dead  1970."55  Importantly,  unlike  previous  press,  this  extended   feature  resulted  in  serious  blowback.  Firstly,  Jim  Hughes,  then  editor  of  Camera  35,   claimed  eight  years  later  that  the  article  nearly  got  him  fired.56  Additionally,  the   magazine  moderated  a  debate  on  the  work  through  its  letters  to  the  editor  columns   in  four  subsequent  issues.  These  columns  offer  a  rare  glimpse  into  the  reactions  of   an  amateur  photography  audience  and  encompassed  opinions  that  ranged  from  the   unimpressed  claim  that  the  work  belonged  in  an  issue  of  "Life  in  1948"  and  that   Camera  35  should  stick  to  articles  on  technical  photography;  to  ones  that  took   general  offense  to  the  photographs,  particularly  the  image  of  a  dead  child;  to  a  letter   that  praised  the  magazine  for  showing  "that  life  isn't  all  wine  and  roses"  before   requesting  information  on  where  to  purchase  a  copy  of  the  book.57  Outside  of  the  art   world,  reactions  were  mixed  and  not  nearly  as  uniformly  positive.      Back  in  Oklahoma,  distributor  Light  Impressions  released  Tulsa  to  local   bookstores  sooner  than  Clark  had  anticipated,  stirring  further  controversy.  Upon   seeing  the  book,  trouble  quickly  arose  with  the  maternal  grandparents  of  Billy   Mann's  two  daughters,  who  at  the  time  were  the  legal  guardians  of  the  children  ­   both  parents'  deaths  were  chronicled  in  Clark's  book.  They  objected  to  the  use  of  a   photograph  showing  Mann  holding  one  of  their  granddaughters  while  smoking  a   cigarette  and  filed  a  defamation  lawsuit  against  Light  Impressions.  Although  the   case  was  settled  outside  of  court,  it  served  as  a  demoralizing  blow  to  Clark  that   ruined  his  relationship  with  the  popular  photobook  distribution  company.58   Additionally,  Tulsa  native  Gaylord  Oscar  Herron,  who  had  grown  up  with  Clark  and   was  at  the  time  a  feature-reporter  for  Tulsa-based  television  station  KOTV  alongside   many  notables  including  future  ABC  News  20/20  reporter  Bob  Brown,  took  offense                                                                                                                    55  Larry  Clark,    "Tulsa,"  Camera  35  16:1  (January/February  1972):  54-61.   56  Jim  Hughes,  "Proof  Sheet,"  Popular  Photography  85:6  (December  1979):  13.   57  "Give  &  Take:  Letters  to  the  editor,"  Camera  35  16:3-6  (April,  May,  June,  and  July- August  1972).   58  Dugan,  Photography  Between  the  Covers,  74-75.      25  

to  the  book  and  blasted  it  on  air.59  Notably,  Herron  became  a  well-known   photographer  years  later  for  his  1975  photobook  Vagabond,  which  took  the  city  of   Tulsa  as  its  primary  subject  and  can  been  seen  as  an  antithesis  to  Clark's  Tulsa.  As   we  can  see,  then,  accounts  of  the  book  being  an  instant  success  are  very  easily   justified  if  one  focuses  only  on  early  literature  produced  largely  within  the  art  world   by  writers  well  versed  in  contemporary  photography.  Conversely,  accounts  of  the   book  being  an  unprecedented  controversy  are  equally  easy  to  come  to  if  one  looks   exclusively  outside  of  the  art  world,  particularly  within  Tulsa  during  the  early   1970s.      Entirely  left  out  of  histories  of  Tulsa's  reception,  however,  are  additional   remarks  made  by  commentators  who  used  the  work,  often  quite  literally,  for   alternative  purposes.  Perhaps  the  best  example  of  these  commentators  was   longtime  Harvard  University  medical  professor  and  psychiatrist  Dr.  Lester   Grinspoon,  who  reviewed  the  book  in  Medical  Tribune's  November  1,  1972  issue.   After  providing  an  abbreviated  history  of  amphetamine  usage  and  its  addictive   nature,  Grinspoon  described  Tulsa  as  both  a  social  document  and  work  of  art   capable  of  showing  "all  the  concomitants  and  sequelae  of  speeding  ­  the  confidence   and  euphoria,  the  high  and  the  depression  and  ennui  of  the  crash,  the  increasing   social  and  sexual  disintegration,  the  violence  and  even  the  death."60  Although  not   writing  from  an  art  background,  Grinspoon  was  nevertheless  consistent  with  the   book's  other  reviewers  in  praising  Clark  for  his  honesty  and  radical  insider  point  of   view,  although  he  used  and  interpreted  the  book  in  a  much  more  didactic  manner   than  many  of  his  art  world  contemporaries.      Similarly,  also  neglected  in  many  accounts  of  the  work's  reception  are  the   exhibitions  it  received  throughout  the  decade.  Many  of  these  shows  were  rented   from  the  work's  first  institutional  collector,  George  Eastman  House  in  Rochester,   New  York,  who  purchased  a  complete  set  of  prints  from  the  book  in  1972  and                                                                                                                    59  Grant  McClintock,  "The  Genesis  of  Vagabond,"  This  Land  Press,  accessed  April  12,   2013,  http://thislandpress.com/06/13/2012/the-genesis-of-vagabond/.   60  Lester  Grinspoon,  "A  Picture  Book  of  Speed:  Tulsa,  by  Larry  Clark,"  Medical   Tribune  13:42:1  (November  1,  1972):  8.          26  

offered  the  set  as  a  traveling  exhibition  until  1978.  In  their  brochure  for  the   exhibition,  the  Museum  interestingly  marketed  it  as  "[offering]  the  unique   opportunity  to  compare  original  to  reproduced  photographs  and  book  format  to   exhibition  format."  Although  Sebastien  Gokalp  briefly  mentioned  exhibitions  rented   from  George  Eastman  House  throughout  the  decade,  incorrectly  asserting  that  they   began  in  1975,  he  neglected  to  mention  the  venues  they  traveled  to.61  Interestingly,   the  context  of  some  of  these  venues,  particularly  during  the  first  years  the  exhibition   was  offered,  suggested  a  literal,  moralizing  interpretation  of  the  work  not  dissimilar   to  Grinspoon's.  One  of  the  show's  first  venues,  for  example,  was  Wellesley  High   School,  located  in  an  affluent,  white  suburb  of  Boston,  Massachusetts.  Other  venues   during  these  earlier  years  included  the  University  of  North  Dakota  and  a  community   college  in  Illinois,  neither  of  which  had  photography  programs  at  the  time.  In  a  1986   interview,  Clark,  during  a  period  of  sobriety,  acknowledged:  "You  know,  I  sent  the   Tulsa  book  to  this  guy  who  runs  a  drug  rehab  center  wondering  if  it  might  put  him   off.  He  thinks  it's  the  best  advertisement  against  drug  taking  that  he's  even  seen.   That  book  has  always  been  many  things  to  many  people."62  Ultimately,  then,  despite   Clark's  insistence  on  publishing  Tulsa  with  an  independent  press  to  gain  complete   editorial  and  authorial  control  as  to  how  his  photographs  were  used,  the  book  was   still,  like  virtually  all  cultural  artifacts,  used  by  a  variety  of  people  in  many   unexpected  ways,  a  fact  he  seemed  to  accept  and  even  embrace.      While  Tulsa  received  varied  attention  from  many  factions  upon  its  initial   release,  much  of  the  publicity  and  public  debates  surrounding  it  abruptly  died  down   by  early  1973.  Between  Tulsa's  release  and  this  time,  Gibson  continued  to  run   Lustrum  Press,  publishing  the  American  edition  of  Robert  Frank's  seminal  The  Lines   of  My  Hand  in  1972  and,  the  following  year,  Erica  and  Elizabeth  Tonnard's  Sunday,   Michael  Martone's  Dark  Light,  and  his  own  book,  Déjà-vu.  Daniel  Seymour,  after   assisting  Frank  with  his  now  infamous  film,  Cocksucker  Blues  (1972),  was  reportedly   killed  in  a  boating  accident  in  the  Caribbean.  Clark  too,  almost  immediately   following  the  release  of  Tulsa,  decided  to  leave  New  York.  He  returned  home  to                                                                                                                    61  Gokalp,  "The  Savage  Eye,"  6.   62  Michelle  Bogre,  "Q&A:  Larry  Clark,"  American  Photographer,  October  1986,  74.      27  

Tulsa,  where  he  planned  to  face  any  criticism  or  anger  over  the  book  in  person.  Back   home,  however,  he  once  again  became  involved  with  drugs  and  crime.  These   activities  quickly  caught  up  to  him.  Clark  managed  to  squander  a  1973  National   Endowment  for  the  Arts  grant  on  attorney  fees  and,  stemming  from  unrelated   charges,  was  later  sentenced  to  a  5-year  prison  sentence,  of  which  he  served  19- months  of  in  the  Oklahoma  State  Penitentiary  beginning  in  1976.63  Remembering   this  period  of  his  life,  Clark  recounted,  "I  had  dropped  out  completely.  I  mean,  I  had   just  lost  it.  I  lost  it.  I  don't  know  what  happened.  I  just  lost  it."64      Clark's  abrupt  exit  from  the  New  York  art  world  and  subsequent  plunge  into   relative  obscurity  can  be  easily  detected  in  the  lack  of  texts  on  him  throughout  this   period.  Between  1973  and  1977,  the  only  mention  of  him  was  in,  rather  unusually,   Esquire's  February  1976  issue.  In  the  issue,  Clark  had  one  photograph  reproduced   within  an  article  written  by  Douglas  Davis  entitled  "The  Ten  `Toughest'   Photographers  of  1975."65  Curiously,  however,  instead  of  creating  a  list  of   photographers,  Davis'  text  is  much  more  a  manifesto  on  the  medium  that   championed  a  trend  he  saw  emerging  that  involved  photographers  adopting  a   "tough,"  subjective  approach  to  their  photographic  practice.  Of  the  ten   photographers  whose  work  was  reproduced  alongside  Davis'  text,  Judy  Dater's   Imogen  and  Twinka  was  the  only  one  that  Davis  directly  addressed.  Clark's   photograph,  which  showed  a  teenager  asleep  with  an  erection,  was  captioned  by   him  and  appropriately  concluded,  "I  never  thought  Esquire  would  publish  this   picture."66  Remembering  the  article,  Guy  Trebay  recalled,  "I  called  Esquire  then  to   find  out  more  about  this  photographer,  but  no  one  knew.  `We  just  got  the  picture   and  we  thought  it  was  great'  was  what  they  told  me,  `but  we  have  no  idea  how  to  

                                                                                                                 63  Clark's  various  legal  troubles  are  very  often  outlined  in  various  writings  on  him.   See  Ron  Horning,  "People  and  Ideas:  The  Autobiography  of  Larry  Clark,"  Aperture  94   (Spring  1984):  2-4  and  Clark,  Teenage  Lust  for  rundowns     64  Clark,  Teenage  Lust.   65  Douglas  Davis,  "The  Ten  `Toughest'  Photographs  of  1975,"  Esquire,  February   1976,  108-115.   66  Ibid,  111.      28  

reach  this  guy  or  anything.  If  you  ever  do  find  out  please  let  us  know.'"67  Completely   out  of  contact  from  the  photography  establishment,  the  Esquire  article  evidently  did   little  to  help  improve  Clark's  quickly  failing  reputation.      Although  he  was  seldom  mentioned  in  print  during  this  period,  Clark's  work   did  not  completely  disappear.  Prints  from  Tulsa  were  shown  at  Parson's  New  School   of  Photography  in  New  York  in  1976.  George  Eastman  House's  exhibition  also   continued  to  travel  throughout  1973,  had  no  renters  in  1974,  showed  at  the   University  of  Delaware  in  1975,  and,  in  1976,  at  the  New  England  School  of   Photography.  1977  proved  to  be  a  particularly  busy  year  for  the  prints.  They  were   shown  internationally  for  the  first  time:  first  in  Saskatchewan,  Canada  in  March;   then  at  Tokyo's  Pentax  Gallery  in  August  and  September;  and  finally,  back  in  the   United  States,  at  the  University  of  Wisconsin  in  October.  Additionally,  in  1974,   Colloquium,  Inc.  and  Lustrum  Limited  Editions  published  a  limited  edition  portfolio   of  Tulsa  work.  Although  the  project  seems  to  have  been  a  failure,  a  rare,  pre- publication  prospectus  remains  that  outlined  the  project,  which  included  ten  prints   in  an  edition  of  fifty,  priced  at  $1250  each.  Importantly,  however,  a  cult  status  began   to  grow  around  Clark  and  Tulsa  during  these  years.  After  its  release  in  1971,  the   book  quickly  went  out  of  print  and  prices  for  it  on  the  secondary  market  steadily   rose  throughout  the  decade,  commonly  reaching  prices  between  $150  and  $250  to   as  much  as  $800  at  auction.68  Because  of  these  prohibitively  high  prices,  copies     were  reportedly  often  lent  and  discreetly  passed  amongst  groups  of  photographer   enthusiasts,  helping  to  build  a  cult  status  to  the  work.  Off  of  the  radar,  Clark   remained  out  of  reach  for  much  of  the  1970s,  but  Tulsa  did  not  completely   disappear  from  the  evolving  photographic  discourse.      The  previously  discussed  increased  interest  in  George  Eastman  House's   exhibition  in  1977  coincided,  whether  coincidentally  or  not,  with  Clark's  release                                                                                                                    67  Guy  Trebay,  "Hot  Flash?:  The  Photographer  from  `Tulsa'  Resurfaces,"  The  Village   Voice,  October  15-21,  1980,  62.   68  Though  $150  to  $250  is  the  most  commonly  cited  price  for  a  first  edition  of  Tulsa   by  the  late  1970s,  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  claimed  $800  was  the  highest  recorded   price  in  an  open  letter  to  museum  professionals  in  1983  that  aimed  to  sell  the   second  edition.      29  

from  prison  that  year.  The  only  mention  of  him  in  print  in  1977  was  in  the  first   volume  of  Lustrum  Press'  Darkroom  series,  where  he  discussed  the  technical  aspects   of  his  printing  practices,  ultimately  urging  readers  to  follow  their  instincts:  "there   ain't  no  rules."69  Intriguingly,  in  Clark's  biography  section,  the  only  mention  about   how  he'd  spent  the  time  since  Tulsa's  release  was  a  note  of  his  1973  NEA  grant,  with   no  mention  of  his  personal  or  legal  troubles.  Following  his  release  from  prison  that   year,  Clark,  on  the  advisement  of  his  parole  board,  returned  to  New  York  City,  where   he  reentered  an  art  photography  establishment  that  was  significantly  changed  from   the  one  that  he  had  left  behind  earlier  in  the  decade.      Away  from  New  York,  Clark  largely  missed  photography's  proliferation  in  the   art  world  throughout  the  1970s.  The  decade  marked  the  era  when  photography   went  from  that  status  of,  to  use  Richard  Christopherson's  words,  "folk  art  to  fine   art."70  Throughout  and  previous  to  the  1960s,  the  only  two  museums  to  consistently   see  photographs  on  display  were  New  York's  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  whose   photography  department  was  then  under  the  leadership  of  John  Szarkowski,  and   George  Eastman  House,  where  Nathan  Lyons  maintained  an  ambitious  exhibition   schedule.  During  the  1970s,  however,  due  in  no  small  part  to  funding  provided  by   the  National  Endowment  for  the  Arts,  whose  photography  department  was  under   the  ambitious  guidance  of  Renato  Danese,  photography  began  to  become  widely   collected  by  and  displayed  within  museums  throughout  the  country.71  The  decade   also  marked  the  rise  of  the  study  of  the  medium's  history  within  the  university.  This   can  be  seen  in  the  increase  of  academic  appointments  throughout  the  decade,   including,  but  not  limited  to,  Beaumont  Newhall  to  the  University  of  New  Mexico  in   1971,  Peter  Bunnell  to  Princeton  University  in  1972,  and  Joel  Snyder  to  the  

                                                                                                                 69  Larry  Clark,  "Mixing  Your  Own  Chemicals,"  in  Darkroom,  ed.  Eleanor  Lewis  (New   York:  Lustrum,  1977),  44.   70  Richard  W.  Christopherson,  "From  Folk  Art  To  Fine  Art:  A  Transformation  in  the   Meaning  of  Photographic  Work,"  Journal  of  Contemporary  Ethnography  3:  123-157.     71  See  Lewis  Baltz  "American  Photography  in  the  1970s:  Too  Old  to  Rock,  Too  Young   to  Roll,"  in  American  Images:  1945-1980,  ed.  Peter  Turner  (Penguin:  Middlesex,   1985),  156-164  for  detailed  overview  of  institutionalization  of  photography.      30  

University  of  Chicago  in  1976.72  Furthermore,  and  perhaps  most  germane  to  Clark,   photography  also  began  to  be  shown  and  sold  in  some  of  New  York's  premier  art   galleries,  including  Leo  Castelli  Gallery,  Robert  Miller  Gallery,  and  Pace  Editions.73   Though  photographs  had  previously  been  shown  and  sold  at  a  few  select  galleries   focusing  exclusively  on  the  medium,  such  as  Helen  Gee's  Limelight  Gallery,  Lee  D.   Witkin's  Witkin  Gallery,  or,  after  1971,  Harold  Jones'  LIGHT  Gallery,  it  only  reached   a  broader  market  and  audience  later  in  the  1970s.  In  many  respects,  Tulsa  appeared   at  the  cusp  of  one  of  American  photography's  most  pivotal  and  defining  decades.   Although  Clark  was  absent  for  the  medium's  proliferation  throughout  it,  Tulsa's   status  as  a  rarity  and  Clark's  mysterious  whereabouts  during  the  time  only  added  an   extra  dimension  to  both  his  reputation  and  the  book's  status,  a  dimension  that   ultimately  proved  to  benefit  him  upon  his  return  to  the  city.      Back  in  New  York  and  staying  with  Gibson,  Clark  began  to  slowly  reinsert   himself  back  into  the  contemporary  photography  discourse.  A  notable  achievement   for  Clark  during  that  period  was  having  his  work  purchased  by  renowned  curator   and  collector  Sam  Wagstaff.  This  led  to  his  inclusion  in  the  popular  traveling   Corcoran  Gallery  of  Art  exhibition,  An  Exhibition  of  Photographs  From  the  Collection   of  Sam  Wagstaff,  its  small,  accompanying  booklet,  and  its  still  widely  cited  catalogue,   A  Book  of  Photographs  from  the  Collection  of  Sam  Wagstaff.74  Additionally,  Clark  was   also  included  in  Thomas  Dugan's  Photography  Between  the  Covers,  where  he   discussed  Tulsa's  history  for  the  first  time.75  The  most  notable  career  landmark  for   Clark  at  the  time,  however,  was  gaining  representation  from  Robert  Freidus  Gallery   in  New  York,  which  had  been  established  in  1976  with  a  multidisciplinary  program   that  focused  on  sculpture,  but  also  valued  photography  and  other  mediums.   Importantly,  through  the  gallery,  Clark  was  able  to  officially  consolidate  his  then                                                                                                                    72  Douglas  R.  Nickel,  "History  of  Photography:  The  State  of  Research,"  The  Art   Bulletin  78:3  (September  2001):  555.   73  Baltz,  "American  Photography  in  the  1970s,"  159.   74  Sam  Wagstaff,  An  Exhibition  of  Photographs  from  the  collection  of  Sam  Wagstaff   (Washington:  Corcoran  Gallery  of  Art,  1978),  4;  Sam  Wagstaff,  A  Book  of   photographs  from  the  collection  of  Sam  Wagstaff.  (New  York:  Gray  Press,  1978),  37   75  Dugan,  Photography  Between  Covers,  65-77.      31  

precocious  fame.  His  partnership  with  Freidus  was  liaised  by  Janet  Borden,  who  was   hired  to  expand  the  gallery's  growing  interest  in  photography.  Upon  meeting  Clark   at  the  opening  of  John  Szarkowski's  Mirrors  and  Windows  at  MoMA  in  July  1978  and   hearing  him  complain  about  not  being  included  in  the  exhibition,  Borden  allegedly   convinced  him  that  joining  an  active  gallery  with  other  active  artists  would  help  him   to  be  included  in  shows  of  a  similar  caliber.76  Soon  after,  Clark  had  signed  a  deal   with  the  gallery  and  by  the  fall  of  the  following  year,  hung  two  shows  that  would   prove  incredibly  important  to  his  career.  The  first  exhibition,  which  ran  from   September  11  to  October  13,  1978,  displayed  the  entire  Tulsa  sequence,  with  the   exception  of  the  filmstrips,  in  its  original  order.  The  following  show  displayed   Clark's  ongoing  work  on  42nd  Street  and  other  material  from  his  Teenage  Lust  series.      Notably,  both  Freidus  shows  received  tremendous  press  and  put  Clark  and   Tulsa  back  into  the  contemporary  spotlight.  For  many,  the  shows  were  long   overdue.  Gene  Thornton,  for  example,  concluded  in  his  review  of  the  show,  "[Clark]   has  had  to  wait  eight  years  from  the  publication  of  Tulsa  to  have  his  first  New  York   show,  and  even  then  not  in  a  major  museum,  although  Tulsa  is  certainly  one  of  the   finest  achievements  of  contemporary  photography."77  John  Yau,  likewise,  praised   the  work  and  concluded,  "these  carefully  chosen  photographs  are  the  highlights  of  a   trip  to  hell,"  a  statement  that  could  have  been  just  as  true  in  regard  to  Clark's  life  as   it  was  about  Tulsa's  narrative.78  Interestingly,  though,  while  most  writers  were   positive  about  the  two  shows  at  Freidus,  the  prevailing  focus  of  their  texts  proved  to   be  much  less  on  the  work  being  shown  than  on  Clark's  tumultuous  past.  For   example,  the  first  published  article  on  Clark's  Tulsa  show  at  Freidus  Gallery   emphasized  the  fact  that  "He  got  himself  known,  disappeared,  and  resurfaced  last   year."  79  Richard  Esposito,  in  an  article  entitled  "Ex-addict  presents  an  essay  in                                                                                                                    76  William  Green,  email  with  Janet  Borden,  July  30,  2013.   77  Gene  Thornton,  "Practitioners  With  a  Story  To  Tell,"  The  New  York  Times,   September  30,  1979,  D31.  Thornton  incorrectly  called  the  Freidus  exhibition  Clark's   first  New  York  show;  however,  it  was  in  fact  his  second.   78  John  Yau,  "Larry  Clark  at  Robert  Freidus,"  Art  in  America,  December  1979,  116- 117.   79  "Briefs:  A  Serendipitous  Guide  of  the  Week,"  Village  Voice,  September  17,  1979.      32  

photos,"  devoted  the  first  two  sections  of  his  text  to  summarizing  Clark's  legal   troubles  and  contrasting  them  with  the  disciplined  lifestyle  he  was  following  at  the   time.80  Likewise,  Jim  Hughes,  in  his  article  on  both  Freidus  Gallery  shows,  also  began   by  introducing  Clark  through  his  jail  time  and  conspicuous  absence  from  New  York   throughout  the  decade.81  Guy  Trebay,  in  an  article  entitled  "Hot  Flash?:  The   Photographer  from  Tulsa  Resurfaces,"  focused  exclusively  on  Clark's  troubled   biography.82  Interestingly,  while  Lustrum  Press'  Darkroom  completely  avoided   discussing  how  Clark  had  spent  most  of  the  1970s,  many  of  the  articles  on  the   Freidus  Gallery  shows  two  years  later  focused  almost  exclusively  on  his  past,  using   it  not  as  a  detracting  detail,  but  as  a  badge  of  authenticity  that  was  used  to  further   authenticate  Tulsa.      Following  the  two  Freidus  shows  in  late  1979,  Clark's  fame  began  to  rapidly   increase.  He  was  featured  in  many  exhibitions  throughout  the  early  1980s,  perhaps   most  notably  in  the  1981  Whitney  Biennial,  where  he  showed  his  ongoing  42nd   Street  photographs.  Beginning  in  1978,  he  also  began  to  lecture  about  his  work  at   universities,  which  became  an  increasingly  common  occurrence  during  the  1980s,   when  he  spoke  at  venues  including  Pratt  Institute,  Rutgers,  and  M.I.T.  In  1980,  due   no  doubt  to  his  growing  popularity  and  successful  showings  at  Freidus  Gallery  the   previous  fall,  Clark  and  Freidus  produced  and  sold  a  complete  portfolio  of  the  Tulsa   work.  Printed  at  11''  x  14''  in  an  edition  of  100  (plus  15  artist  proofs)  and  officially   priced  at  $15,000,  Freidus  astutely  began  marketing  the  Tulsa  portfolios  not  only  to   photography  collectors,  but  also  to  bankers  and  investors,  many  of  whom  took   advantage  of  a  legal  tax  loophole  present  at  the  time  that  allowed  them  to  purchase   the  portfolios  at  a  steeply  discounted  price,  immediately  donate  them  to  museums,   and  then  claim  a  tax  write-off  equal  to  the  value  of  the  prints'  combined  individual   prices,  which  came  out  to  be  significantly  more  than  what  they  had  actually  paid.83   This  arrangement  was  beneficial  to  all  parties  involved  and,  importantly,  finally  got                                                                                                                    80  Richard  Esposito,  "Ex-addict  presents  an  essay  in  photos,"  Daily  News,  September   30,  1979.   81  Hughes.  "Proof  Sheet,"  13.   82  Trebay,  "Hot  Flash?"   83  William  Green,  email  with  Robert  Freidus,  July  29,  2013.      33  

Clark's  work  placed  within  a  variety  of  institutional  collections,  a  crucial  career  step.   Throughout  the  1970s,  prior  to  Freidus  Gallery,  Clark's  sole  institutional  collectors   were  George  Eastman  House,  a  very  active  champion  of  him  and  Tulsa,  Visual   Studies  Workshop,  who  kept  the  prints  used  for  Sweetman's  Afterimage  article,  and   Philadelphia  Museum  of  Art,  who  acquired  four  prints  by  Clark  in  1976.  However,   this  quickly  changed  when  the  1980  Tulsa  portfolios,  often  donated,  made  their   ways  to  additional  institutions  throughout  the  United  States,  including  San   Francisco  Museum  of  Modern  Art;  Center  for  Creative  Photography,  Tucson;  and   Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York  (see  appendix  2  for  a  detailed  list).    When   asked  why  he  was  doing  the  portfolio,  Clark  allegedly  responded,  "for  money";   however,  even  if  we  are  to  believe  this  shortsighted  claim,  the  portfolios  proved  to   do  much  more  than  simply  generate  income.84    Within  only  a  few  years,  then,  thanks   in  no  small  part  to  Freidus  Gallery,  Clark  went  from  entirely  out  of  contact  to  being,   for  the  first  time,  an  active  member  of  the  photography  world  who  was  being  widely   shown  and  collected.      However,  despite  Clark's  "resurfacing"  and  the  proliferation  of  his  work  in   the  gallery  and  museum  archive,  the  Tulsa  book  remained  rare  and  increasingly   difficult  to  come  by.  Influenced  in  part  by  worries  about  additional  lawsuits  from  the   grandparents  of  Mann's  daughters  and  others,  Clark  told  Thomas  Dugan  in  July   1978,  "I  won't  put  the  book  out  [again],  even  if  I  could,  in  the  States.  I  don't  want  to   bring  all  that  heat  back.  It's  7,  8  years  old  now.  It's  no  use  bringing  it  up.  Let's  let  it   lay  back  and  be  whatever  it  is.  I  meet  people  who  tell  me  about  Tulsa  and  they've   never  even  seen  the  book.  The  book  is  so  obscure  now  that  it's  fun.  I  enjoy  that."85   This  sentiment,  however,  was  not  long  lasting.  After  the  success  of  his  1980   portfolio,  it  took  only  three  more  years  for  Tulsa's  second  edition  to  come  to   fruition.  Self  published  by  Clark,  this  edition  was  officially  announced  and  promoted   by  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  in  an  open  letter  to  museum  professionals,  dated                                                                                                                    84  "Prints  and  Photographs  Published,"  The  Print  Collector's  Newsletter  11:3  (July- August  1980).   85  Dugan,  Photography  Between  the  Covers,  73.      34  

February  10,  1983.86  The  reprint  was  issued  in  an  edition  of  3,000  copies  and  was   printed  by  legendary  printer  Sid  Rapoport  in  New  York,  bound  by  Sendor  Bindery,   and  retailed  for  $35.  Aware  of  the  infamously  flimsy  perfect  binding  affecting   Lustrum  titles  even  then,  Clark  chose  to  bind  the  book  as  a  hardcover,  which  was   mentioned  in  advertisements  for  the  new  edition:  "Unlike  the  Lustrum  edition,  the   current  edition  is  hard  cover  and  Smythe  sewn  for  greater  durability."87  Other  than   a  reordering  of  front  matter  and  different  binding  method,  the  second  edition  of   Tulsa  remained  faithful  to  the  first  in  its  size,  content,  and  sequence,  setting  a   precedent  that  all  later  editions  of  the  book  have  adhered  to.  In  1983,  nearly  13   years  after  its  first  edition,  Tulsa  finally  saw  a  new  printing.      With  its  second  edition,  Tulsa  received  renewed  critical  attention.  Andy   Grundberg,  writing  in  April  of  that  year,  noted  that  the  new  edition  of  Tulsa  retained   its  initial  impact,  unlike  other  prominent  work  from  the  1970s,  such  as  that  by  Les   Krims  and  Ralph  Gibson,  which  he  saw  as  already  looking  stale.88  Likewise,  Owen   Edwards  asserted  that  Tulsa  remained  the  most  "terrifyingly  authentic  drama"  to  be   made  outside  of  a  war  zone  and  closed  his  article  by  asserting  that  the  book  should   "never  be  out  of  print."89  Ultimately,  then,  the  years  between  moving  back  to  New   York  and  reissuing  Tulsa  in  1983  proved  to  be  crucial  ones  for  Clark.  In  its  second   edition  two  decades  after  it  was  begun  and  well  over  a  decade  after  it  was  first   published  by  Lustrum  Press  in  its  finalized  book  format,  Tulsa  finally  began  to  be   discussed  as  the  classic  title  that  we  know  it  as  today.  

                                                                                                                 86  Because  the  second  edition  of  Tulsa  lists  only  1971  as  its  copyright  date  and  does   not  present  itself  as  a  reprint,  the  year  of  its  release  is  often  confused  and  widely   disputed.  Some  booksellers  list  it  as  1979  and  the  International  Center  of   Photography's  2005  retrospective  on  Clark  lists  it  as  1981;  however,  it  was  not   mentioned  in  print  or  advertised  until  1983  and  that  year  remains  the  most   commonly  and  confidently  agreed  upon  date.   87  Mary  Efron  to  John  Szarkowski,  February  10,  1983,  in  The  Tulsa  Reader,  ed.   Chelsea  Spengemann  (New  York:  Chelsea  Spengemann,  2010),  n.p.   88  Andy  Grundberg,  "Why  Some  Art  Retains  Its  Emotional  Impact,"  The  New  York   Times,  April  10,  1983,  31-33.   89  Owen  Edwards,  "Data  Bank:  Book  Bits,"  American  Photographer,  October  1983.      35  

Chapter  IV:  Tulsa's  Legacy            Alongside  Tulsa's  second  edition  in  1983,  Clark  also  published  his  sophomore   title,  Teenage  Lust.  The  book,  which  can  be  seen  as  a  sequel  to  Tulsa,  included   various  material  stretching  back  to  the  artist's  childhood  culled  from  his  personal   archive,  outtakes  from  Tulsa,  later  photographs  of  the  teenagers  who  inherited  the   drug  scene  in  Tulsa's  final  chapter,  work  Clark  had  been  making  on  the  adolescents   who  frequented  Manhattan's  42nd  Street,  and  an  extended  account  of  his  life  up  to   that  point.  A  major  second  book,  Teenage  Lust  remains  a  notable,  highly  sought  after   work  in  its  own  right  and  today  has  reached  a  cult  status  not  dissimilar  to  Tulsa's.      It  goes  without  saying,  though,  that  Clark's  artistic  output  and  Tulsa's  history   did  not  suddenly  come  to  a  halt  in  1983;  both  have  morphed  as  his  career  has   continued  to  progress  with  additional  photography  projects,  conceptually-driven   serialized  works,  and  extensive  filmmaking  endeavors.  At  the  heart  of  all  of  the   projects  Clark  has  pursued  since  Tulsa,  there  has  remained  a  sustained  focus  on   evolving  youth  cultures  and  issues  central  to  them.  By  the  mid-1980s,  these   reoccurring,  overarching  themes  were  already  widely  recognized  as  Clark's   signature  subject  matter,  although  certain  commentators  were  publically  skeptical   about  how  he  would  continue  to  approach  them  in  new,  meaningful  ways.  Abigail   Solomon-Godeau,  for  example,  wrote  in  1988  of  her  concerns  about  what  would   happen  once  Clark,  growing  older  but  continuing  to  pursue  younger  subjects,  began   to  "assume  the  role  of  voyeur  and  thus  [...]  forfeit  the  absolute  intimacy,  and  hence,   identification,  that  gave  Tulsa  its  special  authority  and  power."90  Furthermore,  Vince   Aletti,  in  a  1992  article  not  so  subtly  entitled  "Arrested  Development,"  probed  Clark   on  this  reoccurring  theme:           I  remind  him  of  this  comment  to  Mike  Kelley  [from  "In  Youth  Is  Pleasure"]   about  Larry  Clark  1992:  "The  idea  is  to  put  all  these  fucking  teenage  boys  in  

                                                                                                                 90  Abigail  Solomon-Godeau,  "Clark,  Larry,"  in  Contemporary  Photographers,  ed.  Colin   Naylor  (Chicago  &  London:  St.  James  Press,  1988),  180-181.      36  

one  place  and  just  finish  it  there.  Just  put  the  whole  obsession  with  going   back  in  one  book  and  maybe  it  will  be  finished,  maybe  I  can  do  something   else."  Clark,  caught,  looks  mischievous  and  totally  unrepentant.  "I  was  lying,"   he  laughs,  "I  changed  my  mind."91      Despite  concerns  about  redundancy,  Clark  has  remained  committed  to  exploring   youth  cultures.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  he  has  managed  to  at  least  partially  sidestep   concerns  about  his  inevitably  changing  relationship  with  his  subjects  by  pursuing   projects  with  young  people  that  are  increasingly  collaborative.  For  example,  Kids   (1995),  his  first  feature  film,  centered  on  a  day  in  the  life  of  sexually  active  teenagers   in  New  York  City  and  gained  much  of  its  power  and  authenticity  not  from  his  own   heavy  handed  directing,  but  from  Harmony  Korine's  brilliantly  written  screenplay   and  acting  provided  by  teenagers  with  no  previous  Hollywood  experience,  most   notably  Leo  Fitzpatrick  and  Justin  Pierce.    Already  a  huge  art  world  personality,  the   tremendous  success  of  Kids  made  Clark  a  household  name.  Lynn  Hirschberg,  writing   the  year  the  film  was  released,  applauded  him  as  an  artist  immersed  in  the  worlds  of   teenagers  no  different  from  the  world  of  gangsters  and  wiseguys  that  Martin   Scorsese  identifies  with.92  In  subsequent  films,  Clark  has  continued  to  focus  on   adolescence  and  collaborate  with  non-actors,  such  as  in  films  like  Wassup  Rockers   (2006)  and,  most  recently,  Marfa  Girl  (2012),  to  gain  the  distinctly  insider  point  of   view  into  a  subculture  that  he  naturally  had  when  creating  Tulsa.      Today,  Tulsa  is  often  cited  as  Clark's  career-launching  work  and  an  important   example  of  the  subjective,  autobiographical  approach  to  documentary  practices  that   emerged  throughout  the  1960s  and  early  `70s.  It  has  been  included  in  virtually  all   recently  composed  histories  of  photography  and  is  often  framed  as  marking  a   watershed  moment  in  photography.  Naomi  Rosenblum,  in  her  survey,  A  World   History  of  Photography,  notes  the  book's  cult  status  throughout  the  1970s  and  the   way  it  "appears  to  have  persuaded  other  photographers  to  investigate  areas                                                                                                                    91  Vince  Aletti,  "Arrested  Development:  Larry  Clark  Pins  Adolescence  to  the  Wall,"   Village  Voice,  October  13,  1992,  100.   92  Lynn  Hirschberg,  "What's  the  Matter  with  Kids  Today?"  New  York  Magazine,  June   5,  1995,  35.      37  

previously  considered  off-limits  other  than  for  publication  in  frankly  erotic  or   pornographic  magazines."93      Furthermore,  in  recent  years  Tulsa  has  also  received  renewed  critical   attention  within  the  still  emerging  history  and  discourse  surrounding  the   photographically  illustrated  book  ­  a  genre  often  referred  to  as  the  "photobook."   Although  the  genre  has  long  been  recognized  as  an  important  area  of  study  within   the  history  of  photography,  it  has  only  become  a  broadly  researched  and  tentatively   canonized  area  of  the  medium's  history  within  the  past  decade.  Andrew  Roth's  The   Book  of  101  Books,  published  in  2001,  was  an  early  contributor  to  this  discourse  and   presented  an  art  photography  oriented  selection  of  titles  that  included  Clark's   Tulsa.94  Likewise,  Tulsa  was  also  featured  in  the  Hasselblad  Center's  2004   publication,  The  Open  Book,  which  was  spearheaded  by  a  team  led  by  Roth  and  also   appeared  as  an  exhibition  at  New  York's  International  Center  of  Photography.95   Tulsa  was  selected  by  Martin  Parr  and  Gerry  Badger  for  the  first  volume  of  their   seminal  and  widely  read  The  Photobook:  A  History  series,  which  first  appeared  in   2004  and  aimed  to  expand  Roth's  art-centric,  largely  American  and  European   focused  history.96  Although  all  of  these  recent  and  popular  titles  have  presented   distinct  and  varying  histories  of  the  photobook,  Tulsa  has  nonetheless  consistently   played  an  integral  role  in  all  of  them.      Since  1971,  Tulsa  has  also  influenced  a  huge  range  of  cultural  figures  and  can   still  be  felt  in  countless  contemporary  works.  In  film,  director  Gus  Van  Sant  has  cited   Clark  and  Tulsa  as  a  primary  influence,  particularly  when  developing  Drugstore   Cowboy  (1989),  in  which  he  thanked  Clark  in  the  film's  production  notes;  Martin   Scorsese  allegedly  referenced  the  book  when  directing  Taxi  Driver  (1976);  and   Francis  Ford  Coppola's  Rumble  Fish,  which  was  adapted  from  Tulsan  S.  E.  Hinton's                                                                                                                    93  Naomi  Rosenblum,  A  World  History  of  Photography  (New  York:  Abbeville  Press,   2007),  544.   94  Andrew  Roth  ed.,  The  Book  of  101  Books:  Seminal  Photographic  Books  of  the   Twentieth  Century  (New  York:  PPP  Editions,  2001).   95  Andrew  Roth  ed.,  The  Open  Book:  A  History  of  the  Photographic  Book  from  1878  to   the  Present  (Göteborg:  Hasselblad  Center,  2004).   96  Martin  Parr  and  Gerry  Badger,  The  Photobook:  A  History,  vol.  1  (London:  Phaidon,   2004).      38  

novel  of  the  same  name,  was  also  reportedly  influenced  by  Clark  and  Tulsa.97  Clark's   influence  is  strongly  felt  in  Tulsa-born  artist  Joe  Andoe's  relentlessly  self- mythologized,  substance-fueled  lifestyle,  which  he  chronicled  in  his  2008  memoir,   Jubilee  City:  A  Memoir  at  Full  Speed.  Clark  has  also  become  an  icon  within  streetwear   and  skateboarding  counterculture  movements,  with  his  photographs  being   reproduced  on  skateboard  decks  and  t-shirts,  including  his  popular  collaboration   with  New  York-based  clothing  brand,  Supreme.      In  photography,  Tulsa  and  Clark's  influence  is  equally  widespread  and  can  be   felt  in  the  work  of  a  diverse  and  broad  range  of  image-makers.  American   photographer  Nan  Goldin  remembers  the  liberation  and  recognition  she  felt  upon   first  seeing  the  book:  "In  1974,  I  went  to  school  and  there  was  a  teacher  who   showed  me  Larry  Clark.  It  has  entirely  changed  my  work.  I  knew  that  there  had  been   somebody  else  who  had  done  their  own  life.  You  know  his  book  Tulsa?  I  knew  that   [there]  were  precedents  for  using  one's  private  experiences  as  art."98  A  similar,   drug-fueled  autobiographical  impulse  can  be  traced  through  1990s,  perhaps  most   pointedly  in  Corrine  Day's  Diary  (2000).  Currently,  the  posturing  and  self- mythologizing  of  the  exclusive  Manhattan  "downtown"  artists,  a  scene  epitomized   by  figures  such  as  Dan  Colen,  Ryan  McGinley,  and  Dash  Snow,  is  equally  indebted  to   Clark.  Guardian  writer  Sean  O'Hagen,  when  discussing  the  Polaroid  work  of  the  late   Snow  notes,  "You  can  trace  [that  posturing]  back  through  the  work  of   photographers  such  as  Larry  Clark  and  Nan  Goldin,  mythmakers  whose  myths   depend  on  an  unvarnished  and  often  hardcore  portrayal  of  the  lives  of  the  beautiful   losers  they  ran  with,  took  drugs  with  and  whose  defiance  and  despair  ­  and   sometimes  even  their  deaths  ­  they  turned  into  art  of  the  most  relentlessly   uncompromising  kind."99  Despite  its  rather  modest  beginnings,  Tulsa  has  become  a                                                                                                                    97  Gus  Van  Sant,  "Larry  Clark:  Shockmaker,"  Interview  Magazine,  July  1995,  43.   98  Adam  Mazur  and  Paulina  Skirgajllo-Krajewska,  "If  I  want  to  take  a  picture,  I  take  it   no  matter  what:  Nan  Goldin  Interview,"  Photo  Tapeta,  accessed  June  22,  2013,   http://www.fototapeta.art.pl/2003/ngie.php.   99  Sean  O'Hagan,  "The  last  days  of  Dash  Snow,"  The  Guardian,  September  19,  2009,   accessed  June  22,  2013,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/sep/20/   dash-snow-new-york-artist      39  

lasting  and  important  artwork  of  the  early  1970s.  Its  influence  can  be  felt  in  a  broad   range  of  works  that  have  been  made  since  its  initial  release  and  its  celebrated   historical  legacy  continues  to  be  reconsidered  as  histories  of  photography,  art,  and   culture  continue  to  be  revised.  

  

40  

Conclusion            As  Patrizia  Di  Bello  and  Shamoon  Zamir  remind  us,  "photobooks  are  not  just   for  looking;  they  'function'  in  a  direct  and  private  interaction  with  the  reader  and   they  only  come  alive  when  they  are  used,  touched,  handled,  and  manipulated."100   This  passage  reminds  us  that  each  of  the  roughly  2,400  copies  of  Tulsa  printed  in   1971,  in  addition  to  the  book's  1983  edition,  a  1996  Japanese  edition,  a  deluxe  and   limited  1999  Printed  Matter  edition,  and  Grove  Press'  2000  edition,  has  had  its  own   unique  history.101  These  many  copies  and  their  stories  range  from  the  one  that   Shantelle  Jennings,  Billy  Mann's  daughter,  writes  of  seeing  in  1972,  at  the  age  of   nine,  that  provided  her  with  a  glimpse  of  her  deceased  father  for  the  first  time;  to   the  unknowable  amount  of  volumes  that  have  inevitably  been  ruined  or  destroyed   in  the  over  40  years  since  Tulsa's  first  edition  appeared  in  bookstores;  to,  finally,  the   copy  in  the  George  Eastman  House's  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library  that  I,   along  with  countless  other  researchers,  have  consulted  throughout  the  writing  of   this  paper.102      Clark  made  Tulsa's  photographs  for  nearly  a  decade  before  Gibson  and   Lustrum  Press,  with  crucial  funding  provided  by  Seymour,  agreed  to  publish  the   work.  After  that,  it  was  over  another  decade  before  the  book  became  widely  praised   and  was  reprinted.  Immediately  after  its  release  in  1971,  Tulsa  certainly  did  receive   overwhelmingly  positive  attention  from  writers  versed  in  contemporary  art,  along   with  significantly  negative  attention  from  additional,  non-art  world  factions,  and   literal,  one-dimensional  readings  from  others.  Some  of  these  early  reviewers   astutely  praised  Clark  for  his  honest,  insider  point  of  view  towards  a  subculture  that                                                                                                                    100   Patrizia  Di  Bello  and  Shamoon  Zamir,  "Introduction,"  in  The  Photobook:  From   Talbot  to  Ruscha  and  Beyond,  ed.  Patrizia  Di  Bello,  et  al  (London:  I.  B.  Tauris,  2012),   11.   101   Larry  Clark,  Tulsa  (New  York:  Lustrum  Press,  1971);  Tulsa  (New  York:  Larry   Clark,  1983);  Tulsa  (Tokyo:  Taka  Ishii  Gallery,  1996);  Tulsa  (New  York:  Printed   Matter,  1999);  Tulsa  (New  York:  Grove  Press,  2000).     102   Shantelle  Jennings,  "Tulsa  Revealed,"  This  Land  Press,  accessed  April  14,  2013,   http://thislandpress.com/05/09/2012/tulsa-revealed/.      41  

had  previously  only  been  shown  and  presented  through  photographs  by  outsiders.   This  approach  towards  the  subjective  was,  notably,  a  prevailing  trend  in  American   photography  during  the  era  and  was  also  exemplified  in  other  photobooks  that   touched  on  similarly  marginalized  subjects,  such  as  Lyon's  The  Bikeriders  and  others   working  in  the  genre  that  Jonathan  Green  has  dubbed  "personal  journalism."   Likewise,  Tulsa  also  shared  the  widespread  fatalism  towards  the  failed  utopianism   of  the  1960s  that  was  prevalent  during  the  period,  a  quality  detected  by  Sweetman   in  1972  when  he  described  Tulsa  as  focusing  on  death,  early  1970s  American's   prevailing  "background  hum."  Intriguingly,  "We  are  animals  in  a  world  no  one   knows,"  the  most  lasting  photographic  account  of  drug  addition  preceding  Tulsa,   proves  largely  dissimilar  to  it  in  multiple  ways,  although  the  Life  photo-essay's  later   film  incarnation,  The  Panic  in  Needle  Park,  stands  much  closer  to  Tulsa  both   chronologically  and  thematically.      As  we  have  seen,  Tulsa's  popularity  was  not  entirely  sustained  throughout   the  decade.  The  lack  of  mention  of  Clark  and  Tulsa  in  print  around  the  mid-1970s   reflects  his  personal  troubles  during  the  period  and  invites  many  further  questions:   What  if  Clark  had  been  killed  during  his  time  as  a  full-fledged  addict  and  outlaw?  (If   we  are  to  believe  his  testimony  in  Teenage  Lust,  this  came  very  close  to  happening   on  more  than  one  occasion.)  If  he,  like  Daniel  Seymour,  had  died  prematurely,  how   would  it  have  affected  Tulsa's  ultimate  legacy?  If  never  reprinted,  would  we  today   view  Tulsa  as  only  an  obscure  cult  classic,  similar  perhaps  to  the  current  treatment   of  Seymour's  A  Loud  Song?  Furthermore,  what  if  Clark,  afraid  of  possible  legal   repercussions,  chose  not  to  reprint  Tulsa  in  1983?  Though  these  questions  are   clearly  unanswerable,  they  at  the  very  least  demonstrate  the  book's  tentative  status   through  the  decade  and  how  easily  its  story  may  have  been  significantly  different.   Despite  these  questions,  however,  we  know  that  Clark,  as  well  as  Tulsa,  did  survive   the  decade.  Clark's  tumultuous  lifestyle  throughout  the  mid-1970s  was  an  initial   setback,  but  ultimately  proved,  due  to  circumstances  largely  outside  of  his  control,   an  unforeseen  asset  that  he  benefited  from  in  a  rather  roundabout  way.  Away  from   the  boom  of  the  photography  market  in  1970s,  questions  surrounding  his  

  

42  

whereabouts  only  inflated  his  reputation  to  nearly  mythic  proportions  that  have   more  or  less  been  maintained  up  to  the  time  of  this  writing.      After  Clark's  "resurfacing"  later  in  the  decade,  the  suitable  answers  to  the   press'  questions  of  his  whereabouts  only  added  an  extra,  authenticating  dimension   to  the  book  and  his  life  that  many  writers  continue  to  reference  and  rely  upon.   Furthermore,  Clark  benefitted  tremendously  from  the  gallery  system  available  to   him  upon  his  return  to  New  York,  a  system  that  was  virtually  nonexistent  upon   Tulsa's  initial  release  in  1971.  Through  Robert  Freidus  Gallery,  Clark  was  able  to   show  and  sell  his  photographs  at  unprecedentedly  high  prices,  place  them  within   major  institutional  collections  throughout  the  United  States,  and  use  the  gallery  as   an  important  promotional  tool  that  helped  him  to  integrate  himself  back  into  the   contemporary  photography  discourse.  The  1970s  were  the  perfect  decade  for  Tulsa   and  Clark  to  come  of  age  during.      Today,  Tulsa  is  often  mentioned  as  a  timeless  classic.  In  the  years  since  its   release,  Clark  has  continued  to  pursue  similar  subjects  in  the  blunt  and  direct  style   he  mastered  in  Tulsa.  Despite  the  various  strategies  he  has  adopted  to  counteract   the  problems  involved  with  growing  older  but  continuing  to  pursue  young  subjects,   Tulsa  remains  Clark's  most  intimate  and  authentic  body  of  work.  Still,  as  this  paper   demonstrates,  Tulsa's  journey  throughout  the  1970s,  its  first  decade  of  existence,   was  neither  predetermined  nor  straightforward  and  proved  to  be  the  product  of   both  the  era  and  Clark's  perseverance  throughout  it.  

  

43  

Appendix  1:  Exhibitions,  1964  ­  1983         1964:     Heliographers  Gallery,  New  York,  NY.   1971:   San  Francisco  Art  Institute.  San  Francisco,  California.   1972:     *University  of  North  Dakota,  Grand  Forks,  North  Dakota.   1973:   *Wellesley  High  School,  January  15  ­  February  15,  1973.      Kirkland  College.  Kirkland,  New  Jersey.   *State  University  of  New  York  (S.U.N.Y.),  Buffalo,  New  York.  March  1  ­  31.   *Oakton  Community  College.  Morton  Grove,  Illinois.  April  1  ­  30.   1974:   1975:   *University  of  Delaware.  Newark,  Delaware.  May  1  ­  31.   1976:   New  School  of  Photography.  New  York,  New  York.      *New  England  School  of  Photography.  Boston,  Massachusetts.  April  1  ­  30.   1977:   *Photographer's  Gallery,  Saskatchewan,  Canada.  March  9  ­  April  2.      *Pentax  Gallery,  Tokyo,  August  15  ­  September  14      *University  of  Wisconsin,  Eau  Claire,  Wisconsin,  October  1  ­  19,  1977.    1978 :    Group:  The  Collection  of  Sam  Wagstaff"  (Travling) 1979:   Robert  Freidus  Gallery.  New  York,  New  York.      Photographers'  Gallery  and  Workshop.  Sydney,  Australia.      Group:  Albright  College,  Reading,  PA.      Group:  DeCordova  &  Dana  Museum,  Lincoln,  MA.   1980:   James  Madison  University.  Harrisonburg,  Virginia.        Glyph  Gallery.  Amherst,  Massachusetts.      Group:  Albright  College      Group:  DeCordova  &  Dana  Museum      Group:  James  Madison      Group:  Glyth  Gallerhy,  Amherst,  Massachusetts        Group:  Art  Lending  Service,  MoMA      Group:  1980,  CAPS  Fellowship  Recipients   1981:     G.  Ray  Hawkins  Gallery.  Los  Angeles,  California.          Group:  1981  Whitney  Biennial.  Whitney  Museum,  New  York,  New  York.      Group:  Rheinisches  Landesmuseum,  Bonn,  Germany.      Simon  Lowinsky  Gallery.  San  Francisco,  California.        Zenith  Gallery.  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania.          Galerie  Agathe  Gaillard.  Paris,  France.        Group:  Rheinishches  Landesmuseum,  Bonn      Werkstatt  fur  Photographie  der  VHS.  Kreuzberg,  Germany.           44  

1982:     Monmouth  College.  Monmouth,  New  Jersey.        Kresge  Art  Center,  Michigan  State  University.  East  Lansing,  Michigan.          Museum  of  Art,  Rhode  Island  School  of  Design.  Providence,  Rhode  Island.        Group:  Kunsthalle,  Basel,  Switzerland.  (Travling.)      Ohio  State  University,  Columbus,  OH.      North  Texas  State  University,  Denton.  TX.      University  of  California  at  Davis,  Davis,  CA.   1983:   Fay  Gold  Gallery.  Atlanta,  Georgia.        New  York  Cultural  Center,  New  York,  NY.      Werkstatt  fur  Photographie,  Berlin,  Germany.                                                                                    *  Rented  from  George  Eastman  House.     George  Eastman  House  retired  their  Tulsa  traveling  exhibition  in  the  spring  of   1978.    45  

Appendix  2:  Institutional  Collectors,  1971  ­  1983       1972:     George  Eastman  House,  Rochester,  New  York.         -Complete  set  of  prints  used  for  Tulsa's  first  edition.      1974:   Visual  Studies  Workshop,  Rochester,  New  York.         -Seven  prints  from  Tulsa  originally  used  in  Afterimage  1:2.      1976:   Philadelphia  Museum  of  Art,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania.         -Three  prints  from  Tulsa  and  one  from  Teenage  Lust.      1980:   National  Gallery  of  Australia,  Canberra,  Australia.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio,        along  with  additional  prints.        Washington  Arts  Consortium,  Seattle,  Washington.         -  Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      1981:     Brooklyn  Museum,  Brooklyn,  New  York.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio           (#87/100).      Kresge  Art  Museum,  Michigan  State  University,  East  Lansing,  Michigan.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      Los  Angeles  County  Museum  of  Art,  Los  Angeles,  California.      -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio      (#49/100).      Museum  of  Modern  Art,  New  York,  New  York.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      New  Orleans  Museum  of  Art,  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      San  Francisco  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  San  Francisco,  California.         -Single  print  from  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      Smith  College  Museum  of  Art,  Northampton,  Massachusetts.         -Single  print  from  42nd  Street.      1982:     Center  for  Creative  Photography,  University  of  Arizona,  Tucson,  Arizona.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      The  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York,  New  York.         -Three  prints  from  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.  

  

46  

   Milwaukee  Art  Center,  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      Newport  Harbor  Art  Museum,  Newport  Beach,  California  (now  Orange      County  Art  Museum).         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      Princeton  University  Art  Museum,  Princeton,  New  Jersey         -4  prints  from  Tulsa.      San  Francisco  Museum  of  Modern  Art,  San  Francisco,  California.         -Three  prints  from  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      Toledo  Museum  of  Art,  Toledo,  Ohio.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.         Listed  on  Clark's  1983  résumé,  but  not  formally  accessioned  until  years  later:      1986:   Chrysler  Museum  of  Art,  Norfolk,  Virginia.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.        1987:   International  Center  of  Photography,  New  York,  New  York.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.      Minneapolis  Institute  of  Arts,  Minneapolis,  Minnesota.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.        1991:     Mount  Holyoke  College  Art  Museum,  South  Hadley,  Massachusetts.         -Complete  50-image  1980  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  Tulsa  portfolio.           

  

47  

Appendix  3:  Annotated  Bibliography  of  Reviews  and  Mentions  of  Tulsa,  1971  ­   1983            Alfred  Frankenstein,  "'The  History  of  My  Life':  Romanticism  to  Reality,"  San   Francisco  Chronicle,  August  17,  1971,  46.         This  article  deals  primarily  with  The  History  of  My  Life,  an  Imogen   Cunningham  exhibition  at  the  San  Francisco  Art  Institute.  However,  the  final   two  sections  are  devoted  to  two  other  exhibitions  also  showing  at  the   Institute  that  summer:  a  show  of  ceramic  sculptures  by  Robert  Rasmussen   and  an  exhibition  of  Clark's  Tulsa  photographs.  Frankenstein's  review  of   Clark's  work  is  remarkably  unaffected.  He  describes  Clark's  style  as   "detached,  wry,  slightly  weary  realism,"  while  noting  that  his  subjects  "look   like  very  ordinary  citizens  no  more  in  the  grip  of  a  lethal  addiction  than  so   many  baseball  fans  drinking  beer."  Ultimately,  Frankenstein  questions  the   authenticity  of  Clark's  subjects  and  the  pathos  of  his  images,  concluding  "the   wages  of  sin  is  boredom;  so  it  is,  at  least,  in  Tulsa,  according  to  this  show."         Leland  Rice,  "Larry  Clark"  Artweek,  September  4,  1971.         In  her  positive  review  of  Clark's  San  Francisco  Art  Institute  show,  Rice  likens   Clark's  Tulsa  photographs  to  Robert  Frank's,  Walker  Evans'  and  Wright   Morris'  of  years  past  in  their  ability  to  faithfully  chronicle  the  "most   contemporary  scene[s]."         A.  D.  Coleman,  "Latent  Image:  The  life-death  drug  paradox,"  Village  Voice,  September   16,  1971,  24-26.  Published  later  in  A.  D.  Coleman,  Light  Readings:  A   Photography  Critic's  Writings,  1968-1978  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,   1979),  79-81.         This  edition  of  A.  D.  Coleman's  "Latent  Image"  column  focuses  on  three   subjects:  Lustrum's  press'  recent  publications,  including  Tulsa;  The  Third  Sex,   a  three  man  show  at  the  Neikrug  Galleries  in  New  York;  and  Photographs   from  Sing  Sing  at  Floating  Foundation  of  Photography,  an  exhibition  of   photographs  from  a  photographic  workshop  held  at  Ossining  Correctional   Facility.  Within  the  article's  first  section  on  Lustrum,  Tulsa  gets  the  bulk  of   Coleman's  attention.  In  his  review,  he  praises  Clark's  ability  to  "trust  his      48  

honest  subjectivity,  his  instincts  and  heart  and  guts,  and  ride  with  it"  in  order   to  create  an  honest  and  authentic  view  of  his  experiences  immersed  in   Tulsa's  drug  culture.  Additionally,  Coleman  gives  a  short,  yet  astute  summary   of  the  book's  narrative  sequence.  Coleman  ultimately  sees  Tulsa  as  "a  major   work,  almost  too  good  [...]  to  be  true,"  that  elicit  strong  emotional  responses   from  its  readers  through  its  honest,  authentically  produced  photographs,  and   carefully  sequenced  photographs.         Gene  Thornton,  "This  Publisher  Dares,"  The  New  York  Times,  October  3,  1971,  D33.           In  this  article,  Thornton  focuses  on  Ralph  Gibson  and  Lustrum  Press,  first   writing  about  Gibson's  The  Somnambulist,  then  briefly  introducing  each  of   Lustrum's  three  most  recent  books,  and  finally  ending  with  a  short  history  of   the  press.  Of  the  three  books,  all  of  which  are  favorably  reviewed,  Tulsa   receives  the  highest  praise.  Thornton  introduces  the  book's  subject  matter   and  then  describes  its  formal  beauty  and  layout.  He  concludes  that  Tulsa  is   the  strongest  of  the  recent  Lustrum  titles  and  ranks  it  amongst  Robert   Frank's  The  Americans  or  the  portraits  of  Diane  Arbus,  who  had  committed   suicide  only  a  few  months  prior.  "A  testimony  to  life  in  our  times  --  a  small   part  of  life,  perhaps,  but  one  that  won't  go  away."         Dick  Cheverton,  "A  Devastating  Portrait  Of  An  American  Tragedy,"  Detroit  Free  Press,   Sunday,  November  7,  1971,  5B.      In  his  review  for  Detroit  Free  Press,  Cheverton  describes  Tulsa  as  "a  collection   of  photographs  that  assail,  lacerate,  devastate.  And,  ultimately  indict."  Most   of  his  short  review  is  devoted  to  describing  the  subject  matter  of  each  of  the   book's  three  chapters  in  an  extremely  sympathetic  tone.  The  review  ends   with  a  comment  that  the  book  is  appropriately  bound  in  black.         David  Vestal,  "Photographs  and  Photography,"  The  New  York  Times,  December  12,   1971.        In  this  article,  Vestal  lists  22  recently  released  photobooks,  giving  roughly  a   paragraph  to  each.  His  review  of  Tulsa  is  placed  alongside  reviews  of  the   three  other  Lustrum  titles  released  that  fall.  His  short  paragraph  on  the  book   comments  on  the  fact  that  it  was  authentically  and  subjectively  seen  "from      49  

the  inside."  He  also  comments  on  the  dichotomy  between  the  beauty  and   disturbing  nature  of  the  photographs.  Vestal  concludes  the  review  with  the   simple  statement:  "Not  nice;  real."         Larry  Clark,  "Tulsa,"  Camera  35  16:1  (January/February  1972):  54-61.         This  Camera  35  issue  features  a  selection  of  photographs  from  Tulsa  with  an   introductory  text  by  Larry  Clark.  The  article  is  introduced  in  the  issue's  table   of  contents  as  a  photo  essay  and  "a  full-blown  classic  of  contemporary   photojournalism."  The  text  starts  with  a  typewritten  letter  Clark  sent  to  Jim   Hughes,  Camera  35's  editor,  in  April  1971  while  he  was  printing  and  editing   the  work  with  Ralph  Gibson.  In  the  text,  Clark  describes  his  background  and   each  of  his  three  trips  to  Tulsa  to  make  the  work.  The  11  photographs  and   one  filmstrip  reproduced  after  the  text  are  all  taken  from  the  book,  but  are   chronologically  out  of  order  and,  also  unlike  the  book,  reproduced  as   multiple  images  on  one  page.  This  sequence  ends  on  a  more  definitive  note   than  Tulsa  with  the  image  of  Billy  Mann  sitting  on  his  bed  with  a  handgun   above  the  caption:  "Billy  Mann  ­  `Death  is  more  perfect  than  life."  ­  Dead   1970."             "Special  Feature:  Tulsa,"  Camera  Mainichi,  February  1972,  2-16,  31.         This  issue  of  Camera  Mainichi  reproduces  Tulsa's  iconic  cover  photo  on  its   cover  and  features  a  selection  of  images  from  the  book  along  with  a  short   article  by  a  nameless  author  recounting  his  first  experience  with  Tulsa  during   a  trip  to  New  York  City  shortly  before  Christmas  1971.  He  asserts  that   viewers  will  undoubtedly  find  the  photographs  shocking,  but  contextualizes   them  as  the  result  of  coming  of  age  rebelliousness  that  often  benefits  society   and  helps  it  to  develop.  However,  the  translation  of  this  text  into  English  is   not  perfect  and  muddles  up  the  writer's  point.  In  addition  to  this  text,  Clark's   essay  that  appeared  in  Camera  35  the  previous  month  is  also  reproduced   alongside  a  short  commentary  by  Ralph  Gibson,  who  recognizes  that  the   work  is  inseparable  from  Clark's  life  and  the  final  book  is  uncompromised,   "unlike  any  other  ever  before."                    50  

L.  M.  Kit  Carson,  "Books:  Tulsa  by  Larry  Clark,"  Rolling  Stone,  March  16,  1972,  68.         Carson's  review  of  Tulsa  in  Rolling  Stone,  is  short,  yet  particularly  astute.  The   article  begins  by  introducing  the  book  and  details  such  as  the  number  of   photographs,  the  years  in  which  they  were  made,  and  Clark's  age  during  the   making  of  the  book.  In  the  second  paragraph,  Carson  notes,  for  the  first  time,   that  the  images  challenge  the  commonly  held  notion  that  "the  needle  is  a  city- slicker."  He  then  goes  on  to  recap  the  narrative  of  the  book  and  its  two  main   characters:  David  Roper  and  Billy  Mann.  Carson  concludes  his  review  by   stating  that  the  book  signaled  the  end  of  the  long-standing  tradition  of  the   heroic  American  outlaw.         Alex  J.,  Sweetman,  "'Tulsa':  Death  Is  The  Unconscious  Goal,"  Afterimage  1:2  (April   1972):  8-10         In  this  six-page  article,  Sweetman  gives  a  thorough  interpretation  of  the   photographic  sequence  of  Tulsa,  asserting  that  the  "background  hum"  of  the   book  is  death.  Sweetman  gives  a  very  detailed  overview  of  the  narrative  and   even  delves  into  the  book's  image  pairings  and  their  messages.  Additionally,   he,  viewing  the  book  in  relation  to  The  Americans,  asserts  the  gun  is  the   overarching  symbol  of  the  book  and  death  is  it's  main  character.  He  ends  his   review  by  claiming  the  book  is  "the  vision  of  a  tragic  poet."         "Give  &  Take:  Letters  to  the  editor,"  Camera  35  16:3  (April  1972).         This  edition  of  Camera  35's  "Give  &  Take:  Letters  to  the  editor"  contains  six   letters  regarding  the  Tulsa  portfolio  featured  in  the  magazine's   January/February  1971  issue.  Divided  evenly  between  positive  and  negative   letters,  Tulsa's  section  of  the  article  is  entitled  "Junk?"  The  first  letter,  by  D.   W.  Armstrong  of  Pasadena,  California,  calls  Clark's  work  "GARBAGE!"  and   makes  the  claim  that  the  author's  eight-year-old  son  could  make  better   photographs.  Another  letter,  by  Leo  Guichand  of  Redding,  California,  scolds   the  magazine  for  publishing  such  obscene  work,  claiming  that  he  found   Camera  35  was  "a  fine  family  magazine."  W.  R.  Wilson  claims  in  his  letter  that   the  article  belonged  in  an  issue  of  "Life  in  1948."  Conversely,  George   Zurawski  of  Nipigon,  Ontario  found  it  to  be  an  example  of  "startling  realism   that  is  unique."  Two  other  readers  were  positive,  finding  it  to  be,  

  

51  

respectively,  "probably  the  most  courageous  piece  to  be  published  in  recent   years"  and  "definitely  heavy."         "Give  &  Take:  Letters  to  the  editor,"  Camera  35  16:4  (May  1972)         This  edition's  "Give  &  Take"  features  only  one  letter  regarding  the  Tulsa   portfolio.  The  letter  is  from  Susan  Lester  of  East  Hampton,  New  York  and  is   titled  "Censured  Case."  Although  the  reader  found  the  article  to  be  "good  and   very  effective,"  she  brings  up  ethical  questions  regarding  the  photograph  of   the  dead  baby  in  its  coffin,  claiming  that  the  article  could  have  still  been  just   as  successful  without  it.  The  magazine's  response  reminds  readers  that  the   baby  in  the  photograph  was  the  child  of  a  pregnant  woman  on  the  previous   page  and  served  as  a  conclusion  to  her  behavior.         "Give  &  Take:  Letters  to  the  editor,"  Camera  35  16:5  (June  1972)         This  edition's  "Give  &  Take"  features  only  one  letter  regarding  the  Tulsa   portfolio  from  Lynda  Behoff  of  Glenview,  Illinois  and  is  titled  "Book  Stall."  In   the  letter,  she  claims  that  she  was  "stimulated  by  [Clark's]  technique,"  but   was  unsuccessful  in  finding  the  book.  She  asks  the  magazine  where  to  find  it   and  is  directed  to  Rochester's  Light  Impressions.             "Give  &  Take:  Letters  to  the  editor,"  Camera  35  16:6  (July/August  1972)         Three  letters  to  the  editor  regarding  Clark's  Tulsa  portfolio  appear  in  this   edition  of  "Give  &  Take"  under  a  section  entitled  "Double  Takes."  The  first   letter  is  from  Randall  Shinn  of  Colorado  Springs,  who  criticizes  other  readers   of  the  magazine  for  complaining  about  articles  (Clark's  in  particular)  that   stray  away  from  the  technical  or  picturesque.  He  states  that  their  honesty  is   what  makes  them  important  and  real  life  is  not  always  pretty.  Similarly,  the   following  letter  thanks  the  editor  for  showing  them  "that  life  isn't  all  wine   and  roses"  and  urges  the  magazine  to  continue  showing  all  sides  of  life,  even   the  ugly.  The  third  and  final  letter  is  similar  to  the  first  two  in  that  it  praises   the  magazine  for  publishing  honest,  graphic  work  while  blasting  other   readers  for  demanding  only  the  technical  and  pretty.            52  

Larry  Nygaard.  "'Tulsa':  A  brilliant  document,"  The  Dakota  Student,  September  26,   1972.         In  this  review  of  an  exhibition  of  photographs  from  Tulsa  held  at  the   University  of  North  Dakota,  Larry  Nygaard,  writing  for  the  school's  student   newspaper,  positively  reviews  the  exhibition.  He  notes  his  unfamiliarity  and   fascination  with  the  scene  that  Clark  participated  in  and  documented.  Like   many  contemporary  commentators,  Nygaard  also  noted  the  work's  honesty,   concluding,  "One  wonders  occasionally  how  aware  these  people  were  of  the   camera  and  what  they  thought  of  Clark's  activities,  but  in  the  end  it  doesn't   matter  because  `Tulsa'  us  so  very  truthful.  It  is  a  brilliant  document,  a  good   look  at  a  little  known  human  situation."         Lester  Grinspoon,  "A  Picture  Book  of  Speed:  Tulsa,  by  Larry  Clark,"  Medical  Tribune   13:42:1  (November  1,  1972):  8.                Dr.  Lester  Ginspoon  opens  his  review  of  Tulsa  by  offering  a  short  history  of   amphetamine  usage  and  its  addictive  nature,  asserting  that  Tulsa  is  both  a   social  document  and  a  work  of  art  that  gives  viewers  an  intimate  view  of  "the   tragedy."  Although  written  from  a  medical  perspective,  Grinspoon   nonetheless  recognizes  "that  only  an  insider  could  have  created  as  intimate   an  impression  as  this  book  provides."  He  ultimately  sees  the  photographs  as   perfectly  communicating  all  the  sides  of  the  drug,  including  its  ultimate   consequences.         "Books  Reveals  Plight  of  Speed  Addicts  in  Tulsa,"  The  Tulsa  Tribune,  November  2,   1972.        This  short  and  unusual  review  in  The  Tulsa  Tribune  is  essentially  one  extend   quote  from  Lester  Grinspoon's  earlier  review  of  the  book  in  Medical  Tribune   and  offers  no  opinion  or  interpretation  of  its  own.                 

  

53  

Margot  Kernan,  "Writing  with  Light,"  The  Washington  Post,  Times  Herald,  December   3,  1972.      In  her  article,  Kernan  reviews  many  recently  published  photobooks  and  only   mentions  Tulsa  and  other  Lustrum  titles  in  relation  to  Robert  Frank's  then   newly  released,  American  edition  of  The  Lines  of  My  Hand.  She  presents  them   as  "books  that  are  not  random  collections  of  pictures  but  complete  works  in   themselves."  She  concludes  that  The  Lines  of  My  Hand,  not  Tulsa,  was  the   Lustrum  Press'  finest  release  to  date.         A.  D.  Coleman,  "Gibson:  Masterful  Maker  of  Images,"  The  New  York  Times,  February   25,  1973,  138.           This  article  is  meant  to  focus  on  Gibson  photography,  not  his  activity  as  a   publisher,  which  it  what  he  was  then  commonly  known  for.  However,  when   introducing  Lustrum's  titles,  Coleman  states  that  only  Tulsa  "approaches  the   specifically  sequential  complexity"  of  Gibson's  The  Somnambulist.         Douglas  Davis,  "The  Ten  `Toughest'  Photographs  of  1975,"  Esquire,  February  1976,   108-115.         In  this  manifesto  on  photography,  Davis  argues  against  the  theory  of   photography  as  a  window  onto  the  world,  instead  championing  the  medium's   highly  subjective  nature  and  a  trend  of  "toughness"  he  sees  as  dominating   contemporary  photography.  Davis  defines  toughness  as  "a  work  that  defies   the  expectations  of  its  audience  yet,  in  the  deepest  sense,  serves  that   audience  [by  refusing]  pleasure  on  the  normal,  accepted  ground."  Of  the  ten   photographs  chosen,  Davis  only  explicitly  writes  about  one:  Imogen  and   Twinka  by  Judy  Dater.  The  others,  including  Clark's  Teen-ager  Asleep,  which   later  appears  in  Teenage  Lust,  are  accompanied  by  short  captions  supplied  by   the  photographers.  Of  his  image,  Clark  writes,  "I  am  working  on  a  book   entitled  Teen-aged  Lust  and  this  is  an  idea  from  it.  I  never  thought  Esquire   would  print  this  picture."              

  

54  

Allan  Porter,  "Direction:  Ten  Years  After,  1969-1979,"  Camera  9  (September  1979):   4-13.           Allan  Porter  writes  retrospectively  about  a  party  held  in  July  1969  at  Wolf   von  dem  Bussche's  Canal  Street  studio  that  was  organized  by  Carol  Kismaric   and  attended  by  "a  new,  intensive  and  creative  group  of  [American]"   photographers,  many  of  whom  would  go  on  to  define  photography  in  the   `70s.  Interspersed  between  his  story,  however,  are  three  portfolios,  each   containing  eight  photographs,  by  photographers  who  were  either  too  young   to  attend,  such  as  Toby  Old  and  Eileen  Lewis,  or,  writing  about  Clark,  not   there,  but  "still  very  much  in  the  tradition"  of  that  group.  While  introducing   Clark's  eight  images,  all  of  which  appeared  in  Tulsa,  Porter  gives  a  quick   background  on  him  before  extensively  quoting  Leland  Rice,  writing  for   Artweek,  and  Clark  himself  in  his  piece  for  Camera  35.           "Briefs:  A  Serendipitous  Guide  of  the  Week,"  Village  Voice,  September  17,  1979.         This  short  write-up  gives  quick,  matter-of-fact  statements  about  Clark's  Tulsa   work  then  being  shown  at  Robert  Freidus  Gallery.  It  interestingly  notes  that   Clark,  following  the  publication  of  Tulsa,  "got  himself  known,  disappeared   [moved  back  to  Tulsa,  went  to  prison],  and  resurfaced  last  year."         Tony  Perry,  "Life  in  the  raw  vernacular,"  The  Age,  September  19,  1979.           This  article,  published  in  Melbourne-based  newspaper  The  Age,  reviews  an   exhibition  of  Clark's  work  at  the  Photographers'  Gallery  in  South  Yarra,   Melbourne  suburb.  Perry  firstly  commends  Clark,  here  presented  as  a   photojournalist,  for  blending  classical  pictorial  conventions  with  gritty   subject  matter  that  he  interestingly  sees  as  quintessentially  American  (guns,   sex,  and  drug  addiction).  He  also  writes  of  the  experience  of  witnessing  these   acts  from  an  insider's  perspective  ­  for  example,  seeing  not  just  an  armed   robbery,  but  also  the  casualness  of  offenders  while  preparing  to  commit  one.   Perry  concludes  his  review  by  stating:  "If  Larry  Clark  can  approach  them   with  compassion  and  insight,  so  should  we."           

  

55  

Richard  Esposito,  "Ex-addict  presents  an  essay  in  photos,"  Daily  News,  September   30,  1979.         This  review  of  Clark's  show  at  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  offers  a  biographical   sketch  of  Clark  and  his  work.  Interestingly,  it  is  the  first  to  mention  his  prison   sentence,  of  which  Clark  explains,  "I  was  in  [prison]  for  stopping  a  fight  at  a   poker  game.  I  shot  a  guy  in  the  leg,  that  sure  stopped  the  fight  fast."  The   article  goes  on  to  talk  about  his  life  in  New  York  City  while  shooting  what   would  become  Teenage  Lust  and  the  rarity  of  Tulsa.    Esposito  closes  by   quoting  a  positive  1972  review  by  Gene  Thornton  in  Saturday  Review  and   then  giving  a  brief  rundown  of  Tulsa's  plotline.           Gene  Thornton,  "Practitioners  With  a  Story  To  Tell,"  The  New  York  Times,  September   30,  1979.           This  review  by  Gene  Thornton  addresses  both  Clark's  exhibition  of  Tulsa   work  at  the  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  and  an  exhibition  of  Agustin  Victor   Casasola's  work  at  Prakapas  Gallery.  When  discussing  Clark's  work,  Thornton   details  the  narrative  of  Tulsa  and  its  strength  as  a  sequence  while  also   claiming  that  it  had  lost  none  of  its  power  since  its  first  publication  in  1971.   Additionally,  Thornton  closes  by  claiming  Clark,  like  Casasola,  uses   photography  to  convey  a  moral  message,  one  that  has  been  overshadowed  in   an  art  world  he  sees  too  concerned  with  formalism.  Ultimately,  Thornton   champions  the  work,  comparing  it  to  Robert  Frank,  and  expresses  frustration   that  it  was  not  shown  in  New  York  before  1979,  and,  even  then,  not  in  a   museum.           John  Yau,  "Larry  Clark  at  Robert  Freidus,"  Art  in  America,  December  1979,  116-117.           Yau's  article  is  focuses  on  Clark's  show  at  the  Robert  Freidus  Gallery.  The   review  begins  by  briefly  introducing  Clark  before  giving  a  recapitulation  of   the  work's  narrative.  Yau  comments  on  Clark's  style,  which  he  sees  as  just  as   casual  as  the  drug  use  he  is  photographing  and  owing  an  obvious  debt  to   Robert  Frank  both  stylistically  and  for  its  enormous  sympathy  for  its   subjects.  After  praising  Clark  for  not  romanticizing  the  drug  addiction,  Yau   closes  the  article  with  the  summation:  "These  carefully  chosen  photographs   are  the  highlights  of  a  trip  to  hell."           56  

Owen  Edwards,  "The  Tulsa  Connection,"  American  Photographer,  December  1979.           In  Edwards's  review  of  Clark's  show  at  the  Robert  Freidus  Gallery,  he  claims   that,  "at  the  heart  of  Clark's  work  is  romance  pure  and  not  so  simple."  He   finds  that  Tulsa  presents  "no  lobbying  for  pity,  no  overt  attempt  to  shock  or   castigate,"  unlike  other  work  from  insider  perspectives,  which  he  sees  as  too   often  clouded  by  sentimentality  or  self-absorption.  Furthermore,  Edwards   writes,  "it  doesn't  rally  matter  whether  or  not  we  can  trust  these   photographs  as  documents;  to  see  them  as  photographs,  no  more  and  no  less,   is  enough."  After  giving  a  typical  overview  of  Tulsa's  narrative,  Edwards   aligns  Clark  with  Bruce  Davidson's  Brooklyn  Gang  and  Brassï's  Paris  de  nuit.       Jim  Hughes,  "Proof  Sheet,"  Popular  Photography  85:6  (December  1979).         Hughes'  article  on  Clark's  show  at  the  Robert  Freidus  Gallery  is  in  fact  much   more  a  profile  on  the  artist  than  anything  else.  Hughes,  a  former  editor  of   Camera  35  during  the  publishing  of  Clark's  Tulsa  portfolio  and  its  blowback,   introduces  Clark  by  stating  that  he  lost  track  of  him  during  the  years  after   Tulsa,  but  decided  to  visit  him  upon  his  return  to  New  York,  where  he  was   producing  new  work  and  being  shown  at  Freidus.  While  much  of  the  article   thereafter  relates  to  Clark's  then  ongoing  work  on  42nd  Street  and  his   continued  obsession  with  American  youth,  Clark  briefly  discusses  Tulsa  and   that  there  was  "nothing  missing  that  [Clark]  would  want  to  add"  to  the  book.   Interestingly,  Clark  is  quoted  here  as  saying  "I  don't  want  to  be  a   photojournalist  at  all.  If  this  project  looked  like  photojournalism,  even  if  it   told  the  truth,  I  would  probably  burn  it."           Guy  Trebay,  "Hot  Flash?:  The  Photographer  from  `Tulsa'  Resurfaces,"  Village  Voice,   October  15-21,  1980.           This  article  is  partly  a  commentary  by  Trebay  and  half  an  autobiography  by   Larry  Clark.  Trebay  starts  the  article  by  remembering  his  initial  experiences   with  Tulsa,  first  as  a  review  in  The  Village  Voice,  presumably  by  A.  D.  Coleman   in  1972,  and  then  in  Esquire,  presumably  by  Douglas  Davis  in  1976.  He  writes   of  contacting  Esquire  to  find  out  more  information  on  Clark,  but  learning  that   the  magazine  had  next  to  no  information  to  give  him.  The  second  half  of  the   article  is  written  by  Clark  and  recounts  his  life  leading  up  to  Tulsa  and  how  

  

57  

he  spent  the  previous  decade,  ending  with  a  discussion  of  his  then  ongoing   work  on  Manhattan's  42nd  Street.         [W.  W.],  "The  Galleries:  Hollywood,"  Los  Angeles  Times,  November  28,  1980.           This  short  write-up  summarizes  an  exhibition  at  G.  Ray  Hawkins  Gallery  in   Los  Angeles  that  featured  Larry  Clark,  Garry  Winogrand,  and  Arthur  Tress.  Of   Clark,  the  reviewer,  who  only  signs  this  short  entry  as  "W.  W.,"  says  only  that   Tulsa  became  in  the  1970s,  "somewhat  an  underground  classic  as  a  book."         Andy  Grundberg,  "Why  Some  Art  Retains  Its  Emotional  Impact,"  The  New  York   Times,  April  10,  1983.         Here,  Andy  Grundberg  laments  over  the  fact  that  much  of  the  most   innovative  work  from  the  1970s,  especially  Les  Krims  and  Ralph  Gibson,   seemed  stale  only  a  decade  later.  He  states,  however,  that  Clark's  Tulsa,   which  had  just  been  rereleased,  maintained  its  initial  impact.  He  states  that   although  the  pictures  remain  connected  to  the  1960s  drug  scene,  the  book  on   a  larger  level  remains  "a  universal  past  centered  in  late-adolescent   rebelliousness,  degrees  of  which  have  been  experienced  for  generations."  He   closes  the  article  by  openly  wondering  if  Cindy  Sherman's  "Untitled  Film   Stills"  will  keep  their  impact  in  the  next  decade  or  be  lost  to  time.         Owen  Edwards,  "Data  Bank:  Book  Bits,"  American  Photographer,  October  1983.         In  this  short  blurb,  Owen  Edwards  talks  about  the  newly  published  second   edition  of  Tulsa,  claiming  that  the  book  retained  its  initial  emotional  impact,   unlike  most  work  from  the  late  1960s  that  was  made  "before  the  young   rebels  had  a  cause  but  plenty  of  angst"  and  tended  to  age  poorly.  Owens  calls   it  the  most  "terrifyingly  authentic  drama"  to  be  made  outside  of  a  war  zone   and  closes  by  asserting  that  the  book  should  "never  be  out  of  print."        

  

58  

Bibliography      Aletti,  Vince.  "Arrested  Development:  Larry  Clark  Pins  Adolescence  to  the  Wall,"   Village  Voice,  October  13,  1992,  99-100.      ---.  "First  Break:  Larry  Clark."  Artforum  40:9,  May  2002.      Baltz,  Lewis.  "American  Photography  in  the  1970s:  Too  Old  to  Rock,  Too  Young  to   Roll."  In  American  Images:  1945-1980,  edited  by  Peter  Turner.  Penguin:   Middlesex,  1985,  156-164.      Bell,  James.  "Love  and  other  drugs."  Sight  and  Sound,  21:10  (October  2011):  84.      "Briefs:  A  Serendipitous  Guide  of  the  Week."  Village  Voice,  September  17,  1979.      Bogre,  Michelle.  "Q&A:  Larry  Clark."  American  Photographer,  October  1986.      Carson,  L.  M.  Kit.  "Books:  Tulsa  by  Larry  Clark."  Rolling  Stone,  March  16,  1972.      Chan,  Zoë.  Wild  Boys:  Primitivism  and  Male  Youth  in  Larry  Clark's  Photography  and   Films.  MA  Thesis,  Concordia  University,  2008.        Cheverton,  Dick.  "A  Devastating  Portrait  Of  An  American  Tragedy."  Detroit  Free   Press,  November  7,  1971,  5B.      Christopherson,  Richard  W.  "From  Folk  Art  To  Fine  Art:  A  Transformation  in  the   Meaning  of  Photographic  Work."  Journal  of  Contemporary  Ethnography  3:   123-157.      Clark,  Larry.  Kiss  the  Past  Hello.  New  York:  Luhring  Augustine,  2011.      ---.  Larry  Clark.  New  York:  International  Center  of  Photography,  2005.      ---.  "Mixing  Your  Own  Chemicals."  In  Darkroom,  edited  by  Eleanor  Lewis.  New  York:   Lustrum,  1977,  41-49.      ---.  Teenage  Lust.  New  York:  Larry  Clark,  1987.        ---.  "Tulsa."  Camera  35  16:1  (January/February  1972):  54-61.      ---.  Tulsa  (New  York:  Lustrum  Press,  1971).      ---.  Tulsa  (New  York:  Larry  Clark,  1983).     

  

59  

---.  Tulsa  (Tokyo:  Taka  Ishii  Gallery,  1996).      ---.  Tulsa  (New  York:  Printed  Matter,  1999).      ---.  Tulsa  (New  York:  Grove  Press,  2000).      Coleman,  A.  D.  "Gibson:  Masterful  Maker  of  Images."  The  New  York  Times,  February   25,  1973.      ---.  "Highly  Charged  but  Mute  Parade  of  Social  Ills."  The  New  York  Observer,  October   8,  1990,  28.        ---.  "Latent  Image:  The  life-death  drug  paradox."  Village  Voice,  September  16,  1971.      ---.  "Life  May  Have  Died,  But  Photography  Lives  On."  The  New  York  Times,  January   14,  1973.      Davis,  Douglas.  "The  Ten  `Toughest'  Photographs  of  1975."  Esquire,  February  1976,   108-115.      Di  Bello,  Patrizia  and  Shamoon  Zamir  "Introduction,"  In  The  Photobook:  From  Talbot   to  Ruscha  and  Beyond,  edited  by  Patrizia  Di  Bello,  Colette  Wilson,  and   Shamoon  Zamir.  London:  I.  B.  Tauris,  2012,  1-16.      Downes,  Bruce,  editor.  Photography  Annual  1964:  A  Selection  of  the  world's  finest   photographs  compiled  by  the  editors  of  Popular  Photography.  New  York:  Ziff- Davis,  1964.      Doss,  Erika.  Looking  at  Life  Magazine.  Washington  D.C.:  Smithsonian  Institution   Press,  2001.        Dugan,  Thomas.  Photography  Between  the  Covers:  Interviews  With  Photo- Bookmakers.  Rochester:  Light  Impressions,  1979.      Edey,  Maitland.  Great  Photographic  Essays  from  Life.  Boston:  New  York  Graphic   Society,  1987.      Edwards,  Owen.  "Data  Bank:  Book  Bits."  American  Photographer,  October  1983.      Eppridge,  Bill.  "We  are  the  animals  in  a  world  no  one  knows."  Life,  February  26,   1965,  66-81.      ---.  "'I  told  them  not  to  go  home.'"  Life,  March  5,  1965,  92-103.      Esposito,  Richard.  "Ex-addict  presents  an  essay  in  photos."  Daily  News,  September   30,  1979.      60  

Frankenstein,  Alfred.  "'The  History  of  My  Life':  Romanticism  to  Reality."  San   Francisco  Chronicle,  August  17,  1971.      Gennari,  John.  "Bridging  the  Two  Americas:  Life  Looks  at  the  1960s."  In  Looking  at   Life  Magazine,  edited  by  Erika  Doss.  Washington:  Smithsonian  Press,  2001.      "Give  &  Take:  Letters  to  the  editor,"  Camera  35  16:3-6  (April,  May,  June,  and  July- August  1972).      Green,  Jonathan.  American  Photography:  A  Critical  History,  1945  to  Present.  New   York:  Harry  N.  Abrams,  Inc.,  1984.        Grinspoon,  Lester.  "A  Picture  Book  of  Speed:  Tulsa,  by  Larry  Clark."  Medical  Tribune   13:42:1  (November  1,  1972):  8.          Grundberg,  Andy.  "Why  Some  Art  Retains  Its  Emotional  Impact."  The  New  York   Times,  April  10,  1983,  31-33.      Hayden,  Billa.  Larry  Clark:  Bibliography.  n.l.:  Billa  Hayden,  2005.      Heath,  Ashely.  "Conversation  on  Thompson  Street."  Arena  +  Homme  18,   Autumn/Winter  2002-2003.        Hirschberg,  Lynn.  "What's  the  Matter  with  Kids  Today?"  New  York  Magazine,  June  5,   1995,  33-41.      Horning,  Ron.  "People  and  Ideas:  The  Autobiography  of  Larry  Clark."  Aperture  94   (Spring  1984):  2-4.      Hughes,  Jim.  "Proof  Sheet."  Popular  Photography  85:6  (December  1979):  13,  48,  50.      Jennings,  Shantelle.  "Tulsa  Revealed."  This  Land  Press.  Accessed  April  14,  2013.   http://thislandpress.com/05/09/2012/tulsa-revealed/.      Kelley  Mike.  "Larry  Clark:  In  Youth  Is  Pleasure."  Flash  Art  25:164,  May-June  1992,   82-86.      Kernan,  Margot.  "Writing  with  Light."  The  Washington  Post,  Times  Herald,  December   3,  1972      Koether,  Jutta.  "Larry  Clark,"  Journal  of  Contemporary  Art  5:1  (Spring  1992):  30-50.      Ladd,  Jeffrey.  "Kiss  The  Past  Hello  by  Larry  Clark."  5B4:  Photography  and  Books,   March  22,  2011.  http://5b4.blogspot.com/2011/03/kiss-past-hello-by-larry- clark.html.         61  

"Larry  Clark's  Non-Existent  Catalogues."  The  Art  Newspaper,  April  2005.      Lipsitz,  George.  "Who'll  Stop  the  Rain?:  Youth  Culture,  Rock  `n'  Roll,  and  Social   Crises."  In  The  Sixties...  From  Memory  to  History,  edited  by  David  Farber.   Chapel  Hill  &  London:  The  University  of  North  Carolina  Press,  1994,  206-234.      Marcus,  Steve.  The  Lord's  Prayer.  Vortex  Records.  Vinyl  LP.  1969.      Marien,  Mary  Warner.  Photography:  A  Cultural  History.  Upper  Saddle  River:  Pearson   Hall  Inc.,  2011.      Marshall,  Joseph.  "The  Moral  Issue  of  a  Pregnant  Woman  Shooting  Up."  Photo  Review   16:1.  (Winter  1993),  2-9      Mazur,  Adam  and  Paulina  Skirgajllo-Krajewska.  "If  I  want  to  take  a  picture,  I  take  it   no  matter  what:  Nan  Goldin  Interview."  Photo  Tapeta.  Accessed  June  10,   2013.  http://www.fototapeta.art.pl/2003/ngie.php.      McClintock,  Grant.  "The  Genesis  of  Vagabond."  This  Land  Press.  Accessed  April  12,   2013.  http://thislandpress.com/06/13/2012/the-genesis-of-vagabond/.      Monk,  Phillip.  The  American  Trip.  Toronto:  The  Power  Plant,  1996.      Nickel,  Douglas  R.  "History  of  Photography:  The  State  of  Research,"  The  Art  Bulletin   78:3  (September  2001):  548-558.      O'Hagan,  Sean.  "The  last  days  of  Dash  Snow."  The  Guardian,  September  19,  2009.   Accessed  June  22,  2013,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/   sep/20/dash-snow-new-york-artist      Parr,  Martin  and  Gerry  Badger.  The  Photobook:  A  History,  vol.  1.  London:  Phaidon,   2004.      "Prints  and  Photographs  Published."  The  Print  Collector's  Newsletter  11:3  (July- August  1980).      Rice,  Leland.  "Larry  Clark,"Artweek,  September  4,  1971.      Rosenblum,  Naomi.  A  World  History  of  Photography.  New  York:  Abbeville  Press,   2007.      Roth,  Andrew,  editor.  The  Book  of  101  Books:  Seminal  Photographic  Books  of  the   Twentieth  Century.  New  York:  PPP  Editions,  2001.      ---,  editor.  The  Open  Book:  A  History  of  the  Photographic  Book  from  1878  to  the   Present.  Göteborg:  Hasselblad  Center,  2004.      62  

Schrader,  Paul.  "Babes  in  the  Hood."  Artforum  33,  May  1995,  76.      Solomon-Godeau,  Abigail.  "Clark,  Larry."  In  Contemporary  Photographers,  edited  by   Colin  Naylor.  Chicago  &  London:  St.  James  Press,  1988.      "Special  Feature:  Tulsa,"  Camera  Mainichi,  February  1972.      Spengemann,  Chelsea.  The  Tulsa  Reader.  New  York:  Chelsea  Spengemann,  2010.      Sweetman,  Alex.  "'Tulsa':  Death  is  the  Unconscious  Goal."  Afterimage  1:2  (April   1972):  8-10.      The  Velvet  Underground,  "Heroin,"  on  The  Velvet  Underground  &  Nico,  Verve   Records.  1967.  Vinyl  LP.      Thornton,  Gene.  "This  Publisher  Dares."  The  New  York  Times,  October  3,  1971.      Thornton,  Gene.  "Practitioners  With  a  Story  To  Tell."  The  New  York  Times,   September  30,  1979.      Trebay,  Guy.  "Hot  Flash?:  The  Photographer  from  `Tulsa'  Resurfaces."  The  Village   Voice.  October  15-21,  1980,  1-62.      Van  Sant,  Gus.  "Larry  Clark:  Shockmaker."  Interview  Magazine,  July  1995,  42-45.      Vestal,  David.  "Photographs  and  Photography."  The  New  York  Times,  December  12,   1971      Wagstaff,  Sam.  A  Book  of  photographs  from  the  collection  of  Sam  Wagstaff.  New  York:   Gray  Press,  1978.      ---,  An  Exhibition  of  Photographs  from  the  collection  of  Sam  Wagstaff.  Washington:   Corcoran  Gallery  of  Art,  1978.      Willumson,  Glenn.  W.  Eugene  Smith  and  the  Photographic  Essay.  Cambridge  &  New   York:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1992.        Wolfe,  Tom.  The  New  Journalism.  New  York:  Harper  &  Row,  1973.      Yau,  John.  "Larry  Clark  at  Robert  Freidus."  Art  in  America,  December  1979,  116-117.      Zannier,  Italo.  "Larry  Clark:  Tulsa."  Fotografia  Italiana  (Milan),  May  1973.     

  

63  

