A Journey in Collections Management: The Creation of a Finding Aid for The Black Star Ephemera Collection At the Ryerson Image Centre

by Lauren Nicole Potter, BA, Agnes Scott College, 2009

An applied thesis project presented to Ryerson University and George Eastman House

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2013 ©Lauren Potter 2013

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University and George Eastman House to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University and George Eastman House to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

Lauren Potter

ii

A Journey in Collections Management: The Creation of a Finding Aid for The Black Star Ephemera Collection At The Ryerson Image Centre Master of Arts, 2013 Lauren N. Potter Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University/George Eastman House

Abstract This applied project involved the creation of a finding aid for the Black Star Ephemera Collection held at the Ryerson Image Centre (RIC) at Ryerson University in Toronto. This little known and un-catalogued collection was originally part of the Black Star Agency photographic collection founded in New York City in 1935. Black Star is a well known photo agency that has served as a resource for the picture press during the twentieth century, providing photographs of significant events, people, and places. This ephemeral collection is made up of all the textual material originally used by the agency to organize and support the photographic collection. In addition to the finding aid this paper discusses the significance of this collection and its relationship to the history of photojournalism as well as providing a summary of the rationale and methodology for the applied project.

iii

Acknowledgments I would like to acknowledge and thank the following people for their support, guidance, and advice throughout this project. The Ryerson Image Centre for allowing me to work with the Black Star Collection, through which this experience could not have been possible. To the RIC Staff - Jennifer Park, Charlene Heath, and Anna Jedrejowski for all of the appointments, card access, and encouragement needed to complete this project. Chantal Wilson, for her guidance for the creation and structure of this project. Peter Higdon and Valérie Matteau for the knowledge they imparted to me about Black Star. Robert Burley, my thesis advisor, for his time and guidance through the course of this project. My second reader, Thierry Gervais, for his knowledge on photojournalism and constant attention to detail. To Dee Psaila for her advice and knowledge of RAD and her time through reviewing this project. To my dad, G.R. Potter, without whose love, support and encouragement to pursue my dreams and see the world, this would not have been possible. To my friends and family across three continents for their continuous support, encouragement and prayers throughout this program. To my fellow classmates for making this experience what it was. Finally, I thank God, who is my strength.

iv

Table of Contents Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements List of Figures List of Illustrations 1. Introduction 2. Literature Review and Research 2.1 History of Photojournalism 2.2 Research about Photojournalism 2.3 Management of a Collection and the Creation of a Finding Aid 3. Overview of Project 3.1 Photographic Finds 3.2 Creating the Finding Aid and Appendix 4. Conclusion Appendix I: Black Star Ephemera Finding Aid Appendix II: Black Star Ephemera Found Photograph List Appendix III: Black Star Ephemera RAD Finding Aid Bibliography ii iii iv v vi 1 4 4 5 7 10 13 15 19 22 104 155 173

Figures Black Star Ephemera Finding Aid Chart 29

v

Illustrations 1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10: 11: 12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19: Black Star Ephemera Collection in RIC vault A look inside drawer 44 Example of envelope Example of the labeling system at Black Star Found Photographs in drawer 47 Silver gelatin print of actress Marisa Solinas Silver gelatin copy print of Steve McQueen Drawing of a German tank View of miscellaneous ephemera box Inside view of miscellaneous ephemera box Arrangement of ephemera item Illustrated Magazine article Carbon copy article by ABC Press Services Sipa Press article Stern article Paul Anka French caption Lose caption Letter addressed to Benjamin J. Chapnick from Eduardo Comesana Example of filing copy 10 12 12 12 13 14 14 14 17 17 17 26 26 26 26 26 26 27 27

vi

1. Introduction In 2005, Ryerson University in Toronto was gifted the Black Star archive of approximately 292,000 black and white press prints.1 This generous gift included financial support that allowed the university to create the Ryerson Image Centre (RIC), which officially opened in September of 2012. While the RIC staff has been able to complete a great deal of work related to researching and cataloguing this collection of twentieth century photojournalism, there is still several years worth of work ahead of them in making the collection accessible to an international research community. The Black Star Picture Agency continues today as a smaller company based in White Plains, New York providing content to clients seeking both historical and contemporary photojournalism. Black Star was founded by three Jewish-German immigrants; Kurt Safranski, Ernest Mayer, and Kurt Kornfeld, who arrived in New York City in December of 1935 after fleeing the Third Reich. They brought with them two suitcases of photographs that became the basis of the operation, along with their knowledge of picture magazines and photography.2 The founders quickly established and nurtured relationships with all of the major magazines of the early twentieth century, such as, Life, Look, Time and the Saturday Evening Post. Under their direction as well as that of later director, Howard Chapnick, Black Star was built into a major photographic archive that held the work of numerous well-known photographers who captured the important events, places, and people of the twentieth century. In the early years of the twenty-first century, Black Star transformed itself to a digital company and sold most of its print holdings to an anonymous donor who then gifted the archive to Ryerson. The archive's usefulness does not end at simply providing a visual history, but also aids in the understanding of twentieth century photojournalism, the internal operations of a picture agency and its relationships with magazines, photographers and the public.

1

"Research and Collections," Ryerson Image Centre, accessed November 1, 2012, http://www.ryerson.ca/ric/research/collections.html. 2 For a more detail history of Black Star please see the Administrative history of the Finding Aid.

1

I was introduced to the idea of working with the ephemera collection in the fall of 2012, by the RIC staff. This part of the Black Star collection was unknown to me before meeting with staff members at the RIC, but I soon discovered it was a substantial collection made up of 10.5 meters of textual documents stored in eighty banker's boxes, a portfolio, and one oversized box all located in the RIC vault. It was interesting to learn that this extensive collection of documents was originally stored with the photographs in the New York offices of Black Star and used by their staff as reference material relating to the photographs. I was intrigued to work with this collection, because it allowed me to combine my interests in history and photojournalism. In working with the collection, I found a wealth of knowledge not only about what physical objects it consists of ­ articles, captions, tear sheets, correspondences, research, maps, model releases ­ but also about how these provide a backdoor entrance into understanding the photographs. In the RIC publication, Archival Dialogues: Reading the Black Star Collection, Jennifer Allen3 writes about her exploration of the ephemera collection in her essay, "Crate 17." Crate 17 was the shipping container that held all of the ephemera when Black Star was gifted to Ryerson. Allen, who was commissioned by the RIC to write on Black Star, had been overwhelmed by the vastness of the photographic archives and was looking for explanations or a directory of some kind that would help her make sense of the collection.4 Allen found this in "Crate 17," and writes: "Here are the thousands of missing words for the photographs."5 This thesis project continues Jennifer Allen's quest of giving a voice to the photographs by looking at and discovering what is present in the ephemera. This process began in October of 2012 and continued through August of 2013 where I spent time surveying the collection as well as researching

3

Jennifer Allen is the editor of bilingual German-English magazine, frieze d/e (Berlin) that focuses on contemporary art and culture in Europe. 4 Jennifer Allen, "Crate 17" Archival Dialogues: Reading the Black Star Collection. (Toronto, ON: Ryerson Image Centre, 2012); 109-116. 5 Ibid., 114.

2

photojournalism, Black Star, and collections management. There were several problems that needed to be solved, the primary one being the accessibility of the collection to researchers and the RIC staff. An unexpected surprise and challenge was presented by the three hundred photographs found in the collection that needed to be removed, re-housed and catalogued. The preservation needs of the collection also had to be understood. To make the collection accessible, I needed to create a finding aid that outlined both its physical content, as well as what that content reflected. This was the key to bringing a voice to the photographs. My objective was to create a finding aid which re-established the original relationship between the photographs and the ephemera, allowing future researchers to understand how Black Star created, used and maintained the collection as a whole. The goal of this thesis project is not only to provide access to this part of the collection, but also to create a resource that will allow researchers to cross reference the ephemera with the photographs. What follows is an outline of both the intellectual and physical research done on and for the collection, including a literature survey of photojournalism, collections management and finding aids, as well as the physical work and several unique discoveries. Finally, concluding remarks are made on what is left to be done on the collection, as well as suggestions for moving forward.

3

2. Literature Review and Research As part of the preparation for this project, I spent time researching the history of photojournalism, current research on photojournalism and collections management, and finding aids in particular. Through reading about the history of photojournalism I gained an understanding of how this branch of photography developed. I also familiarized myself with the history of Black Star to see how its company history fit into the history of photojournalism. The first two sections below discuss some of the works that shaped both the history of photojournalism and my thinking for this project. The third section discusses collection management, and the creation of finding aids in particular. 2.1 History of Photojournalism Photography & Society, (which is a translation of, Photographie et Société) written by French documentary photographer Gisèle Freund, outlines how photojournalism transformed the press during the twentieth century.6 Photojournalist Robert Lebeck and curator Bodo Von Dewitz of Kiosk: Ein Geschicte Der Fotoreportage, 1839-1973 (A History of Photojournalism)7, examines Lebeck's photojournalism collection of Germany's illustrated press from 1842 through the 1980s. By examining the photographic layout of picture magazines, Kiosk plays the role of the photo editor by comparing layouts and technical changes in the process of creating a photo essay. 8 Things as They Are: Photojournalism in Context Since 1955, by photojournalist historian Mary Panzer, outlines the major photojournalist essays and layouts that shaped photojournalism from 1955 to 2005. Panzer and Lebeck address the same idea of placing the photograph back into the original context of its published photo essay. Panzer discusses the concept of multiple authors to the final published photo essay, including everyone from the photographer to the picture editor.

Gisèle Freund, Photography & Society, (Boston, Massachusetts: David R. Godine, Publisher, Inc., 1980). This is a bilingual publication in German and English. 8 Robert Lebeck, Kiosk: Ein Geschichte Der Fotoreportage 1839-1973, ed. Bodo Von Dewitz, (Germany: Steidl, 2001), 10.
7

6

4

Historian Hendrik Neubauer's Black Star: 60 Years of Photojournalism, provides a comprehensive history of the Black Star Picture Agency from its creation in 1935 to the time of his publication in 1997. Neubauer reveals the relationship between Germany and America through the influence of photojournalism, picture layouts, and magazines. Neubauer's book provides a structure for viewing the inner workings of a particular picture agency. In 2013, Lumiere Press9 released a limited edition book commissioned by the RIC, entitled Black Star. This book traces the administrative history of Black Star, but also provides a personal look into the lives of the founders Kurt Safranski, Ernest Mayer, and Kurt Kornfeld.10 The history of photojournalism is what that is still being written and thus what is included in it is growing to give a fuller view of what is comprised as photojournalism. It is no longer the tracing of the history of the photo essay, but the idea of how the photo essay was consumed, its readership, and giving a voice to the other authors of a picture story, who are not the photographer. This expanding history of photojournalism is what allows us to look at the entire agency as opposed to just crediting the photographer. 2.2 Research about Photojournalism "Finding Wolff: Intellectually Arranging The Werner Wolff Fonds at the Ryerson Image Centre" was Sara Manco's 2012 master's thesis, which focused on the arrangement of a press photographer's archive at the RIC. This was one of the first finding aids created for the RIC, and it laid the groundwork for my own understanding of what a finding aid is and how it functions in a collection like the RIC. Manco constructed a finding aid by studying Werner Wolff (1911-2002), the history of photojournalism, and his connection with Black Star. Since the archive arrived in disarray, Manco arranged the photographs to

9

Lumiere Press creates limited edition handmade books on photography. The press is run and operated by Michael Torosian. 10 Michael Torosian, Black Star. (Toronto: Lumiere Press, 2013).

5

correspond with Wolff's work in the archive.11 Through Manco's careful and methodical work, I was able to use her thesis and finding aid as a guide and as a way to anticipate problems or even oversights in my own project. Photography historian Estelle Blaschke writes in her article "From the Picture Archive to the Image Bank. Commercializing the Visual through Photography: The Bettmann Archive and Corbis," published in Etudes Photographiques in 2009, about the importance of the text-based card index to the Bettmann Archive and Corbis archives she was examining. This idea was the missing element I needed to understand how to recreate the link between the Black Star press photographs and the material in the ephemera collection.12 Another important reference relating to this issue was Mary Panzer's "The Meaning of the Twentieth-Century Press Archive." Panzer uses the Magnum archive (located at the Harry Ransom Center) to show the importance of the paperwork created by photo agencies that support the photographs, and how these documents tell the history of the photograph as object.13 These two seemingly different entities ­ document and photograph ­ actually work in tandem to give a broader context for both the object's individual history and that of the archive as whole. Without these paper documents, the context for some of these images would be lost, and our understanding of how a picture agency archive functioned would be incomplete.14 The research on photojournalism paints a broader view of its history that is no longer limited to the photographer, the content of his images, or the press. The understanding of the role of editor, archive, and the trajectory of a photograph as an object are starting to reshape the way we think about the history of photojournalism.

11

Sara Manco, "Finding Wolf: Intelligently Arranging the Werner Wolff Fonds at The Ryerson Image Centre," (MA Thesis: Ryerson University, 2012), 8, 12, 14. 12 Estelle Blaschke, "From the Picture Archive to the Image Bank. Commercializing the Visual through Photography: The Bettmann Archive and Corbis," Etudes Photographiques 24 (November 2009): 174. 13 Mary Panzer, "The Meaning of the Twentieth-Century Press Archive," Aperture 202 (Spring 2011): 49. 14 Ibid., 50.

6

In Matthew Rushworth's, 2012 master's thesis, "Issues in Object-level Description of Press Phototgraphy Collections: Towards a Metadata Standard for Photojournalism," (presented to Ryerson University) examines how researchers have been using press photographic collections, and then developes a way in which these images could be standardized to talk about. This is important to consider when the history of photojournalism has started to expand its definition from the traditional image maker to the whole process. 2.3 Management of a Collection and Creation of a Finding Aid Developing and Maintaining Practical Archives: A How-To-Do-It Manual by archivist Gregory S. Hunter15 provides simple instructions on the general concepts of managing an archive and the creation of finding aids. Archivists Michael J. Fox and Peter L. Wilkerson's16 Introduction to Archival Organization and Description provides a brief introduction to describing and accessing a collection. Their discussions around finding aids are more in-depth as they identify terms and problems to consider throughout the process. Photographs: Archival Care and Management by photographic conservator Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler and archivist Diane Vogt-O'Conner17 provides a comprehensive overview of managing and caring for a photographic collection. This text builds on the concepts outlined by Hunter, as they specifically relate to photographic collections. One important difference is that they provide an entire chapter on the preservation needs of photographs versus textual documents. Textual documents are created on acidic paper; photographs need to be kept separate from them to prevent damage and deterioration.

15 16

Gregory S. Hunter is the Professor of Library and Informational Science at Long Island University, New York. Michael J. Fox is the Deputy Director of the Minnesota Historical Society and Peter L. Wilkerson is an archivist at The South Carolina Historical Society, both are long term members of The American Society of Archivists. 17 Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler conservator and Diane Vogt-O'Conner retired former Chief of Conservation for the Library of Congress and both are life time members of The American Society of Archivists.

7

Ritzenthaler and Vogt-O'Conner outline different environment and housing pros and cons along with the different types of deterioration that affect photographs.18 Rules for Archival Description (RAD) was prepared in 1990 by the Committee on Descriptive Standards, in the Bureau of Canadian Archivists, which consisted of over fifty archivists from various media backgrounds. This book provides the technical guide for the standardization of descriptions of archival material not only for cataloguing, but also for the creation of finding aids. RAD is followed by Canadian institutions, including the RIC, as a way to provide consistency in archival practices among collecting institutions. Jeff O'Brien's Basic RAD: An Introduction to the preparation of fonds- and serieslevel descriptions using the Rules for Archival Description presents the same information but in a more accessible form to neophytes of the RAD system.19 Associate Professor of the Faculty of Information at the University of Toronto, Heather MacNeil, argues in both her articles, "Picking Our Text: Archival Description, Authenticity, and the Archivist as Editor," and "Archivalterity: Rethinking Original Order,"20 that archivists need to be as transparent as possible about their decision process when creating descriptions for finding aids. This is critical to the accuracy of descriptions in the finding aid, by acknowledging all biases one may have that could possibly skew the researcher's perspective. Special collections archivists Michelle Light at the University of California-Irvine, and Tom Hyry at the University of California-Los Angeles, provide two solutions to the problem raised by MacNeil, in their article "Colophons and Annotations: New Directions for the Finding Aid."21 Either adding a colophon to the end of the finding aid or providing annotations throughout,

Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler and Diane Vogt-O'Connor, Photographs: Archival Care and Management. (Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2006):212-217. 19 Jeff O'Brien, Basic RAD: An Introduction to the preparation of fonds- and series-level descriptions using the Rules for Archival Description, (Regina: The Saskatchewan Council of Archives, 1997). 20 Heather MacNeil, "Picking Our Text: Archival Description, Authenticity and the Archivist as Editor," The American Archivist 68, no.2 (2005): 264-278; "Archivalterity: Rethinking Original Order." Archivaria 66 (2008): 1-24. 21 Michelle Light and Tom Hyry, "Colophons and Annotations: New Directions for the Finding Aid," The American Archivist 65 (2002):216-230.

18

8

allows the decision making process and the possible biases of the archivist to be transparent to the researcher before researching the collection. While it is important to have standards for fnding aids that give researchers a consistency when researching, each institution has its own needs in determining what is important to them. These theories are important to have because they set a standard in how to do create useable research tools, but when it comes to practice it is equally important for the researcher to understand the archivist's decision method and why sometimes institutional need outways the ideal standard. The review of the above three topics ­ the history of photojournalism, research on photojournalism, and collections management and the creation of a finding aid ­ provided the groundwork for the development of my finding aid for the Black Star Ephemera Collection at the RIC. This project is designed to describe the contents of a particular collection and to clarify the relationship it has with the Black Star press prints. The combined application of RAD standards, along with an understanding of how the archive operated at Black Star, provided me with the key to relating the ephemera material back to the press prints.

9

3. Overview of Project The painstaking task of going through the eighty legal-sized boxes, oversized box and portfolio took hundreds of hours to complete between January and May 2013. Through consultation with several RIC staff such as Collections Curator Peter Higdon, Arts Programmer and Exhibitions Coordinator Valérie Matteau, and Gallery Registrar Chantal Wilson, I gained an understanding of the movement of the Black Star Collection, its current physical arrangement, and the significance of the Ephemera Collection as a way to provide insight into the Black Star Picture Agency. Through these conversations I learned that the collection was originally housed in 206 file cabinet drawers at Black Star in New York City. When the collection was then sold, the press prints were removed from these cabinets, by the appraisal company, Penelope Dixon and Associates, but they kept the prints in their original order. Since the prints and textual documents were stored in the same envelopes, everything left in the envelopes could have been discarded. Thankfully, this material accompanied the press prints to the RIC in 2005. Since the original order for the collection was unchanged and it corresponded to the Black Star press prints, the decision was made to maintain the same arrangement. I began to familiarize myself with the material in the envelopes during the fall of 2012 in preparation for this project. I then created an Excel spreadsheet based on what I had already seen in the collection and what I expected to find. The Excel spreadsheet has four components to it: the master sheet which details the box information; the drawer sheet which provides the contents of each drawer and how many articles,
Illustration 1: Black Star Ephemera Collection in RIC vault. Documented by Lauren Potter.

10

captions, letters or other objects found; the photograph sheet which provides the descriptive information on the photographs that were found in the ephemera envelopes; and Drawer 207 (given the name simply in continuation of the Black Star organizational pattern) which provides the organization of the box as well as the description of what is in each folder. The photograph sheet provides both a record of the original order of the photographs found in the Ephemera Collection as well as the basis for the cataloguing of the photographs at a later date. Since there was no organizational arrangement to box 207, one had to be constructed. A guideline for that process is found in the sheet. In addition to the other research22, I spent time reading and understanding the Rules for Archival Description (RAD). There is room for institutional nuances; this standard enables institutions in Canada to communicate efficiently with each other and their researchers through a standard method of describing items in a collection. I also examined pre-existing finding aids for both Canadian and American institutions to get a better understanding of the final design, as well as specifics that might be needed for photojournalism. Through examining these finding aids, such as the United Way of Kitchener-Waterloo23 at the University of Waterloo, I was able to understand large archival collections and what a series level description for a large collection could consist of. The same was true of my examination of the finding aids designed by the University of Texas for the Magnum archive24, especially in understanding the language used in describing objects. The purpose of a finding aid is to offer additional context for the material in a particular collection as well as to provide entry points for research. The Rules for Archival Description are designed to move from the most general form of description (the title), to the most specific (an item level entry). Finding aids are traditionally broken up into fonds, series, subseries and item level. In the case of the Ephemera

22 23

Please see section 2. Literature Review and Research for more information.

University of Waterloo Library. "United Way of Kitchener-Waterloo and Area fonds." http://www.lib.uwaterloo.ca/discipline/SpecColl/archives/united.html. 24 The University of Texas at Austin. The Harry Ransom Center. "Magnum Photos, Inc." http://norman.hrc.utexas.edu/fasearch/findingAid.cfm?eadid=00502.

11

Collection, the fonds level is comprised of material from the Black Star archive. The next level is the series description, in which there are four series based on the original order held at the Black Star Picture Agency. They are: Countries and Places, World War II, Personalities, and Subjects. The sub-series that follow are grouped by the drawer in which they were found, and the number of envelopes in each drawer varies. The title of the sub-series begins with the drawer number from the original filing order of the agency and then moves into a description of what is in the drawer. The description is based on a spreadsheet that was created by Peneople Dixon and Associates during the aprisal process of the Black Star collection, which provides subject headings for the all the prints. By combinig these two names it creates a bridge between the ephemera and photographic collections. This allows researchers to look at a glance at what is in the drawer, but also how the overall archive was arranged by Black Star. Within each drawer there are envelopes measuring 8" X 10" and each has been given an accession number. Each envelope has a minimum of two words written on it, which then become the basis for the descriptions of the contents of the series level descriptions. These envelope descriptions were also used to draw the divide between each section.

Top left: Illustration 2: A look inside drawer 44. Top right: Illustration 3: Example of envelope. BSE.2005.075:032 Above right: Illustration 4: Example of the labeling system at Black Star. (Sometimes these drawings will be found on the folders.) BSE.2005.197:003 Documented by Lauren Potter.

12

Due to time and the amount of envelopes within the eighty boxes, an item level description was not possible or practical at the time of this thesis. From about mid-January to the end of May, I spent an average of fifteen hours a week in the RIC going through the ephemera boxes. I went through each individual folder to see what it contained, and then recorded that information in the Excel spreadsheet. This soon led to questions about how some items should be labeled. For example, an article could be a magazine tear, or a typewritten page, or a short paragraph that was accompanied by the author. In most cases, the upper right or left corner of the items had a handwritten note saying, "Please, return this article to Black Star." Therefore if the agency considered it an article, I did the same. Captions were also hard to define at times. They were either a sliver of paper with a few written sentences, or had the word `caption' typed out on the sheet of paper. A magazine tear differs from a magazine clipping in that all of the creation information such as dates, publication, or author could not be found. The same was true for newspaper clippings. 3.1 Photographic Finds When I started this project it was mentioned to me that there were some photographs left in the Ephemera Collection and I should remove them from their envelopes and re-house them in polyester sleeves. By the end of my survey I had discovered three hundred new images. These photographs are mostly black and white gelatin silver prints, but there are also early ink jet prints, drawings, snapshots, postcards, copy negatives, contact sheets, and photographs that have been mounted to boards. How and why did these photographic objects end up in the Ephemera Collection? There are two answers.
Illustration 5: Found photographs in drawer 47 Documented by Lauren Potter.

13

Firstly, these photographs represent the original filing order at Black Star, meaning that all materials associated to a particular subject topic were stored together in the same envelope for easy access. For example if you wanted information on Yougoslavia outdoor markets, you would look in Drawer 26 find the envelope with those subject headings and inside would be an articles, captions, photographers, or other material relating to that topic. In otherwords, the photographs are meant to be there. This was confirmed when I spoke with Edward Yee25, one of the associates from Penelope Dixon and Associates, who helped to pack up the Black Star archive when moving it from New York to Canada. The ephemera could have been lost during the move, but instead was packed by the team with the rest of the collection.

Top left: Illustration 6: Silver gelatin print of actress, Marisa Solinas, by photographer, Francis C. Fuerst, date unknown. Top right: Illustration 7: Silver gelatin copy print of Steve McQueen, photographer and date unknown. Bottom left: Illustration 8: Drawing of a German tank, creator and date unknown. Documented by Lauren Potter.

25

Edward Yee, interviewed by, Lauren Potter, April 18, 2013.

14

The second possibility as to why these photographs are in the Ephemera Collection is that they were simply missed when the archive was packed up from the Black Star offices. The staff who packed up the archive worked non-stop, so human error was possible. The photographs themselves are still part of the archive and thus will be catalogued, scanned, and reintegrated into the rest of the print collection at a later date. The appendix at the end of the finding aid provides a record of the original order of the photographs. 3.2 Creating the Finding Aid and Appendix After learning about the components of a finding aid, the next step was to write it. Using Microsoft Word, a simplistic finding aid was constructed using all of the elements put out by RAD. In the future, this information will be added to the RIC database, but due to the size of this project, this would likely not be possible for some time. Finding aids are designed to be read starting from the most general level (the fonds), down to the specific (the sub-series level). Several elements that are included in the fonds level description are usually included in the series level, such as title, extent (the physical volume of the collection), administrative history, custodial history, scope and content, and linkage elements. While this is normally the case, it is permitted to exclude these sections when information is repetitive and no new information is added. The only sections in the series level descriptions for this finding aid are title, extent, dates, scope and content, where the name of the title came from, and when possible, a linkage element. This is further broken down in the sub-series of the collection based on the original order of the Black Star Picture Agency. The descriptions found there are specific to each drawer as it relates to the overall series and the collection. The finding aid for the Ephemera Collection opens with an introduction to what a finding aid is and its components. The title is followed by the dates of the collection, from the time the agency was first created in 1935 to the most recent item, created in the 1990s. The extent, or the physical size of the collection, is provided in meters. Next comes an administrative history of the agency, which gives a brief

15

overview of Black Star, and is followed by a custodial history of the collection, which outlines the collections journey to the RIC. The scope and content section provides a glance at what the collection is comprised of in terms of physical objects and subject matter. An explanation for the title of the collection is stated, followed by a physical description condition of the material, and a sentence on the arrangement of the collection. Restrictions and copyright issues are explained in relation to the collection. Finally, the last two sections provide any associated material for the Black Star collection and related records for additional research possibilities. From the beginning of this project, I maintained a simple practice to keep myself organized. After going through two or three boxes for the day, I would go home and take the information relating to those drawers and write out the sub-series level descriptions. I was then able to go back and construct the larger series level description for each of the four sections. In this way, other sections of the finding aid were slowly composed. The last aspect of this project was the completion of the photographic appendix of the three hundred photographs in the collection, found at the end of the finding aid. This involved going through each of the three hundred photographic images, negatives, or other illustrations and detailing the stamps found on the verso, maker (if one was found), the material, and giving a basic description of the subject. My thesis schedule did not allow time for scanning and cataloguing these images, so this work still needs to be completed along with the final placement of the images in the collection. This appendix can also be found in the RIC in the form of an Excel spreadsheet. The final step in the process was going through and establishing an intelligent order for the miscellaneous oversized ephemera box which was first re-housed in a legal size box. I simply continued the drawer numbering system and created Drawer 207 for the items that were found there. The arrangement of this box is numerical and based on any notes left by the appraisers about whether this material was found in a specific drawer. Whether these items will be eventually reintegrated into their

16

proper drawer, is a future decision for the RIC staff. The rest of the items are then grouped by the type of item, such as articles, published articles, captions, model release forms, magazines, etc.

Top left: Illustration 9: outside of miscellaneous ephemera box Top right: Illustration 10: Inside look at miscellaneous ephemera box. Bottom left: Illustration 11: Arrangement of ephemera items. Documented by Lauren Potter.

A breakthrough moment occurred toward the end of the writing process when I had to come up with subject titles for each drawer, so that a researcher could more easily find specific subjects. Essentially, a link needed to be established between the Ephemera Collection and the Black Star press prints. This link came when I was provided with a spreadsheet that had been created by Penelope Dixon and Associates when they were appraising the collection. The spreadsheet simply listed the subject heading and sub-subject headings of the envelope, along with a description of the photograph and photographer. This was a fantastic asset because I was then able to verify that the order of the ephemera had not changed, and this saved me time in the naming of the drawers. This spreadsheet

17

provided a link between the finding aid and the press prints. One of the more startling realizations was seeing how many envelopes had been discarded during the move, especially in the personalities section. However, to establish this link between the photographs and ephemera it forced me to adjust the standards of a RAD finding aid and to customize it to the needs of both the collection and the institution. During the course of this project I created two finding aids, one which is RAD compliant (Appendix III) and takes the form of a box list; and the other which was eventually utilized in this project. Through consulation with RIC staff and my thesis supervisors it was determined that this specific format would serve the needs of staff, researchers, and the collections. At the end of this project, I realized that in the course of preserving an archive, like the Black Star Ephemera Collection, they are altered from their original purpose in order to be preserved for the future.

18

4. Conclusion In her essay, Jennifer Allen writes, "Here are the thousands of missing words for the photographs."26 I quickly began to share this sentiment with Allen as I went through the collection. To understand what happened to these two collections, and to link them together, soon became the goals of this thesis project. Over the one year period completing this work I realized how each collection informs the other, and together they provide an essential resource for future researchers. My wish is that this finding aid will be that bridge for the RIC, between the context and the visual representation of the entire Black Star Collection. I hope that these two collections will no longer be seen as separate, but as a unified collection composed of two parts. However, this project is only scraping the surface. No doubt the true depth of the collection will be realized as staff and researchers begin to dive into the core of Black Star, by relating the photographs to the textual material which makes up the ephemera. Mysteries of who took this image will be solved, but I am sure other questions will arise. No matter how carefully we document events, items and details are always lost in transition. We may never have a complete picture of Black Star, but we can try to get as close to it as possible. There are several steps that must be completed on this project, which I was unable to complete due to time constraints. The first is the scanning and cataloguing of the three hundred photographs found in the collection. These photographs will then need to be labeled and reintegrated into the print collection. At the time of writing this thesis, the question is: Should these photographs be kept with the Black Star press prints, or remain with the ephemera? Arguments can be made for either side, but preservation practices dictate that the unstable material make up of the ephemera should be separated from the photographs to preven substances like newsprint (which is highly acidic) from daming the prints. The other more complex reason is that the photographic objects have a unique history in the context of this

26

Allen, "Crate 17," 114.

19

collection and are objects related to the history of photojournalism as well as this specific archive. For these reasons, they should be reintegrated and treated like the rest of the press print collection. The RIC is an image based institution; this is the method of direction that is most likely going to take place. The next question then becomes: Do all images (postcards, drawings, and illustrations) also get interrogated with the press prints? My answer would be no, because they are photo-mechanical reproductions instead of original photographic prints, with the exception of the postcards created with photographic postcard paper. Catalogue entries will have to be done for the boxes and the written information will need to be entered into the electronic database. Along with this a file level description of the collection would need to be completed. The last step in the process is to have a digital record of the finding aid placed online for researchers to access the collection electronically. Along with creating access to the collection, its physical condition will need to be evaluated. While the majority of the collection is currently stable and can be handled carefully, there are a few items that will need to be addressed based on their fragile nature, before they can be handled by researchers. These items are mostly magazine tears and newspaper articles where the paper has become extremely brittle. In addition, there are many articles and captions that have creases and folds in the paper; when handling this material, researchers must be careful not to damage them further. In these cases, the ink on the paper has faded, or parts of the articles are missing, making them difficult to read. Electronic preservation copies may be required to ensure this information is available in the future. Another point to consider when addressing the Black Star Ephemera Collection is its name. As I have studied its contents and discussed with RIC staff, I have come to the conclusion that the documents in the collection are not really ephemera. However, this material is the backbone of the archive which gives a voice and understanding to the photographs and the agency. I would propose a name change of the collection to "The Black Star Agency at Work", for this is what is reflected in the collection: the work

20

of the agency, the writing and submitting of stories, articles, and captions, correspondence between photographers, the agency and third parties, and business documents. All these documents are not only the records of the Black Star Agency but also provide a context for the photographs. This archive was a functioning part of the agency for decades and they saved the material because it served a purpose for further research. It was also the historical records of an agency which played an important role in twentieth century photojournalism. Even though these steps need to take place, the collection as it stands is ready to be used by RIC staff and researchers alike. The collection clearly has many secrets to reveal and much knowledge to impart to those who are willing to come, read, and understand what the "thousands of words"27 have to say about the photographs once taken by those photographers that were proud to be a part of Black Star.

27

Allen, "Crate 17," 114.

21

Appendix I: Black Star Ephemera Finding Aid The purpose of this finding aid is to offer context for the Black Star Ephemera Collection as well as to provide links between the Collection and Black Star Press Prints. This finding aid is comprised of the following section:, title, dates, extent, administrative history, custodial history, scope and content, source of supplied title, physical description note, arrangement note, restrictions, copyright, associated materials and related records.

Title:

Black Star Ephemera Collection

Dates: 1935-[ca. 1990s] Extent/Physical Description: 81 legal sized boxes and one artist's portfolio [38.7 cm x 31.5 cm x 2.3 cm]. Administrative History: Black Star Publishing Company was founded in New York City in 1935 by three German Jewish immigrants fleeing Hitler's regime ­ Kurt Safranski, Ernest Mayer, and Kurt Kornfeld. Kurt Safranski had been an editor at Ullstein in Berlin, Kurt Kornfeld had worked as a literary agent, and Ernest Mayer had founded Mauritius, a photographic agency in Berlin in 1929 but was forced to sell it when the Nazi Party (The National Socialist German Workers Party) took control of Germany. It was with Kornfeld's two suitcases of prints stolen from his own photographic agency that provided the foundation for the start up of Black Star.28 After arriving in New York City the three founders rented out office space in the Graybar Building in Grand Central Station. A stroke of luck occurred when the newly formed LIFE magazine, pet-project of newspaper tycoon Henry Luce29, set up across the way. Luce was very interested in bringing the style and approach of European photojournalism to Americans in the form of a picture magazine.30 Soon a relationship of mutual benefit was struck by Luce's magazines and Black Star. LIFE reproduced more than three thousand photographs credited to Black Star in the first five years of operation.31 While, Time would pay extra to secure first rights or refusal of newly created photographs.32 With the onset of World War II, many Europeans were immigrating to North America and Black Star quickly became a haven for those photographers who soon found themselves far from home and unemployed. Black Star's working environment, the creative freedom it gave to photographers as well
28 29

Peter Higdon, introduction to Black Star, by Michael Torosian (Toronto, Lumiere Press, 2013), 11-14. Henry Luce was a prominent newspaper man and philanthropist who financed the start of several magazines that changed the face of journalism in the twentieth century, such as Time, Fortune, and Sports Illustrated. 30 This was the idea of the photo essay where editors would selectively arrange photographs together for a layout to visual represent an idea and allows the text to support the photographs. 31 Michael Torosian, Black Star (Toronto: Lumiere Press, 2013), 41. 32 Hendrik Neubauer, Black Star: 60 Years of Photojournalism (Koln: Könemann, 1997), 15.

22

as a professional commitment to supporting and nurturing freelancers, all contributed to Black Star flourishing as a photo agency. 33 After LIFE, they developed other partnerships with magazines such as the Picture Post, Look, Fortune, Saturday Evening Post, as well as countless other newspapers from the New York Times to the St. Louis Post-Dispatch. While the Black Star picture archive soon started to provide a visual history of the past it was also constantly creating new images through commissions and requests from their partners and clients. Since this archive was a living entity everything (photographs, captions, articles, research, etc.) related to a particular topic was kept in everyday manila envelopes stored in office file cabinets. These envelopes were labeled and then organized by country or place (alphabetically by continent then country), World War II, Personalities (alphabetically by last name), or Subject. This picture library soon became a cultural treasure holding images of a global history from the twentieth century, along with articles, captions, and letters which helped support and reveal the story behind the photographs. In 1957 Black Star relocated to 305 East Forty-Seventh Street after having spent a total of twenty-two years in the Graybar Building. Black Star moved again in April of 1962 to 450 park Avenue South and two years later the sold the company to cousins, Howard and Ben Chapnick and Phil Rosen (all three had worked for Black Star during its early days, and had help grow the company to what it was). Howard Chapnick became president of Black Star on January 1, 1964. After having started with a staff of eight in 1935 the company quickly had grown to forty employees and in 1988 Black Star moved again to 116 East Twenty-Seventh Street in New York taking over the 4th and 5th floors of the building. The following year Howard Chapnick retired and Ben Chapnick took over as president.34 Today Black Star is located in White Plains, New York, and while they have downsized significantly they still manage rights and reproductions for photographers around the globe including many of those in the Black Star Archive now housed at the Ryerson Image Centre at Ryerson University in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Custodial History: The Black Star Collection donated to Ryerson University35 in 2005 is comprised of the contents of 206 file cabinet drawers that originally held the Black Star Picture Library in the company's New York
33 34

Neubauer, Black Star: 60 Years of Photojournalism, 16- 17. Torosian, Black Star, 48, 52, and 60. 35 The RIC did not exist in 2005. The original donation was made to the Mira Godard Study Centre in the School of Image Arts, the only on-campus collection which maintained its status with the Canadian Cultural Property & Export Review Board (a government agency that issues tax receipts for donations.) After the donation there was a move to create, The Ryerson Art Gallery. This was eventually renamed The Ryerson Image Centre which opened in 2012.

23

office. This collection has been divided into two collections the first being the Black Star Collection of approximately 292,000 press prints and the second being the Black Star Ephemera Collection. Black Star sold both collections to an anonymous party. After purchasing the collection the buyer hired appraiser Penelope Dixon and Associates to do an evaluation of Black Star and in the process, re-house the photographs and create a basic catalogue of the archive. They were meticulous in the work and maintained the original order of the prints. They not only numbered and labeled each individual photograph but also created an electronic spreadsheet of the entire collection. This Excel document, which was used in the creation of this finding aid, included information about the photographer, date, subject headings and the print's location in the Black Star filing system. Although it was not given the same attention as the photographic collection, they were able to save most of what remained of the ephemera collection- the supporting textual documents, reproductions, caption sheets, etc. which were originally stored with the photographs. While this collection was not catalogued, Penelope Dixon and Associates were able to keep this material in its original order using the manila envelopes that initially held both photographs and ephemera. This collection was donated to Ryerson University in January of 2005 along, with the photographic collection but, for the most part, remained untouched until 2012 when work began on this finding aid. Before the official donation took place the collections were first stored in a warehouse located in Montreal, Quebec. The collections were transported in two trucks on February 8, 2005 in seventeen shipping crates to Pacart's warehouse in Toronto, Ontario which provided the offsite storage and preservation facility for almost eight years while the RIC was being planned and built. With the completion of the Ryerson Image Centre and specifically the Research Centre during May of 2012, the collection moved for its last time into the newly constructed vault. The collection was repacked into the shipping crates which held six skids of approximately 2000 boxes of photographs that had been previously packed by Penelope Dixon and Associates in New York. The ephemera was also packed at this time in crate seventeen but unlike the other crates holding photographs, it was not opened until it arrived at RIC in 2012. The boxes were consolidated down to the 80 legal sized archival boxes by RIC staff by discarding all empty ephemera envelopes.36 In 2012-13, the content of this collection was surveyed for the first time for the creation of this finding aid. There was also one oversized box that was re-housed in a legal sized box during this time as well as one artist's portfolio that remains part of this collection.
36

This was approved by RIC acquisitions committee as a plausible methodology and workflow for processing the collection, because all information, such as captions, was transcribed into the database to preserve the information, that keeping a non-archival folder with nothing in it was unnecessary.

24

Scope and Content: The Black Star Ephemera Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre contains documents created during the operation of the Black Star Picture Agency from the 1930s-1990s. The collection is divided into four series based on the original arrangement by the agency found in the filing cabinet drawers. These series are: 1. Countries and Places (drawers 1-63 or boxes 1-32); 2. World War II (drawers 64-72 or boxes 32-39); 3. Personalities (drawers 73-141 or boxes 40-71); and 4. Subject (drawers 142-206 or boxes 72-81 and portfolio) with corresponding sub-series following each series description. The collection includes, articles, captions, magazine tears (most commonly, Illustrated, Stern, and The Picture Post), photocopies, letters, filling slips, newspapers, and model release forms; found in three primary languages of English, French, and German with Spanish, Polish, Hebrew, and Chinese periodically present. These documents represent and/or are related to the major news stories of the time as well as the day to day administrative functions of the agency. Other organizations that would have shared a biline with Black Star include: ABC Press, Middle East Feature Service, Pan-Asia Newspaper Alliance, Sipa Press, and St. Louis Post-Dispatch. This is seen through the articles and captions that have either been typed on official letter head or written at the top of the page. Unexpectedly, 300 photographs, negatives, and illustrations were discovered interspersed in the ephemera folders of the collection, but have since been removed and integrated into the Black Star Press Print Collection. These photographs were simply missed when Penelope Dixon and Associates were removing the photographs for appraisal, and an appendix of these photographs can be found at the end of this finding aid. Some of the more rare finds in the collection include a book manuscript on the St. Louis Arch; telegrams; invoices in German; letters to Howard Chaphnick; and press kits; and some of the more popular names that can be found include, Glen Gould, John F. Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, Martine Luther King, Jr., and various royal families. The following are illustrated examples of some of the most common examples of items to be found in the collection:

25

Articles: The articles found in the Black Star Ephemera Collection can come in many different forms and languages. Here are some visual examples.

Top Right: Article form Illustrated Magazine, September 26, 1953 on millionaire Paul Dawson. (BSE.2005.086:061) Top Center: Carbon copy of article on Grimaldi's work written by an anonymous ABC Press writer. (BSE.2005.113:021) Top Right: Sipa Press article titled, "Renato Curcio Portrait of an Italian Rebel." (BSE.2005.086:007) Bottom Left: Article, "Warten auf den nächsten Krieg" by Bericht von Heinrich with photographs by Shabtai Tal, published in issue 42 of Stern in 1974. (BSE.2005.035:010)

Captions: The captions found in the Black Star Ephemera Collection normally are found in either French or English with a few instances of some in German. The captions found are commonly in these two formats shown below (and if they are with the blue type, they are almost always in French).

Top: French caption about Paul Anka. (BSE.2005.075:006) Bottom: Lose caption. (BSE.2005.075:041)

26

Letter: Example of one of the many types of letters found in the collection.

Filing Copy: The filing copy is usual stapled to the outside of the folder and lists the history of the items found inside.

Top Left: Letter addressed to Benjamin J. Chapnick from Eduardo Comesana on December 10, 1981 about 24 prints taken at the First Division of the Argentine Army Headquarters. (BSE.2005.075.017) Top Right: Example of a filing slip. (BSE.2005.086.002)

Source of supplied title: Collection is based on the name of the drawer it was found in to keep to the original order of the Black Star Picture agency and its contents. Physical description note: These documents were once part of a working picture library, so there is expected wear on the documents themselves, most typically, items have folds or creases in them. All of the materials in the collection are created with or printed on non-archival papers and some are showing signs of deterioration caused by acids present. There are a few newspaper articles that have become very brittle, as well as other tears in articles and captions from use over time. Some of the captions have acidic tape or adhesive still attached to them. The envelopes that the documents are stored in are torn, but for the most part the entire collection is in good condition. The collection is currently housed in archival boxes and stored in the RIC's vault and constant and monitored temperatures of 16°C (60.8° F) [±2° or ±3.5° F] and 40% relative humidity (RH) ±5%. Arrangement Note: There were 206 file cabinet drawers at Black Star Picture Agency and those drawers and the contents within them have been kept in the original order.

27

Restrictions: The collection is available for viewing in person by appointment. As of 2013 the collection has not been digitized. To view the collection, please contact the Ryerson Image Center at: Ryerson Image Centre 33 Gould Street Toronto, Ontario, M5B 1X8 416-975-5000, ext. 7032 ric@ryerson.ca

Copyright: The textual material associated with the Ephemera Collection maybe reproduced under the Fair Dealing clause of the Canadian Copyright Act. The following statement must accompany all textual reproductions: "© The Black Star Picture Agency, Courtesy of the Ryerson Image Centre."

Finding Aid: Box lists available at the Ryerson Image Centre. Associated material: Thesis Manco, Sara. "Finding Wolff: Intellectually Arranging the Werner Wolff Fonds at the Ryerson Image Centre." (MA Thesis: Ryerson University, 2012). (Soon to be available online at the Ryerson University Library) Smith, C. Zoe. "The History of Black Star Picture Agency: "Life's" European Connection." Presented to the Visual Communication Division at the annual convention of the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication, Gainesville, FL, August 7, 1984. Books Allen, Jennifer, "Crate 17," Archival Dialogues: Reading the Black Star Collection. Edited by Peggy Gale. Ryerson Image Centre: Toronto, Ontario, 2012. 109-117. Which accompanied the exhibition of the same name at the RIC from September 29-December 22, 2012. Contact the RIC for more information about the exhibition. (Exhibition Catalogue available at the RIC) Neubauer, Hendrik. Black Star: 60 Years of Photojournalism. Köln: Könemann, 1997. (Available at the RIC and Ryerson University Library) Torosian, Michael. Black Star. Toronto, Ontario: Lumiere Press, 2013. (Available at the RIC) Other Penelope Dixon and Associates Black Star Inventory Spreadsheet (Available at the RIC) Related records: The Black Star Collection of press prints held at the Ryerson Image Centre. The Werner Wolff fonds held at the Ryerson Image Centre. 28

29
Figure 1: Black Star Ephemera Finding Aid Chart

Series 1: Records of Countries and Places created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Dates: 1935-[ca.1990] Extent: 3.62 meters of textual records. ­1,225 articles. ­ 323 filing copies. ­ 578 captions and 92 caption lists. ­25 letters. Scope and Content: Series consists of information concerning countries and places created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency. Records consist of articles, filing copies, captions, caption lists, letters, and programs, photocopies of photographs, book, magazines, newspapers, notes, press releases, and magazine and newspaper clippings. The records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The originals of the photocopied photographs in the series can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Notes: Includes records in French and German 1.1 Sub-series: [Drawer 1: Grenada, Havana, Cuba, Caribbean Misc, Bahamas, Curacao, Bahama [sic], West Indies, Barbados, Bermuda, and British West Indies] Date: 1936-1980 Extent: 0.6 cm of textual records. ­ 3 articles. ­ 2 captions. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles and captions. Primary subjects of the documents: Cuba with sub-subjects on industry and tobacco. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.2 Sub-series: [Drawer 2: Dutch West Indies, Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo, West Indies, Guadaloupe [sic], Caribean [sic}, Haiti, Jamaica, Martinique, Puerto Rico, San Juan, St. Barts, St. Kitts, Virgin Island, St. Thomas, Trinidad, Grenada, Albania, France, and Austria] Date: 1949­[ca.1990] Extent: 3.81 cm of textual records. ­7 articles. ­ 1 caption. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, filing copies, and newspaper clippings attached to white paper. Primary subjects of the documents: Austria with sub-subjects of industry, pork, fairs, festivals, Salzburg, castle (interior), and celebrations. Another primary subject is France with the sub-subjects of Andorra, Albania, building, handicraft, Puerto Rico, pollution, West Indies, Jamaica, Haiti, and John Lupinot [sic]. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. Linkage: Werner Wolff fonds 1.3 Sub-Series: [Drawer 3: Austria, Vienna, Salsburg [sic], Tyrol, Belgium, Holidays, Brussels, Vienna Austria, Bulgaria, Cyprus, and Med Island] 30

Date: 1951-1975 Extent: 8.26 cm of textual record. ­29 articles. ­ 21 filing copies. ­14 captions. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, filing copies, and an Austrian program. Primary subject of the documents: Cyprus with the sub-subjects of crisis, Belgian, Fascists (1975), Belgium, markets, bird, religion, nuns, stores, welfare, Brussels, American 4th, festivals, carnivals, ford, education, religions festivals, industry, holidays, and xmas [sic]. Another primary subject is Austria with sub-subjects of sports, horse racing, spas, restaurants (interiors), festivals dance, theatres, Carynthians [sic], and refugees. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.4 Sub-series: [Drawer 4: Czechoslovakia, Czech, Denmark, Copenhagen, Odenie [sic], and Faros Island] Date: 1936-1968 Extent: 5 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 8 captions. ­ 2 delivery notes. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, and delivery notes. Primary subject of the documents: Czechoslovakia with sub-subjects on crisis 1968, festivals (dance), homes, aprons, industry, agriculture (animals), industry, construction, theatre, Brats Iara, statues (Stalin), police, people, children, youth movement, religion, Jewish, movies, industry steel, libraries, and music. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.5 Sub-series: [Drawer 5: England, London Buildings, London Churches, London, Education, England Farnborough Avition [sic], and London Hotels] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 4.44 cm of textual records. ­14 articles. ­6 captions. ­2 letters. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, letter, and pamphlets. Primary subject of the documents: England with sub-subjects of Rarnborough [sic] Aviation airshow [sic], customs (town criers) churches, education, Sandhurst-Royal Naval, demonstrations, London, demonstrations Powtured [sic], demonstrate race-civil, employment, history, coronations, industry oil, North Sea, Cheltenham Ladies College, finance, cemeteries, Spanish Flamenco dancers in London, markets, museums Wellington, parades, oil boom, slums, and people. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.6 Sub-series: [Drawer 6: England, England Birmingham, 1979, Birmingham (U.K.), Germans in England, London, Europe, London Street, Wales, Finland, and Helsinki] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 2 cm of textual records. ­ 6 articles. ­ 6 captions. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, and captions. Primary subject of the documents: England with sub-subjects of people, young people, history, crowns, strike (union), welfare, unemployment, Coventry, London, Parks (Hyde), fog and smog, Wales, and

31

Stonehenge. Primary subject of the documents: Finland with the sub-subjects of industry, agriculture, women, and religion. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.7 Sub-series: [Drawer 7: France, Paris, and French] Date: 1950-1982 Extent: 4.45 cm of textual records. ­12 articles. ­10 captions. ­ 1 magazine. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles and captions. Primary subject of the documents: France with the sub-subjects of army, foreign legion, Fontaine Blue, demonstrations, existentialists, festivals, industry, auto safety, industry fishing, navy, submarines, French, parades and tanks, people gypsies, people men, The Vietnamese of Versailles Gardens, religionchurch, "Nortre [sic] Dame Du Haut" religion Easter, religion monks, Paris, river, Le Seine, transportation and boat and hydrofoil. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.8 Sub-series: [Drawer 8: Germany, West Germany, E. Germany, W. Germany, GermanyBitburg, Bonn Germany, Berlin Revolution, Ecology, East Germany, and Germany Wattenscheid [sic]] Date: 1946-1980 Extent: 6 cm of textual records. ­ 20 articles. ­1 caption. ­7 filing copies. ­1 letter. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, caption, filing copies, deliver notices from Stern, and a letter. Primary subject of the documents: Germany with the sub-subjects of education, DDR, schools of Civil Defense for youths, Archiaelogical [sic] in Germany, art, paintings, castles, Herrechiemsee [sic], Sans Souci, communist, W. Germany, demonstrations, police fight demonstration, blockade of U.S. Army installation, Berlin University, elections 1980, government, festivals, carvnivals [sic] (fasching [sic]), religion festivals, St. Anton Day, festivals dance, festivals Octoberfest [sic], Wild Goose Carnival, ford, Berlin, Reichsbank [sic], holidays, xmas [sic](Santa Claus), and hospitals. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.9 Sub-series: [Drawer 9: W. Germany, Germany, West Germany, and East Germany] Date: 1963-1973 Extent: 2.5 cm of textual records. ­5 articles. ­2 captions. ­2 filing copies. ­1 letter. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, filing copies, a letter, and newspaper clippings in addition to the backing of a photograph. Primary subject of the documents: Germany with the sub-subjects of industry auto, wolks [sic] wagon, stock holder meeting (exterior), industry steel (interior) (exterior), industry butter, industry dams, industry Ruhr, coal mining, Ruhr May 1973, I.G. Farben [sic], and industry uranium. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection.

32

1.10 Sub-series: [Drawer 10: Germany, Berlin, W. Germany, East Berlin, East Germany, W. Berlin, Essen West Germany, WWII Germany, Germany East, and West Germany] Date: 1948-1980 Extent: 3.4 cm of textual records. ­17 articles. ­ 1 caption. ­3 invoices in German. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, and invoices written in German. Primary subject of the documents: Germany with the sub-subjects of family life (indoors), East Berlin, new sex trends, 1973, night life (interior), Indians (smuggled) [on their way to England], Berlin, monument (Tomb Unknown Soldier), monuments Victory Column, Germany (East), peoples, army (men), people ­rockers, West Berlin, 1980, Henning Christoph [sic], Turkish people in Germany, circumcision festival, Turkish wedding, parents and children, social life, W. Germany, playground (modern with children), East Germany political prisoners, prisons, Heidelberg University and Karzer [sic] Prison ca. 1948, and theatre. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.11 Sub-series: [Drawer 11: Germany, Berlin, East Germany, West Berlin, and East Berlin] Date: 1953-1977 Extent: 4.0 cm of textual records. ­23 articles. ­4 filing copies. ­2 captions. ­1 caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions, and a caption list. Primary subject of the documents: Berlin with the sub-subjects of crisis, showing people, Berlin Air lift WWII, demonstration, riots and revolution June 1953, religion monks, sport motorcycle, sprit, winter, vacation, scenes, Berlin crisis, the wall, Flip Schulke, religion, nuns, transportation, monorail, transportation subway, Great vast frontier, statues, transportation (autobahn [sic]), men, churches, restaurants (interior), sports, and finger pulling. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.12 Sub-series: [Drawer 12: West Berlin, Berlin, Germany, West Germany, and Bavaria Germany] Date: 1936-1974 Extent: 3.8 cm of textual records. ­12 articles. ­7 filing copies. ­4 captions. ­1 letter. ­1 newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions, a letter, and newspaper clippings. Primary subject of the documents: Germany with the sub-subject of Weisbaden [sic], Saar, Rhineland, Helgoland, Berlin, American landmarks, Bavaria, party, Munich, Rhine life, Bonn, churches (interior), Dresden, and Dresden 1973. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.13 Sub-series: [Drawer 13: Hungary, Hungarian, Iceland, Greece, Athens, Med. Island, and Greenland] Date: 1949-1981 Extent: 7.0 cm of textual materials. ­26 articles. ­5 filing copies. ­12 captions. ­2 newspaper clippings.

33

Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions, newspaper clippings, and other textual documentation. Primary subjects of the documents: Hungary with the sub-subjects of industry, frontier, festival, dance, people, women, politics, revolution Oct. 27, 1956, religion, Hungarian revolt, and refugees (circa '50s). Primary subjects of the documents: Iceland with the sub-subjects of (1981), glaciers and icebergs. Primary subject: Greece with sub-subjects of Athens, sports Olympics, historical artifacts, Greece, art (statues), Olympia, elections 1981, history, handicrafts, industry (olives), museums, Islands Patmos, Med. Island, Rhodes building, prisons, political prisoners release 1974, new Russian Embassy in Greece, war, cities and villages, streets, ruins. Primary subject of the documents: Greenland with sub-subjects of industry fishing, industry coal, industry marble, religion, and scenes. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.14 Sub-series: [Drawer 14: Ireland, Northern Ireland, Italy, and N. Ireland] Date: 1956-1976 Extent: 13.0 cm of textual records. ­37 articles. ­16 invoices. ­3 captions. ­1 letter. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, invoices in English and German, captions, letter, and English transcripts of articles not found in this drawer. Primary subject of the documents: Northern Ireland with sub-subjects of background to violence story, Civil War, Ireland, elections, history, Irish women against terror, castles, people, women, religion, Dublin. Primary subject of the documents: Italy with sub-subjects of accidents, dam breaks 1963, art (sculpture), art (paintings), art (Guidarello [sic]), Naples (street), Italy castles, cemeteries, religion churches, demonstrations -40's-50's [sic], ecology poisoning in Seveso [sic] (1976), education, education (college), elections (1959-1958), exhibitions (autos), exhibitions from 1957, and exhibitions (expositions). Primary subject of the documents: Ireland with sub-subjects of election in Bandon (June 1979), exhibitions (1961/1962), festivals (wine), festivals (flowers), festivals (carnivals), festivals (dance), festivals (spoletto [sic]), and festivals (Geese Palio [sic]). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.15 Sub-series: [Drawer 15: Italy, Holiday, People, Germany, Personalities, Transportation, Foreighn [sic] Politics, and Florence] Date: 1950-1962 Extent: 9.6 cm of textual records. ­42 articles. ­26 filing copies. ­4 captions. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, and captions. Primary subject of the documents: Italy with sub-subjects of funerals, homes (coves), homes and apartments, hotels (interiors), hotels (exterior), industry, atomic reactors, building and construction, industry food (meat), industry marble, industry oil (pipelines), industry oil (tankers), industry ship building, industry (scooters), markets, black market, markets (rags), markets (old cars and tires), South European Task Air Force, Honest John Rocket Testing - April 1957, Army (1955), Aviation military in flight, Monte Cassino [sic], museums, Brera [sic], Stibbert [sic], museums (Naval), museums (science), people, Jews, men (cowboys), people (Germans), and gypsies. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.16 Sub-series: [Drawer 16: Italy, Italy Florence, Italy Rome, Religion, Rome, Sicily, and Venice] 34

Date: 1936-1974 Extent: 13.0 cm of textual records. ­41 articles. ­18 filing copies. ­ 7 captions in English and French. ­1 letter. ­2 manuscripts of translated articles. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, a letter and manuscripts of translated articles without original article. Primary subject of the documents: Italy with the sub-subjects of communists, volcanoes (Vesuvius), Venice (streets), Venice (canals and gondoliers), Venice (St. Marks and Square), transportation (scooters), Trieste (demonstrations), sports camping, religion (status), tourists, transportation railroad, transportation boats, Sicily (welfare), transportation (painted carts), cities and towns, people, men, welfare (medical), welfare children, weather, heat wave, restaurants (exterior), Siena, Rome, Vatican exterior, nuns, monks, blessing animals, winter, Roman and Venice, Rome, Vatican interior, religious processions, pilgrimages and processions, priests (indoors), religion (churches), restaurants (interior), prostitution, politics, Pisa (leaning tower), police, and crime, smuggling. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.17 Sub-series: [Drawer 17: Italy, Naples, Corsica, Dolomites Tyrol, Florence, Lapland, Liechtenstein, Luxemborug [sic], Malta, Med. Islands, Amsterdam, Holland, and France] Date: 1946-1980 Extent: 10.4 cm of textual records. ­ 32 articles. ­24 filing copies. ­20 empty folders. ­ 7 captions. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, in addition to filing copy slips, empty folders, captions, delivery notice from Stern, and magazine and newspaper clippings. Primary subject of the documents: Denmark with the sub-subjects of industry agriculture, Faros Islands, people, industry, Copenhagen, Tivoli Garden, and fairs. Primary subject of the documents: Italy with sub-subjects of San Marino, people, demonstrations, Sandrinea [sic], Cagliari, Sicily, industry, Paluti [sic] Pontine, aprilia [sic], Littoria [sic], Padua, youth, organization, girls, Capri, Lapland [sic], tourists, Florence, Ponte Vecchin [sic], Luxembourg, scenes, Med. Island, Malta, and peoples. Primary subject of the documents: Holland with sub-subjects of dykes, restaurants, night life, Amsterdam, violence 1980, Hague, International Court of Justices, Peace Palace, customs, education, elections, exhibitions, floods, flowers, government, industry agriculture (wheat), industry dolls, and industry construction (social housing). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.18 Sub-series: [Drawer 18: Holland, Norway, Lapland, Oslo, Spitzberger [sic], Monaco, Monte Carlo, Poland, and Danzig] Date: 1954-1962 Extent: 6.4 cm of textual records. ­ 25 articles. ­ 17 filing copies. ­ 9 empty folders. ­ 6 captions. ­ 1 caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and a caption list in English and French. Primary subject of the documents: Holland with sub-subjects of industry ship building, markets and vendors, people, women, floods (showing people), 35

women (Stophorst [sic]), Rotterdam, sports, winter, stores, transportation boats, tourists, frontier, madurodam [sic], lille [sic] putin [sic] Town, Petten [sic], Urk [sic], Utrecht, Volendam [sic], and Zuyder Zee [sic]. Primary subject of the documents: Norway with sub-subjects of markets, Oslo, Vigerana Park, Vardo, Monaco, and Monte Carlo. Primary subject of the documents: Polland [sic] with sub-subjects of people, men, Poland, stars, religion, Pilgrimage to Czenstochowa [sic], and stores (interior). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.19 Sub-series: [Drawer 19: Warsaw, Poland, Poland Crisis, Poland-1978, Poland 1981, Barek Jozef (Government Press Spokesman), Bratkowski Stefan (Chairman of Polish Journalist), PolandPersonalities, Kuron, Jacek (Leading Polish Dissident), and Portugal] Date: 1954-1984 Extent: 7.1 cm of textual records. ­ 17 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 3 captions. ­ 1 letter. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions, a letter, and cardboard slips. Primary subjects of the documents: Poland with sub-subjects of Warsaw Pact Meetings 85", released of Dissident, Aug. 21st, 1984, poor people, tours and cities, people, "State-run bakery in-Warsaw. 1982, Poland-personalities (Jerry Giedrovc, editor, Polish review Kultura [sic], 1982, P men, women, homes, black market, industry mining, Poland Pars. [sic], Jaruzelski-1982, Polish Personalities, Stefan Olszowski, Poland Personalities, Gierck, Ed, Laski, Poland 8/31/84 4th Anniversary of Gdansk Agreement. Primary subject of the documents: Portugal with sub-subjects of Lisbon, Lisbon (streets), castles, overthrow of Facist [sic] Govt. 1974, and most recent political developments 75'. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.20 Sub-series: [Drawer 20: Portugal, Romania, Roumania [sic], and Scotland] Date: 1948-1980 Extent: 5.0 cm of textual records. ­ 26 articles. ­ 7 filing copies. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 2 captions. ­ 1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions, and magazine clippings. Primary subjects of the documents: Portugal with sub-subjects of industry (fishing) (tuna), industry cork, Nazare [sic], people, women and children. Primary subject of the documents: Romania with sub-subjects of medieval [sic], industry oil, 1980, Defectors fly to Freedom in Austria in Small Plane, and Tibru ocna's [sic]Mental Asylum. Primary subject of the documents: Scotland with sub-subjects of Hebridean [sic], winter, sports, and industry whiskey. Primary subject of the documents: Roumania [sic] with sub-subjects of Transalivina [sic]and stores. Primary subject of the documents: Scotland with subjects of sports, government, election, and Romania-Earthquake. Primary subject of the documents: Germany sub-subject election. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.21 Sub-series: [Drawer 21: Spain] Date: 1940-1972 Extent: 12.1 cm of textual records. ­ 43 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 10 empty folders. 36

­ 35 captions and 3 caption lists. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists. Primary subject of the documents: Spain with sub-subjects of fairs, festivals dance, frontiers, guards, art painting, political delopments [sic] 1976, accidents, demonstration, education, festivals, flamenco dance, history, politics, industry fishing (tuna), landscapes, Lequin [sic], markets, sports (Bull fights), bullfight (school), people, basque [sic], women, prisons, religion, Eucharistic [sic]-congress, religion valley of dead, Granada, gipsies [sic], religion festival, blessed Virgin, transportation (donkeys), welfare (children), Sevilla [sic] 1972, Granada (alhambra [sic]), Madrid buildings, Toledo, Gibraltar, Lilvia [sic], homes (apartments), religion, cemetery, Gibraltar rock, Arvila [sic], youth movement girls, youth movement boys, Bermer [sic], Mallor [sic], churches, St. Anthony, St. John, and corpus christe [sic]. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.22 Sub-series: [Drawer 22: Birmingham Alabama, Montgomery Alabama, Alabama, Alaska, Nome Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, and California] Date: 1930s­1980s Extent: 1.8 cm of textual records. ­ 7 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 4 captions and 1 caption list. ­ 1 brochure. ­ 1 flyer. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions and caption lists, a brochure, flyer and cardboard backing. Primary subjects of the documents: Alaska, with subsubjects of Alska [sic]-education (timeless), Nome, Alaska-1950s (Nome midnight Sun Festival), men, volcanoes 1930s, Alaska-Robert B. Goodman Series 1956, and stores 1960s. Primary subject of the documents: Arizona with sub-subjects of Pheonix [sic] (timeless). Primary subject of the documents: California with sub-subjects of forest Lawn 1950s, Los Angeles, 1980s, Los Angeles 1960s, Clifton Cafeteria, Portuguese Bend, "California- 'Renters Unite for West Hollywood', and California-1953 Tournament of Roses. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.23 Sub-series: [Drawer 23: Iowa, Indiana, Indianapolis, Illinois, Southern Illinois, Wilmette, Idaho, Hawaii, Georgia, Rock City Georgia, Mississippi, Florida, Miami, Delaware, Connecticut, Colorado, and California] Date: 1936-1981 Extent: 0.9 cm of textual records. ­ 3 articles. ­ 1 invoice in German. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, an invoice in German, and cardboard backing. Primary subjects of the documents: Florida, Disneyworld, and 1981. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.24 Sub-series: [Drawer 24: Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Orleans, Maine, Maine Coast, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mackinaw City, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, and Nebraska] Date: 1950-1989 37

Extent: 1.5 cm of textual records. ­ 4 articles. ­ 3 letters. ­ 1 book manuscript. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, letters, and a book manuscript. Primary subjects of the documents: Kentucky-Amish population, Louisiana, St. Hartinville [sic] , Maryland, Tangier Island 1955, MA-Boston Houses 1950s, Detroit, Michigan rest timeless, Arch Celebration, St. Louis, MO. and New Orleans. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.25 Sub-series: [Drawer 25: Sweden and Switzerland] Date: 1956-1976 Extent: 12.9 cm of textual records. ­ 34 articles. ­ 23 filing copies. ­ 7 empty folders. ­ 35 captions. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 German program Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions, a letter, and a program with the documents being in English, French, and German. Primary subject of the documents: Switzerland with the sub-subjects of Zurich, people, children, men, sports, mountain climbing, holidays, x-mas [sic], sports winter skiing, landscape, Mount Blone Summet [sic], industry, agriculture, sheep and goats, dam, agriculture (dairy), hotels, festivals (shooting), Gerera [sic], League of Nations, education, education (college), caves, accidents, Vispertermiren [sic], St. Berman, Gotthard, justutal [sic], transportaion [sic] (tunnel), cable car, railroads (winter), bicycles, auto, telephones, statues, stand Labor, volunteers, "Basle, harbor and river. Primary subject of the documents: Sweden with sub-subjects of transportation, auto, bus and taxi, experimental prison and hospital story 1976, politics, Russian submarines in Swedish territory, industry, lumber, holidays, xmas [sic], festivals (Beliman [sic]), education, and atom shelter [sic]. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.26 Sub-series: [Drawer 26: Antarctica, Antarctica-Schulthess [sic], Artic [sic], Yugoslavia, Dalmation [sic], Dalmation Coast, Industry, Markets and Vendors, Markets, Balkan, Yugoslavia 1993, Army, Religion, Parliament, Sarajevo, Split, Sports, and Stores] Date: 1946-1963 Extent: 3.3 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 5 captions. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, and captions. Primary subjects of the documents: Antarctica with sub-subjects of people, animals, Artic [sic], and transportation. Primary subject of the documents: Yugoslavia with sub-subjects of earthquake, The forgotten Massacre, Belgrade, Dalmation [sic], Dalmation [sic] Coast, Hvar, Mostar, people, children, youth movement, religion, cemetery, Sarajevo (streets), sports, Spear Torunament [sic], stores, transportation auto and bus, railroad stations, and welfare. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.27 Sub-series: [Drawer 27: Soviet, U.S.S.R., Russia, Art, Art Exhibition, Ships, Castles, Caucasus, Celebration, and Circus] Date: 1963-1978 38

Extent: 3.5 cm of textual records. ­ 14 articles. ­ 3 captions. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German and captions. Primary subject of the documents: USSR with sub-subjects of art exhibition, Russia, castles, crime in Kiev, dancing, ballet, markets, people, women, workers, youth, 1971 attitudes, religion and the people of today 1971, transportation, and weddings. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.28 Sub-series: [Drawer 28: Russia, Leningrad, Siberia, USSR, U.S.S.R. (Russia), N.Y.C., New York, Industry, People Chinese, World Fair, Worlds Fair, New York City, United States, People, Stadiums, and U.S.] Date: 1937-1978 Extent: 8.7 cm of textual records. ­ 25 articles. ­ 14 filing copies. ­ 15 empty folders. ­ 14 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 3 sets of magazine clippings. ­ 1 news release. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, caption lists, magazine clippings and a news release. Primary subject of the documents: Russia with sub-subjects of cities, Volgograd 1973, Moscow, USSR, Yakutsk, Siberia, Natural Gas pipeline, Siberia scenes, markets and stores, transportation, and railways. Primary subject of the documents: New York with sub-subjects of 1939 World Fair, industry, manufacturing, sport, American, archery, baseballs, gulf balls, gulf clubs, N.Y.C., people Chinese, opera and theatre, British Pavilion, Foreign Pavilion, Polish Pavilion, Art Status, entertainment, demolition, Worlds fair 1964, 1965, street, garment sections, U.S., people, Scots, immigration, U.S. Customs, Japanese, Yugoslave [sic], Felippino [sic], French, Cubans (Florida), Danish, Swiss, police (decoy), people (Chinese), Russians, welfare (men adults), social welfare (children), social welfare, Seaman's Institute, Snug Harbor, and Maritime Union. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.29 Sub-series: [Drawer 29: New York City, Nevada, New Hapshire [sic], New Jersey, Newark NJ, Trenton NJ, New Mexico- Los Alamos, New Mexico, New Mexico- Santa Fe, Taos New Mexico, Toas, NYC, and Battery Park City NYC] Date: 1936-1946 Extent: 1.8 cm of textual records. ­ 2 articles. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 1 caption list. ­ 1 file index. ­ 1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, empty folder, a caption list, file index, and magazine clippings. Primary subject of the documents: N.Y.C. with sub-subjects of United Nations, New York City file index, NYC (night and day), and more aerials and skylines. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.30 Sub-series: [Drawer 30: Penna, Pennsylvania, Oregon, Oklahoma, Ohio, North Dakota, North Carolina, Winston, New York State, New York, N.Y.S., Queens, NY, Penn Station, Grand Central Station, New York City, Schoenfeld [sic], NYC, Wash. SQ. Arch, N.Y.C. Parks, Botanical Gardens, and Lower East Side] Date: 1936­[ca.1990] 39

Extent: 0.5 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. ­ 4 captions and caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions and caption list, and a piece of cardboard. Primary subjects of the documents: Schoenfeld [sic] with the sub-subjects of the building of the Statue of Liberty and N.Carolina [sic]. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.31 Sub-series: [Drawer 31: Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, United States, Vermont, Virginia, Virginia- Arlington, Washington DC, Wash D.C. Bldgs. [sic], Oklahoma, and Washington] Date: 1936-1967 Extent: 1.7 cm of textual records. ­ 5 articles. ­ 2 captions and caption list. ­ 1 piece of cardboard. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions and caption list, and a piece of cardboard. Primary subjects of the documents: Pennsylvania with sub-subject of Amish. Primary subject of the documents: South Carolina, sub-subject of OYO-Tunsi, only African village in the U.S. located in S. Carolina, Utah, Washington D.C., and F.B.I. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.32 Sub-series: [Drawer 32: White House, Washington, Washington D.C., Seatle [sic], Washington-Seatle [sic], Seattle, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming, Water Gate, Watergate, Impeachment, Jury, Impeachment Hearings, C.I.A., Watergate 1973, Dean Maureen, Hearings, 1980's, and Senator-North Carolina] Date: 1973-1974 Extent: 3.6 cm of textual records. ­ 3 articles. ­ 1 caption and 10 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 note. ­ 1 magazine. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, caption and caption lists, letter, handwritten notes, and a magazine. Primary subject of the documents: White House with sub-subjects of interior historical, Seattle, Washington, Watergate captions, impeachment committee, Watergate tapes 9-74-4888, and Bernstein, Carl-Reporter of Watergate. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.33 Sub-series: [Drawer 33: China, China War, and Red China] Date: 1939-1940 Extent: 6.2 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­ 4 filing copies. ­ 5 empty folders. ­ 27 captions. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 photocopy of a photograph. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions, letter, photocopy of a photograph and plastic photo sleeve. Primary subject of the documents: China with sub-subjects of war, women, Peking, navy, camouflage, rivers, posters, army, bomfield [sic], chunking, tanks and transportation, wounded, guerilla, hospitals, theatre, welfare, French, education, Canton, bomfield [sic](showing people), bomfield [sic]harbor, correspondents and

40

photographers, communications, Shanghai (streets), Youmosuke Natori, Japan-China War, and published in Time Life Book "Life at War". Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.34 Sub-series: [Drawer 34: Israel, Palestine, and Sport] Date: 1936-1981 Extent: 5.3 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­ 4 captions and 1 caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and French, captions and a caption list. Primary subject of the documents: Israel with sub-subjects of history, immigrants, transportation (old only), Palestinnian [sic] people, Palestine, 2WW, army, religion, Israel 1981, Breslow [sic] Chassidim (religion), Jerusalem (a model), education, landscape desert, holiday L'ag De-Omer, Kibbutz, and museums. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.35 Sub-series: [Drawer 35: Israel, Arab-Israeli War, Arab-Israeli, Lebanon, Palestine, and Palestinian] Date: 1937-1983 Extent: 3.2 cm of textual records. ­ 8 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 2 captions. ­ 2 letters. ­ 1 magazine. ­1 newspaper clipping. ­ 1 photo list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles and captions in English and German, filling copies, empty folders, letters, a magazine, newspaper clippings, and a photo list. Primary subject of the documents: Israel with sub-subjects of Jewish and Arabs, teenage camp, Jews and Arabs in Hebron, West Bank persons, army, basic training (1981), UN emergency force, Iqrit [sic], BirAm, "uprooted", liberation of hostages from Uganda July, 1976, Arab and Israel boarder, United Nations in Israel, no war, Israel war, dead and wounded, and Jerusalem (street scenes). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.36 Sub-series: [Drawer 36: Africa, Algeria, Angola (W. Africa), Botswana, Chad, Camerron [sic](C. Africa), Zaire, Congo, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Central Africa, Ghana, Guinea, Ivory Coast, Kenya, and Cameroon] Date: 1950-1978 Extent: 3.1 cm of textual records. ­ 23 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 13 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 newspaper clippings. ­ 1 photocopy of handwritten notes. ­ 1 newspaper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English, German, and French, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French, and a caption list, newspaper clippings, photocopies of handwritten notes, and a newspaper. Primary subject of the documents: Ethiopia (East Africa) with sub-subjects of transportation, railroad, Ethiopia aides Ababa, and Henning Christoph. Primary subject of the documents: Ghana with sub-subjects of medical prints, Guinea, politics, 1961 Troops returning from the Congo. Primary subject of the documents: Kenya, with sub-subjects of East Africa, Maumau [sic], prisoners, arresting scene, people, Asians, Mau Mau, and housing. Primary subject of the documents: Algeria with sub41

subjects of demonstration 1955-56, election, education, people, street scenes, and El-Fatah. Primary subject of the documents: Angola (W. Africa) with sub-subject of people, and women and children. Primary subject of the documents: Cameroon (c. Africa) with sub-subject of scenes, people, children, Zaire, and Moroni-Stern 1978. Primary subject of the documents: Congo (central Africa) with sub-subjects of crisis 1961, and people jungle photographer. Primary subject of the documents: Angola with sub-subjects of politics, Unita [sic] Military Refugees, 1975, politics, Luanda in early days of MPLA regime 1974. Primary subject of the documents: Ethiopia with sub-subject of famine, industry 1959, camp Ruga 1974, politica [sic], overthrow of Haile Selassie 1976, Ethiopia telephone, water, transportation and auto. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.37 Sub-series: [Drawer 37: South Africa, Rwanda, Reunion Is., Senegal, Africa, Seychelles Is., Sierra Leone, Somalia, Biafra, Nigeria, Mozambique, Swaziland, Mombosa [sic], Mauritius Is., Mauretania, Mali, Malawi, Madagascar, Liberia and Lesotho] Date: 1960-1986 Extent: 6.0 cm of textual records. ­ 18 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 18 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 1 telegram. ­ 1 handwritten note. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, and caption lists, a telegram, and handwritten notes. Primary subjects of the documents: South Africa with sub-subjects of Soweto peace rally for chief Buthelezl [sic] in Jubulan [sic] Stadium 7/2/86, Mamehodi funeral, elections, education, industry fishing, integration, welfare, children, industry agriculture, cities, and homes-blacks, Primary subject of the documents: Ruanda with sub-subjects of Africa, and religions Islam. Primary subject: Nigeria (central Africa) with sub-subjects of welfare, medical, people, children, movies, German propaganda, government and elections, demonstration, and art. Primary subject of the documents: Mozambique with sub-subject of Massacre by Rhosesian [sic] army 1977, Port of Beira, Beira Corridor, and Mauritius Island. Primary subjects: Malawi (East Africa) Nyasaland, Madagascar (Africa), Liberia (W. Africa) with subject: transportation, people, and handicraft. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.38 Sub-series: [Drawer 38: South Africa, Sahara, St. Helena, Sudan, Tanzania, Tristandacunha [sic], and Tunisia] Date: 1955-1967 Extent: 8.2 cm of textual records. ­ 35 articles. ­11 filing copies. ­1 empty folder. ­ 14 captions and 4 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 6 newspaper clippings. ­1 cardboard. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, letter, newspaper clippings, and piece of cardboard. Primary subject of the documents: South Africa with sub-subjects of accidents, Cape of Good Hope, demonstrations, education, festival, handicraft, bricks and pottery, gold, people-Bushmen, white women, people white, teenagers white, Hindu and Indian fire walkers, men, Transkei tribe, prisons, Capetown [sic], Malay Quarter, religion Bantu, Zulu, welfare deaf, welfare, medical, and winter. Primary subject of the documents: Shara [sic] (N. Africa) with sub-subjects of cities and towns, education, industry oil, people, men, religion, Adams Mission, transportation, railroad, St. 42

Helena, with Murder at Khartowm (Sudan). Primary subject: Sudan (Central Africa) with subsubjects of war, transportation, religion, Animal Migration, Tawzania [sic], Tanzania, people, men, refugees 1974, and sciences. Primary subject of the documents: Tunesia [sic] (North Africa), castles, homes, education, demonstrations (Bizerte) and soldiers. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.39 Sub-series: [Drawer 39: Tunisia, Africa, Uganda, Upper Volta, Central Africa, Zambia, Rhodesia, Zimbabwe Rhodesia, Zambia (1984), Assam, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Burma, Tunesia, Postdam, and WWII] Date: 1954-1970 Extent: 6.2 cm of textual records. ­ 25 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 14 captions. ­3 newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions, and newspaper clippings. Primary subject of the documents: Tunisia (North Africa) with sub-subjects of religion, cemeteries, people, men, and refugees. Primary subject of the documents: Uganda, with sub-subjects of 1972, 1978, education, and industry. Primary subject of the documents: Upper Volta with sub-subjects of central Africa. Primary subject of the documents: Rhodesia (S. Africa) with sub-subjects of demonstration, education, elections, integration, parliament, people, teenagers, white, Salisbury, and stores. Primary subject of the documents: Zimbabwe with sub-subjects of Wankie Natl. Park, Assam, and scenes. Primary subject of the documents: Bangladesh, with sub-subjects of Indian and Pakistan War 1971. Primary subject of the documents: Pakistan with sub-subjects of slave market, Bangladesh, ghetto, cataract, festivals, religious, Bangladesh (Pakistan), disaster November 1970, Pakistan and Indian War 1971, refugees Indian and Pakistan war, Burma, army, handicrafts, religion, and road. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.40 Sub-series: [Drawer 40: Red China and China] Date: 1936-1971 Extent: 2.3 cm of textual records. ­ 5 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 3 captions and 1 caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions and a caption list. Primary subject of the documents: Red China with sub-subjects of newspapers, medical acupuncture, religion, China Emil Schulthess [sic], family (outdoors), industry, blast furnaces, communist soldiers, and festivals. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.41 Sub-series: [Drawer 41: Red China, China, Modern China, Himalaya, and Hong Kong] Date: 1963-1989 Extent: 4.9 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 4 empty folders. ­ 31 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 4 letters. ­ 12 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 1 film roll list.

43

Scope and Content: Records consists of articles English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, letters, plastic photo sleeves, and film roll lists. Primary subject of the documents: Red China with sub-subjects of people, teenagers, foreigners, Bosshard [sic]photo, education college, cities, villages, Chinese writings, religion, Peking the temple of Heaven, restaurants, rivers, Pearl, sports, stores, army training, river scenes, welfare, Peking The Forbidden City, art, Himalaya, and landscapes. Primary subject of the documents: Hong Kong with sub-subjects of demonstrations, festivals, markets and stores, people, refugees, child labor 1980, The Hunt, Hong Kong Harbor, Hong Kong border, and textile. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.42 Sub-series: [Drawer 42: India, People, G, and Kashmin [sic]] Date: 1946-1955 Extent: 8.0 cm of textual records. ­ 46 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 18 captions. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. --1 note. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions, newspaper clippings, and handwritten notes. Primary subject of the documents: India with sub-subjects of birth control, dance, cyclones, demonstrations, education college, elections, festivals, fortune teller, funerals, handicrafte [sic], weaving and spinning, history, housing, industry, building and construction, liquor, medicine, people untouchables, Calcutta, "Rickshaw Family", children, Maharjahs [sic], men, holy men, Point Fourr Program, prostitution, refugees, Ganges River, showing bathers, river, movie industry, theatre and movies, transportation, camels and ox carts and horses, religion, illnesses, wedding, bathing the colossus, sport, stock exchange, welfare children, Bhubaneswar, Delhi, Goa, Madura, Kashmir, Ladakh, boats, and Ura. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.43 Sub-series: [Drawer 43: Japan, Tokyo (Ginza), and Hong Kong] Date: 1947-1981 Extent: 13.1 cm of textual records. ­ 58 articles. ­ 17 filing copies. ­ 4 empty folders. ­ 14 captions and caption list. ­ 1 letter. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists. Primary subject of the documents: Japan with sub-subjects of funerals, foreigners (arts), food, fairs 1950-1960s, flower arranging, floods, Forest of No Return, fortune telling, festivals, fashions, traditional and new, beauty parlors, Osaka, exhibitions, expo 70, army, accidents-air plane crash, animals and birds, aviation, military, The Hair Bank, ancient firemen and women festivities, art, beauty, bridges, business, business offices, building (emperor's new palace), communists, customs, Tokyo Airport, demonstration against enterprise 1968, earthquake, education, education American school, cultural exchange program, history, Harakiri, Samurai, homes, hospitals, Imperial family, hotels, industry auto, industry agriculture, dairy and wheat, holidays, xmas [sic], industry, building and construction, barbering, industry movies, and industry steel and iron. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.44 Sub-series: [Drawer 44: Japan, Japan War, and Japanese] 44

Date: 1952-1972 Extent: 14.3 cm of textual records. ­ 73 articles. ­ 18 filing copies. ­ 16 empty folders. ­ 18 captions and 4 caption lists. ­1 note. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions, caption lists, and handwritten notes. Primary subject of the documents: Japan with sub-subjects of industry, fishing, cigarettes, Tezuka Kosan, newspapers, printing, typewriting, ship building, industry wig, labor camps 1930s, landscapes, medical, heart transplant, men, beauty salon, Okinawa, people, music, music children, hippies, religion, Shinto, Geisha, people women, piracy, politics, prostitution, Soka Gakkai, Buddhists fire walking, sports, badminton, bowling, boxing, mountain climbing, fencing (children), horse racing, jujitsu, fencing and sword fighting, dog fighting, swimming, Olympics 1961, Olympics 1964, Olympic Site at winter 1972 Sapporo, track and gymnasts, wrestling, tea, television, theatre Kabuki, trans-auto, collision tests, Tokyo, tourists, transportation-auto, transportation auto safety, bicycles and boats and motorcycles, subway, rail, weddings, welfare, Bonin Islands, Kyoto, Shimoda, cities and towns, Sachalin, scenes, and Unesco village. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.45 Sub-series: [Drawer 45: Tokyo, Japan, Japan War, Okinawa, Cambodia, Kampuchea, North and South Korea (War), North Korea, North and South Korea, Korea, S. Korea, Formosa, South Korea] Date: 1936­[ca.1968] Extent: 4.8 cm of textual records. ­ 18 articles. ­ 4 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 5 captions and caption list. ­ 2 letters. ­ 1 map. ­ 1 news report. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, a map, and a news report. Primary subject of the documents: Japan with subsubjects of Naka Cho, Yokohama, Nagasaki bombed and victims, Hiroshima, Hiroshima -5 years after atom bomb, army, recruits and training, Okinawa, elections, people, and Naha. Primary subject: Cambodia with sub-subjects of Cambodian trains, and army. Primary subject of the documents: North Korea with sub-subjects of industry, North and South Korea, war, Americans, the Pueblo Crew Crisis 1968, British soldiers, American soldiers in Korea 1968, military, S. Korea, General army, food, refugees, village life, industry, agriculture, people, children with parents, women, religion, and Buddhist. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.46 Sub-series: [Drawer 46: Laos, Cambodia, Malaysia, Maldive [sic] Islands, Singapore, Nepal, Palestinian, Pakistan, Hunza (Northern Pakistan), Bangladesh, Tibet, Formosa, Quemoy at War, Quemoy, Taiwan, Ceylon, Sri Lanka, People, Markets, Industry, Education, Food, Festivals, Anuradhapura, Colombo, and Religion] Date: 1945-1971 Extent: 8.9 cm of textual records. ­ 26 articles. ­ 8 filing copies. ­ 7 empty folders. ­ 6 captions and 1 caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 film roll list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption list, letter and a film roll list. Primary subject of the documents: Indo China with sub45

subjects of Laos, markets, Maldiva [sic] Island, people, Maylasia, English army, Figi jungle, fighters, wars, Japas [sic], aviation, internment camps, prisoners of war, and demonstrations. Primary subject: Nepal with subjects of people, women, coronation of king 1975, industry, and agriculture. Primary subject of the documents: Palestinians with sub-subjects of refugees (Marka Camp) Amman. Primary subject: Pakistan with sub-subject of Rawalpindi, Rite Celebrates Hegira 1500, longevity, Hunza, Tibet, refugees, and religion. Primary subject of the documents: Laos with sub-subjects of war, air lift by U.S.A. Feb. 1970, and communist soldiers. Primary subject of the documents: Formosa with sub-subjects of Quemoy, people, men, war, aviation, industry, agriculture, aviation (pilots), war navy, Liu Chiu Yu, war training, war women, Ceylon, religion festival, religion (monks), and people women. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.47 Sub-series: [Drawer 47: Vietnam, Indo China, Indochina, Thailand, Thailand or Laos, Bangok [sic], Formose [sic], Mongolia, Malaysia Singapore, Malaysia, and Asia] Date: 1961-1980 Extent: 6.1 cm of textual records. ­ 25 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 7 captions and 4 caption lists. ­ 5 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 1 interview. ­ 1 newspaper clippings. ­ 1 cardboard. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, plastic photo sleeves, an interview, newspaper clippings, and a piece of cardboard. Primary subject of the documents: Indo China with sub-subjects of VietNam [sic], Haiphong, war, refugees, Vietnam, Hanoi streets, Laos, welfare, Laos refuges, peace talk, transportation, N. Vietnam, war crimes, training, army, soldier: vietcong [sic], and North Vietnamese. Primary subject of the documents: Thailand with sub-subject of Bangkok 1973, Bangkok, heroin addict's religious cure, drugs, Royal Pomp, funeral, industry fishing, industry working elephants, markets, people, war, Americans in Thai, prostitution, welfare, Mongolia 1980, homes, people, men, Vietnam, rehabilitation, Mondolia, women and children, Maylasia, Singapore, Asia Quemoy (Kinmen) (Taiwan), and sports. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.48 Sub-series: [Drawer 48: Vietnam, Vietnam War, and South Vietnam] Date: 1964-1975 Extent: 3.5 cm of textual records. ­ 15 articles. ­1 caption and 5 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­ 1 news release. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, caption and caption lists, letters, and a news release. Primary subject of the documents: Vietnam with sub-subjects of government, orphans, propaganda posters, American [missing], Vietnam War 1965, Charles Bonnay V.I.P., U.S. black soldiers, South Vietnam, people: children, The Barsky [sic] Unit Healing The Victims of IndoChina, drugs, hospitals (interior), medical-America aid, demonstration youth, refugees, rescue of Vietnam family, refugee, city style, The war in Cambodia goes on, war, Korean troops, people, and village. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection.

46

1.49 Sub-series: [Drawer 49: Vietnam, Vietnam War, South Vietnam, North Vietnam, N. Vietnam, Indo-China, and Indo China] Date: 1962-1973 Extent: 3.9 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 3 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 1 negative sleeve. ­1 film roll list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English, French, and German, captions and caption lists, a negative sleeve, and a film roll list. Primary subject of the documents: Vietnam with sub-subjects of American soldiers, industry, agriculture, rice, people, men, Vietnam (south), prostitution, napalm victims, James Pickerell, mother and Vietnam War, American Chaplin, dead and wounded, women, North Vietnam, Montaguards [sic], mountain tribes, peasants and civilians, Vietnam II, François Sully, Vietnam War, helicopter raid, Indo-China, and VietnamFrench soldiers. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.50 Sub-series: [Drawer 50: Java, New Hebrides, New Caledonia, Philippines Island, Phillippines [sic], Manila, Sumatra, and Pacific Islands] Date: 1952-1982 Extent: 3.7 cm of textual records. ­ 13 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 5 empty folders. ­ 7 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­ 1 newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and captions lists, letters and newspaper clippings. Primary subject of the documents: Java with the sub-subjects of art, festivals, homes, transportation, welfare, Midway and Drake Islands, South Seas, New Hebrides, people, Philippine Island, historical, The Last Command, industry and sugar. Primary subject: Philippines with sub-subjects of accidents, storm and floods, industry mining, homes, religion (catholic), people, primitive moros [sic], prostitution and drugs, religion, and flagellantes [sic]. Primary subject: Sumatra with sub-subjects of homes, people, and men. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.51 Sub-series: [Drawer 51: Afghanistan, Australia, New Zealand, Okinawa, Guam, and Indonesia] Date: 1949-1978 Extent: 2.9 cm of textual records. ­ 14 articles. ­ 5 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 7 captions. ­1 newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions, and newspaper clippings. Primary subject of the documents: Afghanistan with sub-subjects of art, sports, and starvation in Jaftal [sic]. Primary subject of the documents: Australia with sub-subjects of industry building and construction, industry sheep and Rual [sic], industry mining, medical, women, people (American), science, natives, New Zealand, transportation, homes, Indonesia, parliament. Primary subject of the documents: Papua Guerillas sub-subject of sport. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection.

47

1.52 Sub-series: [Drawer 52: Curdish [sic], Iraq, Iranian, Egypt, Eqypt [sic], and Sinai] Date: 1954-1976 Extent: 8.1 cm of textual records. ­ 25 articles. ­ 7 filing copies. ­ 7 empty folders. ­ 18 captions and 4 caption lists. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists. Primary subject of the documents: Iraq with sub-subjects of auction, sports, and horse racing. Primary subject of the documents: Egypt with sub-subjects of archeology, conferences, Afro-Asian, Egypt 1974, exhibitions, demonstration, festivals, flood, industry dams, industry auto, industry oil, industry agriculture (animals and fowl), industry building and construction, Nile, water, museums, night life, people, Jews, women, stores, Egypt 1976, refugees, religion, ruins, Abu Simbel Rameses [sic], Pyramids, Suez Crisis-British, Suez Crisis, ships, ships sunk, U.N. Troops, nationalization, Alexandria and harbor, transportation railroad, Sinai, and UN in Egypt. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.53 Sub-series: [Drawer 53: Jordan, Iran, Iran/Iraq, Persian Gulf, From Germany to Teheran, People, Kurdish, Father of Joel Mayo, Iranian Woman, Iran 1980, and Iran Crisis] Date: 1947-1989 Extent: 6.1 cm of textual records. ­ 13 articles. ­5 filing copies. ­ 6 empty folders. ­ 12 captions and a caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 paper attached to outside of envelope. ­ 2 title pages. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, letter, paper attached to outside of the envelope, and title pages. Primary subject of the documents: Jordan with sub-subjects of Dead Sea, people arabs (Legion), refugees, Arabs (refugees children), war, Ashbal [sic] training at Bagaa Refugee Camp 1970, Refugees 1969, religion festivals, and "way of cross". Primary subject: Iran with sub-subjects of accident, earthquake, bridges, education, flood, and industry fishing. Primary subject of the documents: Iran with sub-subjects of Iraq, chemical warfare, and jewelry. Primary subject: Iran with sub-subjects of people, children, Kurdish, nomads, religion, Kurdistan, sports, transportation (railroad), police, demonstrations, industry, oil, people, and men. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.54 Sub-series: [Drawer 54: Lebanon, South Lebanon, Beirut Lebanon, Beirut, Lybia [sic], Morocco, Spanish Morocco, Arabia, and Polisario [sic]] Date: 1958-1976 Extent: 5.3 cm of textual records. ­ 24 articles. ­3 filing copies. ­2 empty folders. ­ 11 captions and caption list. ­ 19 photocopies of photographs. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption list, and photocopies of photographs. Primary subject of the documents: Lebanon with sub-subjects of civil strife 1975, demonstrations, U.S. involvement, Beirut, and war 1975-1976. Primary subject of the documents: Lybia (N. Africa) with subsubjects of people, Italians, agriculture, markets, Italians and scenes, Siwa Oasis, and Arab Israeli War. Primary subject of the documents: Morocco with sub-subjects of war Against Polisario [sic] 48

over Western Sahara, demonstration, Moroco American bases, earthquake Agadir 1960, Spanish, markets, people, men, children, religion, Arabia, women, scenes, Tangiers and harbor, TeTuan [sic], and Polisario [sic]. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.55 Sub-series: [Drawer 55: Syria, Turkey, Turkistan, U.A.E., Arabia, Abu Dhabi, Persian Gulf (Arabia), Kuwait, Persian Gulf, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen] Date: 1939-1977 Extent: 7.5 cm of textual records. ­ 28 articles. ­ 6 filing copies. ­ 4 empty folders. ­ 30 captions 7 caption lists. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, and caption lists in English and German. Primary subject of the documents: Syria with sub-subjects of demonstrations, Anti-American presence in the Middle East, and ruins. Primary subject of the documents: Turkey with sub-subjects of earthquake 1939/1940, frontier, demonstrations (strikes), demonstrations anti-American, education, college, anatobia [sic], handicraft, Istanbul, Istanbul streets, industry tea, industry nuts, industry dairy, Ankara, cities, people, children, men, women, rocks, Istanbul waterfront, Van Lake and Aghtamar Island. Primary subject of the documents: Turkistain [sic] with subsubjects of people, and restaurants. Primary subject: U.A.E with sub-subjects of Arabia, Aden, Persian Gulf (Arabia), Kuwait, Muscat, Bahrein [sic], industry oil, people, and women. Primary subject of the documents: Saudi Arabia with sub-subjects of Arabia Army, industry, education, Arabia, people, nomads, Arabia War, Dhahrran [sic], and United Arab Emirates. Primary subject: Yemen with sub-subjects of Khat in North Yemen and people. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.56 Sub-series: [Drawer 56: Iwo Jima, Fiji Island, Bali, South Seas, Borneo, Celebres, Eniwetok, Australia, New Zealand, Solomon Island, Tahiti, Tonga, New Calendonia, and New Guinea] Date: 1950-1977 Extent: 7.3 cm of textual records. ­ 22 articles. ­ 6 filing copies. ­ 4 empty folders. ­ 17 captions. ­1 book. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, and a book. Primary subject of these documents: Figi Islands with sub-subjects of people, education (medical), homes (buildings), festivals, firewalkers, education, Sura, Bali, art, handicraft, children, South Seas, Bora Bora, Borneo, religion, men, war, and Eniwetok. Primary subject of the documents: Australia and New Zealand with sub-subjects of geysers and host spas, South Sea, Somoa [sic], Tahiti, strike in Tahiti, Tongo scenes, and Vrallis Islands. Primary subject of the documents: New Guinea with sub-subjects of industry pottery, tribes men, festivals, 1976, and people. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.57 Sub-series: [Drawer 57: Canada, Montreal, Quebec, Ottawa, Ontario, Art, Arctic Yukon, New Foundland, Alberta Calgary Edmonton, North Canada, Gaspe, Labrador, Nova Scotia, and British Columbia-Victoria] 49

Date: 1936-1960 Extent: 6.5 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­ 5 filing copies. ­ 4 empty folders. ­ 19 captions and caption list. ­ 1 newspaper clippings. ­ 1 35mm film sleeve. ­2 plastic photo sleeves. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, newspaper clippings, 35mm film sleeve, and plastic photo sleeves. Primary subject of these documents: Canada with sub-subjects of election, Quebec, Ottawa, conversions, army, mountain and ski, flood, history, homes, apartments, Indians (men), Indians (women), industry agriculture (wheat), industry aluminum and aviation, industry fishing (boats), industry mining (coal), industry oil, industry iron and steel, Ontario, Montreal, people, women, Musk Ox, police, Iuehse [sic], art, religious, harbors and rivers, Sault St. Marie, St. Laurence Seaway, tourist, arctic and Yukon, people, children, scenes, Labrador, Nova Scotia, Halifax, and British Columbia. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.58 Sub-series: [Drawer 58: Mexico, Mexico City and Mexico 1968] Date: 1968-1974 Extent: 6.7 cm of textual records. ­ 31 articles. ­ 7 filing copies. ­ 6 empty folders. ­ 8 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, and a plastic photo sleeve. Primary subject of these documents: Mexico with sub-subjects of art, painting, Acapulco, festivals (carnivals), demonstration, economy, politics, dance (flying pole), handicraft, pottery, handicraft (weaving, industry agriculture, industry building and construction, homes, religion, religion festivals, sports, bull fights, horse racing, statues, stores, student riots Oct. 1968, Volcanoe Paricutin, Oaxaca, holiday, xmas [sic], industry oil, markets vendors food, markets and vendors, street photographer, people, charros [sic] and cowboys, men plus children, people Indians, Tarahumara [sic], and Mayan. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.59 Sub-series: [Drawer 59: Mexico, Mex-Tex, Costa Rica, El Salvador, San Salvador, Guatemala, Belize, and Honduras] Date: 1980-1983 Extent: 7.0 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 20 captions and 7 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­22 photocopies of photographs. ­ 1 newspaper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions and caption lists, letters, photocopies of photographs, and a newspaper. Primary subject of these documents: Mexico with subsubjects of ruins, Pyramid of Sun (Theothuacan), ruins chichen Itza Yucatan, Mayan ruins, welfare, tobacco, xochimilco [sic], and sinarquist [sic]. Primary subject of the documents: Costa Rico with sub-subjects of sport, cock fighting, volcanoes, and Irazu erupting. Primary subject: El Salvador with sub-subjects of 1982, Coar Orphanage, San Salvador, students, and 1981. Primary subject of the documents: Guatemala with sub-subjects of religion, Chichicastenango [sic], Honduras, welfare, and medical. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 50

1.60 Sub-series: [Drawer 60: Nicaragua, Nicaragua-1978, Nicaragua-1983, Panama, Argentina, South America, Boliva [sic], Bolivia, and Bolivia/Paroguay [sic]] Date: 1975-1983 Extent: 5.3 cm of textual records. ­ 14 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 7 captions and 5 caption lists. ­ 1 handwritten note. ­4 photocopies of photographs. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, handwritten notes, and photocopies of photographs. Primary subject of these documents: Nicaragua with sub-subjects of Cindy Karp, war, poverty, funerals, army, 1983, and Miskito Indians. Primary subject of the documents: Panama with sub-subjects of people, sports, wrestling and 1975. Primary subject of the documents: Argentina with sub-subjects of army, demonstration, and anti- communist. Primary subject of the documents: Bolivia with subsubjects of demonstration (cocaine). Primary subject of the documents: Argentina with subsubjects of Argentina's Grand Prix, sports, horse racing, South America, Tierra del fuego, scenes, landscapes, Iquazu Falls, immigration French, immigration Germans, festivals, demonstration, revolution, Mass Rally 1982, Buenos Aires, and La Prensa. Primary subject of the documents: Bolivia with sub-subjects of La Paz, buildings and streets, religion, and sports. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.61 Sub-series: [Drawer 61: Brazil and Rio De Janiero] Date: 1950-1980 Extent: 8.4 cm of textual records. ­ 25 articles. ­ 7 captions. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 photocopy of a map. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; captions, letter, and a photocopy of a map. Primary subject of the documents: Brazil with sub-subjects of Amazon scenes, train surfers, Rio de Janiero [sic], beaches, Xingu River Basin, Brasilia buildings, homes slums, buildings (embassies), aerial and birds eye, Indians and farmers conflict, "Hanging Slum" Amazon boat people, army, art, funerals, integration, people Indian men, San Paulo, buildings, aerials and streets, prisons, animals and birds, religion, church of St. Francisco de Pampulha [sic], Macumba [sic], Umbanda [sic], streets, transportation boats, and welfare. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.62 Sub-series: [Drawer 62: Brasilia, Rio De Janero, Amazon, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Terrorism, and Ecuador] Date: 1973-1977 Extent: 2.8 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 5 captions and 6 caption lists. ­ 1 map. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German; captions and caption lists, a map, and a plastic photo sleeve. Primary subjects of the documents: Brazil with subsubjects of cities, towns, and Goyaz. Primary subject of the documents: Chile with sub-subjects of demonstrations and parades, The last week before the coup September 1973, 6 months after Allerde 1974, revolution one week before 1973, industry mining, 1977, Gaucho, night life, markets and vendors. Primary subject of the documents: Columbia with sub-subjects of hostage

51

incident and puberty ceremony (Ticuna Tribe). Primary subject of the documents: Ecuador with sub-subject of radios. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 1.63 Sub-series: [Drawer 63: British Guiana, Dutch Guiana, French Guiana, Paraguay, Peru, South America, Uruguay, and Venezuela] Date: 1945 - 1992 Extent: 4.4 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 8 captions and 1 caption list. ­ 2 newspaper clippings. ­3 cardboard boards. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions and a caption list, newspaper clippings, and cardboard boards. Primary subject of the documents: British Guiana (South America) with sub-subjects of people, Dutch Guiana (South America), men, French Guiana (South America), Devils Island. Primary subjects of the documents: Paraguay sub-subject handicraft and industry. Primary subject of the documents: Peru with sub-subjects of female paratroopers, cemetery, festivals, water, handicraft, homes, industry cement, industry cotton and wool, Lake TiTicaca, people, men, political, Guano Island, ruins, sports, and mountain climbing. Primary subject: Uruguay with sub-subjects of stores and prisons. Primary subject of the documents: Venezuela with sub-subjects of industry oil, people, and women. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection.

52

Series 2: Records concerning WWII created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Date: 1935-[ca.1990], predominantly 1936-1950 Extent: 95 cm of textual records. ­ 189 articles. ­ 139 filing copies. ­ 213 captions and 13 caption lists. ­2 letters. Scope and Content: Series consists of articles, filing copies, captions, caption lists, letters, fact sheets, magazine and newspaper clippings, plastic photo sleeves, and a flyer concerning to World War II. In relation to WWII, the records document various aspects of military all over the world as well as conferences of the United Nations and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The photographs in reference can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Notes: Includes records in French and German. 2.1 Sub-series: [Drawer 64: Army, General, Alaska, Navy, Mexico, Aviation, Army (in England), England, and Ethiopia] Date: 1950­[ca.1990] Extent: 5.5 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 8 filing copies. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 22 captions. ­ 3 newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, and newspaper clippings. Primary subject of the documents: United States with subsubjects of army, women, U.S. camps outdoors, training, Alaska, U.S. Army, United States abroad (Belgium), United States abroad (in Thailand), United States (abroad) Japan, United States out fitting, and United States Cavalry. Primary subject of the documents: military with the sub-subjects of Mexican, Army Marocco, Army Japan cadets and training, Navy Japan Sailors, Aviation Japan Military, Army Japan (tanks), Army Jordan, Army Kashmir, Army Greece, Army India, Army India recruits, Army India Decorations, Aviation Germany Zeppeling, Navy Australia, Austria, Navy Italy submarines, Navy Argentina Sailors, Navy Brazils Naval Academy, Army Bulgaria, Navy Canada Sailors, Navy Canada Sea Cadets, Navy China, Army Egypt, Egypt Army women, England Army, England Army (in Germany) serving, Navy Poland and Portugal. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.2 Sub-series: [Drawer 65: United Nations, Conferences, WW2 Conferences, Audience, Speeches, Signing, Delegates, Conference, WW1, Belguim [sic], WW1 History, WW2, WW1 France, and Spanish Civil War] Date: 1941-1959 Extent: 8.3 cm of textual records. ­ 13 articles. ­ 6 filing copies. ­ 9 empty folders. ­ 18 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 3 newspaper clippings. ­2 plastic photo sleeves.

53

Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in French and English, caption lists, a letter, newspaper clippings, and plastic photo sleeves. Primary subject of the documents: Conferences New York United Nations 1960 -1962, United Nations International Court, Military: N.A.T.O. ,NATO and Shape (Istanbul), NATO Shape since 1959, Conferences World Peace Paris, Conferences Lurenburg [sic]1984 NEI, Conferences South Pacific 1950, Conferences Bandung 1955, Conference Russian-Czechoslovakia, WWII Conferences SEATO S.E.A. Veteran meeting, Conferences Inter-Parliamentary Union Rome September 1948, Conferences Pan-Europe Interlaken September 1948, Conferences UNESCO November 1947, San Francisco Conference 1951, signing Japanese Peace Treaty, Conference [unintelligible] Poure Scandinavin Senmark [sic]-Norway Sweden, history, I WW American (aviation), I WW battlefields (Belgium), I WW battlefield France, WWII U.N.R.R.A., I WW Italy soldiers, Spanish Civil War, medical, Franco Army, re-construction, Falangists [sic], children, religion, industry, aviation, and army tanks. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.3 Sub-series: [Drawer 66: WW II] Date: 1940s-1950s Extent: 5.6 cm of textual records. ­10 articles. ­11 filing copies. ­11 empty folders. ­11 captions. ­ 1 board. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions, and a board. Primary subject of the documents: World War II with sub-subjects of Africa, Kenya, Libya, cemetery Africa, South Army, South Aviation, women, Egypt (army), Dakar, East Africa Mozambique (army), France, Army Foreign Legion (in Africa), Australia A.E.F., U.S.A., Canada entertainment, Canada, Canada aviation, army India women, Palestine aviation, Palestine women, navy Russia ships, army Russia, navy Russia sailors, Russia refugees, Russia, army Syria, army Thailand, and army Turkey tanks. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.4 Sub-series: [Drawer 67: World War II, WW II, U.S.A. WWII, Army, U.S., WWII- Aftermath, WWII- USA, and Civil Americans] Date: 1940s­1950s Extent: 14.3 cm of textual records. ­ 33 articles. ­ 22 filing copies. ­ 20 empty folders. ­ 27 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­15 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 8 sets of newspaper clipping. ­ 1 backing board. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, a letter, plastic photo sleeves, newspaper clippings, and a backing board. Primary subject of the documents: World War II with sub-subjects of Alaska Air Force Base, WWII industry, women, U.S. army abroad Italy, salvage, areal defense American, Florida, U.S.A. aliens, army U.S. tanks, wounded-Americans outdoors, Washington during war time, GI brides, rations, USA posters, British war posters, German children and American soldiers, California Hollywood at war, U.S.A. women in defense, air raid shelters, U.S. army ski championship, Americans, USA volunteer hospital aids, Red Cross American, air raid defense, US rehabilitation, religion in US, U.S. industry (teenagers), medical rehabilitation and therapy, aftermath, medical nurses, USA housing worries, V-E Day (foreign), USA naval aviation training exhibition in NYC 1944, I AM A 54

Korean War Widow, refugees, prisoners (American), trials court martial, medical disabled, blackout (hospital), U.S. education, education (veterans), US Military Medal of Honor winners, US Blackout, USA Boys Club during war, USA veterans discharge, US the seizure of the German freighters Aurora, awards, USA animals military horses, USA civil defense identification, US British relief, USA return of war dead from Belgium, and USA military surplus G.I. store. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.5 Sub-series: [Drawer 68: WW II, WW II Europe, WW II Austria, WW II Belgium, WW II Bulgaria, WW II Czechoslovakia, WW II Denmark, and WW II England] Date: 1940s-1950s Extent: 11.0 cm of textual records. ­ 35 articles. ­34 filing copies. ­ 23 empty folders. ­7 captions and caption list. ­ 8 sets of magazine clippings. ­ 3 sets of newspaper clippings. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption list, magazine and newspaper clippings, and a plastic photo sleeve. Primary subject of the documents: World War II with sub-subjects of Europe, displaced persons refugees, Belgium, return of expatriated Belgians, Czechoslovakia Jewish refugees, Denmark civil defense "Lottas", Denmark children, England black out, England black market, England animals, England, Denmark German forces invasion, occupation, Denmark, resistance, Denmark traitors, England industry aviation, England industry, England industry (guns and shells), free people and religion, England army transportation (boats), England rationing, England censorship, England radio BBC, England posters and signs, aviation England military, England industry women, England London, England London daily life, England London air raid shelters, England communication, England The Signal Office of the War Office, England London bombed, England aviation, navy England military, England military, England military POW's, England military science, England prisoners, England Red Cross American (abroad), England religion, England salvage, England transportation, England war orphans foreign, and England welfare social services. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.6 Sub-series: [Drawer 69: WW II England, WW II Finland, WW II England Military, WW II France, WW II, and WW II France-Poland] Date: 1940s­1950s Extent: 12.7 cm of textual records. ­ 22 articles. ­22 filing copies. ­ 17 empty folders. ­ 42 captions. ­9 sets of magazine clippings. ­ 2 backing boards. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, and backing boards. Primary subject of the documents: World War II with subsubjects of England camp kitchen for Jewish refugees, England children, England hospitals, England US military post-war, England U.S. military, England navy, Finland air raids and shelters and gas masks, navy rescues, Americans in England, Finland refugees, Finland army, Finland aviation, Finland bombed (Helsinki), Finland medical, Finland prisoners, Finland women, England navy, army England military, France army parades, France traitor (trials) executions, army France, France World War I bombings, France unoccupied Vichy, France woman, aviation France military, navy France sailors, navy France ships, navy France ships, France army Foreign Legion, France army medical and wounded, and France army Food. 55

Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.7 Sub-series: [Drawer 70: France, France WW II, WW II Germany, WW II, Germany, Army, German Aviation, Aviation, Dachau, World War II Germany, and Navy] Date: 1940s­1950s Extent: 11.1 cm of textual records. ­ 21 articles. ­11 filing copies. ­ 23 empty folders. ­ 24 captions and caption list. ­ 56 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 2 archival boards. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­1 newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and a caption list, plastic photo sleeves, archival boards, magazine and newspaper clippings. Primary subject of the documents: World War II with sub-subjects of France Monaco, France army ski trips, France colonial army, France people: Americans, French newsreel, Germany occupation American GI's and family, Germany black market, Germany refugees children, Germany army allied troops), army Germany victory on West Front, Germany: Munich, Germany drawings, Germany industry, fraternization in Germany, Germans surrender, concentration camps, Germany Dachau concentration camp, Germany internment camps indoors, Germany internment camps outdoors, Germany prisoners, Germany displaced persons outdoors, Germany food starvation, Germany food shortage queue, Germany pre-war Nazis, Germany navy, Germany Nazi-Party, Germany training, Germany ships (torpedo), navy Germany ships, Germany Hitler's Youth-boys movement, Germany-aftermath orphans, Germany reunion of P.O.W. of WWII in Jo's, Germany prisoners (outdoors), Germany aftermath Jews, refugees Jewish (children), Germany evacuation and returning home, Germany ruins Potsdam, and Germany ruins Pennemunde [sic]. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.8 Sub-series: [Drawer 71: WW II, Germany, Germany WW II, WW II-Aviation-Germany, WW II Germany, Army, Aviation, Germany-East, Army World War II, and WW II-Navy] Date: 1940s­1950s Extent: 13.5 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 11 filing copies. ­ 17 empty folders. ­ 29 captions and 4 caption lists. ­42 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 10 backing boards. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists in English, French and German, plastic photo sleeves, and backing boards. Primary subject of the documents: World War II with sub-subjects of Nuremberg trail, Germany war criminals, Germany Youth Band communist, Germany traitors, English traitor, Germany suicides, Germany Berlin Allied Control Council, Germany war trials, Germany mine detectors, Germany housing, Germany navy ships, West Front, Siegfried Line, Germany allied Kommandaturat [sic] and government, Germany prisoners in Austria, party (farmers and sheep), aviation Germany, salvage of lost airplanes, search organization (missing WWII persons), dead German, Germany civic -gas masks, Germany history, Germany Russian army, Germany medical and hospital, army Germany ski and mountain troops, Germany politics, peoples congress, Germany tanks, Germany spies, Germany drawings planes, army Germany birds carrier pigeons, army Germany in Spain, army Germany entertainment and rest, army Germans in France, army Germany animals horses, army Germany (east), army Germany prisoners reconstruction, army Germany medicine wounded, aviation Germany passenger, Germany aviation fliers, Germany parachutes, 56

navy Germany mine sweepers, navy Germany ships (destroyed), aviation Germany awards, aviation German in England, and aviation Germany military old bombers in flight. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 2.9 Sub-series: [Drawer 72: WW II and WW II-Nazi] Date: 1940s­1978 Extent: 13.0 cm of textual records. ­ 28 articles. ­ 14 filing copies. ­ 13 empty folders. ­ 33 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 60 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 fact sheet. ­ 1 website page. ­1 flyer. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, plastic photo sleeves, fact sheet, printed website pages, and a flyer. Primary subject of the documents: World War II with sub-subjects of Greece Athens, Holland food shortages (malnutrition), army Holland, cemeteries Holland, Holland children, aviation Holland military, Holland refugees, Holland occupation Amsterdam and Utrecht, Holland art and loot, Italy army parades, Italy prisoners, prisoners (Japanese), Iwo Jima reenactment Japan, Japan Germans, Luxemburg, Norway navy and ships, army Norway ski patrol, army Norway, Nazi Germany occupation of Danzing [sic]- Poland, Poland Warsaw insurrection 1944, Poland history, Portugal refugees, Roumania [sic] prisoners, navy Spain Sweden, army Spain, aviation Spain, army Sweden tanks, Switzerland, A.E.F. Switzerland, army Switzerland ski patrol and winter, army Switzerland women, army Switzerland (elderly soldiers), Yugoslavia crisis, and Yugoslavia. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection.

57

Series 3: Records of 20th Century Personalities created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Date: 1935-[ca. 1990] Extent: 3.82 meters of textual documents. ­850 articles. ­172 filing copies. ­2,470 captions and 119 caption lists. ­52 letters. Scope and Content: Series consists of articles, filing copies, captions and caption lists, letters, biographies, speeches, pamphlets, magazine and newspaper clippings, newspapers, business cards ,fact sheets, programs, notes, liability forms, model releases, film roll list, negative sleeves, receipt, press kit, script, and a telegram. These records predominately feature personalities of the twentieth century. The records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The photographs in reference can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Notes: Includes records in French and German. 3.1 Sub-series: [Drawer 73: Personalities from Vaino Aaltonen to Republican Brock Adams] Date: 1955-1966 Extent: 4.3 cm of textual records. ­ 8 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 16 captions. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 speech. ­1 pamphlet. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­1 backing board. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copy, captions in English and French, letter, speech, pamphlet, magazine clippings, and a backing board. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Aaltonen, Vaino; Abba, Eban; Abbas, Mekki; Abetz, Otto (trials); Abs, Hermann (German banker, consultant to Vatican); Achard, Marcel; Acheson, Dean; Acheson, Dean (family); Acland, Richard Sir; Adam, Noelle; Adams, Marcus; Adams, Samuel Hopkins; Addams, Dawn (alone); Addams, Dawn (family); [missing] Konrad; Adenauer (alone); Adenauer, Konrad (1962-1964); Adenauer, Konrad (1960-1962); and Adenauer, Konrod (1966). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.2 Sub-series: [Drawer 74: Personalities from Isabelle Adjani to Wife of John Anderson] Date: 1951-1986 Extent: 5.2 cm of textual records. ­24 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­1 empty folder. ­ 59 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 2 sets of magazine clippings. ­ 1 note. ­1 plastic photo sleeve. ­1 photocopy of a photograph. ­1 photograph list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, magazine clippings, a note, plastic photo sleeve, photocopy of a photograph, and a photograph list. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Adler, Larry; Adler, Stella; Afghanistan Personalities Karmal, Babrak; Babrak Kamral New Leader of Afghanistan; Afghanistan, King of; Afro; Agnew, Spiro; Aclstedt, Marie (alone); Ailleret, General; Albania Royalty (King Zog Family); Albertini, Jerry; Albert, Michel (alone); Albuquerque, Duke of; Aldrich, Winthrop; Alexander, Harold Vis count; Joseph, Alexander; Aleixandre, Vicente Nobel Prize for lit. 1977; Algerian -Pres. Ferhat 58

Abbas; Algeria (person) Benyussef Benkhedda; Algerian Bachaga, Boualem; Algerian Bouteflika, Abdelaziz (alone); Algerian (person) Boumedjel; Algerian Pres Sid Cara; Algerian (person) Ali Chekkal (assassination); Algerian (person) Ahmed Francis; Algerian person Messali Hadj; Algerian (person) Ben Bella (groups indoors); Muhammad Ali facial treatment 1986, Muhammad Ali large prints; Alighieri, Pieralvise last descendant of Dante; Allen, Irwin; Alliss, Peter; Allto, Avlar Helsinki Architect (shot for time); Aloma, Allo; Ambrose, Amanda; Anderson, Eddie; Anderson, Edgar; Anderson, Elmer C. (Gov.); Anderson, Eugenie; Anderson, Hans Christian (Homes, etc...); Anderson, John Sir; and Anderson, John U.S. congressman. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.3 Sub-series: [Drawer 75: Personalities from Eric Anderson to Louis Armstrong (funeral).] Date: 1954-1982 Extent: 7.4 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 7 filing copies. ­1 empty folder. ­ 52 captions and 5 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­1 newspaper clippings. ­ 1 French script. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­34 plastic photo sleeves. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folder, captions and caption lists in English, French, German, and Spanish, letters, magazine and newspaper clippings, a French script, and plastic photo sleeves. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Anderson, Maxie, U.S. balloonist tragedy; Andreotti, Giulio, Prime of Italy; Andress, Ursula; Yvonne D'Angers; Annabel; Anka, Paul; Aimee, Anouk (alone); Anserment, Ernst (alone); Antonioni, Michelangelo; Antuwes, Melo; Apap, Vincent; Arabian, King Seoud (alone); Aragon, Louis, French surrealist poet; Arends, Leslie; Argenlieu, Thierry D'; Frondizi, Arthur Argentina; Argentina's President Leopoldo Galtieri 1982; Argentina, EUA Peron; Argentina Personality, Peron, Eva (groups-new); Argentina personalities, Jaun Peron funeral July 1974 also showing his wife, (crowds etc); Peron's return to Argentina; Argentina Peron (groups); Argentine political person Gen. Poberto E. Viola (illness 1981); Argyll, Duke and Duchess; Louis Armstrong (playing trumpet with band singing); Armstrong, Louis (groups); Armstrong, Louis (funeral); Armstrong, Neil (astronaut); Armand, Louis; Astn, Viscount; Athanassiades, Bodosakis; Attlee, Clement; Atwell, Winifred; Auchinleck, Sir Claude; Auer, Mischa (alone) (humor); Auerback, Red (Boston Celtics coach); Auerbach, Red; Auriol, Jacqueline (family); Auriol, Vincent; and Auriol, Vincent (groups -outdoors). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.4 Sub-series: [Drawer 76: Personalities from Joseph Auslander to Governor Barnett.] Date: 1938-1981 Extent: 6.1 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 75 captions. ­ 1 envelope. ­ 10 photocopies of photographs. ­ 13 plastic photo sleeves. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, envelope, photocopies of photographs, and plastic photo sleeves. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Aussi, Baignade; Aznavour, Charles; Aznavour, Charles (family); Bach, Sohaun Sebastian; Bailey, Pearl; Blanche Baker (1981); Baker, Carroll; Baker, Carroll (groups indoors); Howard, Baker Presidential Candidate '79'; Bakker, Jim and wife Tammy; Baldwin, James; Lucille Ball [please file with black and white]/ Balke, Ina; Bando, Kimie; Bannister, Roger; Barbiralli, John; Barbu, Marcel; Barclay, Baron Jean; Brigitte, Bardot; Barka, 59

Ben (Case); Barkley, Alben; Baron (photographer); Barre, Rayhond (French Prime Minister 1977); Barre, Raymond; Bartok, Eva (alone); Barrymore, John Jr.; Bates, Sir Percy (alone); Baumgartner Wrefred [sic] (alone- head and shoulders); and Batista, General. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.5 Sub-series: [Drawer 77: Personalities from Mrs. Birch Bayh to William Bennett.] Date: 1949-1982 Extent: 5.7 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 28 captions. ­ 1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, and magazine clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Bean, Orson; Beatles Ringo; The Beatles #2; Beaton, Cecil; Benoit, Pierre; Berenson, Bernard; Beecham, Sir Thomas; Behan, Brendan (alone); Behan, Brendan; Bejart, Maurice; Belafante, Harry (family); Belafonte, Harry (groups U.S. and Abroad); Belguim Royalty (Prince Albert family); Belguim Royalty (Prince Baudouin family); Belgium Royalty (Prince Baudouin alone); Belguim Royalty (Queen Elizabeth alone); Belin, Edouard (alone); Belli, Mel trial lawyer; Bellonte, Maurice; Belloni, Jose; Belvisi, Armand; Berg, Patty (alone); Bergen, Candice; Bergerac, Jacques; Bergman, Ingrid (1982); and Bergner, Elizabeth. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.6 Sub-series: [Drawer 78: Personalities from General Morales Bermudes [sic] President of Peru, 1977 to Von Blomberg.] Date: 1955-1981 Extent: 6.8 cm of textual records. ­ 14 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 18 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­3 contracts. ­1 magazine. ­7 labels. ­1 photocopy of a photograph. ­ 3 sets of newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French and caption lists, letters, contracts, a magazine, labels, photocopy of a photograph, and newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Barnard Heart Transplant: Story About Heart Donor, Clive Haupt; Barnard, Dr. Christian (alone); Barnard, Chris Dr.; Scheler; Stern interview with Crhistian Barnard; Bersohn, Malcolm; Berthoim, Jean; Bertolino, Jean; Besnard, Marie (trail); Besnard, Nicole (alone); Best, Johnny; Bettencourt, Andre; Bettina; Bewer, William (alone);Beyer, John; Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh and His Followers, the Rajneeshees; Biaggi, Jean- Baptiste; Biggs; Bidauet, George (family);Biermann, Wolf; Bigeard, Colonel; Ronald Biggis; Billeres, Rene (alone);Billoux, Francois; Bismarck; Bjornsson, Sweinn (alone); Black, Eugene (alone); Blaiberg, Dr. Phillip; Blakely, Susan; Blankenhorst, Herbert; Bleriot, Louis; and Blocker, Dan. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.7 Sub-series: [Drawer 79: Personalities from Joan Blondell to Ingela Brander.] Date: 1954-1982 Extent: 5.8 cm of textual records. ­ 13 articles. ­ 4 filing copies. ­ 45 captions and caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 1 fact sheet. ­ 2 envelopes. 60

Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, and filing copies, captions in English and French and a caption list, letter, magazine clippings, fact sheet, and envelopes. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Blue, Ben; Blum, Leon (groups-outdoors); Blumentritt, General; Bocuse, Paul France (greatest cook); Bodenam, Francis (ex-chief of Mobutu's secret services); Boeynants, Van Den; Bogarde, Dirk (alone); Bohan, Marc; Bohr, Niels; Bongiornr, Mike; Bondarchouk, Serge; Bonnard, Abel; Borel, Jacques; Borge, Victor (alone indoors); Borgeaud; Bormann, Martin (death); Bormann, Martin (Nazi); Bormann, father (alone-head and shoulders); Bosch, Juan (alone); Bothereau, Robert; Boulin, Bernard; Robert Bolilin (French Labor Minister who committed suicide); Boulloche, Andre (alone); Boumedienne, Houari (persons of Algeria); Bourguiba, Habib; Bouquin, Jean (fashion king); Borman, Frank; Bourdin, Lise; Bourguiba, Habib (alone- head and shoulders); Bourguiba, Habib (family and home); Bourguiba, Habib (groups in France); Bouttier, JeanClaude; Bouvier; Bowles, Chester (family);Brack, Dennis (consumer energy council); Bracken, Eddie; Bradley, Omar; and Braille, Louis. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. Linkage: Werner Wolff Fonds 3.8 Sub-series: [Drawer 80: Personalities from Marlon Brando to Bean Bryant.] Date: 1964-1981 Extent: 6.9 cm of textual records. ­ 5 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 65 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 10 photocopies of photographs. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­1 foreign delivery note. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, letter, photocopies of photographs, magazine clippings, and a foreign delivery note. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Brandt Mr. and Mrs. Willy (family); Brando, Marhon; Brandt, Willy (groups); Brandt, Willy (alone); Brandt and Breschnev; Brandt and Pompidou; Braque, George; Brassens, Georges; Brasseur, Pierre; Bravo, Lopez; Brazilian; Brandt, Willy (groups-outdoors); Brandt, Willy with Breschnev; Brazilian Jaime Ortiz Patino; Brazil; Brazil Goulart (alone); Brazil Francisco Juliao; Brazil, Kubitschek, Joselito (alone); Brazil, Kubitschek, Joselio, (family); Brazzi, Rossano (alone); Brebissom, General de; Professor Auno Breket; Brentano, Heinrich von (alone -head and shoulders); Brentano, Heinrich von (alone); Bresson, Robert (alone); Brezhnev (1973 and before historical); Briand, Aristide; Brice, Olivier; Brillat-Savarin; Britt, May; Brosio, Manilio; Bronson, Charles (actor); Broum, Clarence (alone); Brown, Pat (Governor of California); Bru, Myriam [sic] (alone); Bruce, Jean; and Brynner Yul. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.9 Sub-series: [Drawer 81: Personalities from Phillip Buchen to Author Burns.] Date: 1959-1989 Extent: 4.9 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 56 captions. ­ 2 letters. ­ 1 biography. ­ 5 photocopies of photographs. ­ 2 sets of newspaper clippings. ­1 liability form. ­ 1 backing board.

61

Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, letters, biography, photocopies of photographs, newspaper clippings, liability form, and backing board. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Helen Caldicott; Cagney, James; Cacoyannis, Michael; Cabanier; Byrnes, James; Byrd, Richard (admiral); Butler, Richard; Bullitt, William; Bulgarian (persons); Buganda, Kabaka of; Buffet, Bernard; Bufano (alone); Buehner, Alice; Budge, Don (alone); Buckley, James (senator); Buckingham, Yvonne (alone); Buchholz, Horst (making Moris); Buchholz, Horst (alone); Bucher, Schweizer Botschafter; Bunker, Ellsworth; Burns, George; Burr, Raymond; Burrows, Abe; Burton, Richard; Burundi (persons); and 1981-George Bush with wife in summer home by David B Isaacson. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.10 Sub-series: [Drawer 82: Personalities from Erskine Caldwell to Claudia Cardinale.] Date: 1951-1981 Extent: 8.2 cm of textual records. ­ 23 articles. ­ 5 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 116 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. ­ 1 newspaper clippings. ­2 backing boards. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filling copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, and caption lists, letter, photocopy of newspaper clippings, newspaper clippings, and backing board. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Calder, Alexander (alone) (and family large prints); Callas, Maria (opera singer); Calley, William, (lieutenant); Cambodia (persons); Cambodia Prince Norodom Sihanouk; Sihanouk, Prince of Norodom Prince of Cambodia; King of Cambodia (Norodom Sihanouk); King of Cambodia Norodom Sihanouk; Camus, Albert; Cameroon (persons) Ahamadou Ahidjo; Campbell, Donald (alone); Cauadia (Diefenbaker Family); Canera, Primo (family); Canterbury, Dean of (Dr. Hewlett Johnson in U.S.); Canterbury, Archbishop of (Ramsey, Michael); Cantinflas (Spanish comedian); Capote, Truman; Cappello, Roberto; Capp ,Al; Capucine; Cardin, Pierre; Feltin, Cardinal; Lager, Paul, Emile Cardinal; Marella, Cardinal; Spellman, Cardinal; Tisserant, Cardinal; Cardinals V; Cardinale, Claudia (groups outdoors); Cariappa, General Kodandera; Carlsom, Dr. Paul 1977; Carol, Martine; Caron, Leslie (alone indoors); Teresa Carpenter (Village Voice writer) (Pulitzer Prize Winner 1981); Carradine, David; Carrillo, Santiago (Spanish communist leader); Caron, Christine (alone Indoors); Carroll, Diahann; and Casals, Pablo. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.11 Sub-series: [Drawer 83: Personalities from John Cassavetes to Carmen Cavallaro.] Date: 1944-1981 Extent: 5.9 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 144 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 2 sets of newspaper clippings. ­ 5 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 photocopy of a photograph. ­ 2 photocopies of newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French and caption lists, newspaper clippings, plastic photo sleeves, photocopies of a photograph and photocopies of newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Cassel, Jean Pierre; Cassin, Rene (Nobel Peace Prize - 1986); Castille, Philippe (alone); Castle, Mrs. Barbara; Castro, Raul (brother of Fidel Castro); Catto, Lord (alone); Catroux, General (alone-head and shoulders); Cavallaro, Carmen (alone); Ceylon (persons); Soloman and 62

Sirimao Bandaranaike; Ceylon (persons); Cezanne, Paul de; Chaban - Delmas (alone); Chaban, Jacques; Chadwick, Florence; Cesar; Chaffee, lieutenant Comdr Roger (funeral); Chagall, Marc.; Chakiris, George; Chalandon, Albin (French); Challes, General; Chamberlain, Wilt (alone); Champion, Marge and Gower; Chambrun, Court Charles (alone); Chanel, Coco (alone); Chapelle, Colonel De La; Chaplin, Josephine (sistavoris [sic]with Husband and baby 1971); Chaplin (alone); Chaplin, Charles (home); Chaplin (groups); Chaplin, Charles (family daughter Geraldine); Chaplin, Geraldine; Chaplin, Syney; Chaplin, Victoria; Chapman, Christian (U.S. Charge d'affaires) 1981; Charach, Theodore (1970); Charriere, Henri; Charrier, Jacques; Charrat, Janine; Chatenet, Pierre; Chevalier, Maurice; Chevalier, Maurice (alone outdoors); Chevalier, Maurice (funeral 1972); Chevassus, Alex (wedding); Chevigne, Pierre de; Chiari, Walter; and Chile, Federico Mujiga (Union Pres. C.E.P.C.A.). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.12 Sub-series: [Drawer 84: Personalities from Chinese Nationalist to Kenneth Cole.] Date: 1940-1960 Extent: 7.3 cm of textual records. ­ 21 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 26 captions. ­1 biography. ­2 envelopes. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French, biography, envelopes, and newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Chinese Nationalist; Chinese; China personalities, Hua Guofeng; China (persons) Chairman Mao; China, Zhao Ziyang (visits Kenya); Chopin; Christian, Linda; Christian, Linda (family); Christie, Agatha; Christo, (Bulgarian-American artist); Churchill, John; Churchill, Randolph (family); Churchill, Sarah; Churchill, Winston (alone); Cinquetti, Gigliola; Clair, Rene; Clark, Jim; Clark, Joe; Claudel, Paul; Clemenceau; Clift, Montgomery; President Clinton with foreign policy team; Clouzot, H.G.; Clup, Robert and wife France Nuyen; Cockell, Don; Cocteau, Jean; Coe, Sebastian; Cotten, Pierre; Cohen, Sam (inventor of neutron bomb); Cohn-Benoit, Daniel; and Colborn, Dr. Lon. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.13 Sub-series: [Drawer 85: Personalities from Natalie Cole to Walter Cronkite.] Date: 1942-1980 Extent: 4.5 cm of textual records. ­ 15 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 44 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­1 plastic photo sleeve. ­1 interview transcript. ­ 1 business card. ­1 newspaper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French and caption lists, letter, plastic photo sleeve, interview transcript, business card, and a newspaper. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Collins, Dorothy; Collins, Joan; Collins, Pat; Coluche, (1980 French comedian); Columbus, Christopher (statues); Como, Perry; Compton, Arthur Holly; Comte, M.Arthur; Congo (persons) Mobutu, (family and home); Congo (persons) Pierre Polily (alone); Congo (persons) Tshombe [sic] (alone); Congo (persons) Tshombe [sic] in Spain; Connally, John (1979 only, Presidential Candidate); Connery, Jason; Constantinesco, professor (alone); Cooper, Duff; Cooper, Gary; Cooper, Gary (funeral); Cooper, Jackie; Sister Mary Corita; Corrigan, Mairead (1976 Nobel Prize for Peace); Coty, Rene; Coudenhove ­ Kalergi; Courau, Joseph (alone); Courtenay, Tom; Cousey [sic], Bob; Cousins,

63

Ralph (admiral); Cousteau; Coward, Noel (The 20's); Cox, Bucky (1987); Craig, Edward Gordon (alone); Crane, Bob (murder investigation); and Crawford, Joan. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.14 Sub-series: [Drawer 86: Personalities from James Cromwell to Republican William Dawson.] Date: 1949­1970s Extent: 12.7 cm of textual records. ­ 28 articles. ­ 9 filing copies. ­ 5 empty folders. ­ 97 captions and caption list. ­ 1 interview. ­ 1 copyright transfer. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, an interview, and a copyright transfer. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Cromwell, James (family); Crosby Twins in Germany; Crowfoot, Chief; Cuba (persons); Capolongo, Dennis; Mario Cuomo; Cunliffe, Mitzi; Curcio, Renato, Hahan (Red Brigade Leader); Jurgens (Curd 50's-70's); Curtin, Pfyllis (alone); Curtis, George (alone); Curutchet, Captin Jean; Cyprese (persons); Cyrankiewicz, Joseph; Curtis, Tony; Czech; D'Aboville, Rower Gerard (first man to cross the ocean west-east as a solo rower); DaCosta, Morton; Daddah, Moktar Ould; Daguerre; Dahomey (persons); Daladier, Edouard (groups -indoors); Dalai Lama (family); Dalai Lama; Dalen, Gustav; Dali, Salvador; Dalida; Dalton, Hugh (alone); Damone, Vic; Danelius; D'Angers, Yvonne; Danish Royalty (Princes Aage)(funeral); Danish Royal Family Prince Axel; Danish Royalty Princess Benedikte; Danish Royalty King Christian Queen Alexandrine; Danish Royalty King Frederik; Danish Royalty King Frederik Queen Ingrid (family new); Sammy Davis; Danish Royalty Princess Margretta; Danish Royal Family; Danish personalities; Dankert Pieter; Darc, Mireille; Lloyd Darland; Darmon, Pierre; Darnell, Linda; Dassin, Jules and Melina Mercouri; Dassault, Marcel; Dausset, Jean (Nobel Prize Winning Genetecist 1980); David, Jean Paul; Davidoff, Zino (importer of Havana Cigars in Geveva); David, Phil; Dawn, Marpessa; and Dawson, George. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.15 Sub-series: [Drawer 87: Personalities from Doris Day to Gaston Defferre.] Date: 1951-1984 Extent: 5.9 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 47 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 2 photocopies of photographs. ­ 2 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, letter, photocopies of photographs, plastic photo sleeves, and magazine clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Dayan, Ruth; Dayde, Liane; Debizet, Pierre; Debray, Regis; Michael, Debre; DeCarlo,Yvonne; de Chirico, Giorgio; Defregger, Matthias; Degrelle, Leon (alone); de Lattre de Tassigny (funeral); Dellums, Ron (rep.); Delon, Alain; Delorean, John; John DeLorean (newspaper articles); De Mille, Cecil; Demongeot, Mylene (alone); De Murville, Couve; Denmark (persons) Princess Margrethe; Desmond, Florence (alone); Detmers, Maruschka; DeValera, Eamon; Dia, Mamadou; Dickey, James (poet); Didier, Arlette; Dietrich, Adolf; Dietrich, Sepp; Dillon, Douglas; Dinnyes, Lajos; Diomi Sisters; Di Serego-Alighieri, Pieralvise (descendant of Dante); Disney, Walt (head and shoulder shots); Distel, Sacha (alone); D'Italie, Umberto-Roi;

64

Dobson, Frank; Docker, Lady; Docker, Sir and Lady; Nasser Ben Djamil; Divine, Father; Djibouti; and Dobi, Istvan. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.16 Sub-series: [Drawer 88: Personalities from Senator Cristopher [sic] Dodd to John Foster Dulles.] Date: 1950-1968 Extent: 7.4 cm of textual records. ­ 14 articles. ­ 7 filing copies. ­ 4 empty folders. ­44 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 7 plastic photo sleeves. ­4 sets of newspaper clippings. ­3 photocopies of newspaper clippings. ­3 sets of magazine clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, letter, plastic photo sleeves, newspaper clippings, photocopies of newspaper clippings, and magazine clippings. The primary subject of these documents are: Dodd, William E.; Dodelier, General Louis; Doll, Dora; Dominguin, Miguel; Donegan, Dorothy; Dongen, Van; Dongo Gold Trial; Dooley, Dr. Thomas; Dorleac, Francoise; Dors, Diana; Douglas, William O.; Downey, Thomas Joseph (congressman); Downey, Sue, Anne; Doxiadis, Dr. Constantinos (architect); Dreyfus, Mr. Pierre; Droit, Michel; Drouet, Minou; Dubois, Marie; Dobost, Charles; Duclos, Jacques; Duhamel, Jacques; Dulles, John Foster (groups); Duncan, Raymond; background information Pete du Pont; Durante, Jimmy (groups); Durocher, Leo; Friederich Dürrenmatt; Dutschke, Rudi; Dural, Franca; DuValll, Shelly;Dvorak, Ann; Thomas Dylan; Dynasty Cast; Emelia [sic]Earhart; Easthourne (trails); Eban, Abba; Ecevit, Bulent (President of Turkey); Edelmam, Otto; and Eden, Anthony. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.17 Sub-series: [Drawer 89: Personalities from Samantha Egger to Charles Burke Elbrick.] Date: 1926-1969 Extent: 6.3 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 20 captions. ­ 15 letters. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 1 letter envelope. ­ 2 notes. ­ 1 press release. ­ 1 guest list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and Spanish, captions in English and French, letters, plastic photo sleeve, newspaper clippings, magazine clippings, letter envelope, notes, press release and guest list. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Egypt, General Abd El Hakim Amer; Egypt personality Nasser (historic); Egypt Nasser (family);Egypt General Mahammed Naguib; Egypt King Farouk (groups outdoors and childhood pic.); Adolph Eichman (war criminal trials); Eisenhower, Dwight (Normandr) [sic]; Eisenhower (in uniform); Eisenhower, Dwight (museum);Ekberg, Anita; Eklund, Britt; Charles Burke (American Ambassador in Brazil kindnapped -1969); Ellington, Duke (at White House and Nixon);El Salvador (personalities 1981) Jose Napoleon Duarte; Romero, Archbishop Msgr. Oscar, El Salvador; Elsner, Gisela; Emmons, General Delos; and Empain, Baron Edward-Jean. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.18 Sub-series: [Drawer 90: Personalities from Duke of Edinburgh to Queen Elizabeth.] 65

Date: 1950-1977 Extent: 6.4 cm of textual records. ­ 18 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­2 empty folders. ­ 37 captions and 5 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 2 magazine clipping. ­ 2 notes.--1 pamphlet. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, letter, magazine clippings, notes, and a pamphlet. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): English Royalty Prince Andrew (age- 7 years old); English Royalty Prince Charles and Princess Anne; English Royalty Prince Charles; English Royalty Prince Charles (as child); English Royalty Queen Victoria (family); English Royal Victoria and Albert; English Royalty Princess Anne; English Royalty Queen Elizabeth (alone, mother);English Royalty Queen Elizabeth (in Portugal); English Royalty Queen Elizabeth (in Paris); English Royalty (Elizabeth and husband); English Royalty (history) family Edward and George; Mountabatten, Lord; English Royalty Margaret and Huband [sic]; English Royalty Princess Margaret and Huband [sic] in New York; England History Elizabeth of England; English Royalty Princess Margaret (Honeymoon); English Royalty Princess Margaret and Husband (in U.S.A. California); English Royalty Margaret Rose (alone); English Royalty Margaret Rose in France; English Royalty (Margaret Rose groups indoors); English Royalty Lord Snowdon (water skining) [sic]; Ensor, James; Enturistle, Vivienne; Ericsson, Dr. Ron; Erim, Nihat; Erlander, Tage; Ernst, Max; and Edenburgh, Duke of (groups -France and India). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.19 Sub-series: [Drawer 91: Personalities from Escher to H.V. Evatt.] Date: 1958-2001 Extent: 6.5 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 25 captions. ­ 2 letters. ­ 1 note. ­ 2 film roll list. ­1 newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English, French, and German, letters, notes, film roll lists, and newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Foch, Marshall; Eshkol, Levy; Evenou, Dr.; Eytan, Walter; Fabris, Muguette (alone); Fahd, Crown Prince (in America 1977); Joe Famolare (shoe manufacturer); Farman, Henry; Farrow, Mia; Fath, Jacques; Faubus, Orval (alone); John and William Faulkner; Faure, General Jacques; Faure, Edgar (groups since 1956); Faure, Edgar (alone); Fawcett, Percy; Fellini, Federico; Feo, Emanuel (alone); Ferguson, Sarah; Fernandel (groups indoors); Ferraro, Rep. Geraldine; Ferrero, Anna Marie; Finnish, Teemu Kuusela; Finnish, General Hugo Ocsterman [sic] (alone); Finish Paasikivi; Fischer, Carrie; Fisher, Booby; Fisher, Eddie and Liz Taylor (wedding); Fisher Eddie- Liz Taylor (outdoors); Fleming, Lady Amalia; Fleming, Sir Alexander; Florakis, Charilaos; and Flynt, Larry. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.20 Sub-series: [Drawer 92: Personalities from Jane Fonda to A.J. Foyt.] Date: 1936-1983 Extent: 5.1 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 59 captions and caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, and caption list. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Giscard and Mitterand; DeGaulle (demonstrations and movements); de Gaulle, 66

Charles (funeral-tomb death, Nov. 1970); D'estaing, Valery Giscard; Niargot Fonteyn; D'estaing, Giscard; Forbes, Malcolm S.; Ford, Tennesse Erinie; Foster, Doris (on death row); Fouad, Prince Marriage of (son of ex-King Farouk); Fouchet, Christian; Fourcade, Jacques; Fourquet, General; Fowler, Henry (alone); Foyer, Jean (alone); Frachon, Benoit; Generalisimo, Franco; Francois, Samson; Frank, Karl (death); Frankl, Viktor E. Dr. (professor of psychiatry);Frank, Anne (museum); Franklin, Sidney; Frazier, Joe (boxer); Mitterand, Francois; French; and France, Mendes. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.21 Sub-series: [Drawer 93: Personalities from: Daniel Chester to Teri Garr.] Date: 1951­[ca.1990] Extent: 6.7 cm of textual records. ­ 18 articles. ­ 9 filing copies. ­1 empty folder. ­ 55 captions. ­ 1 pamphlet. ­ 4 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 envelope. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, pamphlet, plastic photo sleeves, envelope, and newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): French, Daniel Chester; Fresnay, Pierre; Frost, Robert (poet); Furness, Betty; Furtwaengler, Wilhelm (groups conducting); Gabin, Jean (alone indoors); Gabon (persons); Gabon, Era (alone); Gable, Clark; Marie-Gabrielle, Princess; Gachet, Paul (alone); Gael, Anna; Gaggero, Don; Gagne; Gaillard, Felix; Gallico, Paul; Gallot; Galvez, Christina; Gam, Rita; Gamba, Peierrino; Gambiez, Raoul General; Gance, Abel; Ganeral, General; Garbo, Greto (alone); Gardner, Jack; Garibaldi, Giussippe [sic]; Garner, Sequin (alone); Garrett, George; Garrison, Jim (and investigation); Garney, Sir Ronald; Gary, Romain; Gasperi, Alcide, de (funeral statue); Gaubert, Danielle [sic]; Gaulle, Philippe de; Gauthier, Jacqueline; Gavin, James (alone); Gavras, Costa; Gelee [sic], General (alone); Gelin, Daniel; and George, Lloyd. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.22 Sub-series: [Drawer 94: Personalities from Kurt Georg Kiesinger to Gilligan.] Date: 1950-1984 Extent: 6.2 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 44 captions and caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­ 3 sets of magazine clippings. ­ 1 negative sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption list, letter, magazine clippings, and negative sleeve.The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Godot, Lt. Daniel (alone); Goldbery, Arthur; Goeethe, Woefzang [sic] (home); Gogh, Van (art); Goheen, Dr. Robert; Goitschell [sic], Christine and Marielle; Goitschell [sic], Christine; Goldman, Pierre; Glaoui, M. Abdessadek; Glaymann, Noemie; Glenn, John Jr. (family and wife); Glenn, John (fighting for gun control); Gloucester, Duchess of; Giamatti, A. Bartlett (Yale President); Gianoli, Reine; Gibbons, Harold (alone); Gibson, Sir Stephen; Gielgud, John; Gigli, Beniamino (alone); Gill, Brendan; Gilles, Patrick; Gillespie, Dizzy; Giepatrie[sic], Roswell; Girardot, Annie (alone); Girod, Charles; Kiesinger, Kurt Georg (German- Christian Democratic Party); Strauss, Frauz, Josep (alone German personalities); Geo, Eno; Gerthoffer, Chez (alone); Ghaleb, Mr. Mourad; and Ghana (persons). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 67

3.23 Sub-series: [Drawer 95: Personalities from Vladimir Golschmann to George Habash- P.F.L.P. Leader 1982.] Date: 1941-1979 Extent: 6.5 cm of textual records. ­ 22 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 53 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 5 negative sleeves. ­ 2 envelopes. ­2 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 biography. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, letters, magazine clippings, negative sleeves, envelopes, plastic photo sleeve, and a biography.The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Golschmann, Vladimir (alone); Goma, Paul; Gonzales, Hilda (alone); Gonzales, Pancho (alone); Gorbach; Gordon, Susan; Gorgeous, George; Gorse, Georges; Gort, Lord (in travel); Gottvalles, Alain; Gottwarld, Klement (groups-indoors); Gould, Glenn; Goya, Francisco; Gozzi, Patricia; Graham, Billy (preacher evangelist); Granville, Joseph; Graudy, Roger; Graues, Robert; Greco, Juliette (alone); Greece Royalty Queen Frederika; Greece Royalty Prince George; Greece Royalty Princess Irene; Greece, Royalty Princess Sophia and husband; Greece Royalty Princess Sophia; Greek Royalty King Constantine; Greek (persons); George, Grivas (alone); Greely, Horace; Green, Julien; Greene, Nancy; Grew, Joseph (alone); Grimaud (French police chief 1968); Grinda, Jean-Noel; Grishin, Viktor (one of top leaders in Moscow 1979); Grissom, (Gus) Virgil; Grissom, Lt. Col. Virgil (funeral); Grosz, George; Gudonov, Alexander; Guillaume, General; Guillaume, Gunther (Brandt, spy case); Guitry, Sacha; Gurvetch, Elia; and Gutenberg, Johanns. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.24 Sub-series: [Drawer 96: Personalities from Paul Hagen to A. Hailey.] Date: 1936­[ca.1990] Extent: 6.0 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 39 captions. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­1 program. ­1 press release. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, magazine clippings, a program, and a press release. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Hagerty, James (alone); Harlem; Halliday, Johnny (alone); Hallstein, Walter; Halpern, Professor Bernard; Hamill, Mark (from Star Wars); Hamilton, Edith; Hamilton, George; Hammarskjold, Dag (home); Hammarskjold, Dag (death); Hampton, Lionel; Hapsburg (Prince Felix and wife); Hapsburg Archduke Robert Princess Marquerite; Hardy, Francoise; Hardy, Rene; Harmon, Tom; Harris, Fred; Harris, Julie; Harris, M. Noel; Hairrison Rex (alone); Harvey, Lillian (alone); Hassan, le Roi (in Paris); and Haworth, Jill. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.25 Sub-series: [Drawer 97: Personalities from Helen Hayes to Eric Hoffer.] Date: 1936-1977 Extent: 4.5 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 9 captions and caption list. ­ 1 pamphlet. ­ 1 invoice (foreign). ­1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French and caption list, pamphlet, foreign invoice, and magazine 68

clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Hays, Wayne; Heflin Van; Heiss, Carol; Helmsley, Leona (1986 with husband Harry); Helou, Charles; Hemmingway, Ernest; Henner, Marilu; Henry's, Rives; Hepworth, Barbara; Herbert, Lt. Col. Anthony; Herrott, Edouard; Himmler, Heinrich (alone); Hess, Rudloph (in Spandall Prison); Hesse, Prince Henry of; Heston, Charlton; Heyer Dahl, Thor (expedition Kon-Tiki); Hill, Graham; John Hinckley's (brain cat scan); Hirsch, Robert; Hitler, (the son by Stern); and Hobsm, Valerie. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.26 Sub-series: [Drawer 98: Personalities from Abbie Hoffman to Lord Alexander.] Date: 1935-1972 Extent: 8.7 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 4 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 30 captions and caption list. ­ 8 photocopies of photographs. ­ 1 receipt. ­ 3 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 2 magazine clippings. ­ 1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French and caption list, photocopies of photographs, receipt, plastic photo sleeves, magazine clippings, and photocopy of newspaper clipping. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Humphrey, Hubert (groups indoors); Hull, John; Rock, Hudson; Hans Hubmann, (tight rope walker); Howe, Harold (alone); Howard, Leslie; Howard, Trem [sic]; Hoving, Walter; Houston, Sam; Houston [sic], John; Hourdiaux, Jules; Houphouet, Boigny (alone); Houghton, Amory [sic]; Humphrey, Hubert (campaigning Inauguration, conventions); Hossein, Robert; Hopkins, Harry; Hope, Edward; Hoover, J. Edgar; Holmquist [sic] , General; Holloway, Nancy; Holland Royalty Queen Wilhelmina; Holland Royalty Princess Beatrix; Queen Juliana; Holden, WM; Hohemzollers (historic); Hohenzollein (homes, interiors); Hogg, Quinin; and Hohenlobe. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.27 Sub-series: [Drawer 99: Personalities from Hubert Humphrey to Sol Hurok.] Date: 1936-1978 Extent: 6.4 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 22 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. ­1 negative sleeve. ­ 2 magazines. ­1 interview. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French and caption lists, newspaper clippings, negative sleeve, magazines, and an interview. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): (inspirational) Hubert H. Humphrey; Hunsinger, Charlie (alone); Hunt, Sir John; Hunt, E. Howard; Hunt Brothers; Hunziker, Richard (General two-star); Hurd, Peter (groups indoors); Hurd, Peter (paintings); Hurley, Eleen; Ichord, Richard; Reverand, Ike; Ghandi, I; India (persons); Gandhi, Mrs. (1977); Indira Gandhi (face shots); Nehru (groups indoors); Bhave, Viora [sic] (groups, outdoors); Bhave, Vinora [sic]; India Kishma Menos [sic] (in France); India Maharodja [sic] of Puri; India Maharajas; India Jardar Malik [sic]; India (persons) Dr. Rajendra Prostad [sic]; India Jagjivan Ram; India Rajagopalacharin (alone); India L. Mujibur Rahmaris; India Shastri; India Singh; Indonesia Nasution abdue Haris [sic]; Indonesia; Subuh, Pak( Indonesia); and Inonu, Erdal (son of late Ismet Inonu). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 69

3.28 Sub-series: [Drawer 100: Personalities from Iranian (Shah) to Italian Persons.] Date: 1936-1980 Extent: 6.2 cm of textual records. ­ 8 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 21 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 3 fact sheets. ­1 foreign delivery note. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French and caption lists, fact sheets, and foreign delivery note. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Princess Soraya (Iran); Shah of Iran Family (historical); Iranian (Shah groups); Shah of Iran; Iran Shah Ex-Wife Soraya; Iran (shah) (groups in foreign countries); Shah of Iran, 3rd wife Farah Diba; Iran (Shah and 3rd wife) Diba Farah; Iran Royalty Diba Farah (alone head and shoulders); Iran Royalty, Diba, Farah (groups in U.S.); Iran Royalty, Diba, Farah (groups outdoors); Iran (Shah, groups outdoors); Iran (Shah family) Princess Shahanaz (daughter); Iranian General A. Hedayat; Italian Royal Family (Umberto [sic] Family Queen Maria Jose); Italian Royal Family (Princesses Maria Pia and Alex wedding); Italian Royal Family Princess Maria Pia and Alex; Fanfani Amintove (groups, France); Israeli Gen. Zvi Tsur [sic] Jacob Tsur [sic]; Israeli (persons) Itzak Ben Zvi; Irving, Clifford Hoax; Mr. Jachmann; Jacquier, General Paul; Jalloud, Salam; and Jamet [sic], Dr. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.29 Sub-series: [Drawer 101: Personalities from Abe Nobuyuki to Ingemar Johansson.] Date: 1940-1972 Extent: 6.9 cm of textual records. ­ 13 articles. ­ 7 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 58 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 3 biographies. ­ 2 backing boards. ­4 sets of newspaper clippings. ­ 1 newspaper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, biographies, backing boards, newspaper clippings, and a newspaper. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Japs (akihito, Prince) (alone); Jap (Akihito, Prince and wife indoors); Japan Royalty Crown Prince Akihito and Crown Princess Michiko (Feb. 1970); Eiko Ando; Japan Foujita (alone); Japan Foujita; Hatoyama, Ichiro; Jap (Sessue Hayakawa); Jap Hatoyama (Ichiro family); Japan Prince Hiro (age 20); Japan (Hirohito alone); Hiroheto (emperor);Jap (Hirohito family) Princess Suga; Japan (persons) Kenichi, Horie; Jap Hayato Ikedo (alone); Jap Hurohito family Princess Suga (alone); Jap (persons) Princes and Princess Hitachi; Jap (Kainin, K); Jap Keiko Kiski (alone); Jap (Kobayashi, Ichizo); Jap Akihito, Prince (5m with parents, indoors); Jap (Machiko Kyo); Jap Ohira, Masayesbhi; Jap (sugiyama, General); Japanese (persons) Tanaka, Kakuei; Yachigusu, Kaolu (Japan); Jap (Tsuyoshi Yamanaka); Jap Honda Soichi (alone); Jap (Yoshida, Admiral); Jap Yoshida, Shigeru (funeral); Jarreau, Al; Jauss, Anna Marie; Jeanmaire, Renee; Jeanneney, Jean Marcel; Jebb, Gladwyn (alone); Jeffries, James J.; Jenkins, Roy; Jivkov; Joan of Arc; [missing] movici (trial); Johonson, Ingemar (groups, indoors); Johansson Ingmar (boxing champ of the world); John, Augustus (alone); Johns, Glynis; Kelly Johnson; and Joliot- Curie, Frederic. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.30 Sub-series: [Drawer 102: Personalities from Al Jolson to James Jones ­Author.] Date: 1959-1975 70

Extent: 6.4 cm of textual records. ­ 21 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 25 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­1 press extracts. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, letter, and press extracts. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Jones, Candy (modeling school); Jones, Casey; Jones , Corolyn; Jones, Prophet; Jones, Spike (family); Jordan, King Hussein (driving car and pilot of plane); Jordan personality King Hussein (groups outdoors); Jordan King Hussein (family wife Princess Morine and children); Jordan King Abdullah; Jordan King Abdullah (alone); Jordan King Hussein (groups, indoors); Jorgenson, Christine; Joseph, Alex (polygamous kingdom by Stephen Wicks)/ Jouhaud, [missing] eon (alone); Jourdon, Louis; Juarez, Benito; Juin, General (groups in uniform); Juin General (groups indoors); Juin General (groups, outdoors); Juin, General (funeral); Junot (alone); Junot, Philippe; Jurgens, Curd Mme; Kaddoumi, Farouk (director of the political fureau for the P.L.O.); Kahanamoku, Duke; Kallen, Kitty; Kapinga, Kashala; Karamanlis, Constantine; Kariuki (Kenyan member of parliement assassinated); Kashmir (persons); Kaufmann, Christine (actress); Kawabata, (Nobel Prize winner, literature 1968); Kaye, Dawn; Kazan, Elia; Keaton, Buster; Keeler, Christine (alone); Kefauver, Estes; Kekkonen, U; Keitel, Urlhelm; and Keller, Marthe. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.31 Sub-series: [Drawer 103: Personalities from Asa D. Kelley-Mayor Albany-Georgia to Bobby Kennedy.] Date: 1964-1975 Extent: 3.3 cm of textual records. ­ 6 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 14 captions. ­ 1 letter. ­ 55 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and French, filing copy, captions in English and French, letter, plastic photo sleeves, and photocopy of newspaper clipping. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Kelley, Asad (mayor Albany, Georgia); Kelly, Gene; Kemps, Robert; Kennedy, David (Secretary of Treasury alone- head and shoulders, 1969); Kennedy, Ted (tennis); Rose Kennedy (by Brian Quigley); John Kennedy Jr. (as child and teenager); Kennedy, Jacqueline (in Puerto Rico); Kennedy, Jacqueline (in South America); Kennedy, Jacqueline (groups); Kennedy, Jacqueline (sports); Kennedy, Jacqueline (in Pakistan); Kennedy, Jacqueline (in Cambodia); and Bobby Kennedy and Family (portrait by Steve Schapiro). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.32 Sub-series: [Drawer 104: Personalities from David Kennedy to Robert F. Kennedy.] Date: 1936-1968 Extent: 4.5 cm of textual records. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 2 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 7 newspapers. Scope and Content: Records consists of empty folders, captions in French and caption lists, and newspapers. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): David Kennedy (death son of R.F.K.); Robert F. Kennedy (in Africa); Robert F. Kennedy (in France); Robert F. Kennedy (assassination CA); R.F.K. (assassination clippings).

71

Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.33 Sub-series: Drawer 105: Personalities from Joan Kennedy to Pamdit Nehry. Date: 1960s­1970s Extent: 8.2 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 16 captions and 8 caption lists. ­1 film roll list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions in English and French and caption lists, and film roll list. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Kennedy, Ted (with brothers and brothers' wives, children); Kennedy, Ted (accident places of significance, "The boiler, room Girls"); Kennedy, Ted (scene of the car and accident); Kennedy, Ted (accident weekend events, the ferry); Kennedy, Ted (accident trial); Ted Kennedy (family, Kathleen's wedding); Kennedy, Ted; Kennedy, Ted (accident Macy Jo's funeral); Kennedy, Ted ('The Sixties 1960's); Kenyatta, Jomo (and funeral 1978); Kessel, Joseph; Kessebuig [sic], Field Marshall (alone);Khan, Yahya (persons Pakistan); Ali Khan; Aga Khan; Kiel, Richard; Kienast (room raising for quints); Kiepura, Jan and Maria Eggert; Killy, Jean-Claude; and King, Mackenzie (groups indoors). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.34 Sub-series: [Drawer 106: Personalities from Billy Jean King to Governor Kirk.] Date: 1960s­1980s Extent: 3.9 cm of textual records. ­ 7 articles. ­ 27 captions and 10 caption lists. ­1 photocopy of photograph. ­ 9 plastic photo sleeves. ­6 small envelopes. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, captions in English and French and caption lists, photocopy of photographs, plastic photo sleeves, and small envelopes. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): King, Coretta; Coretta Scott King; King, Yolanda (80's); M.L. King (with Jesse Jackson in 1966 By: Bob Fitch); Martin Luther King Jr. (groups indoors); Martin Luther King Jr. (groups and marches); M.L.K. (group indoors Flip Schulke); Martin Luther King (funeral, family and friends); Saliya Dr. Martin L. King (in India); Kipphardt, Heinar; Kir, Chanoine; Kirk, Roland; Kinski, Natassia; Kissinger, Nancy; and Klaiber, Manfred. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.35 Sub-series: [Drawer 107: Personalities from Elmer T. Klassen to Queen Kham Phouy and King of Laos.] Date: 1949-1980 Extent: 4.4 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 6 filing copies. ­ 4 empty folders. ­ 38 captions. ­ 2 sets of newspaper clippings. ­ 1 biography. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French and caption lists, newspaper clippings, and a biography. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Kravchenko, Victor (trial); Kravchenko, Victor (trial -showing Lim); Kraft, Christopher (alone, head and shoulders); Kolodny, Dr. Robert; Klein, Lawrence. Dr. (Nobel Prize winner); Klaus, Joseph; Kreisky, Dr. Bruno Austrian; Krone, Dr. Heinrich; Krupa, Gene; Kuhn, Fritz (alone); Kupka, Frantisek; Kuwait 72

(persons); Kuwait Sheik Abdullay Mubark Al Subay; Kuwait (persons) Sheik Abdulla Al Jaber (familes); Kuwait (persons) Sheik Abdulla Al Jaber; Kwan, Nancy; [missing] Alan; Lacoste, Francis (alone); Lacoste, Robert (groups outdoors); Ladd, Alan (family); Carl Lagerfield (fashion designer '78); Laird, Melvin M. (in Paris groups); Lamarr, Hedy (alone head and shoulders); Lamine, Gueye; Landowska, Wanda; Lane, Abbe (alone indoors); Lane, Frank; Lange, Halvard; Laos Royalty King Sisavoug-Vong; Laos Royalty; Laos Royalty Prince Souvanna Phouma (alone); and Laos Royalty Pr. Souvanna Phouma (family). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.36 Sub-series: [Drawer 108: Personalities from Giorgio La Pira to Gloria Chapman.] Date: 1947-1982 Extent: 3.9 cm of textual records. ­ 17 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 11 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. ­ 1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. ­ 1 foreign invoice. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 2 pieces of paper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, and caption lists, newspaper clipping, and photocopies of newspaper clippings, foreign invoice, magazine clippings, and pieces of paper. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): LaRosa, Julius; Latham, Roger (alone); Lauda, Niki; Laurie, Piper; Laura, Achille (alone); Lavallado, Carmen de (alone) [sic]; Lavaud, General; Lazness, Kiljan (alone); Le Corbusier, Charles; Legaret, Jean; Fernand Leger (artist); Lehman, Leroy; Leigh, Vivian; Leighton, Margaret (alone); Lejeune, CA (alone); Lemouitzer, General Lyman (groups, indoors); Lennon John and Yoko (art exhibition); Lesher, Richard (President U.S. Chamber of Commerce 1982); Levine, Joseph (alone); Levy, Norma; Lewis, Joe; Li, Dr. Choh Hoa; Liberace; Lifar, Serge (alone); and Lindsey, S. Arthur. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.37 Sub-series: [Drawer 109: Personalities from John Lindsay to Clark Mac Geogor.] Date: 1950-1977 Extent: 5.8 cm of textual records. ­ 14 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 41 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 fact sheet. ­1 story proposal. ­ 1 form. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English, French, and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, and caption lists, fact sheet, story proposal, and form. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): John Lindsay; David Linley (Viscount son of Princess Margaret); Lise, Vina (alone, indoors); Lisa, Mona; Lloyd, Selwyn (alone); Lockhard, June; Lodge, Henry Cabot (groups, Vietnam); Logan, Barbara; Logan, Joshua; Lollabridgida, Gina; London, George; London, Julie; Long, Marguerite; Lop, Ferdinand; Michael Lord (evangelist); Lorre, Peter; Lorjou (alone); Lourmais, Louis; Lovell, Professor A.; Lovell, James, Jr.; Low, David (alone); Dr. Bernard Lown (Lee Lockwood, Cardiologist co winner 1985 Nobel Peace Prize); Lucky; Lumiere, Louis (alone); Luns, J.M.; Lusis, Janus; Luxembourg Royalty Grand Duchess Charlotte (alone); Luxembourg Royalty Grand Duchess Charlotte; Mac Fadden, Bernarr (alone); and Machel, Samora. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection.

73

3.38 Sub-series: [Drawer 110] Date: Extent: 0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 3.39 Sub-series: [Drawer 111: Personalities from Robert Marx to Rene Mayer.] Date: 1954-1985 Extent: 4.0 cm of textual records. ­ 14 articles. ­ 4 filing copies. ­ 56 captions and caption list. ­ 1 business card. ­ 1 photocopy of magazine spread. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and French, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption list, business card, and photocopy of magazine spread. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Marx, Robert (archaeologist and antiquities hunter); "Maserati Rick" (Richard Corter laid out in a $16,000 casket styled like a Mercedes Benz auto); Mason, James; Masters, Dr. William and Johnson, Virginia; Massey, Ilona; Massu, General; Masumian, Mostafa (trial); Mathe, Professor; Mathieu, Mureille; Matisse, Henri (alone-head and shoulders); Mathieu, Georges; Matzdorf, Pat (sportsman); Maugham, Somerset; Maulnier, Thierry; Maurer, Ian; Mauriac, Francois; Mauroy, Pierre (of Mitterrand's cabinet 1981); Maxwell, Elsa (alone); Mayer, Rene (alone); McDivitt, James; McElroy, Neil (alone); McGouern George (Senator 1972); and McGraw, Ali. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.40 Sub-series: [Drawer 112: Personalities from Harold McCluskey to Margaret Mead.] Date: 1956­[ca.1990] Extent: 3.7 cm of textual records. ­ 7 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 37 captions. ­ 6 sets of newspaper clippings. ­2 photocopies of photographs. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. ­ 2 sets of magazine clippings. ­1 piece of paper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, newspaper clippings, photocopies of photographs, plastic photo sleeve, magazine clippings, and a piece of paper. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): McQueen-Steve; Medecin, Jean; Medici, Guiseppe; Mekhs, Annouchka [sic]; Meusenbock, Robert; Menderes, Adnan; Joseph Mengele (camera tres); Mengele; Menjou, Adolph; Menninger, Dr. Karl (The Menninger Foundation); Menuet; Menuhin Yehudi; Menzies, Robert; Mercier, Michele; Mercouri, Melina; de Merede, Cleo; Merie, Macha (alone); Merkatz, Dr. Hous (alone); Merrick, David; Messina, Carmelo and Eugenio; Messmer, Pierre (groups, outdoors); Michel Augelo; Milland, Ray (alone); Miller, Ann (alone); and James Miller (execdir of Presidents' Task Force on Regulatory Relief). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.41 Sub-series: [Drawer 113: Personalities from John Mills to Barbara Moore.] Date: 1954-1972 Extent: 5.1 cm of textual records. ­ 20 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. 74

­ 59 captions 3 caption lists. ­ 1 foreign invoice. ­ 3 photocopies of photographs. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, caption lists, foreign invoice, photocopies of photographs, magazine and newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Mills, Kenneth (1970 professor at Yale); Milo, Sandra; Milosz, Czeslaw (Nobel Prize winning poet, 1980); Milva; Mimoun, Alain; Mindszenty, Josef Cardinal; Mineo, Sal; Minelli, Liza; Minoso, Minnie; Minot, Paul; Mischnick, Wolfgang (alone); Missoffe, Francois; Misurato, Count Giovanni; Mitchel, Martha; Mitropoulos, Demitri; Mittermaier, Rosi (1976, olympic skier); Mock, Mrs. Jerrie; Molotov, Vyocheslav Mikhailovich (Russian Statesman Commissan of Foreign Affairs); Monoco Royal family, Rainier Princess Grace (with children); Rainier, Prince (Monaco Royalty); Monaco personalities Prince Raineir (and mother, father, sister); Monfreid, Henri de; Monaco, Mario del (alone); Mondale and Mrs.; Monet, Claude (art); Monnerville, Gaston; Marilyn Monroe; Montagu, Lord; Montano, Tony; Montand, Yves; Montevecchi, Liliane; Montgomery, Bernard (general); Montherlant Henri, de (alone); Monzon, Carlos; and Moore, Dr. Barbara. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.42 Sub-series: [Drawer 114: Personalities from Marianne Moore to Herbert Morrison.] Date: 1950­[ca.1990] Extent: 4.0 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 40 captions. ­ 2 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. ­ 1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, plastic photo sleeves, newspaper and magazine clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Nassry, Zia, Khan; Napoleon, Louis; Musiel, Stan (baseball player); Mussolini, Edna [sic], Ciano (alone); B Mussolini; Murphy, Robert (alone); Munch, Charles; Moussac Baron Hubert Augier (high society aristocrat arrested for jewelry raid at the Ritz); Motte, Claire; Mott, Stewart Rawling; Mosley, Sir Oswald; Morrism, Herbert (alone); Moroccan (person) Sultan Ben Youissef (alone); Moroccan (persons); Ben Jelloun; Moroccan (persons) Si Bekkai (alone); Moroccan (persons) Sultan Arafa (indoors); Morocco personality King Hassan II; Mois, Roger (alone); Morin, Jean (alone); Morice, Andre; Morgan, Michele (alone); Morgan, Michele (French actress with Gerard Oury); Moretti, Mare; Morgan, Gussie; and Moore, Marianne. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.43 Sub-series: [Drawer 115: Personalities from Marie Jose Nat to Mr. Newcome (Wimbledon).] Date: 1951-1978 Extent: 4.3 cm of textual records. ­ 20 articles. ­ 7 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 45 captions. ­ 1 piece of cardboard. ­ 1 negative sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English, French, and German, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French, piece of cardboard, and negative sleeve. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Nelson, Earl (alone); Neagle, Anne; Navarre, Yues; Navarre, Henri General; Nat, Marie-Jose (alone); Nenni, Pietro (alone); Nepal, King of; Nigeria (persons); Nijinshky, Kira (alone); Niles, John, Jours (alone); Nitti, 75

Francesco, Saverio; Niven, David; Noel-Bake, Phily (alone); Noel, Edith (alone); Noel, Leon (alone); Nordling, Raoul (alone); Norstad, Gen Lauris (groups in France, indoors); North, Shoree (alone); Norwegian Royal Family Princess Astrid; Norway Royalty (Olaf); O'Conner, Mike; Carroll O'Conner; O'Conner, Donald (alone); O'Casey, Sean; O'Brien, Margaret (alone); Conan O'Brien (new host taking over Letterman); Oakes, Harry (alone); Nyerere, Julius (Tanzania); Nyasaland (persons); Nyad, Diana (1978 Cuba swim); Nuschke, Otti; Rudulf, Nuryeev; Nungesser, Roland; Novatna, Jarmilla (alone); Norway Royal Family Princess Ragnhild; and Norway Royalty (King Haakon funeral). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.44 Sub-series: [Drawer 116: Personalities from O'Detta to Benazir Bhutto.] Date: 1945-1972 Extent: 5.4 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 48 captions. ­ 1 negative sleeve. ­ 1 timeline. ­1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French, negative sleeve, timeline, and magazine clipping. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Claudine Ogen; O' Kelly, Sean; Oliver, Victor; Olivetti, Adriano; Sir Lawrence, Olivier; Ollenhauer, Erich (alone); Opel, Gunther, Sach von; Osman, Sulun (alone); Andy Osterls; O'Toole, Pete (alone); Paige, LeRoy Satchel; Pagnal, Marcel (alone); Pakistan (persons); Pakistan (persons) Ayah [sic] Kahn (alone);Pakistan (persons); Pakistan (persons) Ayuh Khan (in France); Pakistan (persons) Liaquat Ali Khan; Pakistan (persons) Ayuh Khan; Palewski, Gaston (alone); Palmer, Lily; Pampanini Syharan (alone, indoors); Torrijos, Omar (of Panama 1978); Panama personalities; Pandit, Mrs. Vijayalakshmi (groups indoors); Pankhurst, Sylvia; Papacotsis, Mimi; Papas, Irene (alone); Paraguy Pers; Paris, Comte and Contesse; Paris Comte (family) Princess Anne; Parker, Fess; Paker, Dorien Leigh (alone); Isabel Patino; Patino, Antenor; Patou, Adomurial, Andre; and Pattakos, Stylianos (Greece vice Premier). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.45 Sub-series: [Drawer 117: Personalities from Luciano Pavarotti to Blas Pinar.] Date: 1958-1988 Extent: 7.4 cm of textual records. ­ 18 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 44 captions and 4 caption lists. ­ 5 letters. ­1 timeline. ­1 fact sheet. ­3 biographies. ­1 sketch. ­1 film roll list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French and caption lists, letters, timeline, fact sheet, biographies, a sketch, and a film roll list. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): General Emilio Agui Naldo; Philippine persons (Carlos Garcia); Philippine (persons); photographers personalities, Robert Doisneau (self portrait); photographers; photographers, Flip Schucke; Paulhan, Jean (alone); Pavleour, Muriel; Payne, John; Pearson, Lester (family); Pecci, Victor (tennis star); Peck, Gregory; D. Pedro de Orleons; Pele; Pelikan, Jiri; Pella, Guiseppi (alone); Pellegrin, Raymond; Pelletier, Emile (alone); Penalosa, Enrigue; Pepper, Claude; Perez, Vincent; Perillat, Guy; Perkins, Eddi (groups fighting); Perkins, Milly (alone); Perkins, Tony (groups indoors); Perry, Stephen (alone); Peru (personalities); Peter, Paul, and Mary (folk 76

singers); Petit, Pascal; Petit, Roland (ballet 1968); Peugeot (kidnap case); Peyrefitte, Roger; Marcos, Philippines; photographers, Edward Steichen (alone indoors); Suau, Anthony; Professor Piaget; Piatigorsky, George (alone); Piccard, Auguste (alone); Picabia, Francis (alone); Pablo Picasso; Pickering, Dr. William; and Pierangeli, Anna-Maria (alone). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.46 Sub-series: [Drawer 118: Personalities from Antonie Pinay to Pope Paul VI.] Date: 1936-1969 Extent: 5.9 cm of textual records. ­ 7 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 41 captions and 1 caption list. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 1 photocopy of a photograph. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption list, magazine clippings, and a photocopy of a photograph. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Pineau, Chrisian (alone outdoors); Pipinellis, M.; Pirie, Gordon; Pisani (alone); Pisier, Marie France; Pitt, David; Player, Gary; Pleven, Rene (alone); Plummer, Christopher; Podesta, Rossana; Pompideau, George (France groups outdoor); Pompideau, George (France alone); Pompideau, George (France family and wife); Pomidou, George (France indoor, groups) Pontie, Carlo; Ponti, Eduardo (cipi, son of Sophia Loren); Iggy Pop; Pope Paul the VI (visits to Africa, Australia, Somoa, Manilo, Rome); Pope Paul VI (in Africa 1969 August); Pope John XXIII (sculptures paintings); Pope John XXIII (some in ill health); Porter, M. William; and Portugal (persons) Mario Soares (new Prime Minister). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.47 Sub-series: [Drawer 119: Personalities from Robert Postel to Martha Reeves and The Vandells.] Date: 1950-1978 Extent: 5.8 cm of textual records. ­ 22 articles. ­ 5 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 6 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 5 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 3 sets of newspaper clippings. ­ 1 cardboard backing. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, caption lists, letter, plastic photo sleeves, newspaper clippings, and cardboard backing. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Power, Pouly, Roger; Elvis Presley (memorabilia and statue); Proby, P.J.; Prowse, Juliet (groups in U.S.); Puccini, Giacomo; Pudovkin, Vsevold; Pung, Jackie; Purdom, Edmond and Linda Christian; Quandt, Inge; Quezon, Manuel; Quinlan Family (trial); Quixote, Don; Rabine, Oscar (dissident society painter); Radford, Charles (Yeoman I.C.); Raft, George; Ralli, Giovianna; Ramoboa, Petrus (Lesotho Diamon); Ranger, Beverly; Raphael (painter); Ray, Man; Rayburn, Sam; Reddy, Helen (Singer); Redgrave, Vanessa (alone); Reed, Janet; and Rees, Dai. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.48 Sub-series: [Drawer 120: Personalities from Republican Paul Rogers to Rochester.] Date: 1947-1994 Extent: 7.1 cm of textual records. ­ 18 articles. ­ 4 filing copies. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 42 captions and 6 caption lists. ­ 3 letters. ­1 speech. ­ 3 sets of magazine clippings. 77

­ 1 newspaper clipping. ­1 note. ­2 postcards. ­1 newsletter. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, caption lists, letters, a speech, magazine clippings, newspaper clippings, a note, postcards, and a newsletter. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Rodin (sculptures); Rodilla, Simon (also tower); Rodham, Hugh (Hillary's brother); Rodgers, Richard; Rockwell, Norman; Rockwell, George L. (groups talking); Rockwell, George Lincon (death); Rockerfeller, Winthrop; Rockerfeller Steven (wedding); Rockerfeller, Steven (family); Reinhardt, Max; Rejaunier, Jeanne; Rambrant (night watch); Rambrandt; Remick, Lee; Remoortel, Eduoard, van (alone); Renaud, Line; Renaud, Madeleine; Renoir, Auguste; Resnais, Alain; Reuter, Ernst (alone, head and shoulders); Reveili, Beaumont; Ribiere, Rene; Richardson, Tony; Ridguray, General Matthew (groups); Reynolds, Debbie (and husband Harry Karl); Rhodesia Josjua Nkomo's Return; Rives, Henry S. Mr.; Robb, Chuck (wedding); Robb, Lynda Bird; Robertson, Cliff; Roberson, Dale (alone); Robinson, Edward G.; Robinson, James; Robinson, Ray (sugar); and Rocart, Michel. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.49 Sub-series: [Drawer 121: Personalities from Richard Rogers to Eleanor Roosevelt.] Date: 1936-1976 Extent: 7.3 cm of textual records. ­ 21 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 36 captions and 1 caption list. -- 2 negative sleeves. ­1 plastic folder. ­ 1 paper backing. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, caption list, negative sleeves, plastic folder, and a paper backing. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Rubens, Peter Paul; Russian B. Brumel, Valeri; Russian S. Mikhail Souslou; Russian former Soviet General Pjotr Gri Gorenko; Russian F. Faurtseva, Yekaterina A; Russian, E Ilya Ehrenburg (writer); Russian, E V.S. Emelyanou; Russian; Rogers, Rosemary (author); Rogers, Roy; Rogers, William (Secretary of State); Rogers, M. William; Rolling Stones; Ronet, Maurice; Rooney, Mickey; [missing], Pat; Roosa, Stuarta Apollo 14; Roosevelt, Elliiot (family); Roosevelt, Eleonor (in the middle East and India); Roosevelt, Franklin D. (mementoes); Roosevelt, Jubu [sic]; Rosai, Ottone (alone); Rosay, Francoise; Rothschiel, Alain, de; Rothschild, David De; Rougemoont, Denis de; Roumania [sic] Royalty (Carol with Lupes cu and home in Mexico); Roumania [sic] Royalty Princess Heana; Roumania [sic]Royalty Queen Marie (home); Roumania [sic]] Royalty King Michael (family); Rubirosa, Porfirio; Rubinstein, Helena; Robinstein, Arthur; Rudolph, Wilma; Rusk, Dean; Rogers, Etienne, Burin; Rubik, Erno (Hungarian architecture professor inventor of the rubiks cube); Russia (defectors to the west); and Mickey Rourke. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.50 Sub-series: [Drawer 122: Personalities from Alexei to Paul Sand.] Date: 1936-1975 Extent: 5.9 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 93 captions and 4 caption lists. ­ 1 newspaper. ­2 sets of newspaper clippings. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­11 photocopies of photographs.

78

Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption lists, newspaper, newspaper clippings, magazine clippings, and photocopies of photographs. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Sandel, Michael (Harvard professor); Russian M. Kiriline; Russian Kozlov; Russian Kasygin (in France); Russian Kruschev (in Austria); Krucshev at the U.N.; Russian Malinovski; Russian Yuri Gagarine (in France); Russian Zoia Menzulova; Russian; Russian Maya Plissetskaya; Breshnev Leonid (in Bonn, Germany May 1973); Gromyko, Andre; Sakharov, Mrs.; Russian (persons) Tchernenko (funeral); Russian Z, Zorin; Ryun, Jim; Sabrina; Jachs, Gunther (alone); Sacotte, Juge; Saenger, Dr. Ing E. (alone); Sagebrecht, Marianne; Sagan, Francoise; Sailer, Tony (alone); Saint Cyr, Lili; Saint-Marc, Commander; Sainterny, Jean; Sakharov, Andre (father of H bomb); Salam, Mr. Saeb; Salan, Raoul (alone); Abu Saleh P.L.O. Member; Sammartino Bruno (wrestler); and Sanys, Duncan (alone). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.51 Sub-series: [Drawer 123: Personalities from Laddy Sanford to George Segal.] Date: 1936-1977 Extent: 4.0 cm of textual records. ­ 18 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 36 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 2 foreign delivery notes. ­1 photocopy of layout. ­1 picture list. ­1 photograph sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption lists, foreign delivery notes, photocopy, picture lists, and photograph sleeve. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Santos, Manuel Dos; Saudan, Sylvain; Savalas, Telly "Kojaks"; Savary, Alain; Savory, Dr.; Scarpelli, Glen; Schacht, Al; Scheel, Walter; Scheider, Roy (Cannes '80); Schell, Maximilian; Schiller, Karl professor (West German); Schiaffino, Rosanna (groups, outdoors); Schinegger, Erik (girl Olympic skier change to male); Schleyer, Hand-Martin (funeral 1977); Schmitt, Florent; Schmidt, Helmut and Mitterand, Francois; Schmidt, Helmut (1981); Schmidt, Helmut (1976); Schmitt, Len; Romy Schneider; Romy Schneider; Schroder, Gerhard (alone); Schirra, Walter; Schreiber, Jean Jacques (family); Schuman, Horst; Schumacher, Kurt (alone talking); Schuman, Maurice (alone, head and shoulders); Scott, David; Scott, George; James Scott (boxer in prison); Scronton, Willam (alone, head and shoulders); Seagren, Bob; Seberg, Jean; and Seeger, Peter. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.52 Sub-series: [Drawer 124: Personalities from Miscellaneous `S' to Simone Simon.] Date: 1936-1985 Extent: 3.9 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 70 captions and 1 caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­1 interview. ­ 1 photocopy of a photograph. ­ 2 sets of magazine clippings. ­1 biography. ­1 newspaper clipping. ­12 photo sleeves. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption list, letter, interview, photocopy of a photograph, magazine clippings, biography, newspaper clippings, and photo sleeves. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Misln S.; Segonia, Duchess of; Seguy, Gaston; Selassie, Haile; de Séligny, Paul; Selznick, David; Selden, David; Serigny, Alain de (alone); Serin, Marcel (alone); Seyrig, Deephine; Seydoux, Roge (alone); Betty Shabazz (Malcom X wife and children); Shakespeare, William; Shawn, Ted; Shcharansky, Avital (Soviet Dissident); Sheruvood, Roberta (alone); Sici, Vittorio de 79

(alone); Siddeque (Tiger) Leader of Mukti Bahii Bangladash; Siegfried, Andre (alone); Signoret, Simone (alone); Beverly Sills; Martha Simmons Troble (at tent city); Simmons, Jean (alone); Simmon, Michael (alone); Simon, Simone (alone); Sinatra, Nancy; Sinatra, Frank; Sinatra, Frank Jr. (single figures face shots); Sinatra, Frank Jr. (kidnapping); and Siqueiros, David A. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.53 Sub-series: [Drawer 125: Personalities from Svetlana Stalin to Sylvester Stallone.] Date: 1969-1986 Extent: 5.0 cm of textual records. ­14 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 34 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 3 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 translation. ­ 1 film roll list. ­2 negative sleeves. ­3 labels attached to outside of drawer envelopes. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copy, captions in English and French, caption lists, plastic photo sleeves, translation, film roll list, negative sleeves, and labels attached to outside of drawer envelopes. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Sirhan, Bishara (father of Sirhan, Sirhan); Skelton, Red; Skibine, Georges; Slezak, Walter (alone); Smith, Ian (Rhoesian Prime Minister); Smith, Peggy and Guy (Rusk's daughter); Solzheniteza, Alexander; Soames, Christopher; Soares, Mario (Portugal communist leader); Socrates; Solana, Jose (alone); Solinas, Marisa (alone); Alexander Solzhenitsyn; S.A. Botha election campaign poster; South Africa by David Turrnley; Winnie Mandela; Spaak, Agnes; Soutine, Chaim; Spaak, Catherine; Spaak, Paul (alone, head and shoulders); Spadolini, Alberta (alone); Spanish Royalty Prince Don Carlos (as a child); Spanish Royalty Prince Don Carlos (as a young man); Spann, Carter, William (President Carter nephew); Carlos, King Juan (visits Saudi Arabia); Spendel, General Hans (alone); Speer, Albert (1969); Spender, Stephen Author (poet); Stalin, Svetlana (alone, head and shoulders); Stack, Robert; Stafford, Frederick; Stafford, Thomas (astronaut and family); Stalin, Jacob; and Stalone, Sylvester. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.54 Sub-series: [Drawer 126: Personalities from Dr. Wolfgang Stammberger to Tommy Steele.] Date: 1936-1969 Extent: 7.4 cm of textual records. ­ 24 articles. ­ 4 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 23 captions. ­ 1 letter. ­1 note. ­1 interview. ­ 3 plastic photo sleeves. ­1 magazine clipping. ­1 magazine photocopy. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, letter, note, interview, plastic photo sleeves, magazine clippings, and magazine photocopy. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Stevenson, Adlai (groups, abroad); Stevensan, Adlai (groups outdoors); Stevenson, Adlai (alone, head and shoulders); Stevenson, Adlai (family, home); Stewart, Alexandra (groups, outdoors); Stewart, Jackie (alone and with family); Stewart, Michael (France); Stikken, D.V; Stimson, Henry L.; Stoessel, Walter (U.S. State department); Stokowski, Leopold (alone, conducting); Stokowski, Leopold; Stokowski, Leopold (alone, indoors); Amiral Storelli Remplace; Strasberg, Susan; Stanwyck, Barbara; Ringo Starr (Beatle); Starr, Samantha; Stavin, Mary; Steele, Tommy; Steinberg, William; Steinhardt, Lawrence; Stepinac, Archbishop; Isaac Stern; Cat, Stevens (wedding); Stevens, Sir Roger; Stevenson Adlai (playing tennis); Strauss, Peter; Stravinsky, Igor 80

(alone, head and shoulders); Stroyberg, Annette and Roger Vadim; Sukarno (family); Sukarno President (alone); Sukarno (groups); Sumac, Yma; and Sumair, Princess. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.55 Sub-series: [Drawer 127: Personalities from Supreme Court Judges to Liz Taylor with Richard Burton.] Date: 1936-1981 Extent: 6.5 cm of textual records. ­ 17 articles. ­ 6 filing copies. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 25 captions and 3 caption lists. ­ 1 press release. ­1 newspaper clipping. ­1 biography. ­ 1 note. ­ 2 sets of magazine clippings. ­ 1 note card. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English, French and German, caption lists, press release, newspaper clippings, biography, note, magazine clippings, and a note card. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Svendler, Stefan Bulgarian Spy; Joan Sutherland (Soprano); Sutherland, Graham; Donald Sutherland (1981); Olaf Palme (prime minister Swedish); Swedish Royal Family King Gustar Adolph; Sweden Prince Bertil and Lilhain Craig (marriage 1976); Swedish Royal Family Count Facke Bermadotte (alone); Swedish Royal Family Prince Bertil; Swedish Royal Family; Swedish Royal Family Crown Prince Carl Gustar (alone); Swedish Royal Family King Gustar (family); [missing] Royal Family Princess Margaretta; Swedish Royal Family, King Gustar (groups outdoors); Swedish Royal Family Prince Wilhelm; Swedish; Sweeny, Chas; Syrian Allog, Michel; Syrian (persons); Syrian Atassi Lt. General Lou ai'; Tabouis, Geneviere; Taittinger, Jean; Taruffi, Puerio; Tate, Sharon (murder scene); Taylor, Elizabeth; Taylor, Liz (with Burton and children); Taylor, Tony; Tcherepnin, Alex; Tcherina, Ludmilla; Teagarden, Jack; Tebbenjohanns, Ariane Mrs.; Tedder, Arthur (English WWZ); Terracini, Umberto; Tensing, Sherpa (groups, outdoors); Terray, Lionel; Thailand Royalty King Ananda (funeral); Thailand Royalty Prince Buri; Thailand Royalty Princess Mahidal; Thailand Royalty King Phumipham and wife Queen Sirikit; Thailand Royalty Prince Chula; Thailand Royalty Prince Wan Waithayakon; Thailand Royalty; and Thailand (persons) bijayendrn General Char. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.56 Sub-series: [Drawer 128: Personalities from Thailand-Sarit Thanarat to V.S. TubmanPresident of Liberia.] Date: 1936-1977 Extent: 7.0 cm of textual records. ­ 25 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 44 captions and caption list. ­ 3 sets of newspaper clippings. ­1 cardboard backing. ­ 1 receipt. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption list, newspaper clippings, cardboard backing, and a receipt. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Thailand; Theodorakis, Mikis; Thierre, Jean-Pierre; Thomas, Danny; Thomas, Evertt C (heart transplant); Thomson, George Paget; Thorez, Maurice; Thorpe, Jeremy; Tierney, Gene; Timmermans, Felix; Tixier, Vignancour; Tito; Tomonaga, Dr. Shinichiro; Tombalbaye, M; Tone, Franchot; Tonga, Queen of (groups, outdoors); Topol, Chaim; Toscanini, Arturo (alone); Toulouse, Lautree; Tour, Boyer de la; Toure, Sekoui; Townsend, Peter; Toynkee, Arnold; Traore, Maussa; Trenet, Charles; Trevor, Elleston; Triboulet; Tree, Penelope (model); Trudeau, Margaret (1977); Trujillo, Rafael Jr.; 81

Truman, Harry; Tucci Guiseppe (alone); Tuck, Porter; Tucker, Sophie; Tukuaho-Fatafehi, Prince; Tommy Tune and Twiggy; Tunesia (persons) Bahi Ladgham; Tunesia (persons) Sodok Mokkadem; Tunisia personalities; Turkish; Turkish Prime Minister: Mr S. Demireh; and Turkish (royalty). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.57 Sub-series: [Drawer 129: Personalities from Glen Turner to Vietnam (person).] Date: 1944­[ca.1990] Extent: 6.6 cm of textual records. ­ 12 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 44 captions. ­ 3 sets of magazine clippings. ­1 note. ­ 1 note card. ­ 2 biographies. ­1 negative sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, magazine clippings, note, note card, biographies, and a negative sleeve. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Turpin, Randy; Tyler, Carole; Urzi, Saro; Ustinov, Peter; Utrillo, Maurice (art); Utrillo, Maurice (family funeral); Vadim, Annette (alone); Vadim, Roger; Valento, Caterina; Vallon, Louis (alone); Vallone, Ray; Valluy, General; Vancliburn; Vandenburie, Pierre; Vanderbilt, William; Van Doren Mamie (alone, head and shoulders); Van Doren, Mamie; Vaughn, Rpbert; Vaughn, Sarah; Veil, Simone; Vermeersch, Jeanette; Victor, Paul Emile; Vietnam General Ba-Cut; Vietnam (persons) Nquyen Cao Ky (family); Vietnam (persons) Ngo Dinh Diem (groups, indoors); Vietnam (persons) Ha Van Lau; Vietnam (persons) Ky and Thieu; Vietnam (persons) Nguyen Cao Ky (alone); Vietnam (persons) Ho-Chi Minh (groups) Vietnam (persons) Ngo Dinh Nhu (family); Vietnam (persons) Nguyen Xaun Phony; Vietnam (persons); Vietnam Royalty Emperor and Empresses; Vietnam (persons) Xuau Thuy; Vietnam (persons) nguyen Van Tam; and Vietnam (persons) Qu Truong Thanh. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.58 Sub-series: [Drawer 130: Personalities from Bao-Dai to Cornelia Wallace.] Date: 1952-1990 Extent: 3.2 cm of textual records. ­ 6 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 14 captions and caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 biography. ­ 3 sets of photocopies of newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption list, letter, biography, and photocopies of newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Bao-Dai (groups); Vigerie, D'astier de la (alone); Vignau, Jean Pierre (French dare devil); Villaverde, Marquis of; Virolainkiu, Johannes (Finland); Visconti, Luchino (Italian stage director); Vitetti, Le Comte; Vitti, Monica; Viviana, Mme Vlaminch; Volterra, Susy; Von Bock, Feddor; Von Karajan, Eliette; Voth; Walker, Daniel Byron (marine Lance corporal funeral Iraq Crisis); Walker, William; Walkouritz, Abraham (alone); George Wallace (alone); George Wallace. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.59 Sub-series: [Drawer 131: Personalities from Henry Wallace to Charles E. Wilson- Secretary of Defense.] Date: 1936-1977 Extent: 3.5 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 8 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­ 2 photocopies of model release forms. ­1 photocopy of a note. 82

­2 photocopies of newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and French, filing copies, captions in French and caption lists in English, letter, photocopies of model release forms, photocopy of a note, and photocopies of newspaper clippings. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Walsingham, Sir Edmund; Wagner, Walter (alone); Waterman, Peter; Watson, Arthur; Wayser, Nathalue; Weatherly, Shawn (Miss Universe 1980); Weissmueller, Johnny; Welch, Racquet; Wenck, General; Werner, Dr. (German); West, Rebecca; White, Lt. Col. Edward (funeral); Whitman, Walter; Whittle, Sir Frank; Widmark, Richard; Wiesenthal, Simon; Wigman, Mary; Wigny, Pierre de; Wilden, Billy; Wilder, Gene; Wilkinson, Maurice; Clayton Williams; Williams, Esther; and Williams, Vaughan (alone). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.60 Sub-series: [Drawer 132: Personalities from Dagmar Wilson to Gus Wortha.] Date: 1937-1976 Extent: 6.8 cm of textual records. ­ 13 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­8 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 1 letterhead sheet. ­1 letter envelope. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 7 plastic photo sleeves. ­ 1 film roll list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, caption lists, letterhead sheet, letter envelope, magazine clipping, plastic photo sleeves, and film roll list. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Windsor (death); Winkler, #9; Writz, Willard; Wolfe, Glynn; Wolf, Virginia; Wolff, Albert; Wood, Henry (alone, conducting); Natalie Wood; Woodruff, Bob (football coach); Wormser, Oliver (alone); Wright Wilbur and Orville; Malcom X (funeral); Malcom X (inc. good book prints); Yameogo; Yemen (persons) King Ahmed;York, Alvin; Youlou, Fulbert (President Congo); Tito, Yogoslavia; Yugoslavia (persons); Mishima, Yukio; and Zummerman, General Dons. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3. 61 Sub-series: [Drawer 133: U.S. President John F. Kennedy.] Date: 1964-1968 Extent: 3.5 cm of textual records. ­ 1 caption and 3 caption lists. ­ 1 printed image on paper. ­1 form. ­1 backing board. ­1 booklet. ­1 press kit. ­ 1 newspaper clipping. ­1 fact sheet. Scope and Content: Records consists of captions, caption lists, printed image on paper, form, backing board, booklet, a press kit, newspaper clippings, and a fact sheet. The primary subjects of these documents are: President John F. Kennedy with sub-subjects of Kennedy, Bahamas, U.S.S. J.F.K., schools, head shoots, funeral and burial, cemetery model, and assassination exterior views. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.62 Sub-series: [Drawer 134: U.S. President John F. Kennedy and Personalities Nelson Rockefeller.] Date: 1968-1979 Extent: 10.0 cm of textual records. ­ 10 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­4 newspapers. 83

­ 8 backing boards. ­1 shipment list. Scope and Content: Records consists of captions, caption lists, letters, newspapers, backing boards, and a shipment list. The subjects of these documents are: newspapers day of Kennedy's Assassination 23 November 1963; Dallas Times Herald Kennedy Assassination; Drell (list of material return); Rockefeller Plaza dedication; Vice-Presidential House; and Rockefeller, Nelson. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.63 Sub-series: [Drawer 135: U.S. President Lyndon Johnson.] Date: 1965-1967 Extent: 1.4 cm of textual records. ­ 2 captions. ­ 2 newspapers. ­1 note. ­2 slide frames. ­3 photo sleeves. ­1 outline. ­1 telegram. ­1 chronology. ­ 6 plastic photo sleeves. Scope and Content: Records consists of captions in English and French, newspapers, note, slide frames, photo sleeves, outline, telegram, chronology, and plastic photo sleeves. The primary subject these documents are: President Lyndon Johnson with sub-subjects Samoa, President Johnson's daughter Linda's wedding, Inauguration Young and Republican (1965), inaugurations (indoors), press conferences, historic, and groups indoors with cabinet. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.64 Sub-series: [Drawer 136: U.S. President Richard Nixon.] Date: 1964-1974 Extent: 4.4 cm of textual records. ­ 3 articles. ­ 2 captions and 5 caption lists. ­1 photocopy of photograph. ­1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, captions and caption lists, photocopy of photograph, and plastic photo sleeve. The primary subjects of these documents are: President Richard Nixon with sub-subjects of press conference, groups, campaigning outdoors, Air Force One, with personalities, family, material, and Pat Nixon. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.65 Sub-series: [Drawer 137: U.S. President Gerald Ford.] Date: 1974-1976 Extent: 2.5 cm of textual records. ­22 captions. ­1 envelope. ­1 press release. ­1 magazine. ­1 note. Scope and Content: Records consists of captions, envelope, press release, magazine, and note. The primary subjects of these documents are: President Gerald Ford with sub-subjects of campaigning 76, Lebanon Crisis, 1974 book material, and alone. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.66 Sub-series: [Drawer 138: U.S. President Gerald Ford, Mrs. Betty Ford, and U.S. President Jimmy Carter.] Date: 1977-1978 84

Extent: 1.7 cm of textual records. ­ 4 articles. ­ 1 caption list. ­1 photocopy of photograph. ­1 note. ­1 press release. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, caption list, photocopy of photograph, note, and press release. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Mrs. Betty Ford; Ford (soy meet 1977); former President Ford (skiing 1978 with Pierre Trudeau); historical photos of President And Mrs. Ford; Walter Mondale (historical pictures); and President and Mrs. Carter official portraits. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.67 Sub-series: [Drawer 139: Personalities from Kurt Waldheim and U.S. President Jimmy Carter.] Date: 1977-1980 Extent: 3.5 cm of textual records. ­ 5 articles. ­5 photocopies of photographs. ­1 plastic photo sleeve. ­2 newspaper clippings. ­1 press release. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, photocopies of photographs, plastic photo sleeve, newspaper clippings, and press release. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Bell, Griffin (Attorney General); Carter (1980 Campaigning and other Presidential items); Amy Carter (in Hawaii);Vance, Cyrus; Vance and Sapat (Middle East talks); Vance, Cyrus and Mrs. Shcharansky (1978); Vance, Cyrus (in Moscow with Brezhnev and Gromyko 1978); Strauss, Robert; Carter at OAS Reception at Signing of Panama Canal Treaty with White House photographers; President Carter and Jerry Brown (together); and Carter with cabinet members and staff. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.68 Sub-series: [Drawer 140: U.S. President Jimmy Carter, Mrs. Lillian Carter, Amy Carter, and U.S. President Ronald Reagan.] Date: 1977-1989 Extent: 5.5 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. ­ 1 caption and 1 caption list. ­1 negative sleeve. ­5 slide contact sheets. ­4 letter envelopes. ­1 photocopy of photograph. Scope and Content: Records consists of article, caption, caption list, negative sleeve, contact sheets, letter envelopes, and photocopy of photograph. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Carter and Reagan (together campaign 80), Sandler, Roger (Mrs. Elizabeth Dole), Conversions of 1980 Presidential Campaign, Plains, Georgia, Carter (historical photos), Carter (family roots), and Secretary George Shultz (treasury). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 3.69 Sub-series: [Drawer 141: U.S. President Ronald Reagan and Nancy Reagan.] Date: 1977-1985 Extent: 1.7 cm of textual records. ­ 3 articles. ­ 1 captions. ­ 1 letter. ­1 press release. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, caption, letter, and press release. The primary subjects of these documents are: President Ronald Reagan with sub-subjects of (President 85

Ronald Regan with President Ford together), White House (china service), Mrs. Reagan Nancy, Germany 1985, and demonstrations sells his tax plan. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection.

86

Series 4: Subject files created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Date: 1935-[ca. 1990] Extent: 1.13 meters of textual records. ­311 articles. ­32 filing copies. ­245 captions and 58 caption lists. ­8 letters. Scope and Content: Series consists of articles, filing copies, captions, caption lists, letters, newspaper and magazine clippings, photocopies of textual records, receipts, notes, photo releases, model release forms, press kit, newspapers, a college newspaper, flyers, booklets, pamphlets, exhibition takeaway, fact sheets, transcripts, and business cards. The records contain information on a variety of topics arranged in alphabetical order. The records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The photographs in reference can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Notes: Inclueds records in French and German. 4.1 Sub-series: [Drawer 142: Accidents and Animals] Date: 1976-1989 Extent: 2.5 cm of textual records. ­ 4 articles. ­ 10 captions and caption list. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­ 5 photocopies of newspaper clippings. ­1 newspaper. ­1 receipt. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, captions, caption list, magazine clipping, and photocopies of newspaper clippings, newspaper, and a receipt. The primary subject of these documents are: animals with sub-subjects of horses, wild mustangs, ground hog, mammals (birth of a dolphin), veterinary, dogs setters, dogs, husky, bulldogs, cattle (artificial insemination), cats, cat show, bears, bats, and armadillo. Primary subject: accidents (Broadway Central Hotel collapse), plane crash general, and accidents survivors from UAL Flight 881 (crash 2/24). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.2 Sub-series: [Drawer 143: Animals, Archaeology, Art, and Astronomy] Date: 1953-1972 Extent: 2.5 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 10 captions and 3 caption lists. ­1 piece of paper. ­2 background research. ­1 magazine clipping. ­1 newspaper. ­1 press kit. ­1 photo release. ­ 4 photocopies of photographs. ­1 note. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, captions in English and French, caption lists, piece of paper, background research, magazine clippings, newspaper, press kit, photo release, photocopies of photographs, and a note. The primary subjects of these documents are: animals with sub-subjects of llamas, guerillas, raccoons, alligators, turtle, mammal whale, wolf, animals small, and zonkey (zebra and donkey). Primary subject: art (Venus de Milo and other sculptures), archaeology, astronomy with sub-subjects of solar eclipse, NASA photographs, Saturn, moon, moon rocks, and southern skies. 87

Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.3 Sub-series: [Drawer 144: Astronomy through Aviation] Date: 1969-1981 Extent: 5.1 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­ 2 empty folders. ­ 16 captions and 6 caption lists. ­ 9 photocopies of photographs. ­2 note. ­ 21 newspaper clippings. ­2 photocopies of newspaper clippings. ­2 news releases. ­1 piece of cardboard. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, caption lists, photocopies of photographs, notes, newspaper clippings, photocopies of newspaper clippings, news release, and cardboard. The primary subjects of these documents are: aviation with sub-subjects of atomic "blast" explosion, airport (Dallas Fort worth), helicopter, industry, air force base Minnesota, AWAC's, Apollo II (plus other NASA flights), Apollo 12, rockets, Gemini Projects, Mars Voyager, Mercury Mission, control room and launching pad, Apollo 14, space astronauts, rockets foreign, space (Skylab June 1973), space shuttle, and astronauts. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.4 Sub-series: [Drawer 145: Aviation through Children] Date: 1936­[ca.1990] Extent: 4.0 cm of textual records. ­ 4 articles. ­ 7 captions. ­1 backing board. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, and backing board. The primary subjects of these documents are: aviation (propfan [sic] propulsion system begins ground tests), aviation, banks (cash mach general shots), beaches, bombs, business (women), New England cemeteries, and children (indoors, single). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. Linkage: Werner Wolff Fonds 4.5 Sub-series: [Drawer 146: Children through Civic] Date: 1936­[ca.1990] Extent: 0.9 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. ­1 caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of article and caption list. The primary subjects of these documents are: children (war orphans from Korea to US), and civic campaign workers. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.6 Sub-series: Drawer 147: [Clouds through Crowds] Date: 1936-1973 Extent: 2.7 cm of textual records. ­ 3 articles. ­ 1 caption. ­ 1 note on outside of envelope. ­1 newspaper clipping.

88

Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, caption, note attached to outside of envelope, and newspaper clipping. The primary subjects of these documents are: college, graduation, communications, computer checkout counter, cowboys and cowgirls. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.7 Sub-series: [Drawer 148: Civil Rights] Date: 1962-1968 Extent: 1.2 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. ­1 caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­ 1 envelope. ­1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. ­1 note. Scope and Content: Records consists of article, caption list, letter, envelope, photocopy of newspaper clipping, and a note. The primary subjects of these documents are: Civil Rights with sub-subjects of demonstration (Sheraton Palace Hotel San Francisco, California, 3/6/1964), resurrection city closing Washington D.C. 1968, Albany Georgia 1962, and church rebuilding Mississippi. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.8 Sub-series: [Drawer 149: Civil Rights through Demonstration] Date: 1960s-1970s Extent: 3.5 cm of textual records. ­ 5 articles. ­1 caption and 1 caption list. ­1 photocopy. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, caption, caption list, and photocopy. The primary subjects of these documents are: dance club, The Condor, roller-disco, demonstrations, anti-war 1970s, Anti-War demonstrations 1960s, Japanese disarmament demonstration, and demonstrations May tribe. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.9 Sub-series: [Drawer 150: Demonstrations] Date: 1936-1969 Extent: 0.7 cm of textual records. ­ 1 caption. ­ 1 college newspaper. ­ 2 newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of caption, college newspaper, and newspaper clippings. The primary subjects of these documents are: SDS Demonstrations Students for a Democratic Society and U.S. demonstration anti-Castro. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.10 Sub-series: [Drawer 151: Demonstrations through Drugs] Date: 1936-1989 Extent: 1.9 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. ­ 1 caption and 1 caption list. ­ 1 flyer. ­1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. ­1 note. Scope and Content: Records consists of article, caption, caption list, flyer, photocopy of newspaper clippings, and note. The primary subjects of these documents are: anti-abortion demonstrations, demonstration pro-choice abortion (rally Washington D.C. April 9, 1989), anti89

nuclear demonstrations, anti-nuclear power, drugs methadone clinic in Harlem and Brooklyn and drugs ICE. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.11 Sub-series: [Drawer 152: Drugs, Earthquakes, and Ecology] Date: 1965-1986 Extent: 3.3 cm of textual records. ­ 8 articles. ­ 2 captions and caption list. ­ 1 letter. ­ 3 photocopies of newspaper clippings. ­1 envelope. ­ 1 form. ­1 piece of paper. ­ 8 model release. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, caption in French, caption list in English, letter, photocopies of newspaper clippings, envelope, form, paper, and model releases. The primary subject of these documents are: ecology with sub-subjects of foreign, pollution control, whales, endangered species, whooping cranes, killing seals story, and earthquakes. Primary subjects: drugs with sub-subjects of medical, opium, hashish, foreign, marijuana, heroin, crack users, and cocaine. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.12 Sub-series: [Drawer 153: Ecology through Families] Date: 1977-1989 Extent: 1.9 cm of textual records. ­ 5 articles. ­2 captions and caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, and caption list. The primary subject of these documents are: P.C.B. demonstrations, ecology, hazardous waste, toxic leak Texasplant, Hawaii, oil tanker spill, solar energy, economy, R.I. Bank closing, energy, wind turbine, and eye. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.13 Sub-series: Drawer 154: [Families and Farms] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 1.8 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. Scope and Content: Records consists of an article. The primary subjects of these documents are: industry and dairy. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.14 Sub-series: [Drawer 155: Fashion through Games] Date: 1954-1978 Extent: 4.9 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 6 captions. ­ 26 photocopies of photographs. ­2 photocopies of newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, empty folder, captions, photocopies of photographs, and photocopies of newspaper clippings. The primary subject of these documents are: fashion furs, keating, Nolan Patterson, Robert Smith, Ceo Choplin, 90

Covello, Carrol Seghers, Wolff, fashions from London (1975,1977), fashion underwear and bathing suits,fashion 1978, fashion England, housing exterior, fences and gates, 1954 Annual Report, fireworks, fish, manta ray, octopus, fugu, sharks, flags American, and flowers. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.15 Sub-series: [Drawer 156: Gangs through Housing] Date: 1936-1979 Extent: 4.9 cm of textual records. ­ 8 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 11 captions and 3 caption lists. ­69 pages of newspaper clippings attached to paper. ­ 1 form. ­1 foreign delivery note. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions and caption lists, pages of newspaper clippings attached to paper, form, and foreign delivery note. The primary subjects of these documents are: history, gay nineties, holidays, xmas [sic], Poland, Thanksgiving, Iran hostages, American hostages in American Embassy in Iran, motels, gangs, Los Angeles, California, U.S. Washington D.C. State Department, gun control, Kennesaw Georgia, handicrafts, girl without legs, quadruple girls, disabled vet Story, and housing suburban homes. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.16 Sub-series: [Drawer 157: Housing through Industry] Date: 1939-1982 Extent: 3.4 cm of textual records. ­ 7 articles. ­ 6 captions and 4 caption lists. ­2 letter envelopes. ­1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. ­1 piece of cardboard. ­1 news release. ­1 backing board. ­1 piece of paper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions in English and French, caption lists, letter envelopes, photocopy of newspaper clipping, piece of cardboard, news release, backing board, and piece of paper. The primary subjects of these documents are: humorous, spontaneous situations, humor, humorous pictures N.Y. characters, hurricane IWA, Hawaii, 1982, hurricanes, Indians women, Indian dance, Indians demonstrations, Indian men American, Indians, Pueblo, Indians Sioux, Indians Pomo, Indians religion, industry agriculture, and industry auto import. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.17 Sub-series: [Drawer 158: Industry] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 2.6 cm of textual records. ­ 11 articles. ­ 2 filing copies. ­ 3 captions. ­ 1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, captions in English and French, and magazine clippings. The primary subjects of these documents are: industry with sub-subjects of lumber foreign, fishing, shoes American (boots), mushrooms, demolition of Biltmore Hotel (Oklahoma City), iron, and coal miners. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 91

4.18 Sub-series: [Drawer 159: Industry through Meat Boycott] Date: 1936­[ca.1990] Extent: 2.2 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. ­ 1 caption. Scope and Content: Records consists of article in German and caption. The primary subjects of these documents are: industry, oil, markets (flea market), landscapes, and fall. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.19 Sub-series: [Drawer 160: Medical] Date: 1953-1985 Extent: 3.7 cm of textual records. ­ 10 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 12 captions and 4 caption lists. ­7 model release forms. ­1 newspaper. ­1 newsletter. ­1 background information. ­2 magazine clippings. ­1 photocopy of newspaper clippings. ­1 fact sheet. ­1 story proposal. ­1 photocopy of photograph. ­1 news release. ­2 transcripts. ­1 question sheet for media. ­1 magazine. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions and caption lists, model release forms, newspaper, newsletter, background information, magazine clippings, photocopy of newspaper clippings, fact sheet, story proposal, photocopy of photograph, news release, transcripts, question sheet for media, and magazine. The primary subject of these documents are: medical with sub-subjects of home birth, medicine, babies born to alcoholic mothers, premature babies, oncogenes [sic] cancer, boy-in-bubble, children, mobile isolator system, penicillin, microscopic views of aids virus, growth of aids virus, electron photomicrograph cancer, aids, The Connecticut hospice, William Schroeder (artificial heart recipient), cardiology, artificial heart implant, 1984, and Red Cross. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.20 Sub-series: [Drawer 161: Medical through Mills] Date: 1977-1981 Extent: 8.9 cm of textual records. ­11 articles. ­2 captions and 5 caption lists. ­2 notes. ­1 backing board. ­1 letter envelope. ­5 business cards. ­1 magazine. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, captions and caption lists, notes, backing board, letter envelope, business cards, and a magazine. The primary subject of these documents are: medical with the sub-subjects of nurses, patients, candy stripers, kidney transplant, medical, T.V. operation, paramedics, monkey used in medical research, animals used in experiment, medical research, training monkeys to service quadriplegics, sleep research, sperm studies, x-rays, men bowery types, homeless, bums, mental, electroshock treatment, medicine, nervous breakdown, mental retartion [sic], metric measurements, scanning electron microscope, test tube baby, fertilization sperm, eggs, microscopic images, reproduction, sexual reproduction, people, midgets, and Congress of Little People. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4. 21 Sub-series: [Drawer 162: Military] 92

Date: 1969-1974 Extent: 4.1 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­2 empty folders. ­ 3 captions and 3 caption list. ­2 photograph list. ­1 form. ­1 booklet. ­1 photocopy. ­1 piece of paper. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, empty folders, captions, caption lists, photograph list, form, booklet, photocopy, and piece of paper. The subjects of these documents are: army, women, recruiting office, The Discovery (NASA, 1984), U.S. Green Beret training, army US negros [sic], army United States (abroad Germany), NATO (May 20-21, 1976), NATO ( 12/75 meeting), NATO (May 75), NATO meeting Brussels June 26, 1974, Mexican army (West Point), aviation, airplanes in storage, and United States navy submarines. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.22 Sub-series: [Drawer 163: Military through Music] Date: 1980-1986 Extent: 3.0 cm of textual records. ­ 9 articles. ­4 filing copies. ­2 empty folders. ­ 9 captions and 4 caption lists. ­ 1 letter. ­1 memo. ­1 photograph release. ­1 photocopy of photograph. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption lists, letter, memo, photograph release, and photocopy of photograph. The primary subjects of these documents are: weapons (The Keys To Doomsday), U.S. Military Navy patrol hydrofoil (missile ship 1982), perishing missile, cruise missile, military, military history of tanks (new pictures of Soviet ships), navy United States 6th fleet, navy United States Coast Guard (men), U.S. Navy missiles and aircrafts, US Military Civil Defense (fingerprinting 50's), motoring traffic, motoring auto safety testing of airbags, motoring racing, control impact demonstration, music (fiddler's convention galax, N.M. 1980), and motoring transit of new cars. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.23 Sub-series: [Drawer 164: Music through Paleontology] Date: 1947-1992 Extent: 2.5 cm of textual records. ­ 15 articles. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 4 captions and caption list. ­ 2 letter.--1 form. ­1 photocopy of contact sheet. ­1 magazine clipping. ­5 photocopies from a book. ­1 colour photocopy of photograph. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, empty folder, captions and caption list, letters, form, photocopy of contact sheet, magazine clippings, photocopies from a book, and a colour photocopy of photograph. The primary subjects of these documents are: music, historical instruments, Rock Bands concerts, performing, industry musical instruments (violins), American Nazi's, family nudes, Miss Nude America Contest, occupation, transit workers, and Peace Corps. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.24 Sub-series: [Drawer 165: People] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] 93

Extent: 0.8 cm of textual records. ­ 2 captions and caption list. Scope and Content: Records consists of captions and caption list. The primary subjects of these documents are: blacks, welfare, religion, black Jews, and black people (arts). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.25 Sub-series: [Drawer 166: Police and Crime] Date: 1936-1994 Extent: 3.1 cm of textual records. ­ 6 articles. ­ 3 empty folders. ­ 1 caption and caption list. ­3 photocopies of photographs. ­1 photograph list. ­1 newspaper. ­2 newspaper clippings. ­3 photocopies of newspaper clippings. ­1 memo. ­6 photocopies of book pages. ­ 1 agenda. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, empty folders, caption and caption list, photocopies of photographs, photograph list, newspaper, newspaper clippings, photocopies of newspaper clippings, memo, photocopies of book pages, and agenda. The primary subjects of these documents are: police (dated N.Y.C.), police arrest, New Orleans Sniper (police crime), search for black children (Atlanta, GA), Atlanta killing (Harlem March 3/14/1981), police (Detroit corner narcs [sic]), drugs, arrest, busts, Salvadoran refugees in Tijuana Jail, Guatemala refugees in Boston, Hispanic street people in Latin America, people, Cubans, Vietnam (boat people), people Japanese in U.S.A., East German refugees, police and children. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.26 Sub-series: [Drawer 167: Pornography through Religion- Cults] Date: 1936-1982 Extent: 3.5 cm of textual records. ­ 8 articles. ­ 5 caption lists. ­ 1 information sheet. ­1 photocopy of photograph. ­1 newspaper clipping. ­1 memo. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, caption lists, information sheet, photocopy of photograph, newspaper clipping, and memo. The primary subjects of these documents are: homeless in Mineola, N.Y., prison inmates, prisons, Monterey [sic]shock incarceration, correction facility, prostitution (The Lady's of Salt Wells Villa), prostitution, religion "Serpent Haudlers", revivals (American evangelists), religion (the Shroud of Torin), religion (1st married Catholic priest), and religion cult (snake handlers). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.27 Sub-series: [Drawer 168: Religion through Day Care Center] Date: 1936-1973 Extent: 2.0 cm of textual records. ­ 5 articles. ­ 2 captions and caption list. ­ 2 newspaper clippings. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, caption list, and newspaper clippings. The primary subjects of these documents are: religion, Utah Mormons, glide memorial, Methodist Church, Amish, Miami, riots, and schools new math.

94

Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.28 Sub-series: [Drawer 169: Schools through Ships] Date: 1967-1987 Extent: 2.9 cm of textual records. ­ 4 articles. ­ 4 captions. ­2 notes. ­1 magazine. ­1 plastic folder. ­1 newspaper clipping. ­1 receipt. ­2 folders. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, captions, notes, magazine, plastic folder, newspaper clippings, receipt, and folders. The primary subjects of these documents are: schools, private, rats, science, science research, senior citizens (retirement community Florida), The Miami Florida elderly, senior citizens (men with canes), and Titanic (ships). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.29 Sub-series: [Drawer 170: Silhouette through Sports] Date: 1936-1991 Extent: 1.0 cm of textual records. ­ 2 articles. ­1 magazine clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles and magazine clipping. The primary subjects of these documents are: women, sports, football, college football, and horse racing. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.30 Sub-series: [Drawer 171: Sports through Stores] Date: 1936-1987 Extent: 1.8 cm of textual records. ­6 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 4 captions and caption list. ­ 5 archival boards. ­1 photocopy of site map. ­1 newspaper clipping. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folders, captions and caption list, archival boards, photocopy of site map, and newspaper clippings. The primary subjects of these documents are: medical, computer analyst of athletic training, sport (mud bowl), sport (ping pong players), Olympics (winter 1936 Germany), Olympics (Finland 1940), Olympics (1936), Germany (Olympic site for 1972), swimming, children, sport, track, and stock market fall 1987. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.31 Sub-series: [Drawer 172: Streakers [sic] through Unemployment] Date: 1965-1985 Extent: 2.1 of textual records. ­6 articles. ­ 2 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­1 pamphlet. ­1 note. ­1 photocopy of a model release. ­1 form. ­1 plastic folder. ­1 letter envelope. ­4 photocopies of photographs. ­1 photocopy of newspaper clipping. ­1 film roll list. ­1 invoice. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, caption lists in French and English, letters, pamphlet, note, photocopy of model release, form, plastic folder, letter envelope, photocopies of photographs, photocopy of newspaper clipping, film roll list, and 95

invoice. The primary subjects of these documents are: Bonn Economic Summit 1985, teens at work, Baadar Meinhof (terrorist), Kuwait airlines hijack, terrorism Munich Olympic tragedy, Bader Mein-hof Gang, (terrorist), terrorism Samuel Smith Queens shoot out, migrant farm workers out of work due to the big freeze in Florida, Belle Glade, Florida, and unemployment. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.32 Sub-series: [Drawer 173: Union through Zoo] Date: 1936-1978 Extent: 3.7 of textual records. ­ 7 articles. ­ 1 empty folder. ­ 2 captions and 2 caption lists. ­ 2 pamphlets. ­1 press kit. ­1 exhibition takeaway. ­1 photo book. ­1 letter envelope. ­1 press release. ­1 biography. ­1 magazine clipping. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, empty folder, captions and caption lists, pamphlets, press kit, exhibition takeaway, photo book, letter envelope, press release, biography, magazine clipping, and plastic photo sleeve. The primary subjects of these documents are: urban renewal, Vista, Flip Schulke ("An Underwater Look at Ski-ing"), Flip Schulke Underwater Portfolio, Flip Schulke (Bahamas, Spanish treasure find), Flip Schulke (water), water aqueducts, welfare (soup kitchen), science, witchcraft, England, and Africa. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.33 Sub-series: [Drawer 174: Night Train through Maine] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 0.7 cm of textual records. ­ 2 articles. ­1 newspaper clippings. ­1 photocopy of newspaper clippings. ­1 note. ­1 receipt. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, newspaper clippings, photocopies of newspaper clippings, note, and receipt. The primary subjects of these documents are: Kosti with sub-subjects of town meeting selection, U.S. voting town meeting and Kosti's problems. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.34 Sub-series: [Drawer 175] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.44 Sub-series: [Drawer 176] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 96

4.45 Sub-series: [Drawer 177] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.46 Sub-series: [Drawer 178] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.47 Sub-series: [Drawer 179: Architecture] Date: 1936­[ca.1990] Extent: 0.3 cm of textual records. Scope and Content: Records used to contain a photograph. The primary subjects of these documents are: (XAR 02 Lank) Herbert Lanks. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.48 Sub-series: [Drawer 180: Business] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 0.6 cm of textual records. Scope and Content: Records used to contain a photograph. The primary subjects of these documents are: (XBS 03 Dang) Gene Daniels. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.49 Sub-series: [Drawer 181] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.50 Sub-series: [Drawer 182] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. 97

Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.51 Sub-series: [Drawer 183] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.52 Sub-series: [Drawer 184] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.53 Sub-series: [Drawer 185: Military Conflicts] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 0.5 cm of textual records. ­ 1 article. Scope and Content: Records consists of an article titled, "Besen Camp Today." Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.54 Sub-series: [Drawer 186] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.55 Sub-series: [Drawer 187] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.56 Sub-series: [Drawer 188] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. 98

Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.57 Sub-series: [Drawer 189: Personalities `C', `D', and `E'] Date: 1936­[ca.1990] Extent: 0.5 cm of textual records. ­1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of a plastic photo sleeve. The primary subjects of these documents are: (XPR 06 Saka) Ken Sakamoto. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.58 Sub-series: [Drawer 190] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.59 Sub-series: [Drawer 191] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.60 Sub-series: [Drawer 192: Personalities from Tom Hayden, `H' and `I'] Date: 1936 ­ [ca.1990] Extent: 0.1 cm of textual records. ­1 plastic photo sleeve. ­1 archival board. Scope and Content: Records consists of a plastic photo sleeve and an archival board. The primary subjects of these documents are: (XPR 08 Carj) John Carruthers. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.61 Sub-series: [Drawer 193: Personalities `J' and `K'] Date: 1936 - [ca.1990] Extent: 0.6 cm of textual records. Scope and Content: Records used to contain photographs. The primary subjects of these documents are: (XPR11 Baum) J Bruce Baumann and (XPR11 Phil) Robert Phillips. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.62 Sub-series: [Drawer 194: Personalities `L', `M', and `N'] Date: 1936 - [ca.1990] 99

Extent: 1.3 cm of textual records. Scope and Content: Records used to contain photograph. The primary subjects of these documents are: (XPR 13 Owen 0001-0030) J.P. Owen. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.63 Sub-series: [Drawer 195] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.64 Sub-series: [Drawer 196: Personalities `Q' and `R'] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 0.1 cm of textual records. ­1 plastic photo sleeve. Scope and Content: Records consists of plastic photo sleeve. The primary subjects of these documents are: (XPR 18 Konr) Marvin Koner. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.65 Sub-series: [Drawer 197: Personalities `S', `T', `B', and `M'] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 0.1 cm of textual records. ­ 1 plastic photo sleeve. ­1 archival board. Scope and Content: Records consists of plastic photo sleeve and archival board. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.66 Sub-series: [Drawer 198: Personalities `B', `U', `V', and `W'] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 0.3 cm of textual records. ­2 photocopies of photographs. Scope and Content: Records consists of photocopies of photographs. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.67 Sub-series: [Drawer 199] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation.

100

4.68 Sub-series: [Drawer 200] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.69 Sub-series: [Drawer 201] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.70 Sub-series: [Drawer 202: Science/Technology [sic]] Date: 1941-1986 Extent: 8.2 cm of textual records. ­ 16 articles. ­ 3 filing copies. ­1 empty folder. ­61 captions. ­2 letters. ­3 notes. ­1 form. ­1 archival board. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles, filing copies, empty folder, captions in English and French, letters, notes, form, and archival board. The persons these documents are about are arranged (last name first): Marquez, Alicia; Marquand, John (alone); Markos, General; Escobar Marisol (sculptor and work); Maris, Roger (baseball player); Marvin, Marty; Mariano, Luis; Marette, Jacques (alone); Marcilhaey, Pierre (alone, head and shoulders); Manter, George (with 4 stamps printed upside down); Mike Mansfield (ambassador); Mann, Thomas; Marceau, Marcel (alone); Mann, Anthony (director); Manhattan Transfer the; Manescu; Mancini-Ridolfini, Niccole; Mancham, James (former Seychelles President); Manatoc, Tommy (kidnap victim);( Russian feminist) Tatiana Mamonova; Malterre, Andre; Malraux, Andre; Malaya (persons); Malamud, Bernard (novelist); Makarios, Archbishop (cyprus); Makins, Sir Roger; Mac Laine Shierly (family); Mac Kenzie, Giselle; Macias, Enrico; Maisky, Ira (alone); Makeba, Miriam; Magnani, Anna; Maeno, Mitsuyasu; P.M. Harold Mac Millan; MacMillan, Harold (family, and wife); MacMillan, Harald (family and home); MacMillan, Harold (groups in France, outdoors); MacMillan, Harold (groups, in France, indoors); MacMillan, Harold (alone, head and shoulders); MacLaine Shierley; Martin, Mary; Martin, Millicent; Marty, Mgr; Martinis, John (Block Sparrow Press); Martinelli, Elsa (alone, outdoors); and Marshall, Mike (wedding). Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.71 Sub-series: [Drawer 203] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation.

101

4.72 Sub-series: [Drawer 204] Date: Extent: 0.0 cm Scope and Content: No records exist. Note: No ephemera was found in drawer, please see the series Scope and Content section for further explanation. 4.73 Sub-series: [Drawer 205: War and America] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 0.2 cm of textual records. Scope and Content: Records consist of these primary subjects of these documents are: war, Oswaldo Salas, and America. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.74 Sub-series: [Drawer 206: Landscape through U.S.] Date: 1942-1964 Extent: 6.8 cm of textual records. ­23 articles. ­15 filing copies. ­6 empty folders. ­4 captions. ­2 magazine clippings. ­1 takeaway. ­15 forms. ­1 archival board. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and French, filing copies, empty folders, captions in English and French, magazine clippings, takeaway in Spanish, forms, and archival board. The primary subjects of these documents are: industry with sub-subjects of wine, Italy, France. Primary subject: liquor, light houses (England), mail with sub-subjects of foreign mailmen (Switzerland), stamps (fake and mistakes). Primary subjects: men, American model agency, money, money (France), money (foreign). Primary subject: industry with sub-subjects of stocking, sugar beet, sugar (foreign), taxidermist (American), taxidermist (foreign), tea, tin, tobacco (foreign), toys (England), weaving, spinning, upheel [sic], countries 1960s, and (XSC 06 Scna) Steve Schapiro. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.75 Sub-series: [Portfolio of Vera A. Lentz] Date: 1984-1988 Extent: 38.7 x 31.5 x 2.3 cm. ­ 21 articles. Scope and Content: Portfolio consists of articles English, German, and Spanish. This is a bound portfolio of photographs from magazines by Vera A. Lentz. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series and subject headings of the Black Star Press Print Collection. 4.76 Sub-series: [Drawer 207] Date: 1936-[ca.1990] Extent: 13.0 cm of textual records. ­ 76 articles. ­ 1 filing copies. ­ 58 captions and 4 caption lists. ­ 2 letters. ­ 5 newspaper clipping. ­1 postcard. ­2 foreign invoices. ­ 1 receipt. ­4 notes. ­ 3 sports programs. ­ 2 magazines. ­1 press kit. 102

­76 model release forms. ­ 1 magazine clipping. ­7 photocopies of photographs. Scope and Content: Records consists of articles in English and German, filing copies, captions in English and German, caption lists, letters, newspaper clippings, postcard, invoices in German, receipt, notes, sports programs, magazines, press kit, model release forms, magazine clippings, and photocopies of photographs. These items have been separated from their original housing and thus have been organized in and intellectual way. The subjects of these documents are related to Cuba, Czechoslovakia, high schools, basketball, Titanic, ships, Jim Richardson, West Germany, Army, America, Nazi, Eiffel Tower, Paris, teenage, England, Albania, band, Warsaw, Tehran, statue, Berlin, court, fishing, Italy, Junior Scientists, and rats. Source of supplied title: Based on contents of the series.

103

Appendix II: Black Star Ephemera found photographs list Accession # Type of Stamps Caption/ Inscriptions Workmen in tobacco warehouse. Bale being shipped to Australia; Cuba Havana industry tobacco Photogra pher Mediu m Folder Subjects Dimensions (h x w cm)

Description

BSE.2005. 001:002

Black Star Credit, Photo By Sangster

Sangster

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Two men moving tobacco drum women spinning wool

Cuba, Industry, Tobacco

22. 5 x 19. 5

BSE.2005. 002:009

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Photo: A.B.C.-

Pick on Loan sticker

Altria, handicraft

11.7 x 8.6 (image) 11.4 x 17.5 (sheet) 11.0 x 17.0 (image) 12.2 x 18.1 (sheet) 11.3 x 13.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 003:006

caption attached; Belgium store

Silver Gelatin Print

Man looking into Belgium Belgium store stores The National Theatre in Prague

BSE.2005. 004:10

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Copyright Malo Darrat

caption attached caption attached; Bratislova, Czechoslovak

Silver Gelatin Print

Czechoslo vakian, Theatre Czechoslo vakia, Brates lara

BSE.2005. 004:011

Malo Darrat

Silver Gelatin Print

woman walking down street

19.9 x 14.5 (image) 12.5 x 16.1 (sheet) 12.0 x 14.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 004:014

Black Star Credit For Examination Only, Made in England, Copyright

Czechoslovakia ; Shaal for policemen

Silver Gelatin Print

police man

Czechoslo vakia, Pobei England, London, cemeterie s miscl

BSE.2005. 005:015

caption attached; sticker; Black Star London; 104

Silver Gelatin Print

tomb in England

12.9 x 15.4 (image)

E.O. HoppeLondon Please Acknowledge

crop markings

BSE.2005. 005:016

Black Star Credit, Library Copy Black Star Credit, Dorien Leigh LTD

caption attached; sticker; Spanish Flamingo Dance

Silver Gelatin Print

Spanish dancers on stage Three generations on horse back

England, Spanish Flamenco Dancers in London England London, Parks (Hyde)

15.3 x 20.6 (sheet) 13.8 x 19.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 006:007 (1)

caption attached; England Hyde Park London; "Blimey, I said, I don't mind it being warm, but what could't I do with a pint of half and half..."; Aug. 19th 1950 sticker, picture on loan; caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print

10.8 x 15.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 006:007 (2)

Black Star Credit, "Illustrated" Copyright' Black Star Credit, England, Copyright

Silver Gelatin Print

man sleeping under some chairs in a park

England London, Parks (Hyde)

18.9 x 18.8 (image) 15.6 x 11.2 (sheet) 15.3 x 11.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 006:009

Rodeur

Silver Gelatin Print

Street view in England

England, Wales Finland Industry Agricultur al Germany (dated) Industry steel (interior)

BSE.2005. 006:011

Black Star Credit

Finland industry agr caption attached; Germany 49 Ruhr

Silver Ruohoma Gelatin a Rvist Print

portrait of a man in a field

24.9 x 21.7 (image)

BSE.2005. 009:003

Black Star Credit, Fenno Jacobs

Fenno Jacobs

Silver Gelatin Print

men working in steel plant

26.8 x 23.1 (image)

105

(exterior) caption attached; A Ruhr plank tooking undamaged; Germany indust Ruhr;

BSE.2005. 009:006 (1)

Black Star Pictures, "Illustrated" Copyright Photograph Black Star Pictures, "Illustrated" Copyright Photograph

Silver Gelatin Print

industrial plant

Germany, Industry Ruhr

15.8 xx 15.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 009:006 (2)

caption attached; Germany Industry Ruhr

Silver Gelatin Print

Mining in Germany

Germany, Industry Ruhr Germany, Industry coal mining, Ruhr May 1973

15.3 x 15.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 009:007

Black Star Credit, Copyright Planet News LTD

caption attached; Germany Industry mining

Silver Gelatin Print postcar d (silver gelatin print with mecha nical print on verso)

Miniers being feed

15.3 x 20.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 010:005

Black Star Credit, Return to Max Pohloy

Berlin monuments

Inside German monument

Germany, Berlin monumne ts Tomb unknown soldier Germany, Berlin monumne ts, victory column Berlin Crisis Showing

10.4 x 14.7 (sheet) 9.6 x 14.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 010:006 BSE.2005. 011:002

Black Star Credit, Seidenstucke r from Black Star, Aufnahme

Trevgarten, Berlin monument

Silver Gelatin Print

monument in Germany sign for entering the American

17.8 x 12.9 (sheet) 17.5 x12.5 (image) 11.8 x 17.7 (sheet) 11.3 x 17.3

stamped caption in

Gerhard Gronefel 106

Silver Gelatin

Gerhard Gronefeld Illustrationsand Photographs A.G. Nachrichtenh aus Sumatrasteig Zurich,This picture must be paid for if used in series Black Star Credit, Return to Max Pohly, Copyright by Transoraan Black Star Credit, Return to Max Pohly Black Star Credit, Curirpost, Copyright Foto Varkohyi

German

d

Print

section

people

(image)

BSE.2005. 011:019

German church in caption attached to bottom

Silver Gelatin Print

Inside of a church in Germany

Germany, church religion interior (people)

15.0 x 10.9 (sheet) 11.1 x 10.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 012:001

caption attached; Rhineland; Return to Mimi wise

Silver Gelatin Print

castle in Germany

Germany Weisband en

11.2 x 16.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 012:003

Neuistadt ad Haardt. After Hof part of caption attached; The Nitrapean factory at Poh; Hungary Industry The Parliament; The congress in Atheney; Greece; Greek writing

Silver Gelatin Print

German street

Germany, Rhineland

16.4 x 11.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 013:001

Silver Gelatin Print

man working on a machine

Hungary industry

14.1 x 8.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 013:020 (1) BSE.2005. 013:020

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Made

Mega Lokonom on

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

Greek Congress Greek painting

Greece, History Greece, History

11.5 x 17.5 (sheet) 11.0 x 17.0 (image) 19.0 x 15.8 (image)

107

(2)

in Germany "The key which will be presented to the King of Greece on the occasian of the incorporation of the Dadecanese in Greece. March 7th 48"

Print

BSE.2005. 013:020 (3)

Black Star Credit

Silver Gelatin Print

A key Greek soldiers running across the battlefield

Greece, History

17.1 x 9.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 013:031

Black Star Credit, W.Bosshard

Black Star sticker; Greek troups at the battefields The English ships visiting Nauplioy of Peloponissos in Greece.; Greek writing

W. Bosshard

Silver Gelatin Print

Greece war

11.1 x 17.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 013:032

Black Star Credit, (Greek stamp)

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Greek town

Greece, cities and villages Ireland, people women

11.1 x 17.6 (sheet) 10.7 x 17.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 014:008 Black Star Credit, World's Copyright

Cire, The land of Bachelors

landscape

3.7 x 19.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 015:003

Italy guards

Silver Gelatin Print

Guards sault as car drives in

Italy, Guards 4 terms

13.2 x 18 (image)

BSE.2005. 015:009 (1) BSE.2005. 015:009

Publifoto

caption stamp; Milain Traffic caption attached 108

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

Italy, Industry bldg and construction constructi view on construction Italy, view of a Industry

17.9 x 13.2 (image)

Black Star

18.0 x 13.2

(2)

Credit

(centre)

Print

building

bldg and constructi on

(image)

BSE.2005. 015:010

Black Star Credit, Publifoto Black Star Credit, Foto and Copyright GillsaterReportage, Foto: Sven Gillsater Black Star Credit, Copyright Bell, Howarth LTD. Black Star Credit, Roman Vishniac Photographe r Black Star Credit, Copyright by Dr. N. Gidal, Poland Black Star Credit, Foto F. Hallegger,

caption stamp

Silver Gelatin Print

Italy, industry Bldg and constructi construction on of building (bridges and bridges and in Italy houses)

18.2 x 23.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 017:015

caption attached; Lapland

Sven Gillsater

Silver Gelatin Print

Esther hendrikson in a tent with a genuine Lapp

Lapland, tourists Holland, Maduroda m, Lilli Putin Town Poland, people, men (sg. Ty) head and shoulders

24.0 x 18.2 (sheet) 22.3 x 17.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 018:013

attached caption; Madurodam Holland

Gerry Brenes

Silver Gelatin Print

Weeding a miniature town in Holland

21.8 x 20.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 018:023

Poland men

Roman Vishnia

Silver Gelatin Print

portrait of Polish man

18.0 x 12.8 (sheet) 16.7 x 11.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 019:009 (1)

women

Dr. N. Gidal F. Hallegger 109

Silver Gelatin Print

Polish woman Polish woman

Poland, people, women (pz 71g) Poland, people, women

15.3 x 9.1 (image) 18.0 x 13.0 (sheet) 16.8 x 11.9

BSE.2005. 019:009

Sudetendeutsc he Trachten:;

Silver Gelatin

(2)

Dever

Sudeten Dress

Print

(pz 71g)

(image) 17.9 x 13.3 (sheet) 12.3 x 12.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 019:010

Black Star Credit, R.S.W. Prasa

Poland Home

Owen

Silver Gelatin Print

Mother and daughter cooking

Poland, homes (interior) Portugal, overthrow of Fascist, govt. 1974

BSE.2005. 019:018

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Copyright Friedrich Rauch

caption attached Raumania 1960 Oilfield; caption attached on recto

Peter Collis

Silver Gelatin Print

man being greeted in Portugal

18.2 x 23.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 020:007

Friedrich Rauch

Silver Gelatin Print

oilfield at night

Romania, industry oil (new)

12.3 x 17.1 (sheet) 12.3 x 15.3 (image) 11.8 x17.3 (sheet) 11.2 x 16.8 (image) 11.4 x 17.4 (sheet) 11.1 x 17.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 021:011 (1)

Black Star Credit, Foto Mayo

History; France Barelona

Silver Gelatin Print

Spanish solider with gun Soldiers in dugout with machine gun

Spain History Politics

BSE.2005. 021:011 (2)

Black Star Credit, Foto Mayo

History; France Barelona

Silver Gelatin Print

Spain History Politics Spain Leqwn (1Koda) Bottle Museum "Pedro Chicote Bottle Museum" Spain, sports, Bullfightin g (accidents and dead

BSE.2005. 021:015 Black Star Credit, Copyright by Brenhard Moosbruger

Colour transpa rency

portrait of man in Bottle Museum

14.3 x 10.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 021:020

Spain, Bullfight

Brenhard Moosbru ger

Silver Gelatin Print

Bullfighting

17.3 x 23.5 (image)

110

bull) Black Star Credit, phot. Dr. Bernhard Grzimek Black Star Credit, Actualidades Granicas Y Reportajes Black Star Credit, Actualiardes Carficas Black Star Credit, Ace Williams Bullfight posters at house-walls; Spain Bullfight Spain, sports (bullfights ) 17.9 x 13.1 (sheet) 17.1 x 12.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 021:017

Dr. Bernhard Grzimek

Silver Gelatin Print

Bullfighting poster on wall

BSE.2005. 021:036

Madrid, Telefan Building; Spain Madrid

Silver Gelatin Print

The Telefan Building in Madrid, Spain

Span, Madrid, Bldgs. Miscl.

17.5 x 12.1 (sheet) 17.0 x 11.7 (image) 17.4 x 11.9 (sheet) 17.0 x 11.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 021:046 BSE.2005. 022:004 (1)

Avila; Spain Volcano, Valley 10,000 smokes; Al/VT550/6 Valley of 10,000 Smokes Alaska; Valley of the Volcano Alaska; sticker Alaska. Volcano, Valley of the ten thousand smokes.

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Avila, Spain aerial view of volcano in Alaska

Spain Avila Alaska Volcanoes 1930s

Ace Williams

14.7 x 24.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 022:004 (2)

Black Star Credit, Ace Williams Black Star Credit, Ordway's Photo Shop Juneau Alaska

Ace Williams

Silver Gelatin Print

areal view of volcano in Alaska

Alaska Volcanoes 1930s

19.8 x 25.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 022:004 (3)

Extect Volcanoes, new Sutku; Mt. Edgecumb at Sika, Alaska (recto) Ordway 3607 Monument to Ponce de Leon with inscription

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

volcano in Alaska Monument to Ponce de Leon

Alaska Volcanoes 1930s

20.2 x 25.8 (sheet)19.3 x 25.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 023:002

Black Star Credit

Herbert Lanks

Florida-St. Augustine

23.8 x16.5 (image)

111

St. Augustine, Florida Black Star Credit, Return to Max Pohly Zurich H; Switzerland Zurich; German writing caption attached; market of Mostar; Yugoslavia caption attached; Turk cemetery in Mostar; Yugoslavia religion 12.6 x 17.7 (sheet) 11.2 x 16.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 025:002

Silver Gelatin Print

Zurich, Switzerland

Switzerlan d, Zurich

BSE.2005. 026:009

Black Star Credit

Alfred Graber

Silver Gelatin Print

outdoor market in Mostar

Yugoslavia , Mostar

9.2 x 12.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 026:011

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit Walt Hays Photographe r

Afred Grober

Silver Gelatin Print

cemetery

Yugoslavia , religion cemetery

9.2 x 12.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 028:019 (1)

Garment truckers on Eighth Ave., N.Y.C. Garment Truck movers in the garment section of New York City. These men have just completed a delivery of clothing and are returning for mor merchandise. caption attached;

Walter Hays

Silver Gelatin Print

men moving empty coat racks on the street

N.Y.C. street, garment sections

18.2 x 25.3 (sheet) 15.4 x 24.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 028:019 (2) BSE.2005. 033:014

Black Star Credit, Photograph by Walter Hays Black Star Credit

Walter Hays

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

men moving empty coat racks on the street

N.Y.C. street, garment sections China War hospitals

13.3 x 25.4 (sheet) 12.6 x 24.5 (image) 16.2 x 24.5 (image)

cemetery

112

Hankow Africa Sudan; St. Mathews Catholic Cathedral on Kitchener Avenue. British and coyptians Flag Flying over Governor General's Palace, in Omdurman.

Print

(interior)

BSE.2005. 038:032

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library, Edo Koenig Black Star Credit/ Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library/ Edo Koenig

C. Nieschm aun

Silver Gelatin Print

Governor Generals Palace

Sudan (central Africa) Religion

18.0 x 25.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 039:020 (1)

South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969; stores exterior

Edo Koenig

Silver Gelatin Print

men window shopping

Rhodesia (S. Africa) stores

16.6 x 24.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 039:020 (2)

South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969; store interior

Edo Koenig

Silver Gelatin Print

inside store looking at mens coats

Rhodesia (S. Africa) stores

16.6 x 24.5 (image)

113

BSE.2005. 039:020 (3)

Black Star Credit/ Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library/ Edo Koenig Black Star Credit, Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library, Edo Koenig Black Star Credit, Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library, Edo Koenig Black Star

South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969; stores outside

Edo Koenig

Silver Gelatin Print

window shopping

Rhodesia (S. Africa) stores

16.6 x 24.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 039:020 (4)

South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969; Stores interior

Edo Koenig

Silver Gelatin Print

Family shopping

Rhodesia (S. Africa) stores

16.6 x 24.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 039:020 (5) BSE.2005.

South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969, Stores interior South Rhodesia

Edo Koenig Edo 114

Silver Gelatin Print Silver

people shopping view of

Rhodesia (S. Africa) stores Rhodesia

16.6 x 24.5 (image) 16.6 x 24.5

039:020 (6)

Credit, Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library, Edo Koenig Black Star Credit, Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library/ Edo Koenig Black Star Credit, Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library, Edo Koenig Black Star Credit,

(Africa) 1969; Stores interior

Koenig

Gelatin Print

people shopping

(S. Africa) stores

(image)

BSE.2005. 039:020 (7)

South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969; Stores interior

Edo Koenig

Silver Gelatin Print

Women shopping

Rhodesia (S. Africa) stores

16.6 x 24.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 039:020 (8) BSE.2005. 039:020

South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969 South Rhodesia (Africa) 1969;

Edo Koenig

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

Women at checkout counter

Rhodesia (S. Africa) stores Rhodesia (S. Africa)

16.6 x 24.5 (image)

Edo 115

Women

16.6 x 24.5

(9)

Please, do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ---Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library, Edo Koenig

Stores interior

Koenig

Print

shopping

stores

(image)

BSE.2005. 041:010 (1) BSE.2005. 041:010 (2)

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Harry Redl

A tea house in old Chinese section. The nig-zag bridge is constructed in this lorw so that devils who travel at a high speed would fall into the water when they make a sharp turn.; China Shanghai

Norwaw Gordon

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

outside view Red China, of a tea restaurant 22.8 x 19.7 house s (image) Red China, restaurant 25.5 x 16.8 s (image)

caption attached Caption attached; sticker Das Photoarchiv. Christoph and Mayer GmbH; Japan

Harry Redl

line outside a restaurant

BSE.2005. 043:038 (1) BSE.2005. 043:038 (2)

Black Star Credit

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Street scene in Japan line of Japanese people

Japan, Imperial family Japan, Imperial family

20.3 x 15.1 (image)

Black Star Credit

caption attached

15.1 x 20.5 (image)

116

BSE.2005. 045:016 (1)

Black Star Credit, Please Credit KNS, Pan-Asia caption Photo News attached Black Star Credit/ Please Credit KNS/ PanAsia Photo News Black Star Pictures, Illustrated Copyright To Reorder Quote No, Black Star Credit

Silver Gelatin Print

North Korean soldiers outside

North Korea Military (old and new)

11.5 x 14.7 (sheet) 11.3 x 14.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 045:016 (2)

Silver Gelatin Print

North Korean solider signing autographs

North Korea Military (old and new)

10.6 x 16.2 (sheet) 10.4 x 15.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 046:008

Singapore Fall 45; Japanese troops withdraw from Singapore over the Jahore causeway caption attached; Military Training Camp caption attached; Military Training Camp caption attached; Military Training Camp Vietnamese: Samphan Set in the River; Vietnam

Silver Gelatin Print

Japanese troops withdrawing

Malaysia, Ura, Japs

15.3 x 14.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 047:10 (1)

Black Star Credit, PANA

Silver Gelatin Print

Military training camp

Indochina War Training

12.1 x 16.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 047:10 (2)

Black Star Credit, PANA

Silver Gelatin Print

man under barbwire face up

Indochina War Training

11.4 x 16.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 047:10 (3)

Black Star Credit, PANA

Silver Gelatin Print

men in underwear in a line

Indochina War Training

16.5 x 10.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 047:013 (1) BSE.2005. 047:013

Black Star Credit

Francois Sully Ceosa

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

Vietnamese in the river Watchtower

Indochina War

16.5 x 23.4 (image)

Black Star

caption

Indochina

19.1 x 24.2

117

(2)

Credit (twice)

attached

Print

War

(image) 16.0 x 23.9 (sheet) 15.2 x 23.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 047:013 (3)

Black Star Credit

Caption attached in German

Silver Gelatin Print

women in uniform marching women learning to shoot a gun while others watch

Indochina War

BSE.2005. 047:013 (4)

Black Star Credit, Dr. Lothar Reinbacher Black Star Credit/ Richard Lawrence Stack

caption attached in German

Silver Gelatin Print

Indochina War

23.4 x 16.0 (sheet) 23.1 x 15.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 048:009

Seized heroinSaigon, Vietnam (top right)

Richard Silver Lawrence Gelatin Stack Print

seized heroin in crates

Vietnam, drugs James Pickerell Vietnam mother and child. Inter negative

16.0 x 24.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 049:006 Black Star Credit Service Presse Information Section CinePhoto

James Pickerell

copy negativ e

Mother and child

4x5

BSE.2005. 049:012

Indochina; Moroccan soldier pearing Hailhong art after cease fire House of the Anamone (or Sultan) of Bone in the City of Watampone.; East Indonesia Jan Homes

Francois Sully

Silver Gelatin Print

Solider getting ready to board a ship

Vietnam, peasants and civilians by: Sully

18.2 x 13.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 050:003

Black Star Credit

Andrew Roth

Silver Gelatin Print

Outside view of a house

Jana, homes

11.3 x 12.6 (image)

118

BSE.2005. 051:001

Black Star Credit, Copyright Max Klimburg The crown of the Palilain dynasty, which Swali will wear for his coronation in October, is kept in Irauiou National Bank Treasury.; Iran jewelry

Max Klimburg

Silver Gelatin Print

Afghanistan art

Afghanista n Art

12.3 x 15.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 053:014

Black Star Credit, Copyright Stern Hamburg 1, Foto:Scheler

Scheler

Silver Gelatin Print photo paper with retouc hed pigmen t

crown

Iran, Jewelry

29.2 x 19.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 053:018

photo markings

part of photograph with paint

Iran Religion

3.7 x 19.0 (image) 12.2 x 17.6 (sheet) 12.0 x 17.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 055:002

Black Star Credit

Syria; Asian ruins Syria; German writing Dr. Clark

Silver Gelatin Print

Syrian ruins

Siyria ruins Persian Gulf (Arabia) people women

BSE.2005. 055:034

Black Star Credit, Carl Duncker Verlag

caption attached

Carl Duncker

Silver Gelatin Print

Arabian woman Landscape of Bora Bora where a house is being built

13.6 x 13.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 056:012 (1)

AGIP Robert Cohen

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

South Seas, Bora Bora

12.9 x 18.2 (image)

119

BSE.2005. 056:012 (2)

AGIP Robert Cohen Black Star Credit, S.A. Germain Journalist, Leihweise

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

people wearing chickens as hats

South Seas, Bora Bora

12.9 x 18.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 056:014

S.A. Germain

Silver Gelatin Print

Man in native dress

Bomer, people men (pg. fig) Canada, Ottawa Covertion s John Devisser, Herman Kokojan (negatives inside)

11.5 x 7.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 057:003 Black Star Credit, Parque Nacional Del Iguazu, Repulica Argentina

stickers attached

John DeVisser

Black and white copy negativ es from slides

BSE.2005. 060:15

Part of Iguazu Falls called Devils gonge; Argentine; Garganta del Diablo

Silver Gelatin Print

Iguazu Falls

Argentina, Landscape Iguazu Falls

10.4 x 15.0 (sheet) 9.7 x 14.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 061:026

Black Star Credit, Copyright Stern Hamburg 1, Foto: Troeller, Please do not alter mark, or airbrush this print. ______ attached label Prints must (Legg Brothers be returned Limited) after use. 120

Silver Gelatin Print

Brazilian people in impoverishe d town

Brazil Welfare

19.0 x 28.5 (image)

Black Star, Library compo site photog raph Army, United States women

BSE.2005. 064:001

Black Star Black Star Credit, Press Union Photo Service, China Black Star Credit, Copyright Planet News LTD

Do Not Use For Advertising; Army women

6 military portraits

9.4 x 23.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 064:014

caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print

Japanese flyer

Aviation, Japan (old) military

17.8 x 12.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 064:016

caption attached; Army Jordon Greek Army; Old Greek [sic] in his mountainous village during festivities.

Silver Gelatin Print

Jordon Army soldiers

Army, Jordan

15.8 x 20.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 064:018

Black Star Credit, W. Bosshard Black Star Credit, Armed Forces Information Office P.I.B. (Defence Wing)

W. Bosshard

Silver Gelatin Print

Greek man during a festival

Army, Greece (old) sg. Fig.

14.0 x 10.7 (image)

BSE.2005. 064:019

caption attached caption attached; 2 war-India Indian soldier gets the Victorian Cross

Silver Gelatin Print

solider digging a trench

Army, India (heu)

10.7 x 11.9 (sheet) 10.0 x 11.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 064:021

Black Star Credit, Copyright Photo Raj Gopal

Raj Gopal

Silver Gelatin Print

Indian Solider being decorated

Army, India decoratio ns

10.1 x 10.3 (image)

121

BSE.2005. 065:008

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

caption attached; World peace conference in Paris. Delegates from the West Indies and Indonesia Attach of Derwish the troops in the battle of Amdurmar Attach of Derwish the troops in the battle of Amdurmar

Silver Gelatin Print

Delegates form the World Peace Conference talking outside

Conferenc es United Pease Paris

12.9 x 18.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 065:033 (1)

Black Star Credit, Return to Max Pohly

copy print

Battle scene

Spanish Civil War

25.2 x 20.9 (support) 7.9 x 12.7 (image

BSE.2005. 065:033 (2)

Black Star Credit, Return to Max Pohly Black Star Credit, On Loan, Dorien Leigh LTD., Made In England

copy print

artifact

Spanish Civil War

25.2 x 20.9 (support) 5.9 x 17.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 065:033 (3)

By Syindy P. Hall caption attached; Black Star credit sticker

Silver Gelatin Print

sketch portrait

Spanish Civil War

19.5 x 15.5 (image) 11.8 x 17.7 (sheet) 11.3 x 17.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 065:034

Foto Mayo, History

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Soldiers in a field lower right corner of photograph Refugees outside building Palestine immigrants in a line on

Spanish Civil War

BSE.2005. 067:013 BSE.2005. 067:035 (1) Black Star Credit, W. Bosshard Black Star Pictures, Illustrated

WWII Rations

6.6 x 11.8 (image)

1130/6 magazine clipping attached;

W. Bosshard

Silver Gelatin Print

WWII Refugees WWII Refugees

11.7 x 17.1 (image) 15.7 x 15.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 067:035

Silver Gelatin 122

(2)

Copyright To Reorder Quote No

Palestine Immigration

Print

the street

BSE.2005. 067:049

Black Star Credit

Paris October 1945; France 1945; caption attached

O'Neill

Silver Gelatin Print

Soldiers in uniform standing at attention wounded Finish solider being loaded into an Ambulance

2.W.W. US awards

13.2 x 18.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 069:017

Black Star Credit, BilledBladet, Granskat circle stamp

caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print

Finland WWII Medical Germany WWII drawings Mural of Children Roosevelt and Stalin 2.W.W. Germany Air Views Strategic Military Installatio ns 2.W.W. Germany Air Views Strategic Military Installatio ns 2.W.W. Germany Air Views

12.0 x 16.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 070:012

Black Star Credit

caption attached

Dever

photo mecha nical reprod uction

Battle scene

19.1 x 27.6 (sheet) 9.9 x 14.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 071:017 (1)

Black Star Credit, Deutsche Versuchsanst an

Lilly hofman

Silver Gelatin Print

areal view

10.9 x 16.8 (sheet) 8.2 x 14.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 071:017 (2)

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit

Near Berlin; Copehik; German air views

Lilly hofman Lilly hofman 123

Silver Gelatin Print

areal view

11.4 x 17.4 (sheet) 11.0 x 16.9 (image) 10.7 x 16.8 (sheet) 10.5 x 16.6

BSE.2005. 071:017

Germany airviews;

Silver Gelatin

areal view

(3)

Waruemnnde

Print

Strategic Military Installatio ns

(image)

BSE.2005. 071:028

Black Star Credit

Black Star sticker; German tanks

Silver Gelatin Print

Germans in Tanks shows a picture postcard with a secret message underneath

WWII Germany Tanks

18.2 x 13.0 (sheet) 16.7 x 11.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 071:029

Black Star Credit, stamp of a black star London Black Star Credit, Foto Vacn Hansen, Dr. Otto Schneider

Germany spies; history; caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print

Germany WWII spies

11.5 x 14.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:021

caption attached; 2nd W.W. Norway

Silver Gelatin Print

Army WWII, Norway Army on skis Ski Patrol Poland, WWII Warsaw Insurrecti on 1944

18.4 x 24.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:024

Black Star Credit ATP Schwaizer Bilderdienst, Territorialko mmando, Black Star Credit ATP Schwaizer Bilderdienst, Territorialko mmando, Black Star

caption attached; Poland History; B.S. London

Silver Gelatin Print

photograph of a book page in Polish

24.4 x 18.0 (sheet) 24.0 x 17.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:038 (1)

caption attached; First women in the Swizz Army caption attached in German; First women in the Swiss Army

Picord ATP

Silver Gelatin Print

Army women saluting

Army, Switzerlan d women

13.2 x 18 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:038 (2)

Picord ATP 124

Silver Gelatin Print

Army women in formation

Army, Switzerlan d women

13.2 x 18 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.3 (image)

Credit ATP Schwaizer Bilderdienst, Territorialko mmando, Black Star Credit ATP Schwaizer Bilderdienst, Territorialko mmando, Black Star Credit ATP Schwaizer Bilderienst, Territorialko mmando, Black Star Credit, RotkreuzChefarzt ATP Schweizer Bilderienst, Black Star credit ATP Schweizer Bilderdienst, Territorialko mmando, Black Star Credit Black Star Credit,

BSE.2005. 072:038 (3)

caption attached in German; First women in the Swiss Army

Picord ATP

Silver Gelatin Print

Army women wearing gas masks

Army, Switzerlan d women

13.2 x 18 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:038 (4)

caption attached; First women in the Swiss Army

Picord ATP

Silver Gelatin Print

Army women marching

Army, Switzerlan d women

13.2 x 18 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:038 (5)

caption attached

Picord ATP

Silver Gelatin Print

Army women looking at car engine

Army, Switzerlan d women

13.2 x 18 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:038 (6)

First women in the Swiss Army

Picord ATP

Silver Gelatin Print

women banding a womans arm

Army, Switzerlan d women

13.2 x 18 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 072:038 (7)

First women in the Swiss Army West German Chancellor

Picord ATP

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

Woman learing to sault portrait Konrad

Army, Switzerlan d women Adenauer, Konrad

13.2 x 18 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.3 (image) 15.2 x 10.2

BSE.2005.

125

073:021

Copyright Foto: Edo Konig Bonn, Rh. Pressehaus 6 Tel. 41925 Black Star Credit, Pubilfoto

Konrad Adenauer; Adenauer 1960

Print

Adenauer

(alone) 19601962

BSE.2005. 074:002

caption stamp

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Stella Adler

Adler, Stella

13.1 x 18.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 075:014

Black Star Credit, Please Observe Credit Line: Illustrated News Photo by Ken Rep. Leslie C. Adams Arends Ill. Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

Ken Adams

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Leslie Arends

Arends, Leslie Arends

18.1 x 12.5 (sheet) 16.8 x 11.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 075:029

Louis Arnand

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Louis Arnand Portrait of Bodosakis Athanassias es

Arnand, Louis

13.0 x 9.0 (image) 23.5 x 17.6 (sheet) 22.9 x 17.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 075:031

Black Star Credit, 7077 14 Sir Claude Auchinleck; Neatness and order mark General's study at his residence, where busy day begins Jerge wis Berges; Argentina; sticker Eduardo

Nelly

Silver Gelatin Print

Athanassi ades, Bodosakis

BSE.2005. 075:034

Black Star Pictures, "Illustrated" Copyright Photograph

Silver Gelatin Print Eduardo Comesan a 126 Silver Gelatin Print

Sir Claude Auchinleck on phone in his study

Auchinlec k, Sir Claude

15.3 x 15.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 075:041

Black Star Credit

Portrait of a man

Drawer 75 misc

23.9 x 17.7 (image)

Comesana caption attached; left: Marius Moutet right: Vice President Barkley Sicker (centre) © 1985 Scheler, Stern Black Star 5-859910 Interview with Christiaan Barnard

BSE.2005. 076:021

Black Star Credit, Robert Cohen

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Marius Moutet and Alhem Barkley

Barkley, Alhem Scheler/St ern 5-859910 Interview w/ Christiaan Barnard

18.0 x 13.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:004

Stern Hamburg Foto:, Stern 18/85

Scheler

Print from a copy negativ e Silver Gelatin Print

Doctor wearing scrubs Portrait of Jean Berthoin

18.8 x 14.2 (sheet) 12.1 x 9.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:006

Jean Berthoin; Black Star caption attached (centre in French)

Berthoin, Jean

9.0 x 5.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:014 BSE.2005. 078:022 (1) BSE.2005. 078:022 (2)

AGIP Robert Cohen, Black Star Credit

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of John Beyen Portrait of Rene Billeres Portrait of Rene Billeres

Beyen, John Billeres, Rene (alone) Billeres, Rene (alone)

12.9 x 9.2 (image)

AGIP Robert Cohen AGIP Robert Cohen, Black Star Credit

Rene Billeres

Robert Cohen

13.0 x 9.1 (image)

Billeres Francois Billout Communist Leader; part of caption attached

Robert Cohen

13.0 x 9.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:023

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen Black Star Credit, Return to Max Pohly

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print Photog ravure postcar d

Side view of Francois Billoux Three men posing around a table

Billoux, Francois

13.0 x 8.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:024

Bismarck people 127

Bismarck

9.1 x 13.8 (sheet) 7.4 x 10.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:026 (1)

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

left: Eugene Black-Bauh International; caption attached in French left: Eugene Black president of the Bauh International right: French Pinance Minister Petshe Eugene Black president of Bauh International caption attached; One of the first eight

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Eugene Black shaking hands with Maurice Petshe

Black, Eugene (alone)

18.2 x 13.0 (sheet) 16.3 x 13.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:026 (2)

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Eugene Black and Petshe

Black, Eugene (alone)

18.1 x 13.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:026 (3)

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Eugene Black

Black, Eugene (alone)

18.1 x 12.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 078:030

Black Star Credit, Henry Guttmann

Silver Gelatin Print

blowup of a membership Bleriot, card Louis Mike Bongiorno and Prof. Haynes

9.5 x 13.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 079:010

Black Star Credit Pubilfoto

caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print

Bongirono , Mike

18.1 x 13.1 (image) 10.2 x 14.5 (sheet) 10.3 x 14.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 079:034

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Foto Agencia Macion Black Star Credit, Foto Aubauia

caption attached; Bowles

K.M. Vyarawal la

Silver Gelatin Print

Group of children outside

Bowles, Chester (family)

BSE.2005. 080:016 (1)

Eugeoio Guden the Finance Minister; Brazil Napoleao Alenuosko Guimaraes 128

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of an old man portrait of a man

Brazil C-9

11.7 x 8.3 (image) 11.8 x 8.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 080:016

Silver Gelatin

Brazil C-9

(2)

Aauiuar

Labo Minster; Brazil

Print

BSE.2005. 080:031

Black Star Credit, Credit Line To Ernst Mayer (recto)

Brillat-Savarin; Personalities; "He extolled cheese"

Reprod uction from a book

portrait of BrillatSavarin

BrillatSavarin

18.5 x 12.7 (support) 7.4 x 4.7 (sheet) 6.2 x 4.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 080:035

Black Star Credit, Please Observe Credit Line: Illustrated News Photo by Ken Rep. Clarence Adams Brown Ohio attached caption; Donald Campbell attempts to break world land speed record.

Ken Adams

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Clarence Brown

Brown, Clarence (alone)

18.0 x 12.6 (sheet) 17.3 x 11.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 082:012

Black Star Credit (London)

Hardy

Silver Gelatin Print

Campbell in car on the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah Newsstand vendor in New York reading during the blackout

Campbell, Donald (alone) C

16.7 x 24.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 086:003

Black Star Credit

where?; (212)222-7680; NY Blackout

Bill Ray

Silver Gelatin Print

Crowfoot, Chief

8.7 x 12.0 (sheet) 8.1 x 11.5 (image) 11.7 x 17.2 (sheet) 11.2 x 16.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 086:004

Black Star Credit AGIP Robert Cohen, Black Star Credit

Uwritia [sic]

Owen

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

group of people in Cuba Portrait of Douglas Dillon

Cuba (pers) (Urwtia) Dillon, Douglas (alone) D

BSE.2005. 087:028

Robert Cohen

13.0 x 9.2 (image)

129

BSE.2005. 087:043

Black Star Credit, Curirpost, Copyright Foto Varkohyi

Istvan Dobi

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Istvan Dobi Two generals talking

Dobi, Istvan Emmons, Gen. Delos English Royalty (history) Family Edward and George

11.8 x 8.7 (image)

BSE.2005. 089:020

Black Star Credit

Stadoal [sic]

15.9 x 16.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 090:015

Black Star Credit

illustrat ion from a book portrait Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print Black and white interne gative Sir Stephen Gibson C.B.E. Chairman of the Permanent Council of the World Petroleum Congress US undersecretary

19.9 x 13.5 (sheet) 11.1 x 9.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 091:001

Black Star Credit

caption attached

Marechal Foch tomb

Foch, Marshall

11.6 x 14.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 093:028

Black Star Credit

Werner Wolff

Rita Gam on Set of NBC

Gam, Rita

19.3 x 19.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 094:014

Group portrait of the Yale Press

Giamatti, A. Bartlett Yale Press

12.5 x 10.0 (sheet) 9 x 6.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 094:017

Black Star Credit, Copyright Edo Konig Black Star Credit,

Edo Konig

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

portrait of Sir Stephen Gibson Portrait of Gilpatrick

Gibson, Sir Stephen

10.2 x 7.1 (sheet) 9.7 x 6.6 (image)

BSE.2005.

Edo 130

Gilpatrick,

13.0 x 18.0

094:023

Copyright Foto: Edo Konig Bonn, Rh. Pressehaus

of defense, Gilpatrick, called on West German defense Minister KaiUwe von Hassel in Bonn Feb.13 to discuss plans for a mulitnational atomic force within NATO and v. Hassel's forthcoming visit to the US.

Konig

Print

and Kai-Uwe Roswell von Hassel

(image

BSE.2005. 095:012 (1) BSE.2005. 095:012 (2) BSE.2005. 095:012 (3) BSE.2005. 095:012 (4) BSE.2005. 095:012 (5)

copy negativ e copy negativ e copy negativ e copy negativ e copy negativ e photog raph of a drawin g

Glenn Gould playing the piano Glenn Gould playing the piano Glenn Gould playing the piano Glenn Gould playing the piano Glenn Gould playing the piano

Gould, Glenn

12.5 x 10.0 (sheet) 9x7 (image) 12.5 x 10.0 (sheet) 9x7 (image) 12.5 x 10.0 (sheet) 9x7 (image) 12.5 x 10.0 (sheet) 9x7 (image) 12.5 x 10.0 (sheet) 9x7 (image)

Gould, Glenn

Gould, Glenn

Gould, Glenn

Gould, Glenn

BSE.2005. 095:028

Black Star Credit

Horace Greely

portrait of Horace Greely

Greely, Horace G

14.6 x 10.9 (image)

131

BSE.2005. 095:033

Black Star Credit

French caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print photog raph of a drawin g

portrait of Jean-Noel Grinda

Grinda, Jean-Noel G

13.0 x 9.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 095:043 (1)

Black Star Credit

caption attached; writing in French

Portrait of Johanns Gutenberg reproductio n of a page from the Bible reproductio n of a page from the Bible reproductio n of a page from the Bible Portrait of Trevor Howard and Juliette Greco Portrait of Queen Wilhelmina and daughter Portrait of Queen Wilhelmina and daughter Drawing

Gutenber g, Johanns

17.5 x 12.6 (sheet) 17.0 x 11.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 095:043 (2)

Black Star Credit

caption attached

Postcar d

Gutenber g, Johanns

14.8 x 10.5

BSE.2005. 095:043 (3)

Black Star Credit

caption attached

Postcar d

Gutenber g, Johanns

14.6 x 10.5

BSE.2005. 095:043 (4)

Black Star Credit

caption attached

Postcar d

Gutenber g, Johanns

14.6 x 10.5

BSE.2005. 098:008

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

caption attached

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print photo mecha nical reprod uction photo mecha nical reprod uction four

Howard, Trevor Holland Royalty Queen Wilhelmin a Holland Royalty Queen Wilhelmin a Hohenzoll

18.2 x 13.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 098:022 (1)

Black Star Credit

Holland Ry

17.7 x 14.3 (support) 16.9 x 13.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 098:022 (2) BSE.2005.

Black Star Credit Black Star

caption attached; Holland Ry Frederic the 132

19.8 x 16.7 (support) 17.6 x 15.6 (image) 29.5 x 21.8

098:026

Credit, Return to Max Pohly

Great King of Prussia

colour printed reprod uction

portrait of Frederic the Great

er (historic)

(sheet) 25.1 x 18.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 099:003

Black Star Credit, Francis C. Fuerst Villa Miramare (Genova) Pieve Ligure Italy

caption attached; Many families among themselves Sir John Hunt and the Genrvau Herumann Buhl, conguerans of the Mount of Everest and the Heirualay a (Nonga Tibet) were celebrated at the City Hall of Geneva

Silver Gelatin Print

Two men shaking hands

Hunt, Sir John Hunt Brothers 1-B and W copy neg. inside

23.6 x 18.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 099:005 Black Star Pictures Cliffords inn, London E.C.4., The following credit line must be used: Photo: Govind Lal (Lahore) C/o L. Jamna Das Sethi, Oppo:

4x5 copy negativ e

three men talking and looking at papers

BSE.2005. 099:016

caption attached 133

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Pandit Jawaharlal (centre), Dr. Rajendra Prasad (far left) and Syt. Nehru Shanker Rao (groups Deo (right) indoors)

8.0 x 12.5 (sheet) 7.6 x 12.2 (image)

Mela ram Talab, Lahore caption attached; Krishna Menon; Indian pers Wedding of Princess Shahaz H.I.H. The Shah signing the Act of Marriage. attached caption; Gramian H. Left: General Hedayat

BSE.2005. 009:022

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Mr. Krishna Menon and Pineau

India Krishna Menon in France

13.0 x 18.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 100:006

Black Star Credit Ali-Khadem TehranLalezar Iran, Black Star Credit

Kladeu

Silver Gelatin Print

The Shah signing the act of marriage.

Iran-Shah Ex-wife Soraya, Sipa 9607

9.6 x 11.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 100:015

Silver Gelatin Print

General Hedayat and Gerneral Iranian Bakhtiar Gen. A. embracing Hedayat

11.1 x 15.5 (image) 11.9 x 9.0 (sheet) 11.3 x 8.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 101:023

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, PanAsia Photos

caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Ichiro Kiyose Jap-Kis-Kiz Portrait of Yoshio Minami

BSE.2005. 101:027

in Japanese Nagatake, Asano (Japan) Director of Tokyo National museum attached caption; Japanese Motorbike King Honda Hisashi Yoshida 134

Jap-MiaMit

12.6 x 10.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 101:028

Black Star Credit, PanAsia Photos

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Asano Nagatake

Jap-NaaNag

12.6 x 9.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 101:035 BSE.2005.

Black Star Credit Black Star

Silver Gelatin Print Silver

portrait Soichi Honda Portrait of

Jap, Honda Soichi (alone) Jap-Yo-Yo

25.5 x 17.4 (image) 12.3 x 9.9

101:038

Credit, PanAsia Photos

President of Chuo University Post-Graduate

Gelatin Print

Hisashi Yoshida

(sheet) 11.8 x 9.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 102:002

Black Star Credit

caption attached (centre) Abdel Wahhab Majali Under Secretary, Ministry of National Economy, Jordan

Charles May

Silver Gelatin Print

House of Casey Jones (now museum)

Jones, Casey

20.6 x 25.4 (sheet) 19.4 x 24.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 102:013

Black Star Credit, PanAsia Photos

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Abdel Wahhab Majali Wedding of Louis Jourdan and Brigitte Bardot

Jordan (peb) A-M

12.4 x 9.9 (sheet) 11.9 x 9.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 102:017

Black Star Credit

caption attached; Louis JourdanBrigitte Bardot Caption attached; Lachmann from Black Star Sticker Abdruck nur unter Angabe (Mauritius) gestattet; caption attached Latent Pic of Pandit Girdhari Lal Dogra Minister of State in the Bakshi Cabinet

Silver Gelatin Print

Jourdan, Louis

18.2 x 13.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 102:018

Photo Cosmopress

copy print

Portrait of Benito Juarez

Juarez, Benito

10.5 x 8.4 (sheet) 9.6 x 7.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 102:027

Black Star Credit, sport Copy right P.N. Sharma CameraCorresponde nt New Delhi

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Duke Kahanamok u Minister of State Girdhari, Lal Dogra portrait

Kahanamo 11.8 x 7.9 ku, Duke (image)

BSE.2005. 102:032

Silver Gelatin Print

Kashmir pers.

14.9 x 11.7 (sheet) 13.3 x 10.9 (image)

135

(Kashmir) Serian Army leader in Russian; Fieldmarchall Keitel

BSE.2005. 102:041

Black Star Credit, Dever Allen Middleburg, VA, William Allen Black Star

Dever

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Urlhelm Keitel

Keitel, Urlhelm John Kennedy Jr. as child and teenager Kesselring , Field Marshall (alone)

17.1 x 11.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 103:007

J.F.K., Jr. and "skip" Brittle; Kennedy

William Allen

Silver Gelatin Print

J.F.K and Skip Brittle outside Portrait of Kield Marshall Kesselring show Dr. MLK speaking and placing flowers at a memorial site

12.8 x 17.7 (sheet) 12.3 x 17.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 105:012

Black Star Credit

Kesselring

Owen

Silver Gelatin Print

17.2 x 11.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 106.009

square negativ es (6) copy photog raph of a drawin g copy photog raph of a drawin g copy photog raph of 136

Salwja Dr.Martin L. King in India

BSE.2005. 107:011 (1)

Black Star Credit, Copyright Czechopress Black Star Credit, Copyright Czechopress, Studio P.Delbo Black Star Credit, Copyright

caption attached; Frantisek Kupka

political cartoon

Kupka, Frantisek

14.9 x 12.5 (sheet) 14.0 x 11.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 107:011 (2)

caption attached; Frantisek Kupka; caption attached; Frantisek

Egyptian like Kupka, illustration Frantisek circle and dot pattern Kupka, Frantisek

17.9 x 12.8 (sheet) 11.1 x 10.8 (image) 12.3 x 12.2 (sheet) 11.2 x 11.6

BSE.2005. 107:011

(3)

Czechopress

Kupka

art work

(image)

BSE.2005. 107:018

Black Star Credit, Photo Cosmopress

Lafousuire

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Copy Print

portrait of Jean De Lafontainue

L's misel pers.

18.0 x 13.1 (sheet) (image is oval)

BSE.2005. 112:002 Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

caption printed on recto

portrait of Steve McQueen

McQueenSteve

27.9 x 13.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 114:014 (1)

caption attached caption attached; Defense Minister Zeghari caption attached; Si Bekkai; Moroccan pers

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of General Kettani

Moroccan pers H-Z

13.0 x 9.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 114:014 (2)

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Defense Minister Zeghari

Moroccan pers H-Z Moroccan Pers (Sir bekkaiAlme)

18.2 x 13.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 114:017

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Sir BekkaiAlme

18.1 x 13.0 (image) 18.2 x 12.9 (sheet) 15.6 x 12.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 114:025

AGIP Robert Cohen Illustrated Copyright, Black Star Pictures Cliffords inn, London, E.C.4.

Agip-BS (lower right)

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Marc Ouretti

Muretti, Marc

BSE.2005. 115:013 BSE.2005. 115:026

Philip NoelBaker; From Black Star

Silver Gelatin Print 35 mm copy 137

Portrait of Philip Baker Noel Subject is Conan

Noel, Baker Philip (alone) Conan O'Brien

15.1 x 15.0 (image)

negativ es (8 strips)

O'Brien

New Host Taking over Letterman negs inside Torrijos, OMAR 1978 (of Panatia) D. brack 3-78-1406 Torrijos, OMAR 1978 (of Panatia) D. brack 3-78-1406

BSE.2005. 116:024 (1)

Torrijos Death ­Panama; (caption Black Star printed on Credit ©1981 recto)

Silver Gelatin Copy Print

Funeral of Omar Torrijos

19.5 x 27.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 116:024 (2)

Torrijos Death ­Panama; (caption Black Star printed on Credit ©1981 recto) caption attached; 100th Anniversary of San Martins death in Bueno Aire Augurh 1705. caption attached; 100th Anniversary of San Martins death in Bueno Aire Augurh 1705.

Silver Gelatin Copy Print

Raquel Torrijos mourning husband

27.9 x 22.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 116:030 (1)

Black Star Credit

Enrique Tourdra

Unkno wn

Chaves talking with Peron

Paraguay Pres.

23.8 x 17.8 (sheet) 21.2 x 16.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 116:030 (2)

Black Star Credit

Enrique Tourdra

Unkow n

Paraguay's President speaking

Paraguay Pres.

23.9 x 17.8 (sheet) 22.3 x 16.9 (image) 13.8 x 10.1 (sheet) 12.2 x 9.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 117:006

Black Star Credit

caption attached 138

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Mariano A. Yenko, Jr.

Philippine -pres-Y

BSE.2005. 117:008 (1)

Black Star Credit

caption attached; Photographer caption attached; photographer; David Undergraug; The photographer, Hans Hubmann, talks with Colonel Batista. (centre translated from German caption above)

Hudson

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait

photograp hers-H

8.0 x 6.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 117:008 (2)

Black Star Credit

Hudson

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait

photograp hers-H

7.2 x 6.7 (image)

BSE.2005. 117:008 (3)

Black Star Credit Black Star, AGIP Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print Color extachr ome negativ e Color extachr ome negativ e

Hans Hubamm talking with Colonel Batista Portrait of Giuseppe Pella

photograp hers-H

16.2 x 11.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 117:022

caption attached; Pella

Robert Cohen

Pella, Giuseppe

12.9 x 9.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 121:001 (1)

man posing in front of a painting

Rubens, Peter Paul

BSE.2005. 121:001 (2) Black Star Credit, Black Star Pictures, Evening News Copyright ROTA

painting "Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh Mallory (Air Officer Commandin g-in-Chief)

Rubens, Peter Paul

BSE.2005. 121:018

Caption attached 139

Silver Gelatin Print

Roosevelt, Elliott (family)

14.9 x 19.5 (image)

congratulati ng Col. Elliott Roosevelt after decorating him with the C.B.E. at Stanmore to-day" Michael Sandel - Harvard Prof. ©1991 Rick Friedman Black Star; caption attached to recto Michael Sandel - Harvard Prof. ©1991 Rick Friedman Black Star; caption attached to recto Black Star Credit, Rented Return to Max Pohly Czar Nikolaus II of Russia; GermanRussian War 1914/16 Walter Schirra 1965; Astronaut Gemini VI David R. Scott relazesas a barber gives him a haircut. March 2, 1969 140

BSE.2005. 122:001 (1)

Rick Friedman

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Michael Sandel

Sandel, Michael Havard Prof

25.4 x 19.5 (sheet) 22.8 x 15.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 122:001 (2)

Rick Friedman

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Michael Sandel

Sandel, Michael Havard Prof

19.2 x 25.4 (sheet) 15.2 x 22.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 122:012

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Czar Nikolaus II

Russian-Ni

11.3 x 7.0 (sheet) 11.0 x 6.7 (image)

BSE.2005. 123:024

Black Star Credit Publication of this photograph Must Credit World Book

Owen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Walter Schirra

Schirra, Walter S

17.3 x 12.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 123:029 (1)

Silver Gelatin Print

David Scott getting a hair cut

Scott, David

11.9 x 9.3 (sheet) 11.4 x 8.8 (image)

Encyclopedia s Science Service, Inc. Astronaut David Scott awaits transportation from suiting room to the launch pad for Apollo 9 Mission. March 3, 1969

BSE.2005. 123:029 (2)

Publication of this photograph Must Credit World Book Encyclopedia s Science Service, Inc.

Silver Gelatin Print dry mount ed silver gelatin print

David Scott wearing astronaut suit

Scott, David

12.1 x 9.8 (sheet) 11.1 x 8.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 125:007

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Francis C. Fuerst Sori (Genova) Italy

Alexander Solzhenitsya Caption attached; She will play the role of Edith PiaFina new Frender film. Steiner; Black Star; Aleksandor Solzhenitsyn 1969 Stephen Spender; ©1981 Mark Morrow Columbia, S.C.; sticker with Black Star Credit stamp;

Dennis Brack

Portrait of Alexander Solzhenitsya

Solzhenite za, Alezander

22.7 x 33.9 (support and image)

BSE.2005. 125:012

Francis C. Fuerst

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Marisa Solinas

Solinas, Marisa (alone)

19.6 x 14.7 (image)

BSE.2005. 125:013

Silver Gelatin Print

Head and shoulder Alexander Solzhenitsyn

Alexander Solzhenits yn

7.0 x 5.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 125:028

Mark Morrow

dry mount ed silver gelatin print

Portrait of Stephen Spender

Spender, Stephen Author Poet

20.2 x 25.5 (support) 16.3 x 24.8 (sheet) 16.5 x 24.6 (image)

141

Stephen Spender Author, poet Bart Bartho Lomeu Black Star 685-9976 sticker (lower Sylvester left side) Stallone 85 Bart Bartholomew Black Star 6-85sticker (lower 9976 Sylvester Stallone left side)

BSE.2005. 125:034 (1)

inter negativ e

Portrait Sylvester Stallone

Stallone, Sylvester

25.3 x 20.1 (sheet) 24.3 x 16.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 125:034 (2)

inter negativ e

Portrait Sylvester Stallone

Stallone, Sylvester Stravinsky , Igor (alone) head and shoulders

25.3 x 20.1 (sheet) 24.3 x 16.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 126:029

AGIP, Robert Cohen, Black Star

Stravinsky Count Bernadotte one of his last pictures taken in Paris 3 weeks before his assassination. caption attached; "King Gustar with his granddaughter Ingrid and her husband Crawfsher Frederic of Denmark" Swedish Royalty Robert Cohen 142

Silver Gelatin Print

Head and shoulders of Igor Stravinsky

13.0 x 9.1

BSE.2005. 127:008

Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Count Bernadotte

Swedish Royal Family Count tacke Bernadott e (alone)

13.0 x 8.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 127:012 BSE.2005. 127: 014

Black Star Credit, IFOT, Copyright H. Stehergs Black Star Credit, AGIP Robert

Silver Gelatin Print

King Gustar with Granddaugh ter and husband Swedish Royal Family

Swedish Royal Family King Fustar (family) Swedish Royal Family

17.9 x 12.9 (image) 12.9 x 18.2 (image)

Silver Gelatin

Cohen

Print

(King Gustargroups outdoors)

BSE.2005. 127:016

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Copyright Publifoto

Caption attached; Ingmar Bergman; Swedish B.; Agiph-B.S.

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Ingmar Bergman

Swedish-B

18.3 x 13.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 127:017

Caption attached; Swedish E.

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of S. SwedishEricsson E "Lord Tedder in friendly conversatio n with General Shang-Chen (left) and Col. Nikolai P. Fastovschuk of the Red Army Air Force (right) at the reception."

13.0 x 18.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 127:036

Black Star Credit, Copyright Planet News LTD Please Credit Pan-Asia Photo, Black Star Publifoto, Black Star Credit

caption attached

Silver Gelatin Print

Tedder, Arthur (English) WWZ

15.2 x 20.6 (image) 12.9 x 10.1 (sheet) 12.1 x 9.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 129:029

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of a person Italian stagedirector Luchino

Vietnam (pres.) Visconti, Luchino (Italian Stage

BSE.2005. 130:006

caption attached

13.2 x 18.1 (image)

143

Viscenti and Italian actress Virna Ligi at table General Deddor Con Bock; fedor C. Bock Field marshal

Director)

BSE.2005. 130:012

Black Star Credit: Dever

Dever

Silver Gelatin Print Ink Jet Print on Kodak inkjet paper Ink Jet Print on Kodak inkjet paper

Feddor von Bock side view

von Bock, Feddor

19.3 x 5.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 133:006 (1)

Black Star

Sticker; Ink Jet Copies Do Not Get Wet

Fred Ward

Portrait of John F. Kennedy

JFK Head Shoots

27.9 x 25.6 (sheet) 25.3 x 15.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 133:006 (2)

Black Star

Sticker; Ink Jet Copies Do Not Get Wet

Fred Ward

Portrait of John F. Kennedy

JFK Head Shoots Lyndon, Johnson (Press Conferenc e) Campaign 80 -B/W Carter and Reagan together Al Smith Dinner in NYC Campaign 80 -B/W Carter and

27.9 x 25.6 (sheet) 26.1 x 16.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 135:005

Black Star Credit

Pres. Johnson Press Conference

Dennis Brack

Silver Gelatin Print

President Johnson Press Confrence

10.2 x 24.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 140:001 (1)

Black Star Credit ©1980 Black Star Credit ©1980

Owen, D.B. Owen, D.B. 144

Silver Gelatin Print

Reagan speaking at dinner

20.6 x 25.3 (sheet) 16.7 x 24.4 (image) 20.6 x 25.3 (sheet) 16.7 x 24.4

BSE.2005. 140:001

Silver Gelatin

Reagan speaking at

(2)

Print

dinner

Reagan together Al Smith Dinner in NYC Campaign 80 -B/W Carter and Reagan together Al Smith Dinner in NYC Campaign 80 -B/W Carter and Reagan together Al Smith Dinner in NYC Campaign 80 -B/W Carter and Reagan together Al Smith Dinner in NYC Campaign 80 -B/W Carter and Reagan together Al Smith Dinner in NYC Campaign

(image)

BSE.2005. 140:001 (3)

Black Star Credit ©1980

Owen, D.B.

Silver Gelatin Print

Carter speaking at dinner

20.6 x 25.3 (sheet) 16.7 x 24.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 140:001 (4)

Black Star Credit ©1980

Owen, D.B.

Silver Gelatin Print

Carter speaking at dinner

20.6 x 25.3 (sheet) 16.7 x 24.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 140:001 (5)

Black Star Credit ©1980

Owen, D.B.

Silver Gelatin Print

Dinner guests

20.6 x 25.3 (sheet) 16.7 x 24.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 140:001 (6) BSE.2005.

Black Star Credit ©1980 Black Star

Owen, D.B. Owen, 145

Silver Gelatin Print Silver

Dinner guests Reagan and

20.6 x 25.3 (sheet) 16.7 x 24.4 (image) 20.6 x 25.3

140:001 (7)

Credit ©1980

D.B.

Gelatin Print

Carter shaking hands

80 -B/W Carter and Reagan together Al Smith Dinner in NYC Sandler, Roger (Mrs.) Elizabeth Dole 1280-8724 1 Roll, 2-681 Prints made for files Reagan Staff Drawer color Filed under same # Sandler, Roger (Mrs.) Elizabeth Dole 1280-8724 1 Roll, 2-681 Prints made for files Reagan Staff Drawer color Filed under same #

(sheet) 16.7 x 24.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 140:002 (1)

Black Star Credit ©1981

Roger Sandler

contact sheet

Contact sheet of Mrs. Elizabeth Dole at desk

21. 9 x 28.0 (image)

BSE.2005. 140:002 (2)

Roger Sandler

35 mm negativ es (3 strips)

negatives to the above contact sheet

146

BSE.2005. 142:008

Black Star Credit

Bulldog

Herbert Lanks

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

close up of a bulldogs face

dogs, bulldogs

20.1 x 20.2 (sheet) 19.2 x 19.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 143:001

Black Star Credit

Llama caption attached; "Helicopter lights"; aviation night Credit Ted Cowell; Bomb Factory N.Y.C.; 7/12/18; FG Police-Bomb Squad Sticker, Bowny Woodpecker Waldo County, Main Jon Laitin photo; Birds

Keagez

Baby llama nursing

llamas

19.9x 18.8 (image)

BSE.2005. 144:003

Black Star Credit

Gordon Tenney

Silver Gelatin Print

Landed helicopter at night

helicopter

20.2 x 20.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 145:005

Ted Cowell

Silver Gelatin Print

bomb squad in action

Bombs (miscl)

11.3 x 16.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 145:009

Black Star Credit

Jon Laitin

Silver Gelatin Print

Woodpecke r

Drawer 145 Misc

20.2 x 25.3 (sheet) 12.8 x 23.9 (image) 12.2 x 17.9 (sheet) 10.9 x 16.6 (image)

BSE.2005. 153:008

Black Star Credit Black Star Credit, Ron Taylor Black Star, PresseAgentue, Fatos & Fotos, Manghbte Black Star Credit, Ralph

owen

Silver Gelatin Print

close up of eyes

Eye Misc 23

BSE.2005. 155:020

shark gay nineties Party (1898)

Ron Taylor

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

Man with showing shark bite Victorian era people

FishSharks History, Gay

25.7 x 20.3 (sheet) 24.1 x 16.5 (image) 20. 4 x 25.2 (sheet) 19.5

BSE.2005.

147

156:001

A. brant 2620 East 13th Street Tulsa, Oklahoma

Garden City Kan. House Party 1898; Plates Brant, by C. Gravas (deceased)

Print

paying cards and drinking

nineties

x 24.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 157:007 BSE.2005. 157:008 (1)

Black Star Credit, Erna LendvaiDircksen

Erna LendvaiDircksen

dry mount ed gelatin silver print mount ed print Native American dancing

Indians women

25.6 x 18.3 (support) 23.5 x 17.6 (image)

Black Star Credit Montana-8 Night Dancing, Crow Fair (1977) Crow Agency, Montana; Michael S. Crummett, Photographer 941 Howard Billings, Mt. 59102

Herbers Mather

Indian Dance

27.9 x 17.5 (image)

BSE.2005. 157:008 (2)

Black Star Credit

Michael S. Crummet t

dry mount ed gelatin silver print dry mount ed gelatin silver print

Native American dancing

Indian Dance

25.4 x 20.3 (sheet) 23.3 x 17.2 (image) 23.0 x 22.7 (support) 22.2 x 18.2 (sheet) 20.2 x 14.7 (image) 27.7 x 21.2 (support) 23.7 x 18.4 (image)

BSE.2005. 157:008 (3)

Matter Black Star; Nov. 48; Indian dance Black Star Credit, Please do not alter Hopi; American mark, or Indian airbrush this 148

Native American dancing

Indian Dance

BSE.2005. 157:011

Silver Gelatin Print

portrait of a Hopi Indian

Indian men American

print. Prints must be returned after use. Black Star, Library Sticker; Flea Market; Jewelry Shopper FairgroudsAlbuquerque, N.M./ 1979

BSE.2005. 159:002 (1)

Black Star Credit Photography by Adele Hodge

Adele Hodge

Silver Gelatin Print

Flea market shoppers

Markets (Flea market)

20.3 x 25.3 (sheet) 15.9 x 24.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 159:002 (2)

Black Star Credit

Rag Dolls of Amsterdam; "Flea-market vendors, with two mutilated dolls which lie ready to join the rest of their companions on the wall of "Steptoe and Son."; John John Moss Moss Army; "Automobil Fortress drawn by the Kaiser in 1891 (recto lower centre) Army; "XVIth Century War Chariot constructed to go by land and sea" (recto)

Silver Gelatin Print

Flea market shoppers

Markets (Flea market)

23.3 x 30.4 (sheet) 22.1 x 29.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 163:005 (1)

Black Star Credit

Illustra tion

tank

Military, History of Tanks

14.9 x 27.3 (sheet)

BSE.2005. 163:005 (2)

Black Star Credit

Illustra tion

tank

Military, History of Tanks

15.1 x 27.2 (sheet)

149

BSE.2005. 163:005 (3)

Black Star Credit

Army;"Penning ton 1900" (recto) Army: 1855 Project of Steam Fortress" (recto) Army;"Henry VIII War Chariot in Action" (recto); "Cross-section of War Chariot" (recto) Sticker, subway maintenance; "Two transit system maintenance workers stand on a ledge as the Lexington Avenue #6 train pulls into Grand Central Station."; © 1980 Alice J. Garik

Illustra tion

tank

Military, History of Tanks

12.4 x 27.3 (sheet)

BSE.2005. 163:005 (4)

Black Star Credit

Illustra tion

tank

Military, History of Tanks

13.3 x 27.2 (sheet)

BSE.2005. 163:005 (5)

Black Star Credit

Illustra tion

2 illustrations of a horse powered tank

Military, History of Tanks

27.0 x 21.4 (sheet)

BSE.2005. 164:007

Black Star Credit

Alice J. Garik

Silver Gelatin Print

Two maintenanc e workers watch train come into the station.

Occupatio n, Transit Workers New Orleans Sniper Jan 73, PoliceCrime Mike Smith Titanic ships

20.1 x 25.2 (sheet) 16.2 x 24.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 166:003 BSE.2005. 169:007

Henning Christoph

Crime swat team; caption attached; 7713/23 caption attached

Hennin Christop h

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

Swat team practice (action photo) Lt. George Rey, Jean

17.6 x 23.3 (image) 21.5 x 13.8 (sheet) 18.8

Black Star

150

(1)

Print

Jarry, and Robert D. Ballard

x 12.7 (image)

BSE.2005. 169:007 (2)

Black Star Black Star Credit, La Mention, Photo René Maltête est obligatoire, René Maltête Photographe -Illustrateur 14,Cité BergèreParis-9 Tél.Pro.18-12 (le matin de préférence)

captions

Emory Kristof, National Geograp hic

Silver Gelatin Print

Underwater photo of part of the Titanic

Titanic ships

13.9 x 21.6 (sheet) 12.7 x 19.2 (image)

BSE.2005. 179:001

Les Surfrises du frsid, AJ Fer.63 Paris Notre Dame [sic]; [stickerLexington,MA (undated) Church] Strike; not used; 5-9A; [stickerUntitled Auto Worker (1968)] 4Rel407; Jane Fonda (small sticker on right hand side)

René Maltête

Silver Gelatin Print

Gargogal with iceikle

XAR02 Herbert Lanks

25.4 x 20.9 (image)

BSE.2005. 180:001

Black Star Credit, Pay When Used

Gene Daniels

Silver Gelatin Print

Auto Workers on strike

XBS03 Dang, Gen Daniels

17.6 x 24.9 (sheet) 16.6 x 24.1 (image) 20.1 x 25.4 (sheet) 18.0 x 24.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 189:001

Black Star, Ken Sakamoto

Ken Sakamot o

Silver Gelatin Print

Jane Fonda talking to the press King Hussuin holding a letter Robert Kennedy

XPR06 Saka, Ken Sakamoto

BSE.2005. 192:001

Black Star Credit

King Hussuin

John Carruthe rs, Jr.

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin

XPR08 John 24.0 x 18.3 Carruthers (image) XPR11, J. Bruce 20.4 x 25.3 (sheet) 16.6

BSE.2005.

Black Star

14-21 C;

J. Bruce 151

193:001

credit

Kennedy 1986

Baumann

Print

leaving a stage with wife and kids

Caumann

x 24.1 (image)

BSE.2005. 193:002

Black Star credit

Robert; John Kennedy NYC.107/75; JFK as Senator General Douglas MacArthur, commander of the Allied offensive in New Guinea and the Solomons.; Douglas Ali. Arthur

Robert Phillips (center)

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of JFK

XPR11Phil , Robert Phillipss

25. 4 x 20.6 (sheet) 24.3 x 19.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 194:001

Black Star (in red ink)

Owen

Silver Gelatin Print

Portrait of Douglas MacArthur Portrait of Eleanor Roosevelt at table man looking down, cut photograph

XPR13 Owen 00010030/ J.P. Owen XPR18 konr, Marvin Koner Marquand , John (alone)

17.8 x 12.9 (sheet) 16.6 x 11.8 (image) 20.8 x 25.2 (sheet) 19.3 x 20.3 (image)

BSE.2005. 196:001

Black Star © 1984

"Eleanor Roosevelt; June Marvin 1957" Koner

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

BSE.2005. 202:002

Black Star

"rt. John Marquaud" 3th Greek Democratic Army of Gen. Makos, Macedonian girl, member of Gen Markois Democratic Army The Greek Democratic Army of Gen

Ralph Crane

19.9 x 6.8

BSE.2005. 202:003 (1)

copyright Czechopress, Black Star

copy prints of snapsh ots copy prints of 152

Macedonian girl holding a gun, outdoors

Markos, Gen. Markos, Gen.

13 x 9

BSE.2005. 202:003

copyright Czechopress,

Macedonian people,

8.6 x 13. 2

(2)

Black Star

Markos. Inhabitants of a liberated Macedonian village with their Greek Orthodox Priest The Greek Democratic Army of Gen. Markos, Gen. Markos leader of Greek Democratic Army The Greek Democratic Army of Gen. Markos Group of soldiers and girls in arms in the mountains of the liberated territory Greek Democratic Army of Gen. Markos Group of soldiers of Gen. Markos Army. They are mostly peasants who have joined the army when their farms had been burnt by the Greek government 153

snapsh ots

outdoors

BSE.2005. 202:003 (3)

copyright Czechopress, Black Star

copy prints of snapsh ots

General Markos

Markos, Gen.

13 x 9.5

BSE.2005. 202:003 (4)

copyright Czechopress, Black Star

copy prints of snapsh ots

men and women soldiers

Markos, Gen.

13. 1 x 9.1

BSE.2005. 202:003 (5)

copyright Czechopress, Black Star

copy prints of snapsh ots

group of soldiers outside

Markos, Gen.

9.6 x 13. 1

troops. The Greek Democratic Army of Gen. Markos, Group of soldiers of the Greek Democratic Army in a mountain village of the liberated territory. The Greek Democratic Army of Gen. Markos, Colonel Gioppoulis, center, one of the leaders of the Greek Democratic Army.

BSE.2005. 202:003 (6)

copyright Czechopress, Black Star

copy prints of snapsh ots

group of soldiers outside

Markos, Gen.

9.9 x 13

BSE.2005. 202:003 (7)

copyright Czechopress, Black Star

copy prints of snapsh ots

soldiers, outside Jacques Marette pointing to board Jacques Marett outside

Markos, Gen.

8.4 x 13

BSE.2005. 202:008 (1) BSE.2005. 202:008 (2)

AGIP, Robert Cohen/ Black Star

Robert Cohen

Silver Gelatin Print Silver Gelatin Print

Marette, Jacques (alone) Marette, Jacques (alone)

18 x 13

Black Star/ AGIP/

yes (in French)

18 x 13

154

Appendix III: Black Star Ephemera RAD Finding Aid Series 1: Records of Countries and Places created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Dates: 1935-[ca.1990] Extent: 3.62 meters of textual records. Scope and Content: Series consists of information concerning countries and places created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency. Records consist of articles, filing copies, captions, caption lists, letters, and programs, photocopies of photographs, book, magazines, newspapers, notes, press releases, and magazine and newspaper clippings. The records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The originals of the photocopied photographs in the series can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Restrictions: The collection is available for viewing in person by appointment. As of 2013 the collection has not been digitized. To view the collection, please contact the Ryerson Image Center at: Ryerson Image Centre 33 Gould Street Toronto, Ontario, M5B 1X8

416-975-5000, ext. 7032 ric@ryerson.ca

Copyright: The textual material associated with the Ephemera Collection maybe reproduced under the Fair Dealing clause of the Canadian Copyright Act. The following statement must accompany all textual reproductions: "© The Black Star Picture Agency, Courtesy of the Ryerson Image Centre." Notes: Includes records in French and German. Box List for Series 1: File Number Title Date 1936-[ca. 1990] Physical Description 1 box of textual records. Scope and Content
Box consists of records concerning Cuba, Austria, France, Cyprus, Belgium, and Brussels. Box consists of records concerning Czechoslovakia, England, and France.

Notes

Order Info To view, order box 1.

BSE.2005.001- Countries BSE.2005.003 and Places Box 1

BSE.2005.004- Countries BSE.2005.007 and Places Box 2

1936-[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

To view, order box 2.

155

BSE.2005.008- Countries BSE.2005.010 and Places Box 3 BSE.2005.011- Countries BSE.2005.012 and Places Box 4 BSE.2005.013 Countries and Places Box 5

1946-1980

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

1936-1977

1949-1981

BSE.2005.014

Countries and Places Box 6 Countries and Places Box 7 Countries and Places Box 8 Countries and Places Box 9

1956-1976

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.015

1950-1962

Box consists of records concerning Germany. Box consists of records concerning Berlin, Germany. Box consists of records concerning Hungary, Greece, Greenland as well as the Olympics. Box consists of records concerning Ireland and Italy. Box consists of records concerning Italy. Box consists of records concerning Italy. Box consists of records concerning Denmark, Italy, and Holland. Box consists of records concerning Holland, Norway, Poland, and Portugal. Box consists of records concerning Portugal, Romania and Scotland. Box consists of records concerning Spain. Box consists of records concerning Alaska, Arizona,

To view, order box 3. To view, order box 4. To view, order box 5.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 6. To view, order box 7. To view, order box 8. To view, order box 9. To view, order box 10.

BSE.2005.016

1936-1974

BSE.2005.017

1946-1980

Some records are in German. Some records are in German. Some records are in French and German.

BSE.2005.018- Countries BSE.2005.019 and Places Box 10

1954-1984

BSE.2005.020

Countries and Places Box 11

1948-1980

1 box of textual records.

To view, order box 11.

BSE.2005.021

Countries and Places Box 12

1940-1972

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

Some records are in German. Some records are in German.

To view, order box 12. To view, order box 13.

BSE.2005.022- Countries BSE.2005.024 and Places Box 13

1930s1989

156

BSE.2005.025

Countries and Places Box 14

1956-1976

1 box of textual records.

California, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Michigan, St Louis, and New Orleans. Box consists of records concerning Switzerland and Sweden. Box consists of records concerning Antarctica, Yugoslavia, and USSR. Box consists of records concerning Russia and New York. Box consists of records concerning New York, Schoenfeld [sic], Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Washington DC, The White House, and China. Box consists of records concerning Israel, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Algeria, Angola, Cameroon, and Congo. Box consists of records concerning South Africa, Ruanda, Nigeria, Mozambique, Malawi, Shara [sic], Sudan, and Tunesia [sic].

BSE.2005.026- Countries BSE.2005.027 and Places Box 15

1946-1978

1 box of textual records.

Some records are in French and German. Some records are in German.

To view, order box 14.

To view, order box 15.

BSE.2005.028

Countries and Places Box 16

1937-1978

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

Some records are in German. Some records are in German.

To view, order box 16. To view, order box 17.

BSE.2005.029- Countries BSE.2005.033 and Places Box 17

1936-[ca. 1990]

BSE.2005.034- Countries BSE.2005.036 and Places Box 18

1936-1983

1 box of textual records.

Some records are in French and German.

To view, order box 18.

BSE.2005.037- Countries BSE.2005.038 and Places Box 19

1955-1986

1 box of textual records.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 19.

157

BSE.2005.039- Countries BSE.2005.041 and Places Box 20

1936-1989

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.042

Countries and Places Box 21 Countries and Places Box 22 Countries and Places Box 23

1946-1955

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.043

1947-1981

BSE.2005.044

1952-1972

BSE.2005.045- Countries BSE.2005.046 and Places Box 24

1936-1971

BSE.2005.047- Countries BSE.2005.049 and Places Box 25

1961-1980

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.050- Countries BSE.2005.051 and Places Box 26

1949-1982

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.052- Countries BSE.2005.053 and Places Box 27

1947-1989

1 box of textual records.

Box consists of records concerning Tunisia, Uganda, Rhodesia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, China, and Hong Kong. Box consists of records concerning India. Box consists of records concerning Japan. Box consists of records concerning Japan. Box consists of records concerning Japan, Cambodia, North Korea, South Korea, Indo China, Palestinians, Laos, and Formosa. Files reference events in WWII and the Korean War. Box consists of records concerning Indo China, Vietnam, and Thailand as well as the Vietnam War. Box consists of records concerning Java, Philippine Island, Sumatra, Afghanistan, and Australia. Box consists of records concerning Iraq, Egypt, Jordan, and Iran.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 20.

To view, order box 21. Some records are in German. To view, order box 22. To view, order box 23. To view, order box 24.

Some records are in French and German. Some records are in German.

To view, order box 25.

To view, order box 26.

Some records are in French and German.

To view, order box 27.

158

BSE.2005.054- Countries BSE.2005.055 and Places Box 28

1939-1977

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.056- Countries BSE.2005.057 and Places Box 29

1936-1977

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.058- Countries BSE.2005.059 and Places Box 30

1968-1983

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.060- Countries BSE.2005.061 and Places Box 31

1950-1983

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.062- Countries BSE.2005.063 and Places Box 32

1945-1992

1 box of textual records.

Box consists of records concerning Lebanon, Lybia [sic], Morocco, Syria, Turkey, Turkistain [sic], and Yemen. Box consists of records concerning Figi [sic], Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea, and Canada, Box consists of records concerning Mexico, Costa Rico, and El Salvador. Box consists of records concerning Nicaragua, Panama, Argentina, Bolivia, and Brazil. Box consists of records concerning Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Ecuador, British Guiana, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

Some records are in French and German.

To view, order box 28.

Some records are in French and German. Some records are in German.

To view, order box 29.

To view, order box 30.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 31.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 32.

159

Series 2: Records concerning WWII created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Dates: 1935-[ca.1990], predominantly 1936-1950 Extent: 95 centimeters of textual records. Scope and Content: Series consists of articles, filing copies, captions, caption lists, letters, fact sheets, magazine and newspaper clippings, plastic photo sleeves, and a flyer concerning to World War II. In relation to WWII, the records document various aspects of military all over the world as well as conferences of the United Nations and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The photographs in reference can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Restrictions: The collection is available for viewing in person by appointment. As of 2013 the collection has not been digitized. To view the collection, please contact the Ryerson Image Center at: Ryerson Image Centre 33 Gould Street Toronto, Ontario, M5B 1X8

416-975-5000, ext. 7032 ric@ryerson.ca

Copyright: The textual material associated with the Ephemera Collection maybe reproduced under the Fair Dealing clause of the Canadian Copyright Act. The following statement must accompany all textual reproductions: "© The Black Star Picture Agency, Courtesy of the Ryerson Image Centre." Notes: Include records in French and German. Box List for Series 2: File Number BSE.2005.064 Title WWII Box 1 Date 1950-[ca. 1990] Physical Description 1 box of textual records. Scope and Content
Box consists of records concerning Army, and Navy of United States, Japan, Mexico, Jordan, Kashmir, Greece, India, Germany, Australia, Austria, Italy,

Notes

Order Info To view, order box 32.

160

BSE.2005.065- WWII Box 2 BSE.2005.066

1940s-1959

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.067

WWII Box 3

1940s1950s

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.068

WWII Box 4

1940s1950s

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.069

WWII Box 5

1940s1950s

BSE.2005.070

WWII Box 6

1940s1950s

BSE.2005.071

WW II Box 7

1940s1950s

1 box of textual records.

Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Egypt, England, Poland and Portugal. Box consists of records concerning conferences of the United Nations, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), WWI and WWII. Box consists of records concerning WWII events, activities, and military in the United States and Germany. Box consists of records concerning WWII in Europe. Box consists of records concerning WWII in Europe. Box consists of records concerning WWII in France and Germany. Box consists of records concerning WWII in Germany.

Some records are in French.

To view, order box 33.

To view, order box 34.

To view, order box 35. Some records are in French. Some records are in French. To view, order box 36. To view, order box 37.

Some records are in French and German.

To view, order box 38.

161

BSE.2005.072

WWII Box 8

1940s1950s

1 box of textual records.

Box consists of records concerning WWII in Europe.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 39.

162

Series 3: Records of 20th century personalities created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Dates: 1935-[ca. 1990] Extent: 3.82 meters of textual documents. Scope and Content: Series consists of articles, filing copies, captions and caption lists, letters, biographies, speeches, pamphlets, magazine and newspaper clippings, newspapers, business cards ,fact sheets, programs, notes, liability forms, model releases, film roll list, negative sleeves, receipt, press kit, script, and a telegram. These records predominately feature personalities of the twentieth century. The records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The photographs in reference can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Restrictions: The collection is available for viewing in person by appointment. As of 2013 the collection has not been digitized. To view the collection, please contact the Ryerson Image Center at: Ryerson Image Centre 33 Gould Street Toronto, Ontario, M5B 1X8

416-975-5000, ext. 7032 ric@ryerson.ca

Copyright: The textual material associated with the Ephemera Collection maybe reproduced under the Fair Dealing clause of the Canadian Copyright Act. The following statement must accompany all textual reproductions: "© The Black Star Picture Agency, Courtesy of the Ryerson Image Centre." Notes: Includes records in French and German. Box List for Series 3: File Number Title Date 19511986 Physical Description 1 box of textual records. Scope and Content
Box consists of records concerning

Notes Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French. Some records are

BSE.2005.073- Personalities BSE.2005.074 Box 1

Vaino Aaltonen John Anderson.
Box consists of records concerning Maxie Anderson -

Order Info To view, order box 40.

BSE.2005.075

Personalities Box 2

19541982

1 box of textual records.

Vincent Auriol.
Box consists of records concerning Baignade Aussi -

To view, order box 41.

BSE.2005.076

Personalities Box 3

19381981 19491982

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual 163

General Batista.
Box consists of records concerning

To view, order box 42. To view, order

BSE.2005.077- Personalities BSE.2005.078 Box 4

records.

Orson Bean - Dan

Blocker. BSE.2005.079- Personalities BSE.2005.080 Box 5 19541982 1 box of textual records.
Box consists of records concerning Ben Blue - Brynner

Yul.
Box consists of records concerning

BSE.2005.081- Personalities BSE.2005.082 Box 6 BSE.2005.083- Personalities BSE.2005.084 Box 7 BSE.2005.085 Personalities Box 8 Personalities Box 9

19511989 19401981 19421980 19491970s

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

Helen Caldicott Pablo Casals.
Box consists of records concerning Jean Pierre Cassel -

in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French. Some records are in French. Some records are in French. Some records are in French and German. Some Records are in French and German.

box 43.

To view, order box 44.

To view, order box 45. To view, order box 46. To view, order box 47. To view, order box 48.

Dr. Lon Colborn.
Box consists of records concerning Dorothy Collins - Joan

Crawford.
Box consists of records concerning James Cromwell -

BSE.2005.086

George Dawson.

BSE.2005.087- Personalities BSE.2005.088 Box 10

19501984

1 box of textual records.

Box consists of records concerning Ruth Dayan -

Anthony Eden.

To view, order box 49.

BSE.2005.089- Personalities BSE.2005.090 Box 11

19261977

1 box of textual records.

Box consists of records concerning

BSE.2005.091- Personalities BSE.2005.092 Box 12

19362001

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.093- Personalities BSE.2005.094 Box 13 BSE.2005.095- Personalities

1950[ca. 1990] 1936-

1 box of textual records. 1 box of 164

Some records are General Abd El Hakim in French Amer - Duke of and Edinburgh. Spanish. Box consists of Some records concerning records are Marshall Foch in French Mendes France. and German. Box consists of Some records concerning records are Daniel Chester in French. Ghana (persons). Box consists of Some
records concerning

To view, order box 50.

To view, order box 51.

To view, order box 52. To view,

BSE.2005.096

Box 14

BSE.2005.097- Personalities BSE.2005.098 Box 15

[ca. 1990] 19351977

textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

Vladimir Golschmann

- Jill Haworth.
Box consists of records concerning Wayne Hays -

Hohenlobe.
Box consists of records concerning

BSE.2005.099- Personalities BSE.2005.100 Box 16

19361980

Hubert H. Humphrey - Dr. Jamet [sic].
Box consists of records concerning

BSE.2005.101- Personalities BSE.2005.102 Box 17

19401975

Japan Royalty Crown Prince Akihito and Crown Princess Michiko - Martha Keller.
Box consists of records concerning Asad Kelley - Robert

records are in French. Some records in French and German. Some records in French and German. Some records are in French.

order box 53. To view, order box 54. To view, order box 55. To view, order box 56.

BSE.2005.103- Personalities BSE.2005.104 Box 18 BSE.2005.105- Personalities BSE.2005.106 Box 19

19361975 1960s 1980s

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

F. Kennedy.
Box consists of records concerning Ted Kennedy -

Some records are in French. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are

To view, order box 57. To view, order box 58.

Manfred Klaiber.
Box consists of records concerning Victor Kravchenko -

BSE.2005.107- Personalities BSE.2005.109 Box 20

19471982

1 box of textual records.

Samora Machel.
Box consists of records concerning Robert Marx - Dr.

To view, order box 59.

BSE.2005.111- Personalities BSE.2005.113 Box 21 BSE.2005.114- Personalities BSE.2005.116 Box 22

1954[ca. 1990] 1950[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records. 1 box of textual records.

Barbara Moore.
Box consists of records concerning Zia Khan Nassry -

To view, order box 60. To view, order box 61.

Stylianos Pattakos.
Box consists of records concerning

BSE.2005.117- Personalities BSE.2005.118 Box 23

19361988

1 box of textual records.

General Emilio Agui Naldo - (Portugal) Mario Soares.
Box consists of records concerning

To view, order box 62.

BSE.2005.119- Personalities BSE.2005.120 Box 24

19471978

1 box of textual 165

To view, order

records.

Roger Pouly - Michel Rocart.
Box consists of records concerning Peter Paul Rubens -

BSE.2005.121- Personalities BSE.2005.122 Box 25

19361976

1 box of textual records.

Duncan Sanys.
Box consists of records concerning Manuel Dos Santos ­

BSE.2005.123- Personalities BSE.2005.125 Box 26

19361986

1 box of textual records.

Sylvester Stallone.
Box consists of records concerning Adlai Stevenson ­

BSE.2005.126- Personalities BSE.2005.127 Box 27

19361981

1 box of textual records.

(Thailand) General Char Bijayendrn [sic].
Box consists of records concerning Mikis Theodorakis ­

BSE.2005.128- Personalities BSE.2005.129 Box 28

1936[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

(Vietnam) Qu Truong Thanh [sic].
Box consists of records concerning

in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German.

box 63.

To view, order box 64.

To view, order box 65.

To view, order box 66.

To view, order box 67.

BSE.2005.130- Personalities BSE.2005.132 Box 29

1936[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

Bao-Dai ­ General Dons Zummerman [sic].
Box consists of records concerning newspapers from

To view, order box 68.

BSE.2005.133- Personalities BSE.2005.134 Box 30

19641979

1 box of textual records.

President John F. Kennedy assassination.
Box consists of records concerning

To view, order box 69.

BSE.2005.135- Personalities BSE.2005.139 Box 31

19641980

1 box of textual records.

President Lyndon Johnson, President Richard Nixon, President Gerald, and The White House.
Box consists of records concerning Jimmy Carter, Ronald

Some records are in French and German.

To view, order box 70.

BSE.2005.140- Personalities BSE.2005.141 Box 32

19531989

1 box of textual records.

Reagan, Roger Sandler, Mrs. Elizabeth Dole, 166

To view, order box 71.

Plains, Georgia, and Secretary George Shultz.

167

Series 4: Subject files created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency Dates: 1935-[ca. 1990] Extent: 1.13 meters of textual records. Scope and Content: Series consists of articles, filing copies, captions, caption lists, letters, newspaper and magazine clippings, photocopies of textual records, receipts, notes, photo releases, model release forms, press kit, newspapers, a college newspaper, flyers, booklets, pamphlets, exhibition takeaway, fact sheets, transcripts, and business cards. The records contain information on a variety of topics arranged in alphabetical order. The records were created and accumulated by the Black Star Agency to provide contextual information for the photographs and photo stories that the company sold and circulated. This is either seen in research collected for stories, correspondence between Black Star and its photographers, or in finished articles and captions. The photographs in reference can be found in the Black Star Collection at the Ryerson Image Centre. Restrictions: The collection is available for viewing in person by appointment. As of 2013 the collection has not been digitized. To view the collection, please contact the Ryerson Image Center at: Ryerson Image Centre 33 Gould Street Toronto, Ontario, M5B 1X8

416-975-5000, ext. 7032 ric@ryerson.ca

Copyright: The textual material associated with the Ephemera Collection maybe reproduced under the Fair Dealing clause of the Canadian Copyright Act. The following statement must accompany all textual reproductions: "© The Black Star Picture Agency, Courtesy of the Ryerson Image Centre." Notes: Includes records in French and German. Box List for Series 4: File Number Title Date 1953-1989 Physical Description 1 box of textual records. Scope and Content
Box consists of records concerning animals, accidents, art, archaeology, and astronomy. Box consists of records concerning aviation, NASA, banks, beaches, bombs, business, cemeteries, children, college, graduation,

Notes Some records are in French and German. Some records are in French and German.

Order Info To view, order box 71.

BSE.2005.142- Subjects BSE.2005.143 Box 1

BSE.2005.144- Subjects BSE.2005.147 Box 2

1936-[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

To view, order box 72.

168

BSE.2005.148- Subjects BSE.2005.154 Box 3

1936-[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.155- Subjects BSE.2005.157 Box 4

1936-1982

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.158- Subjects BSE.2005.160 Box 5

1936-[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.161- Subjects BSE.2005.162 Box 6

1969-1981

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.163- Subjects BSE.2005.167 Box 7

1936-[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

communications, computer checkout counter, cowboys and cowgirls. Box consists of records concerning Civil Rights, dance, demonstrations, drugs, ecology, economy, energy, and dairy industry. Box consists of records concerning fashion, fences and gates, fireworks, fish, flags, flowers, history, holidays, Iran hostages, motels, gangs, guns, vets, realestate, housing, humor, hurricanes, Indians, and industry. Box consists of records concerning industry, markets, landscapes, fall, and medical. Box consists of records concerning medical field and research, and the military. Box consists of records concerning military, weapons, motoring, music, occupation, transit workers, Peace Corps, welfare, religion, people, police, drugs,

Some records are in French and German.

To view, order box 73.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 74.

Some records are in French and German. Some records are in German.

To view, order box 75.

To view, order box 76.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 77.

169

BSE.2005.168- Subjects BSE.2005.173 Box 8

1936-1987

1 box of textual records.

BSE.2005.174- Subjects BSE.2005.202 Box 9

1936-[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

homeless, prisons, prostitution, and religion. Box consists of records concerning religion, Amish, Miami, riots, schools, senior citizens, Titanic, sports, medical, Olympics, terrorists, unemployment, urban renewal, Flip Schulke, welfare, science, and witchcraft. Box consists of records concerning Kosti [sic], Herbert Lanks, Gene Daniels, military conflicts, Ken Sakamoto, John Carruthers, J Bruce Baumann, Robert Philips, J.P. Owen, Marvin Koner, Alicia Marquez,

Some records are in French and German.

To view, order box 78.

To view, order box 79.

John Marquand, General Markos, Escobar Marisol, Roger Maris, Marty Marvin, Luis Mariano, Jacques Marette, Prierre Marcilhaey, George Manter, Mike Mansfield, Thomas Mann, Marcel Marceau, Anthony Mann, Manescu; Nicole ManciniRidolfini, James Mancham, 170

Tommy Manatoc, Tatiana Mamonova, Andre Malraux, Malaya, Bernard Malamud, Archbishop Makarios, Sir Roger Makins; Giselle Mac Kenzie, Enrico Macias, Ira Maisky, Miriam Makeba, Anna Magnani, Mitsuyasu Maeno, Harold MacMillan, Shierley MacLaine, Mary Martin, Millicent Martin, Mgr Marty, John Martinis, Elsa Martinelli, and Mike Marshall. BSE.2005.205- Subjects BSE.2005.206 Box 10 1936-[ca. 1990] 1 box of textual records.
Box consists of records concerning war, Oswaldo Salas, America, wine industry, liquor, light houses, mail, men, model, money, industry, taxidermist, tea, tin, tobacco, toys, weaving spinning, and Steve Schapiro. Box consists of records concerning Cuba, Czechoslovakia, high schools, basketball, Titanic, ships, Jim Richardson,

Some records are in French.

To view, order box 80.

BSE.2005.207

Subjects Box 11

1936-[ca. 1990]

1 box of textual records.

Some records are in German.

To view, order box 81.

171

BSE.2005.208

Subjects Portfolio

1984-1988

1 portfolio.

West Germany, army, America, Nazi, Eiffel Tower, Paris, teenage, England, Albania, band, Warsaw, Tehran, statue, Berlin, court, fishing Italy, Junior Scientist, and rats. Portfolio consists of records concerning Vera A. Lentz.

Some records are in German and Spanish.

To view, order portfolio.

172

Bibliography Photojournalism Allen, Jennifer. "Crate 17," Archival Dialogues: Reading the Black Star Collection. Toronto, ON: Ryerson Image Centre, 2012. 109-116. Black Star. "Photojournalism." Accessed 5 March 2013. http://www.blackstar.com/editorial/. Blaschke, Estelle. "From the Picture Archive to the Image Bank. Commercializing the Visual through Photography: The Bettmann Archive and Corbis." Etudes Photographiques 24 (November 2009): 171-181. Brennen, Bonnie and Hanno Hardt ed. Picturing the Past: Media, History and Photography. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1999. Carlebach, Michael L. American Photojournalism Comes of Age. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1997. ---. The Origins of Photojournalism in America. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1992. Chapnick, Howard. Truth Needs No Ally: Inside Photojournalism. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1994. Cookman, Claude Hubert. American Photojournalism: Motivations and Meanings. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2009. Freund, Gisèle. Photography & Society, translated by David R. Godine. Boston: David R. Godine, Publisher, 1980. Frizot, Michel, ed. A New History of Photography, translated by Susan Bennett, Liz Clegg, John Croock, Caroline Higgitt. Köln: Könemann, 1998. Gale, Peggy ed. Archival Dialogues: Reading the Black Star Collection. Ryerson Image Centre: Toronto, ON, 2012. Getty Images. Photojournalism. Germany: Könemann, 2006. Lebeck, Robert. Kiosk: Ein Geschichte Der Fotoreportage 1839-1973. (A History of Photojournalism) Edited by Bodo Von Dewitz. Germany: Steidl, 2001. Meijer, Emile and Joop Swart ed. Photographic Memory: Press Photography ­ Twelve Insights. London: Quiller, 1988.

173

Neubauer, Hendrick. Black Star: 60 Years of Photojournalism. Koln: Könemann, 2002. Panzer, Mary. "The Meaning of the Twentieth-Century Press Archive." Aperture 202 (Spring 2011): 4651. ---. Things as They Are: Photojournalism in Context Since 1955. New York: Aperture, 2005. Ryerson Image Centre. "Research and Collections." http://www.ryerson.ca/ric/research/collections.html. Torosian, Michael. Black Star. Toronto: Lumiere Press, 2013. Collections Management and Creation of Finding Aids Boles, Frank. "Disrespecting Original Order." The American Archivist 45 (1982): 26-32. Brothman, Brien. "Orders of Value: Probing the Theoretical Terms of Archival Practice." Archivaria 32 (1991): 78-100. Bureau of Canadian Archivists, Rules for Archival Description. Ottawa, Canada: Bureau of Canadian Archivists, 1990. Duff, Wendy and Marlene van Ballegooie, and Lori Eddy. RAD Revealed: A basic primer on the Rules for Archival Description. Ottawa: Canadian Council of Archives, 2001. Fox, Michael J. and Peter L. Wilkerson. Introduction to Archival Organization and Description. Edited by Susanne R. Warren. United States of America: Getty Information Institute, 1998. Hunter, Gregory S. Developing and Maintaining Practical Archives: A How-To-Do-it Manual, Second Edition. New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers, INC., 2003. Light, Michelle and Tom Hyry. "Colophons and Annotations: New Directions for the Finding Aid." The American Archivist 65 (2002): 216-230. MacNeil, Heather. "Archivalterity: Rethinking Original Order." Archivaria 66 (2008): 1-24. ---. "Picking Our Text: Archival Description, Authenticity and the Archivist as Editor." The American Archivist 68, no. 2 (2005): 264-278. Manco, Sara. "Finding Wolff: Intellectually Arranging the Werner Wolff Fonds at the Ryerson Image Centre." (MA Thesis: Ryerson University, 2012). Note, Margot. Managing Image Collections: A Practical Guide. United Kingdom: Chandos Publishing, 2011. 174 Accessed November 1, 2012.

O'Brien, Jeff. Basic RAD: An Introduction to the preparation of fonds- and series-level descriptions using the Rules for Archival Description. Regina: The Saskatchewan Council of Archives, 1997. Oleck, Joan. Trends in Photography Special Collections Management, 2011 Edition. New York: Primary Research Group, 2011. Ritzenthaler, Mary Lynn and Diane Vogt-O'Connor. Photographs: Archival Care and Management. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2006. Rushworth, Matthew. "Issues in Object- Level Description of Press Photography Collections: Towards A Metadata Standard for Photojournalism." (MA Thesis: Ryerson University, 2012). Smith, Amanda. "Providing Access to the Everette Dixie Resse Prints and Negatives at the George Eastman House." (MA Thesis: Ryerson University, 2011). The University of Texas at Austin. The Harry Ransom Center. "Magnum Photos, Inc." http://norman.hrc.utexas.edu/fasearch/findingAid.cfm?eadid=00502. University of Waterloo Library. "United Way of Kitchener-Waterloo and Area fonds." http://www.lib.uwaterloo.ca/discipline/SpecColl/archives/united.html. Verbin, Rachel. "Photographic Retouching: The Press Picture Editor's `Invisible' Tool (1930-1939)." (MA Thesis: Ryerson University, 2010). Yerushalmy, Merav. "Performing the Relational Archive." Photography & Culture Vol. 2: 2 (July 2009): 153-170.

175

