      "A  GREAT  VARIETY  OF  NEW  AND  FINE  DESIGNS:"     ADVERTISEMENTS  FOR  PAINTED  BACKGROUNDS,  1856-1903        by   Krista  Keller   HBA,  Art  and  Art  History,  University  of  Toronto,  2011   Diploma,  Art  and  Art  History,  Sheridan  College,  2011        A  thesis        presented  to  Ryerson  University  and  George  Eastman  House  International  Museum   of  Film  and  Photography        in  partial  fulfillment  of  the   requirements  for  the  degree  of     Master  of  Arts     in  the  Program  of     Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management      Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2013     ©  Krista  Keller  2013        

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  THESIS   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the   thesis,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.   I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research   I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or   by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  understand  that  my  thesis  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.         Krista  Keller  

  

  

ii  

"A  GREAT  VARIETY  OF  NEW  AND  FINE  DESIGNS:"  ADVERTISEMENTS  FOR   PAINTED  BACKGROUNDS,  1856-1903     Master  of  Arts,  2013   Krista  Keller   Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management   Ryerson  University  /  George  Eastman  House     

Abstract     
   The  painted  background,  as  a  piece  of  photographic  equipment,  has  rarely  

been  studied  apart  from  its  decorative  function  in  portraits.  This  thesis  addresses   the  history,  construction,  and  use  of  the  painted  background  within  studio  portrait   photography  during  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  as  revealed  from   examining  advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds.   1,096  advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds  were  reviewed  in  nine   periodicals  published  in  the  United  States  of  America  from  1856  to  1903,  all  taken   from  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library  at  George  Eastman  House.  This   material  has  been  compiled  into  a  comprehensive  index  revealing  an  increase  in  the   use  of  painted  background  within  portrait  photography  during  this  time  period.     The  analysis  of  this  research  also  provides  information  about  the  history  of  painted   backgrounds,  companies  advertising  backgrounds,  sizes,  styles,  and  costs  of   backgrounds,  and  ways  companies  shipped  their  backgrounds  throughout  this  era.        

  

iii  

Acknowledgements  
         I  would  like  to  express  my  deepest  thanks  to  my  thesis  advisor  and  first  

reader  Jamie  M.  Allen  for  her  motivation,  attention  to  detail,  and  continuous  support   throughout  this  process.  I  also  want  to  thank  my  second  reader  Mark  Osterman  for   his  wealth  of  knowledge  about  anything  photographic.  I  would  also  like  to  thank   Alison  Nordström  for  her  help  and  guidance  in  forming  this  topic,  and  to  my   dedicated  editor  Emily  McKibbon.  I  also  want  to  thank  Jessica  Johnston,  Joe  Struble,   Rachel  Stuhlman,  Sue  Drexler,  Rheytchul  Kimmel,  Barbara  Galasso,  and  my  fellow   classmates  for  their  intellectual  conversations,  support,  and  continuous   encouragement.      Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  wonderful  family  and  cherished  friends  for  

all  their  support  and  love  throughout  my  education;  especially  to  my  sister  Sarah   who  has  been  and  will  always  be  there  for  me,  and  once  gave  me  the  advice  to  "stay   focused,  eat  lots  of  chocolate,  and  be  glad  you  are  not  dead!"

  

iv  

                  "Let  me  paint  the  backgrounds  for  a  nation,  and  I     care  not  who  makes  the  photographs."                                 -L.W.  Seavey     

  

v  

Table  of  Contents  
     
Abstract  .........................................................................................................................................................................   iii   Acknowledgements  ..................................................................................................................................................  iv   List  of  Illustrations  .................................................................................................................................................  vii   Introduction  .................................................................................................................................................................  1   Literature  Survey  .......................................................................................................................................................  5   History  of  the  Painted  Background  .................................................................................................................  12   Methodology  .............................................................................................................................................................  28   Analysis  of  Findings  ...............................................................................................................................................  32   Conclusion  ..................................................................................................................................................................  51   Appendix  One:  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903  .........................  53   Appendix  Two:  Terms  to  Refer  to  Painted  Backgrounds  ......................................................................  54   Appendix  Three:  Companies  Advertising  Painted  Backgrounds  .......................................................  57   Appendix  Four:  List  and  Glossary  of  Materials  ..........................................................................................  60   Appendix  Five:  Modes  for  Inquiring  and  Shipping  Backgrounds  ......................................................  62   Appendix  Six:  Histories  of  Companies  ...........................................................................................................  65   Bibliography  ..............................................................................................................................................................  75  

           

  

vi  

List  of  Illustrations  
      Figure  1:    Example  of  a  painted  background  situated  behind  the  sitter  and  alongside     other  photographic  apparatuses  a  photographer  would  have  needed.   Unknown,  Philadelphia  Photographer  25  (1888):  n.p.         Figure  2:    Examples  of  four  graduated  backgrounds.  George  Murphy,  Dealers               Catalogue  (New  York:  George  Murphy  Inc.,  1913),  29.        Figure  3:    Example  of  a  Fancy  or  Scenic  Background.  Paul  N.  Hasluck,  The  Book  of     Photography:  Practical  Theoretic  and  Applied  (New  York:  Cassell  and   Company,  Limited  1907),  473.         Figure  4:    Left:  A  soldier  posed  in  front  of  a  landscape  background.  Unidentified     Photographer,  ca.  1862,  tintype,  1969:0208:0027.  Centre:  A  group   situated  before  a  background  portraying  a  stately  home.  Unidentified   Photographer,  ca.  1895,  tintype,  2003:1167:0012.  Right:  Two  men   situated  in  front  of  a  background  depicting  a  famous  tourist  destination.   Unidentified  Photographer,  ca.  1880,  tintype,  1978:0829:0002.  All  images   courtesy  of  George  Eastman  House.      Figure  5:  Left:  Example  of  a  background  painted  slightly  out  of  focus.  S.  Anderson,     ca.  1870,  albumen  print,  carte-de-visite,  1982:0142:0006.  Right:  A   background  painted  in  focus  with  definite  lines.  Robert  Armstrong,  ca.   1870,  albumen  print,  carte-de-visite,  1982:0185:0002.  Both  images   courtesy  of  George  Eastman  House.      Figure  6:    Front  and  side  view  of  a  conical  background.  W.  Kurtz,  The  Photographic                 Times  26  (1872):  71      Figure  7:    Front  view  of  a  revolving  background.  Bigelow,  Philadelphia  Photographer                 9  (1872):  64.         Figure  8:    Sketch  of  a  sitter  holding  onto  a  picturesque  foreground  in  front  of  the               photographer.  The  Anthony  &  Scovill  Co.,  Photographic  Goods  (1903):                           124.        Figure  9:    Left:  Example  of  a  background  holder  with  bottom  rollers.  Wilson's     Photographics  (New  York:  E.L.  Wilson,  1881),  176.  Right:  A  background   holder  with  rollers  along  the  frame.  W.P.  Buchanan,  Buchanan's  Complete   Illustrated  Catalogue  (Philadelphia:  W.P.  Buchanan,  1893):  127.           

  

vii  

   Figure  10:  Example  showing  the  darkest  section  of  the  background  against  the     lightest  part  of  the  face.  John  W.  Bainbridge,  ca.  1865,  albumen  print,   carte-de-visite,  1979:0753:0002.  Courtesy  of  George  Eastman  House.      Figure  11:    Left:  According  to  A.R.  Crihfield  this  is  an  example  of  a  sitter  not  blending     in  or  matching  with  the  background  and  accessories.  A.R.  Crihfield,   Philadelphia  Photographer  72  (1869):  55.  Right:  Example  of  a   background  and  accessories  suited  for  the  client.  L.W.  Seavey,   Philadelphia  Photographer  219  (1882):  331.         Figure  12:  Richard  Walzl,  The  Photographer's  Friend:  Almanac  and  American  Year                   Book  of  Photography  2  (1872):  n.p.         Figure  13:    Full  page  spread  of  a  photography  journal.  The  Photographic  Times  9                     (1884):  n.p.         Figure  14:    Anthony's  Photographic  Supplies,  Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin  1                   (1870):  172.         Figure  15:    J.W.  Bryant  Co.,  The  Photo-American:  An  Illustrated  Monthly  Magazine                     Devoted  to  Photography  4  (1895):  130.         Figure  16:    W.F.  Ashe,  Photographic  Times  120  (1880):  285.         Figure  17:    Edwin  Davis,  The  American  Journal  of  Photography  7  (1895):  v.         Figure  18:    L.W.  Seavey,  Philadelphia  Photographer  8  (1871):  n.p.         Figure  19:    L.W.  Seavey,  The  Photographer's  Friend  2  (1872):  n.p.         Figure  20:  "Plan  in  building  in  which  the  photographers'  convention  will  be  held,     July  14th,  1885,  State  Arsenal,  Buffalo,  N.Y."  L.W.  Seavey,  W.F.  Ashe,  and   J.W.  Bryant  purchased  booths  at  the  convention.  They  appear  at  the   lower  right.  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  15   (1885):  n.p.         Figure  21:    J.W.  Bryant,  Philadelphia  Photographer  25  (1888):  viii.         Figure  22:    Ralph  J.  Golsen,  The  American  Journal  of  Photography  233  (1900):  247.            Figure  23:    Minott  M.  Govan,  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  16                     (1886):  vi.         Figure  24:    Example  of  an  advertisement  for  backgrounds  by  a  specialized  company.        viii  

   Figure  25:    Lafayette  W.  Seavey,  Photographic  Times  96  (1878):  255.      Figure  26:    Portrait  showing  a  child  in  front  of  a  winter  themed  background  and     sitting  in  a  sleigh.  G.  E.  Bacon,  ca.  1870,  albumen  print,  carte-de-visite,   2008:0531:0021.  Courtesy  of  George  Eastman  House.      Figure  27:    Example  of  a  military  style  background.  Unidentified  Photographer,   ca.  1863,  tintype  with  applied  colour,  1981:2678:0001.  Courtesy  of   George  Eastman  House.      Figure  28:  Example  of  an  advertisement  for  painted  backgrounds  by  a  specialized                     company.  L.W.  Seavey,  The  Philadelphia  Photographer  25  (1888):  iv.      Figure  29:    Advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds  by  three  different  companies     located  on  a  single  page.  J.W.  Bryant,  W.F.  Ashe,  and  Minott  M.  Govan.   The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  17  (1887):  iii.         Figure  30:  Example  of  a  full  page  advertisement  for  painted  backgrounds  by  a     specialized  company.  Rough,  Platzer  &  Caldwell,  Buchanan's  Complete   Illustrated  Catalogue  (Philadelphia:  W.P.  Buchanan,  1896):  n.p.         Figure  31:    Chas.  W.  Stevens,  Philadelphia  Photographer  170  (1878):  27.         Figure  32:    Example  of  one  of  L.W.  Seavey's  Bulletins.  The  Photographic  Times  and                     American  Photographer  12  (1882):  454.     

J.W.  Bryant,  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  16   (1886):  iii.  

  

ix  

Introduction  
   For  centuries  prior  to  photography,  painted  backgrounds  were  closely  linked  

to  fields  outside  of  photography  including  dioramas1  and  theatre  designs.  Within   photography  the  painted  background  first  appeared  shortly  after  the  invention  of   the  daguerreotype.2  From  this  introduction,  the  painted  background  became  an   essential  apparatus  for  any  successful  portrait  photographer.  As  portraiture  evolved   and  developed  throughout  the  nineteenth  century,  the  amount  and  variations  of   backgrounds  available  to  any  photographer  also  increased.    Companies  specializing   in  custom  or  artistic  painted  backgrounds  and  accessories  appeared,  and  soon   offered  several  different  styles,  contributing  to  the  market  for,  and  promoting  the   use  of  painted  backgrounds.     During  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  there  was  a  shift  from  a   photographer  owning  one  painted  background,  to  a  photographer  owning  a   multitude  of  backgrounds  reflecting  fashionable  or  seasonal  trends.  Though  painted   backgrounds  are  a  tool  used  by  photographers  still  today,  the  use  of  photographic   backgrounds  reached  its  zenith  during  the  late  nineteenth  century.  This  can  be   accounted  for  by  the  rise  in  accessibility  in  photographic  portraiture  for  the  general   public,  and  competition  amongst  photographers  for  this  burgeoning  market.   Examining  advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds  found  in  nineteenth  century   photographic  journals  demonstrates  the  truth  of  this  claim  by  the  volume  of  

                                                                                                                
1Diorama  is  an  image  on  fabric  and  painted  so  that  the  image  changes  as  the  light  changes.  Thus,  the  
2  Avon  Neal,  "Folk  Art  Fantasies:  Photographers'  Backgrounds,"  Afterimage  24  (1997):  12.  

  

1  

advertisements  found  and  the  volume  of  companies  advertising  for  painted   backgrounds.     Painted  backgrounds  that  appear  in  portraits  produced  in  the  latter  half  of   the  nineteenth  century  vary  in  what  they  depict,  and  scholarly  research  about   painted  backgrounds  tends  to  focus  on  the  subject  matter  of  the  background  instead   of  how  the  background  was  used  as  a  necessary  tool  for  the  photographer.  Very   little  has  been  discussed  about  how  painted  backgrounds  were  advertised,  sold,  and   used  during  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  in  the  United  States  of  America.   Though  this  paper  will  briefly  examine  different  styles  of  backgrounds  that  were   available  to  portrait  photographers  in  the  late  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  the   main  emphasis  of  this  research  focuses  on  how  backgrounds  were  advertised,  sold,   and  used  during  this  time  period,  explains  the  functional  consideration  that   determine  some  of  the  aesthetics  of  painted  backgrounds,  examines  how   photographers  would  have  used  the  background,  and  analyses  how  photographers   would  have  purchased  their  backgrounds.   From  contemporary  to  historical  records,  the  language  used  to  describe  or   account  for  painted  backgrounds  varies.  Terms  such  as  "backgrounds,"  "head   Grounds,"  "photo-backgrounds,"  and  "grounds"  among  many  others  have  been  used   in  both  historical  and  contemporary  sources.  Nonetheless,  all  terms  refer  to  and   mean  the  same  thing.  Most  consistently,  historical  writers  have  used  the  term   background,  either  in  one  word  or  two  words.  Contemporary  scholars  generally  use   the  term  backdrop,  with  the  exception  of  some  authors  reverting  to  the  historical  

  

2  

term.  For  this  paper  "background"  will  be  used  to  refer  to  the  piece  of  fabric  situated   behind  the  sitter.    

Figure  1:  Example  of  a  painted  background  situated  behind  the  sitter  and  alongside  other  photographic   apparatuses  a  photographer  would  have  needed.  Unknown,  Philadelphia  Photographer  25  (1888):  n.p.     

The  literature  summary  focuses  on  a  review  of  the  secondary  literature   about  painted  backgrounds  and  their  use  in  portrait  photography.    This  section   shows  that  little  has  been  discussed  about  the  painted  background  as  a   photographic  apparatus,  discussing  instead  the  background  as  a  cultural  artifact.   A  history  of  the  painted  background  including  its  introduction  in   photography  is  discussed.  This  chapter  will  briefly  mention  how  backgrounds  were   constructed,  stored,  and  repaired  by  photographers.  However,  most  of  the  chapter  

  

3  

will  be  devoted  to  how  photographers  were  instructed  to  use  the  painted   background  in  relation  to  his  other  photographic  tools  and  the  sitter.   My  approach  for  reviewing  the  nineteenth  century  journals  available  at   George  Eastman  House  and  the  creation  of  the  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted   Backgrounds  1864-19033  is  discussed  in  detail  within  the  methodology  section.   Finally,  I  analyze  the  surveyed  advertisements.  In  this  chapter  I  examine  the  data  I   gathered  and  place  it  in  its  historical  context  to  comment  on  general  trends  and   shifts  that  occurred  within  this  time  period  in  relation  to  the  painted  background.   Furthermore,  I  compare  and  contrast  these  advertisements  to  explain  how   photographers  purchased  backgrounds  from  the  companies  and  demonstrate  the   differences  between  how  general  photographic  suppliers  and  background  artists   advertised  backgrounds.  This  essay  concludes  with  a  description  of  seasonal  trends   and  shifts  in  subject  matters  and  materials,  while  comparing  costs  and  shipping  of   backgrounds.   Examining  advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds  explains  how  painted   backgrounds  were  used  in  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  in  the  United   States  of  America  and  aids  in  understanding  why  painted  backgrounds  appear  the   way  they  do  in  these  portraits.  This  information  helps  contextualize  the  sitter  in   relation  to  the  painted  background,  the  aesthetic  trends  of  the  day,  and  the   challenges  of  using  a  painted  background  in  the  late  nineteenth  century.

                                                                                                                 3  Krista  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903  (Masters  Thesis,  Ryerson   University,  2013).      4  

Literature  Survey    
         There  are  a  limited  number  of  resources  available  about  studio  staging  

within  nineteenth  century  portrait  photography  and  even  less  so  about  specific   topics  within  this  subject.  Usually,  information  about  portrait  photography   produced  in  the  late  nineteenth  century  focuses  on  the  pose  of  the  sitter  or  the  use   of  the  photograph  within  its  social  context.  Thus,  information  about  painted   backgrounds  that  appear  in  typical  portraits  is  scarce  and  brief.  Furthermore,  how   painted  backgrounds  were  advertised  and  sold  during  the  latter  half  of  the   nineteenth  century  is  a  subject  that  is  rarely  discussed  by  contemporary  scholars.   Within  the  primary  literature,  there  are  several  rich  nineteenth  century   sources  in  the  form  of  manuals,  catalogues,  and  periodicals  that  discuss  the  role  and   use  of  the  painted  background.  Some  of  these  publications  teach  photographers  to   construct  their  own  painted  backgrounds  providing  detailed  information  on  their   construction.  These  nineteenth  century  sources  include  sufficient  information  about   the  role  of  a  painted  background  in  portraiture  and  the  ideal  studio  set  up  while   contemporary  sources  lack  this  information.  Information  from  the  numerous   nineteenth  century  sources  is  highlighted  and  discussed  in  the  history  of  the  painted   background,  while  the  secondary  literature  is  featured  here.   Within  the  secondary  literature  there  is  an  emphasis  on  the  cultural  context   and  the  aesthetic  qualities  of  the  photographs.  Stephen  Kasher  provides  a  complete  

  

5  

history  of  the  tintype  in  America  in  his  book,  America  and  the  Tintype.4  This   publication  stresses  the  technique's  low  cost  and  how  that  allowed  for  sitters  to  be   more  flexible  and  experimental  with  how  they  posed  for  their  portraits.  The  chapter   "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds"  devotes  roughly  two  pages  to  the   discussion  of  the  painted  background  and  Kasher  describes  the  increase  in  the  use   of  painted  backgrounds  alongside  the  rise  and  popularity  of  the  tintype.  Kasher   believes  that  a  background  supplied  romanticism  and  transported  the  sitter  to  an   imagined  time  and  place.  The  background  was  an  escape  from  the  pollution  of  a  city   to  an  idealized  paradise,  stately  home,  or  tourist  site.  According  to  Kasher,  "It  stood   for  romance,  for  escape,  for  clean  air,  and  for  city  planning."5     Avon  Neal,  in  his  essay  "Folk  Art  Fantasies:  Photographers'  Backgrounds,"   argues  that  the  history  of  painted  backgrounds  should  be  included  in  the  history  of   folk  art.6  Though  Neal  discusses  the  recent  uses  of  painted  backgrounds  at  local  fairs   in  Guatemala,  he  believes  this  practice  is  similar  to  what  would  have  occurred   during  the  height  of  portrait  photography  in  the  United  States.  The  author  discusses   the  fabrication  and  use  of  painted  backgrounds  by  anonymous  professional   photographers  similar  to  those  found  in  the  nineteenth  century.  Neal's  essay   provides  an  anthropological  approach  to  the  painted  background  that  focuses  on  the   photographer's  relationship  to  the  background,  such  as  how  different  subject   matters  of  backgrounds  affected  business.  In  addition,  Neal  also  discusses  the   practical  aspects  surrounding  the  use  of  a  painted  background,  including  how  it  was                                                                                                                   
4  Steven  Kasher,  "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds,"  in  America  and  the  Tintype  (New   York:  International  Center  of  Photography  2008).   5  Kasher,  "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds,"  129.   6  Avon  Neal,  "Folk  Art  Fantasies:  Photographers'  Backdrops,"  Afterimage  24  (1997).  

  

6  

transported,  hung,  and  commissioned.7  This  essay  does  not  focus  specifically  on  the   nineteenth  century  or  the  United  States  of  America,  but  provides  a  source  about   how  sitters  and  photographers  interacted  with  the  painted  background.   Furthermore,  Peter  Palmquist's  Frozen  in  Iron  is  a  catalogue  from  an   exhibition  highlighting  tintypes  from  his  private  collection.8  The  author  discusses   the  relaxed  atmosphere  inherent  in  tintype  portraits  through  studio  staging  and  the   playfulness  of  the  sitters'  poses.  The  reproductions  of  tintypes  that  appear  in  this   publication  show  numerous  examples  of  painted  backgrounds  that  were  available   during  the  late  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  but  there  is  no  discussion  of  the   function  that  backgrounds  played  in  portraits.  The  most  Palmquist  mentions  about   backgrounds  can  be  found  in  the  chapter  titled  "Resorts  &  Recreational."  In  this   chapter,  Palmquist  recognizes  that  a  background  representing  famous  tourist   destinations  was  a  common  subject  matter  for  painted  backgrounds  and  discusses   the  playfulness  of  sitters  in  front  of  backgrounds  of  notable  tourist  attractions  such   as  Niagara  Falls.9     Alan  Griffith  of  Luminous  Lint,10  mentions  the  use  of  painted  backgrounds  for   decorative  purposes  in  portraits  and  argues  that  theatre  and  theatre  sets  influenced   early  backgrounds.  Griffith  mentions  large  manufacturers  of  painted  backgrounds   during  the  nineteenth  century,  such  as  the  L.W.  Seavey  Company,  and  discusses   famous  portrait  photographers  known  for  their  extensive  collection  of  painted                                                                                                                   
7  Neal,  "Folk  Art  Fantasies:  Photographers'  Backdrops,"  2.     8  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  Frozen  in  Iron  (New  York:  Eureka  Printing  Company,  2001).   9  Palmquist,  Frozen  in  Iron,  207.     10  Alan  Griffith,  "Luminous  Lint,"  Last  modified  April  22,  2013.  http://www.luminous-

lint.com/app/home/H1/  

  

7  

backgrounds.  Furthermore,  Griffith  also  argues  that  there  is  a  relationship  between   photographic  truth  and  the  painted  background;  backgrounds  frequently  depicted   tourist  sites  in  an  idealized  form,  while  the  real  thing  might  have  been  just  across   the  street.11  Griffith  dates  the  decline  of  painted  backgrounds  to  the  turn  of  the   twentieth  century  when  photographers  wanted  less  decorative  flair  in  their   portraits  and  also  cites  the  emergence  of  the  amateur  photographer  as  a   contributing  factor  to  its  disappearance.  Though  this  source  is  not  devoted  solely  to   the  late  nineteenth  century,  the  author  includes  patents  for  painted  backgrounds,  as   well  as  advertisements  providing  some  evidence  about  how  they  were  sold  and   constructed  in  the  nineteenth  century.   In  addition,  a  brief  history  of  the  painted  background  is  discussed  in  Mark   Osterman's  article  "Focus  on  the  Background."12  Osterman  examines  the  use  of  the   background  and  its  aesthetic  shifts  from  the  daguerreotype  era  until  the  twentieth   century.  The  author  discusses  the  various  materials  used  in  the  construction  of   painted  backgrounds  and  the  array  backgrounds  available  to  portrait  photographers   during  the  nineteenth  century.    Though  this  source  does  not  exclusively  discuss  the   use  of  backgrounds  in  the  United  States,  Osterman  provides  sufficient  information   about  how  backgrounds  were  constructed  and  used  amongst  other  photographic   devices.   The  exhibition  publication  Forgotten  Marriage:  The  Painted  Tintype  &  The   Decorative  Frame  1860-1890  justifies  the  Stanley  Burns'  inclusion  of  tintype  

                                                                                                                
11  Griffith,  "Luminous  Lint."    

12  Mark  Osterman,  "Focus  on  the  Background,"  The  Collodion  Journal  6  (2000):  6.-9.  

  

8  

portraits  within  the  American  Folk-art  tradition.13  The  publication  examines  painted   tintypes  from  the  Burns  Archive,  which  holds  largest  collection  of  painted  tintypes   in  the  world.  Though  how  painted  backgrounds  were  sold  during  this  era  is  not   mentioned  specifically,  Burns  argues  Europeans  initially  preferred  more  painterly   photographs  and  therefore  employed  the  use  of  a  painted  background,  while  the   American  population  at  first  desired  realism  and  simplicity.  Burns  also  argues  that   Mathew  Brady,  the  famous  American  portrait  photographer,  preferred  the  sitter   emerging  from  a  dark  background  and  did  not  endorse  the  use  of  "painted  `art'   backgrounds."14  The  author  briefly  mentions  the  invention  of  the  painted   background  and  its  early  use  within  Europe  but  completely  dismisses  any  use  of   painted  backgrounds  in  America.     In  Cartes  de  Visite:  In  Nineteenth  Century  Photography,  William  C.  Darrah   traces  the  history  of  the  carte-de-visite.  This  history  focuses  on  it  uses  within   portraiture,  ethnography,  reproductions  of  art,  and  the  Civil  War.  In  the  chapter   focusing  on  portraiture,  Darrah  discusses  painted  backgrounds  and  claims  that   painted  backgrounds  were  purchased  on  a  roll  that  contained  multiple  views.15  This   roll  was  convenient  for  the  photographer  as  all  he  had  to  do  was  unroll  the   background  until  the  desired  scene  appeared.   Marion  and  Floyd  Rinhart's book,  The  American  Tintype,  discusses  the   history,  production,  and  use  of  the  tintype  in  America.16  A  short  discussion  of                                                                                                                   
13  Stanley  B.  Burns,  Forgotten  Marriage:  The  Painted  Tintype  &  The  Decorative  Frame  1860-1890  (New   York:  The  Burns  Collections,  Ltd.  1995).   14  Burns,  Forgotten  Marriage:  The  Painted  Tintype  &  The  Decorative  Frame  1860-1890,  18   15  William  C.  Darrah,  Cartes  de  Visite;  In  Nineteenth  Century  Photography  (Gettysburg:  W.C.  Darrah   Publisher,  1981),  31.   16  Marion  and  Floyd  Rinhart,  The  American  Tintype  (Columbus  :  Ohio  State  University  Press,  1999).  

  

9  

painted  backgrounds  can  be  found  in  the  chapter  on  the  logistics  of  producing   tintypes,  which  focuses  on  studio  set  up.  This  chapter  includes  other  aspects  of   studio  set  up  including  specific  accessories,  cameras  used  by  tintype  photographers,   and  the  skylight  studio.  Rinhart  and  Rinhart  briefly  mention  different  styles  of   backgrounds  that  were  available  during  this  time  period  and  note  that  a   photographer  would  have  had  multiple  backgrounds  to  choose  from  so  that   backgrounds  could  be  tailored  to  specific  clientele;  however,  there  is  no  mention   about  how  they  were  advertised,  constructed,  or  sold  within  this  time  period.  While   Rinhart  and  Rinhart  include  reproductions  of  advertisements  for  other  objects  used   in  portraits,  such  as  accessories,  props,  and  darkroom  equipment,  they  do  not   include  any  advertisements  for  the  painted  background.   Camera  Clues:  A  Handbook  for  Photographic  Investigation,  authored  by  Joe   Nickell  is  a  source  on  how  to  understand  historic  photographs.17  Nickell  discusses   different  techniques,  materials,  and  equipment  frequently  used  by  photographers  to   help  demonstrate  how  photographs  were  produced  in  the  past.  Nickell  includes  a   brief  history  of  photography,  as  well  as  a  brief  section  about  identifying  old   photographs.  A  few  pages  are  devoted  to  backgrounds,  describing  how  they  were   made  and  how  companies  such  as  L.W.  Seavey  sold  painted  backgrounds.  Nickell   also  discusses  different  scenes  that  were  available  and  used  by  portrait   photographers.   The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits  by  Audrey  Linkman  examines  the   popularity  of  portrait  photography  in  the  Victorian  era  throughout  the  United                                                                                                                   
of  Kentucky,  1994).  
17  Joe  Nickell,  Camera  Clues:  A  Handbook  for  Photographic  Investigation  (Lexington  :  University  Press  

  

10  

Kingdom.18  Linkman  discusses  the  carte-de-visite  and  its  use  within  albums,  the   family  home,  and  as  a  medium  to  record  important  events  such  as  marriage  or   death.  In  the  chapter  "Photography  Art  Theory,"  Linkman  discusses  the  use  of   painted  backgrounds  and  other  accessories  in  portraits.  The  author  alludes  to  how   the  photographer  would  have  used  the  background  in  relation  to  the  sitter,  the   subject  matters  available  to  a  portrait  photographer  at  the  time,  and  its  practical   functions  within  the  portrait.19  Linkman  does  not  discuss  how  the  background  was   advertised,  or  sold  to  a  portrait  photographer.   In  many  of  these  publications  there  is  mention  of  the  playful  poses  of  the   sitter  and  how  these  scenes  were  produced  in  concert  with  backgrounds,  but  further   in-depth  discussion  about  studio  set-up  is  omitted.  Painted  backgrounds  appeared   in  most  portraits  reproduced  in  the  selected  publications  mentioned  above,  yet  they   were  discussed  rarely,  if  at  all.  Though  painted  backgrounds  were  used  in  portraits   for  aesthetic  and  practical  reasons,  it  is  important  to  understand  how  they  were   sold,  used,  and  advertised  to  portrait  studios  during  this  time  period.  This   information  is  significant  to  understand  the  appearance  of  backgrounds  in   nineteenth  century  portraits  and  how  the  painted  background  was  used  as  an   necessary  photographic  apparatus.     

                                                                                                                
  

18  Audrey  Linkman,  The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits  (London:  Tauris  Parke  Books,  1993).   19  Linkman,  The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits,    52.  

  

11  

History  of  the  Painted  Background  
   Similar  to  the  head-rest  the  painted  background  was  a  necessary  tool  for  

portrait  photographers.  In  portrait  photography  the  painted  background  was  used   to  enhance  the  overall  appearance  of  the  final  photograph  by  creating  dimension   and  complementing  the  sitters'  attire  and  pose.  Various  subject  matters,  styles,  and   sizes  of  backgrounds  were  available,  which  influenced  their  use  in  relation  to  the   sitter  and  other  studio  accessories.     Painted  backgrounds  were  used  in  theatre  productions  before  the  invention   of  photography;  professional  theatres  used  large  backgrounds  as  part  of  stage   designs  and  itinerant  actors  also  utilized  backgrounds  in  their  performances.20   Although  backgrounds  used  for  stage  set-up  tended  to  be  larger  than  ones  needed   for  portrait  photography,  they  shared  similarities  in  how  they  were  hung  and  in  the   conscious  effort  to  have  matching  accessories  and  costumes.21  In  addition,  artists   who  painted  backgrounds  for  theatre  usually  painted  backgrounds  for  photographic   portraiture.22     Within  the  field  of  photography,  backgrounds  were  first  introduced  during   the  daguerreotype  era.    The  backgrounds  shown  in  early  daguerreotypes  were  plain   pieces  of  fabric,  usually  wool.    Antoine  Claudet  is  credited  with  the  introduction  of   the  scenic  background  to  photography  in  Europe  in  1842;  Henry  Ulke  is  credited   with  introducing  it  to  the  United  States  of  America  around  the  same  time.23  As                                                                                                                   
20  Erik  Viker,  "Background  Basics"  Stage  Directions  21  (2008):  42.   21  Viker,  "Background  Basics,"  42.   22  La  Fayette  W.  Seavey,  Photographic  Mosaics  6  (1873):  180.   23  Linkman,  The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits,  52.  

  

12  

photography  became  more  accessible  with  the  introduction  and  popularity  of  the   tintype  and  carte-de-visite,  and  later  the  cabinet  card,  the  number  of  photography   studios  in  America  greatly  increased.  Thus,  the  demand  for  and  use  of  painted   backgrounds  increased  significantly,  and  as  a  result  the  painted  background  can  be   seen  in  copious  portraits  produced  in  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.   By  the  end  of  the   nineteenth  century  there   were  a  number  of  styles  of   backgrounds  available  to   the  common  portrait   photographer;  the  majority   of  backgrounds  can  be   classified  into  two  styles   based  on  their  subject   matter.  These  styles  are  the   plain  background  and  the   fancy  or  scenic  background.  
Figure  2:  Examples  of  four  graduated  backgrounds.  George  Murphy,   Dealers  Catalogue  (New  York:  George  Murphy  Inc.,  1913),  29.     

Plain  backgrounds  were   painted  evenly  in  a  single  

colour.24  Graduated  backgrounds  (figure  2)  were  also  considered  plain  backgrounds   and  featured  a  monochromatic  gradient  appearing  more  saturated  or  darker  in   specific  areas  and  less  so  in  other  areas.  The  Rembrandt  Background  was  a  popular                                                                                                                   

24  Edward  L.  Wilson,  Wilson's  Photographics  (Philadelphia:  Wilson,  1883),  172.  

  

13  

style  of  a  graduated  background  that  was  sold  by  several  companies  during  this   time  period.25     The  second  style  of  background  was  the  scenic  background.  This  style  of   background  usually  depicted  a  realistic  and  detailed  scenic  view  (figure  3).  These   scenes  included,  but  were  not  limited  to,  nature  views,  famous  art  scenes  and   historical  events,  and   interior  views.    Steven   Kasher,  believes  that  the   three  most  popular  styles   of  scenic  backgrounds  in   the  late  nineteenth  century   were  backgrounds   depicting  generic  pastoral   scenes,  famous  tourist   sites,  and  interior  views  of   generic  stately  homes   (figure  4).26  
Figure  3:    Example  of  a  Fancy  or  Scenic  Background.  Paul  N.   Hasluck,  The  Book  of  Photography:  Practical  Theoretic  and  Applied   (New  York:  Cassell  and  Company,  Limited  1907),  473.     

Though  the  image  painted  on  the  background  varied  significantly,  the   construction  of  most  backgrounds  was  similar.  The  support  was  typically  fabric,   usually  canvas  or  muslin.  These  heavier  fabrics  made  backgrounds  flexible  while                                                                                                                   
25  Rembrandt  backgrounds  usually  mocked  the  dark  effect  of  Rembrandt  paintings.  These   backgrounds  were  designed  for  bust  photographs  as  they  were  only  five  feet  by  five  feet.  In  1871,   Rembrandt  backgrounds  designed  produced  by  Seavy  and  his  company  cost  five  dollars.  L.W.  Seavy,   Photographic  Mosaics  (1871):  151.   26  Kasher,  "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds,"  128.  

  

14  

also  providing  durability.  Furthermore,  backgrounds  were  usually  painted  with  oil   or  distemper  paint.27    Distemper  was  significantly  cheaper,  but  it  was  also  more   susceptible  to  scratches,  dirt,  and  dents.  In  addition,  earlier  backgrounds  made  with   distemper  could  not  be  rolled.28  Thus,  oil  painted  backgrounds  were  generally   preferred  because  of  their  durability  and  flexibility.    

Figure  4:    Left:  A  soldier  posed  in  front  of  a  landscape  background.  Unidentified  Photographer,  ca.   1862,  tintype,  1969:0208:0027.  Centre:  A  group  situated  before  a  b ackground  portraying  a  stately   home.  Unidentified  Photographer,  ca.  1895,  tintype,  2003:1167:0012.  Right:  Two  men  situated  in  front   of  a  background  depicting  a  famous  tourist  destination.  Unidentified  Photographer,  ca.  1880,  tintype,   1978:0829:0002.  All  images  courtesy  of  G eorge  Eastman  House.     

Several  nineteenth  century  sources  provided  instructions  for  photographers   to  create  their  own  backgrounds.29  However,  these  instructions  were  usually   prefaced  with  caution,  generally  expressing  that  painting  a  background  was  better   left  to  experts.  Nonetheless,  a  few  photographers  provided  detailed  step-by-step                                                                                                                   
27  Distemper  paint  consists  of  a  mixture  of  fine  chalk,  glue,  water,  and  pigment.   28  Unknown,  "Backgrounds,"  Photographic  Times  25  (1894):  38.   29  Sources  include:  Hanmer  Croughton,  "Backgrounds  for  Photographers,"  The  Philadelphia   Photographer  25  (1888):  107-109;  Unknown,  "Home-made  Backgrounds,"  The  Photo-American  7   (1895):  71-72.  Unknown,  "Artistic  Backgrounds  in  Portraiture,"  The  Photo-American  8  (1895):  177- 178.  J.  Traill  Taylor,  How  to  Make  a  Pictorial  Background,"  The  Photographic  Times  and  American   Photographer  7  (1882):  15-16.  

  

15  

instructions.  The  initial  layout  for  the  desired  image  was  sketched  with  chalk  before   the  paint  was  used,  to  map  out  basic  forms,  sizes,  and  shapes.  Paint  was  then  applied   usually  consisting  of  a  mixture  of  glue  with  oil  or  distemper  paint.  Scenic  and  plain   backgrounds  were  typically  painted  in  a  monochromatic  colour  scheme  and  painter   tended  to  favour  lamp  black  or  rouge  pigments.30  Finally,  to  make  the  background   more  durable  and  to  extend  the  life  expectancy,  a  layer  of  varnish  or  rosin  could  be   applied  to  the  fabric.       In  response  to  specific  detailing  and  shading  there  are  conflicting  nineteenth  

Figure  5:  Left:  Example  of  a  background  painted  slightly  out  of  focus.  S.  Anderson,  ca.  1870,   albumen  print,  carte-de-visite,  1982:0142:0006.  Right:  A  b ackground  painted  in  focus  with   definite  lines.  Robert  Armstrong,  ca.  1870,  albumen  print,  carte-de-visite,  1982:0185:0002.  Both   images  courtesy  of  George  Eastman  House.  

                                                                                                                 30  Osterman,  "Focus  on  the  Background,"  6.      16  

century  opinions  of  whether  the  background  should  be  painted  as  sharp  as  possible   so  that  the  background  will  remain  in  focus  in  the  final  photograph,  or  whether  a   background  should  be  painted  with  soft  lines  to  give  the  portrait  more  of  a  natural   appearance  (figure  5).  These  decisions  were  left  to  the  photographer  and  his  or  her   personal  tastes.  G.M.  Carlisle,  in  an  article  the  Photographic  Times  and  the  American   Photographer  about  the  how  photographer  should  use  backgrounds  stated,   "experience  has  shown  that  a  ground  properly  painted  should  have  no  hard  or   decided  lines,  but  should  be  merely  suggestive  with  a  ponumbra  [sic]  to  all  lines  and   figures"31  and  the  more  sophisticated  scenes  were  better  painted  out  of  focus.   Conversely,  Edward  Wilson  argued  that  a  background  should  be  painted  as  harshly   as  possible,  and  that  a  sharp  background  will  provide  a  harmonizing  look  with  the   sitter.32     Though  the  most  popular  type  of  background  was  paint  applied  to  a  single   flat  piece  of  fabric,  there  were  variations  of  formats  for  backgrounds  in  the   nineteenth  century,  including  the  conical  background,  revolving  background,  and   picturesque  foregrounds.  The  conical  background  was  fashioned  into  a  three- dimensional  cone  shape.33  Conical  backgrounds  (figure  6)  worked  best  for   headshots  because  they  framed  the  face  with  realistic  depth  and  gradations.    This   type  of  background  allowed  the  illuminated  side  of  the  face  to  be  juxtaposed  against   the  dark  side  of  the  background  and  the  shaded  side  of  the  face  to  be  juxtaposed                                                                                                                   
31  G.M.  Carlisle,  "The  Background,  its  Use  and  Abuse,  "Photographic  Times  and  the  American   Photographer  15  (1885):  410.   32  Edward  Wilson,  Wilson's  Photographics;  a  series  of  lessons,  accompanied  by  notes,  on  all  the   processes  which  are  needful  in  the  art  of  photography  (Philadelphia:  E.  L.  Wilson,  1881),  172.   33  W.  Kurtz,  "Van  Riper's  Patent  Conical  Photographic  Background,"  The  Photographic  Times  26   (1872):  71.  

  

17  

against  the  illuminated  side  of   the  background.  Properly   constructed  conical  backgrounds   could  be  raised  or  lowered   depending  on  the  sitter.34   Variations  on  this  type  of   background  were  also  produced,  
Figure  6:  Front  and  side  view  of  a   conical  background.  W.   Kurtz,  The  Photographic  Times  26  (1872):  71.  

but  all  designs  created  depth   using  a  three-dimensional                       concave  form.     Photographers  sometimes  chose  

revolving  backgrounds  (figure  7)  because   they  could  be  adjusted  based  on  the   direction  of  light.  The  revolving   background  was  a  circular  shape  and   featured  a  gradation  from  light  to  dark.35   Thus,  a  photographer  could  turn  the   background  until  the  darkest  part  of  the   background  appeared  behind  the  lightest   side  of  the  sitter  and  the  darkest  part  of  
Figure  7:    Front  view  of  a  revolving  background.   Bigelow,  Philadelphia  Photographer  9  (1872):   64.  

the  sitter's  face  against  the  lightest  part  

                                                                                                                

34  Kurtz,  Van  Riper's  Patent  Conical  Photographic  Background,"  72.   35  Unknown,  "Bigelow's  Graduated  Circular  Background,"  The  Photographic  Times  13  (1872):  53.  

  

18  

of  the  background  in  order  to  direct  emphasis  towards  the  face  of  the  sitter.36     Picturesque  foregrounds  were  a  trendy  choice  for  commercial  photographers   because  they  were  well  liked  amongst  the  public.  As  opposed  to  being  placed  behind   the  sitter,  foregrounds  were  placed  in  front  of  the  sitter  (figure  8).  Sitters  would   often  place  their  face  above  of  the  foreground  while  holding  onto  the  foreground  at   the  sides,  or  poke  their  heads  through  cutouts  in  the  foreground.37  Foregrounds   usually  depicted  a  comedic  scene  to  make  it  look  as  if  the  sitter  is  caught  doing   something  outrageous  such  as  riding  a  crocodile  or  being  sketched  by  a  dog.38     Though  backgrounds  provided  an  aesthetic  element  they  also  had  an   important  practical  role.  The  primary  function  of  most  backgrounds  was  to  remain   stationary  during  exposure  times,  which  could  sometimes  be  close  to  eight   seconds.39  This  was  especially  significant  for  photographers  who  set  up  studios  at   outside  fairs  and   celebrations.  If  the  sitter   was  standing  as  still  as   possible  it  was  important   to  have  a  background  that   remained  still  as  well.   Furthermore,  backgrounds  
Figure  8:    Sketch  of  a  sitter  holding  onto  a   picturesque   foreground  in  front  of  the  photographer.  The  Anthony  &  Scovill   Co.,  Photographic  Goods  (1903):    124.     

                                                                                                                
36  Unknown,  "Bigelow's  Graduated  Circular  Background,"  53.   37  W.P.  Buchanan,  Buchanan's  Complete  Illustrated  Catalogue  (Philadelphia:  W.P.  Buchanan,  1893),   124.   38  Buchanan,  Buchanan's  Complete  Illustrated  Catalogue,  124.   39  There  were  backgrounds  that  were  intended  to  moving  during  exposure  time.  Moving  the   background  created  a  even  background.  A.K.  Trask,  Trask's  Practical  Ferrotyper  (Philadelphia:   Benerman  &  Wilson,  1872),  50.  

  

19  

Figure  9:    Left:  Example  of  a  b ackground  holder  with  b ottom  rollers.  Wilson's  Photographics   (New  York:   E.L.  Wilson,  1881),  176.  Right:  A  background  holder  with  rollers  along  the  frame.  W.P.  Buchanan,   Buchanan's  Complete  Illustrated  Catalogue  (Philadelphia:  W.P.  Buchanan,  1893):  127.     

shielded  unwanted  objects  from  the  camera's  view.  Undesirable  and  distracting   studio  objects  could  be  hidden  from  the  camera,  thus  producing  a  more  professional   looking  photograph.40    Finally,  a  background  was  intended  to  create  dimension   within  the  photograph  by  creating  the  illusions  of  a  space  behind  the  sitter.41  This   was  especially  significant  for  backgrounds  depicting  a  scenic  view.     Storing  more  than  one  background  was  difficult,  especially  in  small  portrait   studios.  At  first,  studio  photographers  could  stretch  a  background  on  the  front  and   back  of  a  wooden  stretcher.  Then  to  change  the  background  the  photographer   would  have  to  swing  the  frame  around,  which  would  require  the  photographer  to  

  

                                                                                                                

40  Wilson,  Wilson's  Photographics,  170   41  Linkman,  The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits,  51.  

  

20  

move  all  of  his  accessories  and  anything  else  that  was  in  the  way.42  To  alleviate  this   problem,  backgrounds  were  often  stored  on  background  holders  or  background   carriers  (figure  9).  This  apparatus  was  designed  for  the  photographer  who  owned   multiple  backgrounds,  and  the  background  holder  allowed  for  backgrounds  to  be   rolled  up  and  hidden  away  when  not  in  use.  It  also  helped  protect  the  backgrounds   from  potential  scratches,  dirt,  or  dents.     Though  there  were  variations  on  holder  designs,  most  often  the  holder   featured  a  wooden  frame  with  rollers  along  the  bottom  or  top.    Backgrounds  were   wrapped  around  rollers,  which  were  attached  to  the  frame.  Cords  and  pulleys  on  the   sides  of  each  background  were  used  to  raise  or  lower  the  background.  To  increase   its  functionality,  wheels  attached  to  the  bottom  of  the  background  holder  allowed   the  photographer  to  shift  or  transport  the  backgrounds  when  necessary.     The  type  of  portrait  the  sitter  desired  affected  the  choice  of  background.   Backgrounds  were  available  in  standards  sizes  from  most  photographic  supply   companies  and  the  most  common  size  was  eight  feet  by  ten  feet;43  nevertheless,   companies  who  specialized  in  painted  backgrounds,  such  as  L.W.  Seavey  could   construct  backgrounds  in  custom  sizes  and  subject  matters.  Larger  and  more   versatile  backgrounds  tended  to  be  more  practical  to  a  frugal  photographer  as  large   groups  could  be  photographed  together,  and  the  photographer  had  the  option  of   taking  either  full  body  photographs  or  partial  body  photographs.  Moreover,  with  a   larger  background,  photographers  were  able  to  focus  on  one  particular  section  over  

                                                                                                                

42  The  Homeliest  Man,  "A  Good  Background  Frame,"  Philadelphia  Photographer  17  (1880):  n.p.   43  Other  sizes,  listed  in  feet  include:  5  x  8,  6  x  8,  7x7,  7x8,  8x8,  8x9,  9  x  11,  10  x  12,  11  x  14.  

  

21  

another.  However,  if  the  photographer   only  created  bust  or  half  body  portraits,   he  would  only  require  a  smaller   background  stretched  on  a  wooden   frame.   According  to  multiple  nineteenth   century  photographers  such  as  L.W.   Seavey,  Thomas  Aquinas,  and  G.M.   Carlisle,  there  was  a  proper  way  of   utilizing  a  background,  comparable  to   any  piece  of  photographic  equipment.   Firstly,  to  create  contrast  in  the   photograph,  the  majority  of  
Figure  10:  Example  showing  the  darkest  section   of  the  background  against  the  lightest  part  of  the   face.  John  W.  Bainbridge,  ca.  1865,  a lbumen  print,   carte-de-visite,  1979:0753:0002.  Courtesy  of   George  Eastman  H ouse.  

photographers  agreed  that  the  darker   part  of  the  sitter's  body  was  supposed  to  

be  situated  in  front  of  the  lighter  part  of  the  background  and  the  lighter  part  of  the   body  in  front  of  the  darker  part  of  the  background  (figure  10).    This  technique   allowed  for  the  sitter's  face  to  stand  out  more  dramatically  from  the  background,   which  was  important  in  a  portrait.44  For  example,  in  bust  work  the  gradation  of  the   background  was  to  be  darkest  at  the  bottom  and  gradually  got  lighter  towards  the  

                                                                                                                
Company,  Limited,  1905):  344.  

44  Paul  N.  Hasluck.  The  Book  of  Photography:  Practical  Theoretical  and  Applied  (New  York:  Cassell  and  

  

22  

face.45  Secondly,  the  sitter  was  meant  to  be  at  least  ten  inches  in  front  of  the   background  so  that  the  sitter  would  be  in  focus  while  the  background  would  be   slightly  out  of  focus.  In  an  ideal  situation,  the  sitter  was  to  be  placed  as  far  away   from  the  background  as  possible  because  in  the  final  photograph  the  background   would  not  be  in  sharp  focus,  producing  an  overall  natural  look  and  depth  to  the   photograph.46  This  technique  also  subdued  the  appearance  of  any  stains,  scratches,   wrinkles,  and  other  damages  to  the  background.47  Lastly,  it  was  important  to  create   the  illusion  that  the  sitter  was  situated  within  the  particular  scenery.  This  involved   the  photographer  being  conscious  of  the  horizon  line  in  the  scenery  in  relation  to   the  sitter,48  synchronizing  the  sitter's  shadows  and  the  shadows  painted  on  the   background,  hiding  the  edges  of  the  background  from  the  camera's  view,  and   obscuring  the  line  separating  the  background  and  the  floor.49  Hiding  this  separation   created  a  more  believable  setting  especially  if  the  photographer  was  utilizing  a   scenic  background.  If  the  photographer  used  a  holder  with  bottom  rollers,  a  false   baseboard  would  be  placed  in  front  to  hide  the  rollers.50    Interior  backgrounds  were   easier  to  use  than  exterior  backgrounds  because  baseboards  and  simple  accessories   looked  better  in  interior  views,  while  it  was  more  difficult  to  create  a  convincing   foreground  for  a  landscape  utilizing  fake  grass,  rocks,  and  other  props.51                                                                                                                   
45  L.  W.  Seavey,  "Mr.  L.W.  Seavey  of  New  York:  Presentation  on  the  Second  Day,"  The  Philadelphia  

  

Photographer  16  (1879):  312.   46  Thomas  Aquinas.  Photographic  Mosaics  36  (1900):  37.   47  Osterman,  "Focus  on  the  Background,"  6.   48  W.M.  Mora,  "Background  Matters,"  The  Photographic  Times  and  the  American  Photographer  11   (1881):  188.   49  Seavey,  "Mr.  L.W.  Seavey  of  New  York:  Presentation  on  the  Second  Day,"  312.   50  Unknown,  "Hull  Device  for  a  Background  Frame,"  in  The  Philadelphia  Photographer  5  (1868):  243.   51  G.M.  Carlisle,  "The  Background,  it's  Use  and  Abuse,  "Photographic  Times  and  the  American   Photographer  15  (1885):  410.  

  

23  

According  to  most  photographers,  including  Thomas  Aquinas  in   Photographic  Mosaics  and  George  Croughton  in  Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin,   backgrounds  were  supposed  to  complement  and  blend  in  with  the  sitter  while   simultaneously  allowing  the  sitter  to  be  the  main  focus.  52    Thus,  a  painted   background  was  supposed  to  flatter  a  sitter  without  competing  to  become  the  main   focus.  To  do  this  properly,  a  photographer  was  supposed  to  own  multiple  painted   backgrounds  so  the  photographer  could  select  the  best  background  to  match  any   sitter's  attire  and  attitude  (figure  11).    In  addition  to  owning  a  multitude  of   backgrounds,  the  photographer  was  also  supposed  to  own  accessories  to  match   each  background  he  or  she  owned.53  For  example,  a  nice  chair  or  table  would  suit  a   background  depicting  a  fancy  interior,  while  a  bench  or  a  couple  of  papier  maché   rocks  would  suit  a  rustic  landscape.  The  background  was  supposed  to  recede   naturally  and  support  the  figure  and  proper  accessories  aided  this  effect.54  To  some   nineteenth  century  photographers,  scenic  backgrounds  were  too  loud  and  tended  to   compete  with  the  face  or  body  of  the  sitter.  55    Thus,  a  plain  clean  background  was   suggested  for  the  photographer  who  could  not  afford  multiple  backgrounds.  A  plain   background  was  believed  to  complement  any  person  that  walked  into  a  studio,  rich   or  poor,  and  thus  this  was  considered  to  be  the  perfect  background  by  many   photographers.  G.  Hanmer  Croughton  stated,  "a  Photographer  is  always  safe  with  a  

                                                                                                                
52  Thomas  Aquinas,  Photographic  Mosaics,  37   53  Linkman,  The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits,  51.   54  Otto  Walter  Beck,  Art  Principles  in  Portrait  Photography:  Composition,  Treatment  of  Backgrounds,   and  the  Process  Involved  in  Manipulating  the  Plate  (New  York:  The  Baker  &  Taylor  Company,  1907),   162.   55  Beck,  Art  Principles  in  Portrait  Photography:  Composition,  Treatment  of  Backgrounds,  and  the   Process  Involved  in  Manipulating  the  Plate,  162.  

  

24  

Figure  11:    Left:  According  to  A.R.  Crihfield  this  is  an  example  of  a  sitter  not  blending  in  or  matching   with  the  background  and  a ccessories.  A.R.  Crihfield,  Philadelphia  Photographer  72  (1869):  55.    Right:   Example  of  a  background  and  accessories  suited  for  the  client.  L.W.  Seavey,  Philadelphia  Photographer   219  (1882):  331.  

plain  background,"56  while  Ellerslie  Wallace  agreed  that  for  practical  reasons,   "nothing  is  so  useful  as  the  plain  background."  57  Furthermore,  plain  backgrounds   could  be  tilted  and  swung  to  create  natural  gradients.     One  of  the  most  serious  concerns  for  passionate  photographers  during  this   time  period  was  to  have  the  background  remain  the  same  in  every  photograph  while   the  sitters'  outfits  and  outward  appearance  could  vary  dramatically.58  Many   nineteenth  century  photographers  wrote  in  response  to  this  concern  and  suggested   ways  to  avoid  this  amateur  mistake.  The  aid  of  proper  posing,  drapery,  and  lighting                                                                                                                   
56  A.  R.  Orinfield.  "Relation  of  Backgrounds  to  Subjects,"  The  Philadelphia  Photographer  7  (1870):  55.   57  Ellerslie  Wallace,  "Incongruities  Between  Background  and  Subjects  in  Portraiture,"  American  

Journal  of  Photography  7  (1895):  301.   58  W.  Kurtz,  "On  Backgrounds  and  Reflectors,"  Photographic  Mosaics  5  (1870):  15.  

  

25  

were  aspects  that  could  be  easily  altered  and  shifted,  which  gave  character  to  the   sitter  and  individuality  to  the  photograph.59  Photographers  at  this  time  aspired  to   this  concept  of  individuality  because  in  reality  no  photographer  could  afford  to  own   accessories  to  match  every  patron  exactly.    Therefore,  proper  manipulations  using   these  three  variables  were  considered  important  elements  for  every  photographer   to  use.    Thus,  a  successful  photographer  could  make  each  photograph  different   whilst  using  the  same  background  and  accessories  over  again.     Contemporary  scholars  tend  to  view  scenic  painted  backgrounds  in  a   romanticized  way,  suggesting  that  the  background  crossed  the  boundary  between   what  was  real  and  what  was  pretend.  Audrey  Linkman,  in  The  Victorians:   Photographic  Portraits,  claims  that  with  the  addition  of  a  painted  background  the   photography  studio  itself  became  a  place  of  make-believe  where  everything  was   fake,  accessories  and  all.60  Kasher  claims  that  backgrounds  situated  the  sitter  in  a   time  and  place  that  was  fictional;  most  sitters  posing  for  inexpensive  tintypes  and   cartes-de-visite  would  have  never  been  able  to  experience  such  finery.  According  to   Kasher,  the  painted  background  provided  an  escape  from  the  slums  of  the  city   where  a  majority  of  patrons  probably  lived,  and  transported  the  sitter  to  a  large   spacious  home,  or  a  lush  landscape  with  clean  air,  and  exotic  plants.61  Painted   backgrounds  were  considered  a  way  to  undermine  one's  social  status  at  the  time;  

                                                                                                                

59  Edward  M.  Estabrooke,  The  Ferrotype  and  How  to  Make  It  (Cincinnati:  Gatchel  &  Hyatt,  1872),  175.   60  Linkman,  The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits,  67.   61  Kasher,  "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds,"  129.  

  

26  

once  in  front  of  the  background  the  sitter  could  be  whomever  he  or  she  wanted  to   be.62     The  background  provided  a  practical  function  for  photographic  processes   with  long  exposures  and  an  aesthetic  and  escapist  element  for  sitters  who  wanted  to   be  situated  in  front  of  a  scenic  view.  Accessories,  lighting,  and  posing  helped  accent   the  painted  background  and  what  it  was  meant  to  convey.  These  aspects  also   allowed  for  versatility  for  the  photographer  who  could  not  afford  an  abundance  of   backgrounds.  As  a  dimensional  addition  to  portraiture,  the  painted  background  was   a  way  for  the  sitter  to  become  someone  who  they  were  not,  shown  in  a  setting  that   was  make-believe.  The  painted  background  in  all  its  varying  shapes  and  sizes,  was   and  continues  to  be  a  useful  tool  for  every  studio  and  professional  photographer.  

                                                                                                                

62  Kasher,  "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds,"  129.  

  

27  

Methodology  
   The  remainder  of  this  analytical  paper  is  an  examination  of  advertisements   for  painted  backgrounds  found  within  nineteenth  century  photographic  journals   published  in  the  United  States  of  America  between  1856  and  1903.  These  journals   are  part  of  The  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library,  located  at  George  Eastman   House  International  Museum  of  Photography  and  Film  in  Rochester,  New  York.  The   advertisements  have  been  compiled  into  an  index  titled  Index  of  Advertisements  for   Painted  Backgrounds  1864-190363  recording  the  bibliographical  information  of   every  advertisement  located.  A  sampling  of  this  index  can  be  found  in  Appendix  One   and  due  to  the  length  of  the  complete  index,  could  not  be  published  in  this   document.  The  complete  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903   can  be  found  at  the  The  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library  at  Eastman  House.   The  journals  held  at  Eastman  House  provide  a  sufficient  sampling  for  my   research  and  include  titles  such  as  Photographic  Mosaics,  The  American  Journal  of   Photography,  various  volumes  of  Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin,  and  the   Philadelphia  Photographer.  However,  a  few  publications  held  at  Eastman  House   were  bound  at  a  later  date  and  advertisements  were  removed  at  that  time.  This   affected  the  selection  of  journals  I  examined,  and  as  a  result,  I  was  not  able  to  review   advertisements  in  Humphrey's  Journal  of  Photography  and  the  Allied  Arts  and   Sciences,  and  various  volumes  of  Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin.      

                                                                                                                 63  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.      28  

  

When  examining  available  advertisements,  basic  bibliographical  information  

was  recorded.  This  information  included  the  title  of  the  journal,  volume  number,   date,  and  the  exact  page  number  of  the  advertisement.  The  name  of  the  company   that  was  selling  painted  backgrounds  was  recorded,  as  well  as  the  type  of  company   (Appendix  Three).  The  types  of  companies  advertising  during  this  time  period   included  large   general   photographic   suppliers,  small   companies  that   specialized  in   painted   backgrounds  and   accessories,  and   companies  that   were  agents  for   other  businesses  or   independent   manufacturers.  It  
Figure  12:    Richard  Walzl,  The  Photographer's  Friend:  Almanac  and   American  Year  Book  of  Photography  2  (1872):  n.p.  

was  important  to   note  the  type  of  

company  that  was  advertising  painted  backgrounds  because  it  often  affected  how   much  information  was  provided  as  well  as  the  design  of  the  advertisement.  In  

  

29  

addition,  the  size  of  the  advertisement  was  also  noted;  size  was  referred  to  as  full   page,  half  page,  quarter  page,  and  so  forth.    

Figure  13:    Full  page  spread  of  a  photography  journal.  The  Photographic  Times  9  (1884):  n.p.     

Special  attention  was  concentrated  on  the  language  that  was  used  in  these   advertisements.  This  included  the  terms  used  to  refer  to  a  painted  background   (Appendix  Two),  and  if  the  advertisements  identified  specific  styles,  themes,  or   subject  matters  that  were  available,  usually  in  the  form  of  style  reference  numbers,   specific  titles  of  backgrounds,  and  specific  brands  of  backgrounds.  Reference  to   materials  or  techniques  used  to  produce  the  background  was  also  noted  (a  full  list  of   these  can  be  found  in  the  Appendix  Four).  Furthermore,  if  the  advertisement  

  

30  

mentioned  how  the  photographer  could  order  or  inquire  about  specific  styles,  this   information  was  recorded  in  the  index  (Appendix  Five).  It  usually  stated  the  costs,   shipping  times,  or  how  to  acquire  an  illustrated  catalogue.     A  digital  image  was  made  of  each  advertisement  to  record  additional   information  not  transcribed  directly  to  the  index.    This  included  design  elements   and  overall  ornamentation  of  the  advertisement.  Since  this  would  be  too  difficult  to   describe  in  a  consistent  way,  the  digital  image  files  capture  the  overall  design   elements  of  the  advertisements.     This  research  and  complete  index  assists  in  understanding  how  the   advertising  of  painted  backgrounds  evolved  during  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth   century,  including  the  companies  that  sold  painted  backgrounds,  the  language  that   was  used  to  describe  painted  backgrounds,  and  the  trends  in  subject  matters  and   materials.          

  

31  

Analysis  of  Findings  
   Upon  completion  of  this  index,  nine  periodicals  had  been  reviewed  and  a   total  of  1,096  advertisements  were  found  and  indexed.  The  dates  of  the  periodicals   ranged  from  1864  to  1903.  Information  that  was  extracted  from  these   advertisements,  as  outlined  in  the  methodological  approaches,  can  be  found  in   Appendices  One  through  Four.  General  trends  identifying  background  costs,  sizes,   and  methods  of  shipping  during  this  time  period  can  be  understood  from  looking  at   these  advertisements.  These  advertisements  also  revealed  how  many  companies   were  selling  backgrounds  at  this  time,   what  type  of  company  they  were,  and   how  they  referred  to  a  painted   background.   A  total  of  ninety-four  variations   of  the  word  "background"  were  found   in  the  advertisements,  although  all   advertisements  used  the  term   "background"  (Appendix  Two).  In  most   examples  the  word  "background"  was   spelled  out  in  one  word,  but   occasionally  it  was  separated  into  two  
Figure  14:    Anthony's  Photographic  Supplies,   Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin  1  (1870):  172.  

words.  Adjectives  or  proper  nouns  

were  sometimes  added  before  or  after  the  word  "background"  to  reference  a  specific   brand  and  style  or  to  make  the  background  sound  more  appealing;  examples  of  

  

32  

these  include  "New  Backgrounds,"  "Seavey's  Backgrounds,"  and  "Scenic   Backgrounds."  However,  the  majority  of  the  advertisements  simply  used  the  word   "background,"  without  modification.   There  were  a  total  of  sixty-two  companies  advertising  painted  backgrounds   during  this  time  period  (refer  to  Appendix  Three),  with  thirty-nine  general   photographic  suppliers,  and  twenty-three  companies  specializing  in  painted   backgrounds.64  There  was  a  significant  difference  in  how  companies  that  specialized   in  painted  backgrounds  and  general  photographic  suppliers  advertised  painted   backgrounds.    For  companies  that  sold  all  kinds  of  photographic  goods,  the  word   background  was  usually  small  in  size  and   located  towards  the  middle  to  bottom  area   of  the  advertisement  (figure  14).   Conversely,  for  companies  that  specialized   in  painted  backgrounds,  the  word   background  was  most  commonly  the  first   word  in  the  advertisement  and  relatively   large,  all  in  capitals,  and  often  bolded   (figure  15).  Furthermore,  in   advertisements  for  specialized  companies   information  such  as  cost,  size,  and  
Figure  15:    J.W.  Bryant  Co.,  The  Photo-American:  An   Illustrated  Monthly  Magazine  Devoted  to   Photography  4  (1895):  130.  

materials  were  mentioned  in  the   advertisements,  while  on  average  this  

                                                                                                                

64  Brief  histories  of  these  companies  can  be  found  in  Appendix  Six.  

  

33  

information  was  not  included  in  advertisements  for  general  photographic  suppliers.   Some  general  companies  listed  how  many  styles  they  had,  or  that  they  were  agents   for  specific  brands,  but  this  occurred  infrequently.  Very  few  large  photographic   dealers  used  their  advertising  space  to  advertise  for  painted  backgrounds   exclusively.  There  were  a  few  exceptions,  but  these  were  short-lived  promotions   that  only  occurred  for  a  few  months  before  the  company  shifted  their  focus  to   another  photographic  apparatus.  In  advertisements  for  large  photographic  suppliers   painted  backgrounds  were  usually  listed  amongst  a  multitude  of  other  photographic   supplies  (figure  14).      The  size  of  the  advertisement  

often  indicated  the  type  of  company   advertising  backgrounds.  General   photographic  suppliers  such  as   Wilson,  Hood  and  Co.,  and  E.  &  H.T.   Anthony  usually  purchased  a  full  page   of  advertising  space  to  list  an  array  of   the  products  they  sold.  This  was  in   contrast  to  specialized  companies   including  N.C.  Thayer  &  Co.,  W.  F.   Ashe  (figure  16),  and  Edwin  Davis   (figure  17)  that  published  smaller   advertisements  ranging  from  three  
Figure  16:    W.F.  Ashe,  Photographic  Times  120  (1880):   285.  

  

34  

quarters  of  a  page  or   smaller.  65  There  were  a   few  exceptions  to  this  as   specialized  companies  such   as  J.W.  Bryant  and  more   often  L.W.  Seavey   occasionally  purchased  full   page  space  to  advertise  the   latest  styles  of  their   painted  backgrounds.     In  1871  the  L.W.   Seavey  Company  produced  
Figure  18:  L.W.  Seavey,  Philadelphia  Photographer  8  (1871):   n.p.   Figure  17:    Edwin  Davis,  The  American  Journal  of  Photography  7   (1895):  v.  

an  engraving  of  a  sitter  in  front  of  a  graduated  background  (figure  18).  Additionally,   in  the  1872  and  1873  volumes  of  Photographic  Mosaics,  Seavey  included  an   engraving  of  his  busy  studio  with  examples  of  backgrounds  in  progress  and   background  painters  (figure  19).  This  was  rare  because  as  prior  to  1900   advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds  rarely  included  illustrations  depicting  the   imagery  or  styles  of  the  background.  Many  advertisements  described  the  different   styles,  but  never  provided  any  illustrations.  Backgrounds  were  not  easily   reproduced  through  engraving,  and  photomechanical  reproduction  was  inefficient   and  expensive  in  this  period.  If  an  advertisement  was  promoting  backdrops  and   accessories--which  was  common  for  companies  that  specialized  in  painted                                                                                                                   
quarter  of  a  page.  
65  Advertisement  sizes  for  specialized  companies  also  include  twelfth,  tenth,  eighth,  sixth,  fifth,  and  

  

35  

backgrounds--illustrations  of  the  accessories  would  be  reproduced  through   engravings,  and  in  two  cases  with  tipped-in  albumen  photographs,  while  the   backgrounds  were  not  (figure  16).  The  most  common  accessories  that  were   illustrated  in  advertisements  included  vases,  pedestals,  and  posing  chairs.  Entering   the  twentieth  century  illustrations  of  backgrounds  did  become  more  common  in  

Figure  19:    L.W.  Seavey,  The  Photographer's  Friend  2  (1872):  n.p.  

advertisements.  Companies  such  as  W.P  Buchannan,  and  Hub  Scenic  Co.  published   engravings  depicting  painted  backgrounds  in  1900.    

  

36  

There  were  ninety-one  different  ways  that  companies  specified  how  a   photographer  should  inquire  about  the  advertised  painted  backgrounds  and  how   the  companies  shipped  their  backgrounds  (see  Appendix  Five).  Backgrounds  could   be  purchased  directly  from  manufacturers  or  from  agents  for  individual  artists  or   smaller  companies.  If  photographers  were  in  the  same  city  as  large  photographic   dealers  they  were  able  to  visit  the  stores  to  purchase  their  backgrounds.   Photographic  conventions  were  another  way  photographers  could  order  painted   backgrounds  in  person,  and  it  is  evident  from  L.W.  Seavey's  monthly  bulletins  in   Photographic  Times  that  background  painters  regularly  attended  these  conventions   to  display  new  painted  backgrounds  and  accessories  (figure  20).  Photographers  

Figure  20:    "Plan  in  building  in  which  the  photographers'  convention  will  be  held,  July  14th,  1885,  State   Arsenal,  Buffalo,  N.Y."  L.W.  Seavey,  W.F.  Ashe,  and  J.W.  Bryant  purchased  b ooths  at  the  convention.  They   appear  at  the  lower  right.  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  15  (1885):  n.p.     

  

37  

could  view  the  painted  backgrounds  in  person  before  ordering  backgrounds,  and   from  Seavey's  bulletins  published  after  the  conventions  it  is  apparent  that  they  were   successful  business  ventures  as  Seavey  usually  indicated  that  he  had  made  several   transactions.  66     In  contrast,  for  commercial  photographers  living  outside  of  any  major  city,   attending  these  conventions  or  visiting  the  stores  was  difficult  and  thus  they  were   required  to  complete  mail  orders.  Not  every  company  specified  how  they  completed   mail  orders  in  their  advertisements,  but  many  did.  In  order  to  view  the  different   styles  of  backgrounds  for  sale,  photographers  usually  wrote  to  the  company   enquiring  what  styles  they  were  interested  in  and  the  company  would  send  a   selection  of  sample  photographs  or  an  illustrated  catalogue  (figures  20,  21).  
67Sometimes  sending  these  photographs  was  at  the  expense  of  the  photographer,  

and  a  few  companies  required  the  photographer  to  send  a  stamp  upon  initial  inquiry   to  pay  for  the  shipment  of  the  sample  photographs.  Some  companies  required  the   photographer  to  return  the  sample  photographs.    Nearer  to  the  turn  of  the  century   companies  began  to  indicate  that  their  sample  photographs  included  a  model   demonstrating  different  poses  in  front  of  the  background,  including  L.W.  Seavey,   Scovill  &  Adams  Company,  and  W.P.  Buchanan.   Once  a  photographer  made  his  or  her  selection,  he  or  she  then  had  to  choose   the  size  and  material  of  the  background.  For  materials,  photographers  had  the   choice  of  distemper,  or  the  more  expensive  but  more  durable  oil  paint.  Sixteen                                                                                                                   
66  L.  W.  Seavey,  "Ye  Monthlie  Bulletin,"  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  152   (1883):  469.   67  Catalogues  with  painted  fabric  samples  exist,  however  the  author  did  not  find  any.  

  

38  

different  materials  and  mediums  were  identified  in  the  advertisements  alluding  to   how  painted  backgrounds  were  constructed  during  this  time  period  (Appendix   Three).  Additionally,  specialized  companies  offered  additional  features.  For   example,  when  purchasing  from  the  L.W.  Seavey  Company  the  photographer  had  to   choose  the  direction  of  light  either  from  left  or  right.68  When  backgrounds  were   shipped  they  were  usually  rolled  and  shipped  in  a  crate.  The  crate  or  box  and  even   rollers  were  an  extra  cost  to   the  photographer,69  and  the   advertisements  usually   stated  this  cost.   Furthermore,  it  was   common  for  a  company  to   send  a  set  of  written  or   illustrative  instructions  if  a   background  was  unique  in   its  subject  matter  in  order  to   demonstrate  how  to  pose   the  sitter  and  show   examples  of  how  the   background  had  been  used   successfully.70    
Figure  21:    J.W.  Bryant,  Philadelphia  Photographer  25  (1888):   viii.  

                                                                                                                

68  L.  W.  Seavey  &  Co.,  Scenic  Artists,  Philadelphia  Photographer  64  (1869):  n.p.   69  George  Murphy,  Photographic  Mosaics  21  (1885):  155.   70  Lafayette  W.  Seavey.  Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin  1-18  (1878):  n.p.  

  

39  

There  were  generally  two   pricing  options  for  backgrounds   based  on  size:  by  standard  size  or   per  square  foot.  Mainly,   backgrounds  were  sold  in   standard  sizes  such  as  4  x  5,  5  x  7,   8  x  10,  and  11  x  14  feet.   Advertisements  typically  stated   these  background  sizes  and  their   set  costs,  which  increased  as  the  
Figure  22:  Ralph  J.  Golsen,  The  American  Journal  of   Photography  233  (1900):  247.  

Figure  23:    Minott  M.  Govan,  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  16  (1886):  vi.  

  

40  

size  of  the  background  increased  (figure  23).71  Periodically,  these  standard  sizes   were  advertised  to  suit  a  particular  clientele;  smaller  backgrounds  (head  grounds),   such  as  five  by  seven  foot  or  smaller,  were  advertised  to  suit  children  and  larger   backgrounds  of  eleven  by  fourteen  feet  were  best  for  groups  of  people.72   Alternatively,  backgrounds  were  also  priced  per  square  foot,  allowing  the   photographer  to  choose  the  specific  measurements  of  his  background  to  fit  his   studio  (figure  23).    The  cheapest  background  available  during  this  time  period  was   fifteen  cents  per  square  foot  and  the  most  expensive  was  forty  cents  per  square  foot.  
73  Thus,  in  1887  a  8x10  plain  background  priced  at  twenty-five  cents  per  square  foot  

would  cost  a  photographer  twenty  dollars.  On  average,  prices  for  backgrounds   depicting  a  scenic  view  cost  more  than  plain  or  graduated  backgrounds;  this  was   true  for  both  backgrounds  sold  in  standard  sizes  and  backgrounds  priced  by  the   square  foot.  Also,  scenic   backgrounds  were   priced  according  to  the   specific  subject  matter   or  the  amount  of  detail   on  the  background.  It   was  common  to  find   exterior  backgrounds                                                                                                                   
71  Packard  Bros.,  The  American  Journal  of  Photography  178  (1894):  x.   72  Scovill  Manufacturing  Company,  "Osborne's  Practical  Backgrounds,"  The  Photographic  Times  and   American  Photographer  157  (1884):  n.p.   73  Plain  backgrounds  were  generally  less  expensive  than  scenic  backgrounds  and  most  plain   backgrounds  were  advertised  at  eight  cents  per  square  foot.  Prices  for  scenic  backgrounds  depicting   landscapes,  and  various  interior  scenes  also  include  20,  25,  30,  35  cents  per  square  foot.  

Figure  24:    Example  of  an  advertisement  for  painted  backgrounds  by  a   specialized  company.  J.W.  Bryant,  The  Photographic  Times  and   American  Photographer  16  (1886):  iii.  

  

41  

priced  lower  than  interior  backgrounds,  and  in  1878  the  L.W.  Seavey  Company   stated  that,  "our  backgrounds  at  30  and  35  cents  contain  twice  the  elaboration  of  the   old  styles  at  25  cents."74  Occasionally  backgrounds  were  advertised  as  part  of  a   packaged  deal  with  matching  accessories;  for  example,  scenic  artist  W.F.  Ashe   advertised  a  landscape  background  and  three  papier  maché  rocks  for  twenty-five   dollars.75     After  1871  plain   unpainted  woolen  backgrounds   commonly  found  in   daguerreotypes  were  no  longer   advertised.  Similarly,  the  amount   of  backgrounds  available  to   photographers  increased  yearly.   By  1883,  L.W.  Seavey  advertised   that  he  had  more  than  500   designs76  and  by  1892  almost   1,200  styles  to  choose  from.77   Furthermore,  in  1889,  Seavey   also  advertised  that  his  
Figure  25:  Lafayette  W.  Seavey,  Photographic  Times  96   (1878):  255.  

background  holder  was  large  

                                                                                                                
74  Lafayette  W.  Seavey,  Philadelphia  Photographer  178  (1878):  332.   75  W.F.  Ashe,  Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin  1-18  (1878):  25.   76  L.W.  Seavy,  Philadelphia  Photographer  25  (1883):  3-4.   77  Lafayette  W.  Seavey,  Photographic  Mosaics  28  (1892):  312  

  

42  

enough  to  store  up  to  thirty   backgrounds,78  while  earlier  background   holders  could  only  hold  little  more  than   two  backgrounds.  Thus,  in  the  late   nineteenth  century  it  was  common  for   portrait  photographers  to  own  a   multitude  of  backgrounds.      As  more  backgrounds  were  being   produced  seasonal  trends  in  the   production  of  backgrounds  began  to   emerge.  These  trends  usually  focused  on   an  approaching  holiday  or  the  upcoming   season;  for  example,  from  the  fall  months   until  December,  winter  themed   backgrounds  were  advertised  (figure  25).  These  backgrounds  were  usually   advertised  as  snow  landscapes,  snow  grounds,  and  winter  cottages;  winter   accessories  such  as  sleighs  and  artificial  snow  (figure  26)  were  also  advertised   alongside  the  background.  Winter  themed  backgrounds  appeared  to  be  a  popular   choice  for  photographers  because  they  were  often  the  only  style  mentioned  in  the   advertisement  or  the  style  was  bolded,  larger  in  size,  or  given  other  emphasis   through  graphic  design.  There  was  also  an  increase  of  background  orders  around   the  Christmas  season  and  sometimes  companies  could  not  keep  up  with  the  amount                                                                                                                   
Figure  26:    Portrait  showing  a  child  in  front  of   a  winter  themed  background  and  sitting  in  a   sleigh.  G.  E.  Bacon,  ca.  1870,  albumen  print,   carte-de-visite,  2008:0531:0021.  Courtesy  of   George  Eastman  H ouse.  

78  Lafayette  W.  Seavey,  Photographic  Mosaics  25  (1889):  161.  

  

43  

of  orders  and  admitted  that  the  volume  precluded  timely  shipment  of  orders.  L.W.   Seavy  acknowledged  this  in  his  advertisements  and  bulletins  after  the  holiday   season  and  stated,  "many  backgrounds  ordered  for  Christmas  we  failed  to  supply  on   time.  Rush  too  great.  We  need  from  one  to  six  weeks  to  fill  orders,  according  to  the   season"79  and  warning  photographers  in  the  autumn  months  "Don't  defer.  The  rush   will  soon  begin."80  After  the  winter  months,  advertisements  shifted  their  focus  to   spring  and  summer  styles  of  backgrounds.  These  styles  generally  included  summer   villas,  cottages,  and  park  scenes  with  matching  accessories  including  benches  or   artificial  rocks.  Trends  in  the  subject  matter  of  backgrounds  relating  to  a  specific   time  period  or  cultural  trends  were  also   apparent  in  these  advertisements.  Military   styled  backgrounds  were  available  and   advertised  in  1864  and  1865,  usually  titled   military,  naval,  or  battlefields  (figure  27).     Despite  Kasher's  argument  that   backgrounds  depicting  tourist  sites  were  very   popular  and  common,  none  of  the   advertisements  specifically  mentioned  painted  
Figure  27:  Example  of  a  military  style   background.  Unidentified  Photographer,   ca.  1863,  Tintype  with  applied  colour,   1981:2678:0001.  Courtesy  of  George   Eastman  House.  

backgrounds  that  portrayed  popular  tourist   attractions.81  However,  they  did  appear  in  

                                                                                                                
  
79  Seavy,  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer,  98.   80  L.W.  Seavy,  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  135  (1882):  92.   81  Kasher,  "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds,"  128.  

  

44  

portraits  and  there  are  a  few  possibilities  that  explain  why  backgrounds  depicting   tourist  attractions  appeared  in  portraits,  but  not  in  any  of  the  surveyed   advertisements.  Firstly,  portrait  photographers  could  have  painted  their  own   background,  which  would  have  allowed  for  the  customization  of  subject  matter.     Secondly,  companies  that  specialized  in  painted  backgrounds,  such  as  L.W.  Seavy   and  W.F.  Ashe,  advertised  that  they  could  paint  any  subject  and  famous  tourist   destination  could  have  been  an  option.  Finally,   it  is  possible  that  these  were  commonly   available  but  not  advertised.     Despite  reviewing  journals  prior  to   1864  my  research  lacks  advertisements   before  this  year.  There  are  two  explanations   that  can  clarify  why  no  advertisements  for   painted  backgrounds  appeared  in  any  of  the   surveyed  journals  published  prior  to  1864.   First,  various  journals  at  Eastman  House  had   their  advertisements  removed  prior  to  
Figure  28:    Example  of  an  advertisement  for   painted  backgrounds  by  a  specialized   company.  L.W.  Seavey,  The  Philadelphia   Photographer  25  (1888):  iv.  

binding;  82  however,  it  is  possible  that  there  

82  Periodicals  that  did  not  contain  advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds  include  Humphrey's   Journal  of  Photography  and  the  Allied  Arts  and  Sciences;  Photographic  Mosaics,  Volume  1;  Anthony's   Photographic  Bulletin,  Volumes  1-7;  The  American  Journal  of  Photography,  Volumes  1-11;  The   Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer,  Volumes  18,  19,  24,  26;  The  Photographic  Pointer,   Volume  1:  Numbers  1-6,  Volume  2:  Number  1,  Volume  27:  Numbers  5-7;  The  Photographer's  Friend,   Volumes  1,  4;  The  Photographic  World,  Volumes  1-2;  The  Indicator,  Volume  2  Number  7;  Philadelphia   Photographer,  volumes  1-3,  7,  12-13;  The  Photographic  and  Fine  Art  Journal,  Volumes  7-11,  second   series  Volumes  1-2;  The  Photo-American:  An  Illustrated  Monthly  Magazine  Devoted  to  Photography,   Volumes  7-11.  

                                                                                                                

  

45  

were  no  or  few  advertisements  for   painted  backgrounds  available  to   photographer.  Second,  journals  with   advertisements  intact  contained  no   advertisements  for  painted   backgrounds.  This  absence  of   advertisements  prior  to  1864  verifies   that  there  was  not  a  large  market  for   painted  backgrounds  at  this  time.  G.M.   Carlisle  stated  in  1885,  "During  the  first   years  of  my  experience  with  the  
Figure  29:    Notice  three  different  advertisements   for  painted  backgrounds  by  three  different   companies  located  on  the  page  spread.  J.W.  Bryant,   W.F.  Ashe,  and  Minott  M.  G ovan,  The  Photographic   Times  and  American  Photographer  17  (1887):  iii.  

camera--1857--it  was  impossible  to   obtain,  painted  to  order  on  in  the   market  as  merchandise,  a  practical  or  

useful  background,  but  to-day  we  are  favoured  with  a  variety  that  leaves  nothing  to   be  desired."83  However,  earlier  in  1864,  there  were  at  least  six  different  companies   advertising  backgrounds  and  advertising  multiple  styles.  Thus,  photographers  had   several  of  styles  to  choose  from  early  in  portrait  photography  but  not  nearly  as   many  as  the  thousands  of  options  available  by  the  end  of  the  century.  Furthermore,   in  1864  John  B.  Purdy  &  Son  advertised  that  they  re-painted  over  existing   backgrounds,84  confirming  that  photographers  were  using  painted  backgrounds   prior  to  this  date.  In  addition,  services  for  re-painting  backgrounds  were  less  costly                                                                                                                   
83  Carlisle,  "The  Background,  it's  Use  and  Abuse,"  410.   84  John  B.  Purdy  &  Son,  The  American  Journal  of  Photography  7  (1864):  n.p.  

  

46  

per  square  foot  (eight  cents  rather  than  up  to   thirty  cents).  This  proves  that  backgrounds   were  considered  an  expensive  apparatus  that   photographers  might  be  loathe  to  accumulate   in  great  numbers,  and  that  backgrounds   could  be  re-painted  in  order  to  stay  current  

Figure  30:    Example  of  a  full  page   advertisment  for  painted  b ackgrounds  b y  a   specialized  company.  Rough,  Platzer  &   Caldwell,  Buchanan's  Complete  Illustrated   Catalogue  (Philadelphia:  W.P.  Buchanan,   1896):  n.p.  

with  the  latest  styles  and  trends  in  a   more  economic  way.     Companies  sometimes  used  their   advertisements  to  acknowledge  the  artist   painting  their  backgrounds  and  to   promote  their  other  services.  In  two   circumstances  the  names  of  individual  
Figure  31:    Chas.  W.  Stevens,  Philadelphia   Photographer  170  (1878):  27.  

  

47  

background  artists  were  revealed;  examples  of  these  included  Chas.  W.  Stevens   advertising  the  pencil  of  Paul  Brown85  (figure  31)  and  the  Benj.  French  &  Co.   advertising  backgrounds  manufactured  by  Peter  Fales  of  New  Bedford,   Massachusetts.86  These  names  usually  highlighted  individual  painters  who  did  not   sell  their  own  backgrounds  like  L.W.  Seavey,  W.  D.  Osburns,  WM.  M.  Conran,  W.  P.   Buchanan,  and  W.  F.  Ashe  did.  Moreover,  though  the  majority  of  the  advertisements   were  tailored  specifically  to  photographers  as  they  were  published  in  photographic   journals,  companies  sometimes  advertised  other  services  they  could  provide.  The   Hub  Scenic  Co.  stated  in  many  of  their  advertisements  that  they  were  specialist  in   painted  backgrounds  for  both  photography  as  well  as  theatre.  Furthermore,  Seavey   also  advertised  that  his  services  included  fields  other  than  photography  including   theatre,  decorations  for  halls,  and  flags.87  We  can  therefore  conclude  that  painters   for  painted  backgrounds  were  the  same  as  those  panting  backgrounds  for  other   applications.  Furthermore,  it  is  a  possibility  that  they  included  these  mentions  to   build  interest  or  to  add  legitimacy.     As  stated  earlier  there  were  over  sixty  companies  advertising  painted   backgrounds  during  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  the  company  that   most  frequently  advertised  throughout  these  journals  was  the  L.W.  Seavey   Company.  Not  only  did  the  L.W.  Seavey  Company  purchase  a  substantial  amount  of                                                                                                                   
85  Chas.  W.  Stevens,  Philadelphia  Photographer  170  (1878):  77.   86  Benj.  French  &  Co.  Philadelphia  Photographer  8  (1864):  n.p.   87  L.W.  Seavey's  advertisement  stated,  "Scenery  for  theatre,  public  halls,  and  amateurs.  Panoramas,   theatres  and  churches  frescoed.  Panoramas,  sceneries  for  Private  theatricals.  Flags  and  decorations   for  balls,  and  political  associations  to  let.  Patterns,  stencils,  and  ready  mixed  colors  for  fresco   painters."  La  Fayette  W.  Seavey   Photographic  Mosaics  6  (1873):  180.  

  

  

48  

advertising  space,  other  companies  also  specifically   noted  that  they  carried  Seavey's  backgrounds.  It  is   clear  that  the  L.W.  Seavey  Company  was  very  popular,   and  that  Seavey  was  himself  a  very  influential  and   established  background  painter.  Furthermore,  to   emphasize  his  popularity  within  the  photography   world,  L.W.  Seavey  occasionally  listed  prominent   photographers  that  owned  his  backgrounds,  including   Napoleon  Sarony,  Mathew  Brady,  William  Kurtz,  and   Jeremiah  Gurney.88  In  addition,  the  L.W.  Seavey   Company  began  to  publish  a  monthly  bulletin  in   Photographic  Times  (figure  32).    This  bulletin  varied   in  size  from  an  eighth  of  a  page  to  a  half  of  a  page,  and   appeared  in  the  "Special  Notices"  section  before  the   advertisements  at  the  back  of  the  journal.  This  bulletin  was  used  to  announce  new   styles  of  backgrounds,  upcoming  photographic  conventions,  updates  about  the   studio,  and  other  matters.        To  summarize,  it  is  clear  that  prices  were  either  set  for  standard  sizes  of  
Figure  32:    Example  of  one  of  L.W.   Seavey's  Bulletins.  The   Photographic  Times  and  American   Photographer  12  (1882):  454.  

backgrounds  or  priced  by  the  square  foot  for  photographers  wanting  a  custom-sized   background.  Photographers  who  wished  to  purchase  backgrounds  could  view   sample  photographs  upon  an  initial  mail  inquiry,  or  visit  stores  or  attend   conventions.  Both  general  photographic  suppliers  and  companies  who  specialized  in                                                                                                                   

88  L.W.  Seavey,  Photographic  Mosaics  7  (1870):  177.  

  

49  

painted  backgrounds  advertised  painted  backgrounds  but  the  design  and  layout  of   the  advertisement  usually  differed  in  the  size  of  the  advertisements,  the  amount  of   information  provided  regarding  costs,  sizes,  shipping,  and  placement  of  the  word   "background."  On  rare  occasions  the  name  of  the  individual  who  painted  the   backgrounds  was  revealed.  This  index  of  information  compiled  from  these   advertisements  shows  that  there  was  a  rise  in  the  use  of  painted  backgrounds   during  the  later  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  a  growing  specialization  within   the  field  as  demand  inspired  competition  and  customization.  

  

50  

Conclusion  
   This  thesis  addressed  the  historic  and  contemporary  scholarly  research   about  painted  backgrounds;  the  history  of  the  painted  background  and  how  they   were  used  and  produced  during  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century;  and   analyzed  the  terms  used  to  describe  painted  backgrounds,  companies  that  sold   backgrounds,  how  photographers  enquired  and  purchased  their  backgrounds,  and   the  various  materials  and  styles  of  backgrounds  available  during  the  period  of  1864   to  1903  in  the  United  States.  This  research  showed  that  in  the  latter  half  of  the   nineteenth  century  there  a  was  a  rise  in  the  use  of  painted  backgrounds  by  portrait   photographers  in  the  United  States  of  America,  as  evidenced  by  advertisements  for   painted  backgrounds  found  in  periodicals  published  during  this  time  period.   Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-190389  and  this  thesis   are  substantial  sources  contributing  to  the  understanding  of  the  different  terms   used  to  describe  painted  backgrounds,  which  companies  were  selling  backgrounds   during  this  time  period,  and  how  photographers  purchased  their  backgrounds.    This   paper  also  revealed  the  different  styles,  sizes,  and  materials  that  were  available  to   photographers,  which  increased  in  number  and  variation  every  year.  This  research   is  significant  in  understanding  the  use  and  appearance  of  painted  backgrounds  in   portraits  produced  in  the  late  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  why  backgrounds   appear  the  way  they  do.  

                                                                                                                 89  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.      51  

Expanding  the  timeline  of  the  journals  surveyed  or  the  geographical  location   of  where  the  journals  were  published  would  be  invaluable  sources  for  comparison.   Research  could  also  be  completed  on  patents  for  specific  styles  of  backgrounds,   brands  of  background  carriers,  and  materials.  Furthermore,  uncovering  sample   photographs  would  provide  rich  information  about  how  photographers  would  have   purchased  their  backgrounds.   My  thesis  revealed  that  backgrounds  were  advertised  in  a  multitude  of  ways   and  referred  to  by  many  terms.  The  use  of  the  background  shifted,  and  by  the  latter   part  of  the  nineteenth  century  it  was  common  for  a  photographer  to  own  several   backgrounds.  New  styles  of  backgrounds  were  introduced  annually  and  sitters  had   greater  choice  of  how  they  wanted  to  be  photographed.  Companies  specializing  in   backgrounds  and  accessories  were  common  throughout  this  period  and  often   advertised  their  range  of  services  and  extensive  styles  and  products.    Like  the   painted  background  itself,  this  thesis  provides  a  foil  for  contextualizing  the  sitter,   and  nineteenth  century  portraiture  in  general.  As  one  of  the  largest  pieces  of   photographic  equipment,  the  painted  background  should  be  not  be  disregarded  as  it   reveals  much  about  cultural  trends  of  the  time,  the  photographer's  skills,  and   aesthetic  aspirations  of  late  nineteenth  century  photographic  portraiture.

  

52  

Appendix  One:  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903  

   The  following  is  a  sampling  extracted  from  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted   Backgrounds  1864-190390  recording  the  bibliographical  information  pertaining  to   advertisements  for  painted  backgrounds  found  in  journals  published  in  the  United   States  of  America  between  1864  and  1903.  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted   Backgrounds  1864-1903  is  part  of  the  Richard  and  Ronay  Menschel  Library  at   George  Eastman  House  in  Rochester,  New  York.     
Name  of   Journal   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Anthony's   Photographic   Bulletin   Vol ume   Vol   1   Vol   1   Vol   1   Vol   1   Vol   1   Vol   1   Vol   5   Vol   9   Vol   9   Vol   9   Vol   9   Vol   9   Vol   9   Date   August   1870   Septemb er  1870   October   1870   October   1870   Novemb er  1870   Novemb er  1870   April   1875   Novemb er  1878   Novemb er  1878   Page   Number   Company   Anthony's   Photographic   Supplies   Anthony's   Photographic   Supplies   Anthony's   Photographic   Supplies   Type  of   Company   Size   Terminology   Inquiry  /   Shipping   Materi als  

152  

General  

Full    

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

172  

General  

Full    

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

193  

General  

Full    

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

197  

215  

W.F.  Ashe   Anthony's   Photographic   Supplies  

Specialized  

Sixth  

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

General  

Full    

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

219  

W.F.  Ashe  

Specialized  

Sixth  

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

n.p.  

n.p.  

W.F.  Ashe   E.  &  H.T.   Anthony  &   Co.   Lafayette  W.   Seavey  

Specialized  

Sixth  

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

Specialized  

Full    

Backgrounds   Snow   Landscapes  

Yes  

No  

n.p.  

Specialized  

Full     Quar ter  

Yes  

No  

1878  

25  

1878  

8  

W.F.  Ashe   E.  &  H.T.   Anthony  &   Co.  

Specialized  

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

Specialized  

Full     Quar ter  

Backgrounds  

Yes  

No  

1878  

23  

W.F.  Ashe  

Specialized  

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

1879  

23  

W.F.  Ashe  

Specialized  

Third  

Backgrounds  

No  

No  

                                                                                                                 90  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.      53  

  

Appendix  Two:  Terms  to  Refer  to  Painted  Backgrounds  

   This  appendix  lists  the  terms  used  to  refer  to  a  painted  background.  This   information  was  compiled  from  the  photographic  journals  published  in  the  United   States  of  America  between  1864  and  1903  that  were  reviewed  while  creating  the   Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.91      · Architectural,  landscape  boudoir,  interior  or  exterior   · Artistic  Backgrounds   · Ashe's  Backgrounds   · Back  Grounds   · Backgrounds   · Backgrounds  for  Amateurs   · Backgrounds  for  Professional  and  Amateur   · Backgrounds  for  Spring  and  Summer  work   · Backgrounds  on  Burlap  in  Colors   · Backings   · Baltimore  Conservatory  Background   · Benndon  and  Asher's   · Bigelow's  Backgrounds   · Bendann  and  Plain  False  Backgrounds   · "Brendann"  Background  Negatives   · Bryant's  Accessories  &  Grounds   · Bryant's  Backgrounds   · Burlap  Grounds  in  Colors   · Chestnut  Series   · Cloth  Backgrounds   · Continuous  Backgrounds     · Continuous  Grounds   · "Eagle  Standard"  Background   · Endless  background  (with  Purchase  of  a  background  carrier)   · Exterior  Ground   · Extra  Graduated  Backgrounds   · Fancy  Painted  Backgrounds   · Felt  Grounds   · Felt  Plain  Backgrounds     · Fine  Backgrounds   · First  Class  Plain  and  Fancy  Backgrounds   · Flock  Backgrounds   · German  Graduated  Backgrounds                                                                                                                    91  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.      54  

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·   

German  Graduated  Grounds   Graduated  Backgrounds   Grounds   Handling  Grounds   Head  Backgrounds   Head  Grounds   High  Art  Backgrounds   High  Grade  Background   High-Grade  Backgrounds   Improved  Photographic  Background     Interior  and  Exterior  Backgrounds   Interior  and  Exterior  Grounds   Interior  Ground   Landscape  Ground   Landscape  and  Conservatory  Background   Mascotte  Junior  Backgrounds   Modern  backgrounds   Negative  Backgrounds   New  Backgrounds   New  Interior  and  Exterior  Backgrounds   New  Style  Backgrounds   Oil  Backgrounds     Oil  Painted  Backgrounds   Osborne's  Practical  Backgrounds   Painted  Oil  Foregrounds,  Head  Rest  Plants,  The  new  foreground,   Assortment  of  Backgrounds   Picturesque  Foregrounds   Plain  Cloth  Backgrounds,  black  and  grey   Plain  Grounds   Plain  Woollen  Backgrounds   Photo  Backgrounds   Photo.  Backgrounds,  &c   Photographic  Backgrounds   Rehn's  Backgrounds   Rembrandt  Backgrounds   Revolving  Backgrounds   Ross'  Backgrounds   Sanded  Oil  Backgrounds   Scenic  Backgrounds   Scenery  Backgrounds   Scenery  Backgrounds,  woolen  Backgrounds,  Bigelow's  Plain  Oil   Painted  Backgrounds   Scenery  Grounds   Seavey's  Backgrounds  and  Accessories   55  

     

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

Seavey's,  Osbourne's,  and  Hough's  Backgrounds   Shaded  Grounds  Painted  in  Oil   Skating  Rink  Ground   Snow-Covered  Landscapes   Snow  Grounds   Snow  Landscapes   Snow  Scenes   Special  Vignetting  Background   Spurgeon,  Bryant  Backgrounds     "Spurgins"  Celebrated  Backgrounds   Standard  New  York  Backgrounds   Summer  Backgrounds   The  Finest  Backgrounds  in  the  West   The  "Leading"  Backgrounds  and  Accessories  of  the  world   Weeke's  Concave  Background   Winter  Landscapes     Wool  backgrounds   Wunderlich's  Fancy  French  Backgrounds     

  

56  

Appendix  Three:  Companies  Advertising  Painted  Backgrounds  
   The  following  appendix  lists  companies  that  advertised  the  sale  of  painted   backgrounds.  This  information  was  compiled  from  the  photographic  journals   published  in  the  United  States  of  America  between  1864  and  1903  that  were   examined  while  compiling  the  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds   1864-1903.92  The  list  is  separated  into  two  sections;  (1)  companies  specializing  in   painted  backgrounds  and  accessories  and  (2)  those  selling  general  photograph   supplies.  Variations  of  the  company  names  are  sub-listed.     
SPECIALIZED:  

   o W.F.  Ashe   § Ashe's   § W.  F.  Ashe,  Scenic  Artist   § W.  F.  Ashe,  Artist   o Ashe,  Dayton  &  Co.   o Badgley  and  Hoerter  Co.   o Bigelow's   o J.  W.  Bryant   § J.  W.  Bryant  Co.   § Bryant's   o W.  P.  Buchanan   o WM.  M.  Conran   o Edwin  Davis'   o Ralph  J.  Golsen   o R.V.  Harnett   o Hearn's  Photographic  Printing  Institute   o E.B.  Hough   o Hub  Scenic  Co.   o Lamson  &  Co  (late  with  Ashe,  Dayton,  &  Co.)   o W.D.  Osburns   o Packard  Bros.   o John  B.  Purdy  &  Son   § John  B.  Purdy  &  Co.   o The  Rehn  Background  Company   o C.F.  Rice   o Rough  &  Caldwell   o Lafayette  W.  Seavey   § Lafayette   § L.W.  Seavey's   § L.W.  Seavey   § Lafayette  W.  Seavey's                                                                                                                    92  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.      57  

§ La  Fayette  W.  Seavey's  Scenic  Studio   § Lafayette  W.  Seavey's  Scenics   § L.  W.  Seavey  &  Co.,  Scenic  Artists   § Seavy   § Seavy's  Hys  Workeshop   § L.W.  Seavey  hys  Workeshope   § Seavy's  Studio   § L.  W.  Seavey  &  Co.,  Scenic  Artists   o Swasey's  (Scoville  Manufacturing  Co.)   o Hiram  J.  Thompson           
GENERAL  PHOTOGRAPHIC  SUPPLIERS:  

  

o WM.  H.  Allen  &  Bro.,  Successors  to  Moses  Sutton,  selling  Bigelow's   o E  &  H.T.  Anthony  &  Co   § Anthony's  Photographic  Supplies   § E.  &  H.T.  Anthony  &  Co.  (selling  for  W.F.  Ashe)   o The  Blair  Camera  Company  Co.,  agents  for  Seavey's   o The  Boston  Institute  of  Photography   o Brendann  Brother's   o Buchanan.  Bromley  &  Co.,   o Buffalo  Photographic  Warehouse   o Central  Stockhouse/R.H.  Moran   o Chicago  Photo.  Stock  House   o Douglass,  Thompson,  &  Co.   o Benjamin  French  &  Co.   § Benj.  French  &  Co.  manufactured  by  Peter  Fales   o Gatchel  &  Hyatt   o The  Globe  Scenic  Company     o Minott  M.  Govan  (Successor  to  Lehmann  &  Brown)   o R.A.  Green's  Scenic  Headquarters  (est.  in  1871)   o Harris  &  Kittle   o William  B.  Holmes   § W.B.  Holmes   § WM.  B.  Holmes   o H.  A.  Hyatt  for  The  Western  Interior  Decorating  Co.   o Dr  E.  Jacobson's  New  Anline  Colors   o A.B.  Lamson   o George  Murphy   o Edward  W.  Newcomb   o Platzer  &  Co.'s   o Scoville  Manufacturer  Co.   § Scovill  Manufacturing  Co.   § Scovill  Manufacturing  Co.  for  L.G.  Bigelow   58  

  

o o o o o o o o o o o o o o

        

§ Geo.  Murphy   Charles  A.  Seely   Sheen  &  Simpkinson   Jas  H.  Smith  &  Co.   Chas.  W.  Stevens   § Chas.  W.  Stevens  (for  Paul  Brown's)   Chas.  W.  Stevens  from  the  pencil  of  Paul  Brown   John  Taylor  &  Co.   N.C.  Thayer  &  Co.   David  Tucker   Richard  Walzl  at  the  National  Photographic  Emporium  and  Publishing   House   Willard  &  Co.     § Willard  MFG.  &  Co.   § Willard  &  Co.  (Selling  for  Sto  &  Borgelt's  Flock  Backgrounds)   Chas.  A.  Wilson   Wilson,  Hood,  &  Co.   Geo.  J.  Wolf  &  Co.   United  States  Photographic  Supply   § United  States  Photographic  Supply  (successors  to  C.B.  Richard   &  Co.)   § United  States  Photographic  Supply  Co     

           

  

59  

Appendix  Four:  List  and  Glossary  of  Materials  
   This  appendix  features  materials  that  were  identified  in  the  advertisements,  as  well   as  definitions  of  each  material.  This  information  was  compiled  from  the   photographic  journals  published  in  the  United  States  of  America  between  1864  and   1903  that  were  reviewed  while  creating  the  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted   Backgrounds  1864-1903.93         · Burlap   · Distemper   · Felt   · Fir   · Cloth     · Cotton   · Oil   · Oil  paint   · Oil  colors     · Oilene   · Paint     · Painted  in  oils   · Painted  in  pure  lead  and  oil   · Painted  on  cotton   · Watercolour   · Wool         Burlap   Burlap  is  a  natural  fibre  made  from  the  jute  plant.  With  painted  backgrounds,  burlap   was  used  as  an  alternative  to  canvas.      Distemper   Distemper  paint  consists  of  a  mixture  of  fine  chalk,  glue,  water,  and  pigment.  During   the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century  it  was  a  cheaper  alternative  to  oil  but  did   have  its  disadvantages.  Earlier  distemper  backgrounds  could  not  be  rolled  because   the  paint  would  crack,  the  backgrounds  were  more  likely  to  scratch,  and  they  could   not  be  cleaned.      Felt   Felt  is  a  non-woven  fabric  made  from  wool.  Felt  backgrounds  were  generally  used   for  plain  backgrounds.                                                                                                                       93  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.      60  

Fir   Fir  is  wood  found  from  an  evergreen  tree.  This  wood  is  employed  to  create  the   revolving  background.  Wood  was  used  for  structure  and  support  and  oil  paint  was   applied  to  the  wood.      Lead  and  Oil   Lead  oxide  is  added  to  oil  paint  to  increase  its  durability.      Oil/Oil  Paint/Oilene/Oil  Colors   Oil  paint  consists  of  colour  pigment  suspended  in  oil.  Backgrounds  painted  in  oil   were  popular  because  of  their  durability.  Oil  backgrounds  were  less  susceptible  to   scratches,  dirt,  dents,  and  stains.  If  a  background  did  get  dirty  the  photographer  was   able  to  clean  the  background.  Furthermore,  it  was  advertised  that  oil  backgrounds   did  not  crack  or  fade,  and  they  could  be  rolled,  which  made  it  easier  to  store  and   transport.  Background  painters  usually  sold  pastels  and  small  containers  of  paint  to   repair  backgrounds  in  case  something  did  happen  to  the  background.      Watercolour   Watercolour  paint  is  a  mixture  of  pigment  in  a  water-soluble  ground.  Backgrounds   made  of  water  colours  were  very  fragile  as  they  could  fade,  stain,  and  scratch.      Wool   It  is  a  fibre  made  from  sheep's  fur.  Most  commonly  wool  blankets  were  stretched   taut  over  a  wooden  frame.  Wool  blankets  were  used  to  create  a  plain  or  in  some   cases  an  almost  invisible  looking  background.  To  create  an  invisible  background  in   daguerreotypes,  wool  stretched  over  a  wooden  frame  was  hung  from  a  ceiling  and   then  swung  by  the  photographer  so  the  background  was  in  motion  during  exposure.   It  was  said  to  have  "rendered  the  surface  of  the  plate  invisible."94        

                                                                                                                
(1850):  111.  

94  System  of  Photography,  "Back  Ground:  Transparent  or  Invisible,"  The  Daguerreian  Journal  1  

  

61  

  

Appendix  Five:  Modes  for  Inquiring  and  Shipping  Backgrounds  
  
This  appendix  explains  how  companies  advertising  for  painted  backgrounds  specified  how   photographers  would  have  had  to  contact  the  companies  to  inquire  about  specific  styles  and   to  purchase  their  backgrounds.  This  list  also  includes  how  backgrounds  would  have  been   shipped  to  the  photographers.  The  entries  were  compiled  from  the  photographic  journal   published  in  the  United  States  of  America  between  1864  and  1903  that  were  reviewed   while  creating  the  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.95  

   · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · A  Photographic  Book  of  Backgrounds  or  Accessories,  mailed  on   application,  to  be  re-turned.   A  trial  of  Rehn's  Backgrounds  will  assure  you  of  their  beauty  and   cheapness   Address  all  order  to   Address  for  price  list   Address  your  dealer  or  the  manufacturer   All  orders  should  state  the  direction  of  light,  Whether  from  right  or   left.   Any  goods  bought  of  me  can  be  returned  at  my  expense  if  they  fail  to   please.   Call  and  Examine  my  Grounds  before  making  your  purchase   Call  and  inspect  our  showroom.   Call  on  or  write  for  terms  and  samples  before  making  their  purchases   Complete  Professional  or  Amateur  Catalogue  on  Application   Correspondence  Solicited     Correspondence  Solicited,  inquiries  cheerfully  answered.   Descriptive  price  list  of  the  above  on  application   Estimates  and  Illustrated  Price  Lists  free.   For  circulars  address  Henry  C.  Peabody  Manager   Foreign  Orders  Carefully  Filled.   Full  illustrated  circular  mailed  on  application   Full  particulars  and  descriptive  circulars   Furnish  samples  on  application   Further  information  can  be  obtained  by  writing  for  latest  price  list,   just  out.   Get  our  samples  and  look  them  over   Goods  carefully  packed  and  shipped  to  all  parts  of  the  country   Illustrated  Price  Lists  Sent  Free   Latest  novelties  introduced  by  Mr.  L.W.  Seavey  on  application.   Mail  for  Sample  Set  

                                                                                                                 95  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.      62  

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·   

New  Price.  List  No.4,  October  1st.  Send  name  now  and  receive  one.   Address   Ordered  executed  promptly  with  care   Orders  filled  in  their  turn   Orders  filled  promptly     Orders  filled  with  care   Orders  not  shipped  on  time,  need  one  to  six  weeks   Orders  Promptly  Filled   Our  new  samples  are  now  ready  and  will  be  mailed  on  application,  but   must  be  returned  in  five  days.   Our  productions  can  be  procured  of  any  dealer   Pasteboard  models   Photographs  mailed  on  application   Photographs  mailed  on  application.  All  orders  receive  careful   attention   Photographs  mailed  on  application,  but  must  be  returned   Photos  with  subjects  on  application   Sample  Photographs  sent  on  receipt  of  stamps  and  indication  of  the   style  wanted   Samples  furnished  upon  application   Sample  Photos  (to  be  returned  and  not  for  copying)  on  application   Sample  Photographs  sent  on  receipt  of  stamps  and  indication  of  the   style  wanted   Sample  Prints   Sample  prints  on  usual  conditions   Sample  prints  sent  to  known  responsible  parties  only.   Sample  sheet  on  application     Samples  Free   Samples  on  application   Samples  show  figure  posed   Samples  sent  by  mail   Samples  sent  on  application   Samples  sent  on  application,  orders  for  any  of  the  above  can  be  filled   on  short  notice.   Samples  to  the  profession   Securely  packed  that  they  will  bear  safety,  transportation  as  freight   Send  4-cent  stamp  for  our  new  112  page  catalogue  and  background   design  circular.   Send  4  cents  in  stamps  for  our  new  112  page  catalogue  and  design   sheet  of  new  backgrounds   Send  for  catalogue   Send  for  descriptive  circular   Send  for  free  with  subscription   Send  for  Illustrated  Catalogue   63  

· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

  

Send  for  new  books  of  Photographs   Send  for  Photographs   Send  for  photographs  showing  different  positions   Send  for  price  list   Send  for  sample  photographs  with  subjects   Send  for  Sample   Send  for  sample  photographs   Send  for  sample  photos   Send  for  sample  Photos.  Especially  the  new  designs     Send  for  samples     Send  stamp  for  circular   Send  stamp  for  photographic  catalogue   Set  strips  of  every  description   Shipped  by  express   Shown  in  photograph  with  Subjects,  in  our  new  Sample  book.   Solicit  domestic  and  foreign  correspondence   These  sizes  may  be  sent  by  mail  on  receipt  of  35c.  Extra   To  all  purchasers  a  reduced  sheet  of  poses  gratis.  Address  for  Sample   prints   Those  sold  will  be  shipped  immediately,  if  desired   Bryant's  new  accessories  sent  on  application.   We  will  furnish  you  photographs  for  selection   Will  furnish  samples  on  application   Write  for  photographs  and  illustrated  catalogue.   Write  for  Sample  Book  of  New  Backgrounds  and  Accessories,  they   contain  a  Great  Variety  of  New  and  Fine  Designs   Write  for  samples  of  Background  and  Accessories.  Photographs  of  J.W.     Write  for  suggestions,  samples  and  catalogue.   Write  to  your  stock  Dealer  or  to  us  direct  for  samples.  

  

64  

Appendix  Six:  Histories  of  Companies  

   The  following  appendix  features  brief  histories  of  the  companies  that  were  found  to  have   advertised  for  painted  backgrounds  in  the  reviewed  photographic  journals  published  in  the   United  States  of  America  between  1864  and  1903  that  were  reviewed  while  creating  the   Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.96  

      WM.  H.  Allen  &  Bro/  Allen  Brothers   W.H.  Allen  and  O.C.  Allen  were  successors  to  Moses  Sutton.  They  established  the   WM.  H.  Allen  and  Brother  business  in  1851.  In  1871  the  company  was  located  at  11   East  Larned  Street  in  Detroit,  Michigan.97      E.  &  H.  T.  Anthony  &  Company  (1842-1901)   E.  &  H.  T.  Anthony  &  Company  was  the  largest  supplier  and  distributor  of   photography  supplies  in  the  United  States  during  the  nineteenth  century  and  was   located  at  501  Broadway  for  the  majority  of  this  time.  In  1842,  Anthony  opened  a   daguerreotype  studio  and  five  years  later  opened  a  separate  shop  that  sold   photographic  supplies.  Anthony  later  closed  his  portrait  studio  to  focus  on  selling   photography  supplies  and  in  1847  Anthony  moved  to  205  Broadway.  In  the  1850s   he  expanded  his  business  to  include  daguerreotype  cases,  stereographic  images,  and   other  apparatuses.  In  1852  his  brother  Henry  joined  the  business  and  together  in   1854  the  brothers  opened  a  factory,  which  was  located  in  New  York  City's  Harlem   Rail  Road  Depot.  In  1870  the  company  began  to  manufacture  cameras  and  by  1871   the  British  Journal  of  Photography  was  describing  Anthony's  as  the  largest   photographic  firm  in  the  world.  In  1877  the  company  listed  Edward  Anthony  as   President,  and  his  brother  Henry  T.  Anthony  and  V.  M.  Wilcox  as  vice  presidents.   Notably,  E.  &  H.  T.  Anthony  &  Company  had  a  very  close  business  relationship  with   Mathew  Brady.98  On  23  December  1901,  E.  &  H.T.  Anthony  merged  with  rival  Scovill   and  Adams  Company  becoming  Anthony  and  Scovill.99        W.F.  Ashe   W.F.  Ashe  owned  a  specialized  company  manufacturing  backgrounds  and   accessories.  The  company  was  located  on  76  East  9th  St.  New  York  in  1892.  

                                                                                                                 96  Keller,  Index  of  Advertisements  for  Painted  Backgrounds  1864-1903.  
97  W.H.  Allen,  Photographic  Times  1  (1871):  106.   98  Keya  Morgan,  "The  History  of  Photography,"  accessed  July  10,  2013,   http://www.mathewbrady.com/history.htm.   99  Michael  Pritchard,  "Anthony,  Edward  (1819-1888)  and  Henry  Teibout  (1814-1884)"  in   Encyclopedia  of  Nineteenth-Century  Photography  edited  by  John  Hannavy    (  New  York:  Routledge,   2007):  48-9.  

  

65  

   Badgley  and  Hoerter  Co.   Badgley  and  Hoerter  Company  was  owned  by  Samuel  F.  Badgley  and  John  A.   Hoerter.  The  business  was  located  in  Louisville,  Kentucky.        Bigelow   Bigelow  was  a  manufacturer  of  backgrounds.  He  is  best  known  for  his  revolving  and   Rembrandt  backgrounds.      The  Blair  Camera  Company  Co.   Thomas  Blair  founded  the  Blair  Tourograph  Company  in  1878  in  Connecticut.  The   Scovill  Company,  to  whom  Blair  had  ties  with,  first  introduced  the  Tourograph   camera.  In  1881  Blair  moved  to  Boston  to  expand  his  business,  which  included   selling  dry  plates  and  four  years  later  detective  cameras  and  in  1886  shortened  the   company  name  to  the  Blair  Camera  Company  and  concentrated  his  business  efforts   to  manufacturing  photography  apparatuses.100  In  1890,  Blair  purchased  the  Boston   Camera  Company  in  competition  with  Eastman  Kodak  Company.  In  1899  the  Blair   Camera  Company  was  purchased  by  Eastman  Kodak,  and  moved  to  Rochester  where   it  was  open  until  1907  and  in  1908  Blair  Camera's  were  sold  as  a  division  of   Eastman  Kodak  Company.      The  Boston  Institute  of  Photography   The  Boston  Institute  of  Photography  was  located  at  52  Boylston  Street  in  1886.      J.  W.  Bryant   Bryant  specialized  in  backgrounds  and  accessories  and  his  backgrounds  were   claimed  to  have  been  firmly  made  but  were  light  so  they  were  easy  to  use.101  The   company  was  based  out  of  La  Porte,  Indiana.  Wair  &  Barnes  became  successors  to   this  company  ca.  1897.102      Buchanan,  Bromley  &  Co.     Buchanan,  Bromley  &  Company  was  located  at  1030  Arch  Street  Philadelphia  in   1890  and  had  a  second  location  at  1226  Arch  Street.  They  specialized  in  painted   backgrounds  and  accessories.  The  partnership  published  and  distributed  How  to   Make  Photographs  in  1888.      W.  P.  Buchanan   W.P.  Buchanan  owned  a  general  photographic  supply  company  based  out  of   Philadelphia.  Buchanan  is  best  known  as  the  Luxo  Flashlight  man  because  in  1906   he  established  a  flashlight  competition  with  Luxo.  Buchanan  was  also  a  member  of                                                                                                                   
100  Historic  Camera's  History  Librarium,  "Blair  Camera  Company  History,"  accessed  July  6,  2013,   http://www.historiccamera.com/cgi-bin/librarium/pm.cgi?action=display&login=blair_camco   101  Unknown,  "Exhibits:  Fourth  Notice,"  The  Photographic  Times  and  the  American  Photographer  11   (1881):  344.   102  Wair  &  Barnes,  International  Annual  of  Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin  and  American  Process   Yearbook  9  (1897):  26.  

  

66  

the  photographer's  association  of  Pennsylvania103  and  became  the  vice-president  of   the  Columbia  Photographic  Society  in  Philadelphia.104  Buchanan  also  published  The   Photo  Ticker  a  photographic  magazine.105       Central  Stockhouse/R.H.  Moran   The  Central  Stockhouse  was  established  by  R.H.  Moran  in  1874.  The  business  was   located  at  231  Centre  Street  in  New  York  City.  Moran  was  a  manufacturer  and  dealer   of  photographic  supplies  and  specialized  in  photographic  chemicals  such  as   collodion,  silver  nitrate  and  varnish.      Chicago  Photo  Stock  Co.   In  1896  E.  &  H.T.  Anthony  purchased  the  Chicago  Photo  Stock  Company,106  which   was  located  at  38  E.  Randolph  Street  in  Chicago  in  1897.        WM.  M.  Conran   WM.  M.  Conran  was  best  known  for  his  oil  backgrounds.  His  business  was  situated   in  several  locations  including  187  S.  Clark  Street  Chicago  in  1890,  and  185  S.  Clark   Street  1891.    Later  in  1891,  Conran  moved  studios  to  445  South  Normal  Parkway   Englewood,  Illinois.107       Edwin  Davis   Located  in  Philadelphia  at  1226  Arch  Street,  Edwin  Davis  was  the  sole  agent  for  W.P   Buchanan  in  Philadelphia  in  1895.      Douglass,  Thompson,  &  Co.   The  Douglass,  Thompson,  &  Co  was  a  general  Photographic  supplier  at  229  and  231   State  Street,  Chicago,  Illinois.  They  sold  Paul  Brown  &  Son's  backgrounds  and   accessories  in  1881  and  1882.      Benjamin  French  &  Co   Benjamin  French  opened  a  daguerreotype  studio  in  1844  but  due  to  lack  of  business   became  a  retailer  for  photographic  goods  in  partnership  with  L.H.  Hale.  From  its   beginning,  the  company  was  located  at  109  Washington  Street  in  Boston  until  1864   when  the  company  moved  to  319  Washington  Street.    In  1856  the  Benjamin  French   &  Co.  became  the  first  supplier  in  the  United  States  to  sell  Jamin  and  Darlot   products.  By  the  1890s  due  to  French's  failing  health  his  son,  Dr.  Wilfred  French   (who  was  also  a  photographer)  was  handling  much  of  the  business  responsibilities.   The  Benjamin  French  Company  was  successful  into  the  twentieth  century  and   merged  with  the  William  H.  Robey's  Horgan  &  Robey  firm  to  become  the  Robey-                                                                                                                 
103E.E.  Seavey,  The  Camera  Magazine  10  (1906):  108.   104  Greg  Beato,  "Out  of  Focus:  An  Eulogy  for  Kodak"  The  Smart  Set,  February  10,  2012.   105Unknown,  Wilson's  Photographic  Magazine  39  (1902):  448.   106  Unknown,  Wilson's  Photographic  Magazine  35  (1896):  47.   107Edward  L.  Wilson,  Wilson's  Photographic  Magazine  28  (1891):  94.  

  

67  

French  Company  in  1920,  and  later  became  a  subordinate  of  the  Eastman  Kodak   company.108      Gatchel  &  Hyatt   Gatchel  and  Hyatt  formed  a  partnership  selling  daguerreian  goods  from  1848  to   around  1861.  In  1863  Gatchel  became  a  branch  manager  of  a  store  owned  by  a   refiner  in  Cincinnati.  A  year  later  both  Gatchel  and  Hyatt  purchased  the  branch  to   sell  photographic  goods.  In  1874  the  company  purchased  William  H.  Tillford's   photographic  supply  stores  and  was  however  briefly,  called  the  Tri-City  Stock   House.  Gatchel  and  Hyatt  eventually  dissolved  their  relationship  and  Hyatt  kept  the   St.  Louis  branch  while  Gatchel  retained  the  remaining  two  stores.  In  1880  the  two   men  rejoined  their  partnership  with  the  addition  of  Mulett  a  photographic  dealer  in   St.  Louis.  In  1882  Gatchel  sold  his  store  in  Cincinatti  and  relocated  to  St.  Louis  where   he  remained  as  manger  until  1895  when  his  two  sons  (A.D.  Gatchel,  and  F.E.   Gatchel)  took  over  and  renamed  it  W.D.  Gatchel  and  Sons.  Hyatt  owned  the  branch   in  St.  Louis  until  his  death  in  1905.      The  Globe  Scenic  Co.   The  Globe  Scenic  Company  specialized  in  background  accessories.  The  company  was   located  at  261  Wabash  Avenue  in  Chicago.      Ralph  J.  Golsen   Ralph  J.  Golsen  owned  a  business  located  on  80  and  82  Wabash  Avenue  in  Chicago.   The  company  was  a  retailer  for  a  variety  of  photographic  equipment.        Minott  M.  Govan  (Successor  to  Lehmann  &  Brown)   Minott  M.  Govan  was  a  general  photographic  supplier,  but  frequently  advertised  for   painted  backgrounds  and  accessories.  Govan  first  had  his  business  at  28  West  14th   Street,  New  York,  and  in  1886  was  listed  at  18  Clinton  Place,  New  York.  In  1901   Govan  either  opened  a  second  location  or  moved  to  6  West  15th  Street.      R.A.  Green's  Scenic  Headquarters     The  R.A.  Green's  Scenic  Headquarters  Company  was  established  in  1871  and  they   specialized  in  painted  backgrounds  and  accessories.  In  1889  the  business  was   located  at  148  State  Street  in  Chicago.    

108  Unknown,  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  7(1882),  xxvi;     Unknown,  Commerce,  Manufactures  &  Resources  of  Boston,  Mass:  A  Historical  Statistical  &  Descriptive   Review  (Boston:  National  Publishing  Company  1883),  132;   American  Publishing  and  Engraving  Co.,  Illustrated  Boston,  the  Metropolis  of  New  England  (New  York:   American  Publishing  and  Engraving  Co.  1889),  136;   Unknown,  The  Photographic  Journal  of  America  27  (1890):  512;  Unknown,  Wilson's  Photographic   Magazine  27  (1891),  59;  Unknown,  The  Photographic  Times  32  (1900),  92;  Unknown,  Photo-Era:  The   American  Journal  of  Photography  44  (1920),  321.    

                                                                                                                

  

68  

   R.V.  Harnett   R.V.  Harnett  was  a  manufacturer,  importer,  and  dealer  in  photographic  goods.  In   1864  his  business  was  located  at  482  Broadway,  New  York.      Albert  M.  Harris   Albert  M.  Harris  was  the  trade  agent  for  The  Rehn's  Background  Company  and   supplier  for  Bryant's  Backgrounds.  His  business  was  located  at  15  Grand  River   Avenue,  Detroit,  Michigan  in  1883.      Harris  &  Kittle   Located  at  13  Grand  River  Avenue  Detroit  in  1886  the  Harris  &  Kittle  Company  was   a  retailer  for  all  types  of  photographic  goods.      Hearn's  Photographic  Printing  Institute   Charles  W.  Hearn  established  a  career  in  artistic  printing  including  drawing  the   backgrounds  in  photographs.  Hearn  published  The  Practical  Printer:  a  Complete   Manual  of  Photographic  Printing  in  1874.  Hearn  printed  photographs  for  many   publications  and  in  1876  he  purchased  The  Philadelphia  Photographer  printing   company.  In  1877  his  business  was  located  at  24  Winfield  Place  in  Philadelphia,  but   he  also  had  stores  in  Portland,  and  Boston  by  1889.  Though  Hearn  moved  into   several  studios  throughout  Boston  he  remained  in  the  city  until  his  death  in  1922.109      William  B.  Holmes   William  B.  Holmes  owned  a  business  selling  general  photographic  supplies.  The   business  was  located  at  555  Broadway,  New  York  City  in  1867-72.      E.B.  Hough   E.B.  Hough  owned  a  specialized  company  selling  backgrounds  and  accessories.  The   company  was  located  at  the  Grand  Opera  House  in  Syracuse,  N.Y.  in  1882.      Hub  Scenic  Co.   The  Hub  Scenic  Company  specialized  in  painted  backgrounds  and  was  based  out  of   Boston,  Massachusetts.      H.  A.  Hyatt  for  The  Western  Interior  Decorating  Co.   Hyatt  opened  a  retail  store  in  St.  Louis  selling  photographic  goods  in  1880  when  his   partnership  with  Gatchel  dissolved.  Hyatt  sold  The  Western  Interior  Decorating   Company's  backgrounds  at  his  St.  Louis  branch  in  1884.  (see  also  Gatchel  and  Hyatt)      A.B.  Lamson   A.B.  Lamson  was  located  at  565  Ninth  Avenue  New  York  City  in  1872.                                                                                                                   
109  Eastman  Kodak  Company,  Abel's  Photographic  Weekly  (1922):  478,  480;  Unknown,  Photo  Era  

Magazine  27  (1906):  106;  Unknown,  Photo-Era  Magazine  38  (1917):  48;  Unknown,  The  Practical   Printer  (1874):  10.  

  

69  

Lamson  &  Co   In  1865  the  Lamson  Company  was  located  at  68  Bleecker  Street,  New  York.  They   specialized  in  backgrounds  and  skylights  exclusively.        George  Murphy     Sometimes  referred  to  as  George  Murphy  Inc,  George  Murphy's  business  was  based   out  of  250  Mercer  Street,  New  York  City  in  1885.110  In  1893  the  business  was   located  at  57  East  Ninth  Street,  New  York  City.      Edward  W.  Newcomb   Edward  W.  Newcomb  was  a  chemist  and  a  dealer  in  photography  supplies.        W.D.  Osborne   W.D.  Osborne  patented  "Picturesque  Foregrounds,"  which  were  sold  by  Scovill   Manufacturing  Company  in  1882.      Packard  Bros.   The  Packard  Brothers  Company  was  established  in  1884  and  was  located  in   Roslindale,  Boston.  They  primarily  sold  mainly  scenic  backgrounds  and  remained  in   business  until  at  least  1894.      Platzer  &  Co.'s   Platzer  and  company  specialized  in  oil  backgrounds  and  was  located  at  41  Carlton   Ave,  Jersey  City  in  New  Jersey  in  1890.        John  B.  Purdy  &  Son   In  1864  John  B.  Purdy's  shop  was  located  at  52  Franklin  Street,  New  York  and  in   1865  he  moved  to  242  Canal  Street,  New  York.      The  Rehn  Background  Company   The  Rehn  Background  Company  produced  painted  backgrounds  and  accessories.   Albert  M.  Harris  was  the  trade  agent  for  these  backgrounds.      C.F.  Rice   C.F.  Rice's  business  was  located  at  220  Wabash  Avenue,  Chicago.  The  company   specialized  in  accessories  and  backgrounds.      Rough  &  Caldwell   Rough,  Platzer,  Caldwell  specialized  in  painted  backgrounds.  The  business  was   located  in  Westchester,  New  York  in  1896  and  then  on  56th  East  9th  Street,  in  New   York  City  by  1922.

                                                                                                                

110Unknown,  "Industrial  Displays"  Photo-Era:  The  America  Journal  of  Photography  15  (1910):  159.  

  

70  

   Scovill  Manufacturer  Co.   The  Scovill  Manufacturing  Company  was  originally  founded  in  in  Waterbury,   Connecticut  in  1802  by  Dr.  Frederick  Leavenworth,  David  Hayden,  and  James   Mitchell  Lamson  Scovill.  The  company  first  produced  and  rolled  their  own  brass  and   began  to  manufacture  silver  plated  copper  sheets  for  daguerreotypes  around  1842.   In  1846  they  opened  a  store  in  New  York  carrying  a  full  array  of  photographic   products  and  soon  became  a  primary  distributor  of  photographic  equipment.  The   company  acquired  the  American  Optical  Company  in  the  1860s,  which  allowed  for   the  production  of  Scovill's  box  cameras,  stereoscopes,  and  accessories.  In  1866  the   company  was  located  at  4  Bleeker  Street  in  New  York  City.  In  1889,  the  name  of  the   company  was  changed  to  Scovill  &  Adam's,  and  on  December  23,  1901,  the  firm   merged  with  E.  &  H.T.  Anthony  becoming  Anthony  and  Scovill.111  In  1907  the   company  changed  and  abbreviated  their  name  to  ANSCO.  The  company  still  exists   today.112        Lafayette  W.  Seavey   In  1865  Seavey  and  Gaspard  Maeder  (a  scenic  painter)  opened  a  studio  in  New  York   specializing  in  painted  scenery  for  travelling  theatre.  In  1868,  Seavey  began  to   produce  painted  backgrounds  tailored  to  photography  and  soon  he  became  one  of   the  most  popular  background  painters  in  the  United  States  of  America.  Seavey  ran   his  business  like  of  a  factory  producing  mail  order  and  custom  made  backgrounds.   At  one  point  Seavey  had  twenty  workers  in  his  studio,  presumably  in  the  1870s   when  his  company  increased  in  popularity.113  Charles  Trembley  and  M.M.  Govan   over  sighted  his  shop  financially.        Dr.  Hermann  Vogel  considered  Seavey  to  be  the  first  background  painter  in  the   world114  because  he  was  the  first  to  have  opened  his  own  business  specializing  in   painted  backgrounds.  The  Seavey  Company  allowed  portrait  photographers  to   choose  from  an  illustrated  catalogued  of  many  different  styles  and  subject  matters.      Charles  A.  Seely   Charles  Seely  was  a  chemist  and  in  1863  was  credited  as  the  editor  for  the  American   Journal  of  Photography.115  In  1864,  his  business  was  located  at  244  Canal  Street,   New  York  and  he  sold  Weeke's  concave  backgrounds.                                                                                                                      
111  "Pacific  Rim  Camera:  Photographica  Pages:  Scovill  Index,  accessed  July  8,  2013,   http://www.pacificrimcamera.com/pp/scovill/scovill.htm   112  Historic  Camera's  History  Librarium  "Scovill  Manufacturing  Company,  accessed  July  8,  2013,   "http://www.historiccamera.com/cgi-bin/librarium/pm.cgi?action=display&login=scovill   113Historical  Ziegfeld  Group  "Theatre,"  accessed  July  6,  2013,   http://historicalziegfeld.multiply.com/photos/album/497?&show_interstitial=1&u=%2Fphotos%2F album#   114  A.E.  Rinehart,  "L.W.  Seavey:  Artist,"  accessed  July  6,  2013,  http://photos- memories.com/SeaveyBio.htm   115  Leah  Dilworth,  Acts  of  Possession:  Collecting  in  America  (Newark:  Rutgers  2003),  90.  

  

71  

Sheen  &  Simpkinson   Comprised  of  C.H.  Sheen  and  Simpkinson,  the  Sheen  &  Simpkinson  company  was  a   retailer  for  general  photographic  supplies  located  166  and  168  Race  Street   Cincinnati,  Ohio.      Jas  H.  Smith  &  Co.   James  Smith  founded  the  Jas  H.  Smith  and  company  in  the  late  1860s  to  early  1870s.   Smith  purchased  a  photography  studio  where  he  worked  as  a  professional   photographer  for  over  a  decade.  By  the  1870s,  Smith  began  to  concentrate  on  selling   and  manufacturing  various  apparatuses  including  camera  stands,  posing  stools,   burnishers,  and  darkroom  equipment.  In  1892  the  company  was  located  at  186   Wabash  Ave  in  Chicago  and  sold  all  types  of  photography  equipment  including   revolving  backgrounds.      In  1901,  two  fires  damaged  Smith's  business  and  ultimately  bankrupted  him.  Smith   eventually  rebuilt  the  company  by  inventing  a  more  powerful  form  of  flash-powder   and  by  1909  was  marketing  Victor  powder  under  the  James  H.  Smith  &  Sons   Corporation  name.116  The  Jas.  H.  Smith  &  Company  eventually  became  and  grew  into   the  well-known  Smith-Victor  Corporation,  manufacturers  of  photographic  lighting.      Chas.  W.  Stevens   Chas.  W.  Stevens'  business  was  located  at  150  Dearborn  St.,  Chicago  in  1874.      Sto  &  Borgelt's  Flock  Backgrounds   Willard  &  Company  sold  Sto  &  Borgelt's  Flock  Backgrounds  in  1886  in  New  York.      Swasey   Swasey  specifically  manufactured  painted  backgrounds  and  accessories.    Swasey   backgrounds  were  sold  by  Scovill  Manufacturing  Company  in  New  York  City.      John  Taylor  &  Co.   John  Taylor  &  Company  was  formed  in  San  Francisco  around  1865.  The  company   consisted  of  John  Taylor  and  James.  H.  Page,  who  were  druggists  by  profession  but   became  retailers  of  chemical  glassware  and  photographic  equipment.  Albert  A.   Hickox  became  a  third  owner  sometime  during  the  1860s  or  1870s.  The  company   was  first  located  at  512-514  Washington  Street  and  in  1873  the  company  expanded   to  512-518  Washington  Street.  In  1875  a  competing  photographic  supply,  Oscar   Foss  and  Company  purchased  John  Taylor  &  Co.  and  the  business  no  longer  sold   photographic  supplies.  The  company  moved  four  times  until  1900  when  the   business  closed.117                                                                                                                 
116  Smith-Victor  Corporation,  "History,"  accessed  July  7,  2013   http://www.smithvictor.com/company/history.asp?s1=History   117  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  Thomas  R.  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West:  A  Biographical   Dictionary,  1840-1865  (Stanford:  Stanford  University  Press,  2000),  542-543.  

  

72  

   N.C.  Thayer  &  Co.   The  N.C.  Thayer  and  Company  was  located  at  46,  48,  and  50  East  Jackson  Street  in   1883  Chicago,  Illinois  and  then  at  257  and  259  State  Street  in  1886.        Hiram  J.  Thompson   In  1880  Thompson's  store  was  located  at  259  Wabash  Avenue,  Chicago.  The   company  manufactured,  imported,  and  sold  many  products  including  mirrors,   engravings,  and  photographic  materials.118  Prior  Hiram  J.  Thompson  and  C.F.  Rice   were  partners  (Rice  &  Thompson)  but  the  company  dissolved  in  1879.      David  Tucker/  Buffalo  Photographic  Warehouse   In  1871  David  Tucker's  business  was  located  on  296  Main  Street  Buffalo,  New  York.   Tucker  owned  the  Buffalo  Photographic  Warehouse  in  1873  and  1874  it  was  located   on  292,  294,  and  296  Main  Street,  Buffalo.  Tucker  was  presumably  partner  with  S.B.   Butts  during  this  time.      United  States  Photographic  Supply   Based  out  of  57  East  9th  street  New  York  City  and  62  Clark  Street  Chicago  the  United   States  Photographic  Supply's  specialties  were  German  Graduated  backgrounds  as   well  as  albumen  paper  and  Eikonogen  (a  chemical  developer).    George  Murphy  was   appointed  sole  selling  agent  for  the  company.119        Richard  Walzl  at  the  National  Photographic  Emporium  and  Publishing  House   The  National  Photographic  Emporium  and  Publishing  House  was  a  retailer  for   general  photographic  supplies  and  was  located  at  46  Charles  Street  in  Baltimore,   Maryland  in  1872.  Walzl  published  The  Photographer's  Friend  and  Revised  Price   Catalogue.      Willard  &  Co.   J.W.  Willard  worked  with  the  Scovill  &  Adams  Co.  for  many  years.  In  1896,  he   purchased  an  agency  for  photographers  and  photo-engraving  under  the  name  of   J.W.  Willard,  which  was  located  on  7  Co.  at  25-27  Third  Avenue,  New  York.120      Chas.  A.  Wilson   Chas.  A.  Wilson  was  listed  at  No.  7  N.  Charles  Street,  Baltimore  in  1874.      Wilson,  Hood,  &  Co.   John  G.  Hood,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Wilson,  Hood  and  Company,  began  business   life  under  F.  Gutekunst,  one  of  the  oldest  photographers  in  Philadelphia.  In  1866   Hood  owned  a  retail  store  specializing  in  photographic  supplies  with  Edward  L.   Wilson  on  Arch  Street  in  Philadelphia.    Initially  the  company  focused  on  props  and                                                                                                                   
118  Hiram  J.  Thompson,  Photographic  Times  9  (1879):  41.   119Edward  L.  Wilson,  Wilson's  Photographic  Magazine  17  (1890):  640.   120Edward  L.  Wilson,  Wilson's  Photographic  Magazine  33  (1896):  640.  

  

73  

accessories  for  cabinet  cards.121  This  business  eventually  formed  Wilson,  Hood,  &   Co.,  which  was  then  succeeded  by  the  Cheney,  Hood  Company.  122        Geo.  J.  Wolf  &  Co.     Geo.  J.  Wolf  &  Co.  was  listed  at  918  Arch  Street,  Philadelphia  in  1893  and  1894.     

                                                                                                                

121  The  Library  Company  of  Philadelphia,  "Collections,"  accessed  July  10,  2013,  

http://www.librarycompany.org/collections/stewardship/   122Edward  L.  Wilson,  Wilson's  Photographic  Magazine  50  (1913):  317  

  

74  

Bibliography  
     
PRIMARY  SOURCES  

   Aquinas,  Thomas.  Photographic  Mosaics    36  (1900):  37.      Ashe,  W.F.    Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin  1-18  (1878):  25.      Beck,  Otto  Walter.  Art  Principles  in  Portrait  Photography:  Composition,  Treatment  of     Backgrounds,  and  the  Process  Involved  in  Manipulating  the  Plate.  New  York:   The  Baker  &  Taylor  Company,  1907.      Benj.  French  &  Co.  Philadelphia  Photographer  8  (1864):  N.p.      Buchanan,  W.P.  Buchanan's  Complete  Illustrated  Catalogue.  Philadelphia:  W.P.     Buchanan,  1893.      Carlisle,  G.M.  "The  Background,  it's  Use  and  Abuse."  Photographic  Times  and  the     American  Photographer  15  (1885):  409-411.      Crihfield,  A.  R.  "Relation  of  Backgrounds  to  Subjects."  The  Philadelphia  Photographer     6  (1870):  54-55.      Estabrooke,  Edward  M.    The  Ferrotype  and  How  to  Make  It.  Cincinnati:  Gatchel  &     Hyatt,  1872.      Hasluck,  Paul  N.    The  Book  of  Photography:  Practical  Theoretical  and  Applied.  New     York:  Cassell  and  Company,  Limited,  1905.      Kurtz,  W.  "On  Backgrounds  and  Reflectors."  Photographic  Mosaics  2  (1870):  15-18.      .  "Van  Riper's  Patent  Conical  Photographic  Background."  The  Photographic     Times  26  (1872):  71-72.      Mora,  W.M.  "Background  Matters."  The  Photographic  Times  and  the  American     Photographer  11  (1881):  187-8.      Murphy,  George.  Photographic  Mosaics  21  (1885):  155      Packard  Bros.  The  American  Journal  of  Photography  15  (1894):  x.      Seavey,  La  Fayette  W.  Photographic  Mosaics  8  (1873):  180.      .    Anthony's  Photographic  Bulletin  1-18  (1878):  N.p.      75  

   .  Photographic  Mosaics  25  (1889):  161.      .    Photographic  Mosaics  28  (1892):  312.      .  "Mr.  L.W.  Seavey  of  New  York:  Presentation  on  the  Second  Day."  The     Philadelphia  Photographer  16  (1879):  312.      .  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  15  (1883):  469.      .  &  Co.  Scenic  Artists,  Philadelphia  Photographer  64  (1869):  N.p.      .    Philadelphia  Photographer  15  (1878):  332.      .    Philadelphia  Photographer  25  (1883):  3-4.      .  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  12  (1882):  92.      .  The  Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  13  (1883):  98.      .    Photographic  Mosaics  6  (1871):  151.      Scovill  Manufacturing  Company.  "Osborne's  Practical  Backgrounds."  The     Photographic  Times  and  American  Photographer  13  (1884):  N.p.      Stevens,  Chas.  W.    Philadelphia  Photographer  15  (1878):  27.      Taylor,  J.  Traill.  "How  to  Make  a  Pictorial  Background."  The  Photographic  Times  and     American  Photographer  7  (1882):  15-16.      The  Homeliest  Man.  "A  Good  Background  Frame."  Philadelphia  Photographer  17     (1880):  N.p.      Trask,  A.K.  Trask's  Practical  Ferrotyper.  Philadelphia:  Benerman  &  Wilson,  1872.      Unknown.  "Artistic  Backgrounds  in  Portraiture."  The  Photo-American  8  (1895):  177-   178.      .  "Backgrounds."  Photographic  Times  25  (1894):  38.      .  "Bigelow's  Graduated  Circular  Background."  The  Photographic  Times  13     (1872):  53.      .  The  Photographic  Times  13  (1872):  53.      .  "Home-made  Backgrounds."  The  Photo-American  7  (1895):  71-72.      76  

   .  "Hull  Device  for  a  Background  Frame."  The  Philadelphia  Photographer  5     (1868):  21.      Wilson,  Edward  L.  Wilson's  Photographics.  Philadelphia:  Wilson,  1883.      .  Wilson's  Photographics;  a  series  of  lessons,  accompanied  by  notes,     on  all  the  processes  which  are  needful  in  the  art  of  photography.  Philadelphia:   E.  L.  Wilson,  1881.        
SECONDARY  SOURCES  

   Burns,  Stanley  B.  Forgotten  Marriage:  The  Painted  Tintype  &  The  Decorative  Frame     1860-1890.  New  York:  The  Burns  Collections,  Ltd.,  1995.      Darrah,  William  C.  Cartes  de  Visite;  In  Nineteenth  Century  Photography.  Gettysburg:     W.C.  Darrah  Publisher,  1981.      Gernsheim,  Alison  and  Helmut.  L.  J.  M.  Daguerre;  the  history  of  the  diorama  and  the     daguerreotype.  London:  Secker  &  Warburg,  1956.      Griffith,  Alan.  "Luminous  Lint."  Last  modified  April  22,  2013.  http://www.luminous-   lint.com/app/home/H1/      Kasher,  Steven.  "Stereotypical  Tintypes  and  Tintype  Backgrounds."  In  America  and     the  Tintype.  New  York:  International  Center  of  Photography  2008.      Linkman,  Audrey.  The  Victorians:  Photographic  Portraits.  London:  Tauris  Parke     Books,  1993.      Neal,  Avon.  "Folk  Art  Fantasies:  Photographers'  Backgrounds"  Afterimage  24     (1997):  12-18.      Nickell,  Joe.  Camera  Clues:  A  Handbook  for  Photographic  Investigation.  Lexington:     University  Press  of  Kentucky,  1994.      Osterman,  Mark.  "Focus  on  the  Background."  The  Collodion  Journal  6  (2000):  6.-9.      Palmquist,  Peter  E.  Frozen  in  Iron.  New  York:  Eureka  Printing  Company,  2001.      Viker,  Erik.  "Background  Basics."  Stage  Directions  21  (2008):  42,  44-45.        

  

77  

