ROBERT C. KRAUT'S JAPAN: CATALOGUING AND CONTEXTUALIZING POST WORLD WAR TWO PHOTOGRAPHIC ALBUMS OF JAPAN AND THE SOUTH PACIFIC AT THE ART GALLERY OF ONTARIO by Steven Kramer

Bachelor of Fine Arts, Commercial Photography Winthrop University Rock Hill, South Carolina, USA 2010

A thesis presented to Ryerson University, the Art Gallery of Ontario and George Eastman House International Museum of Photography and Film in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada ©Steven Kramer 2013

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A THESIS

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

iii

ABSTRACT Robert C. Kraut's Japan: Cataloguing and Contextualizing a Post World War Two Photographic Album of Japan and the South Pacific at the Art Gallery of Ontario,

Steven Kramer, Masters of Arts 2013 Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University in association with the Art Gallery of Ontario

This applied thesis examines three albums created by US Army Air Force personnel Robert C. Kraut from 1945-46. The albums were donated by Toronto based artist Max Dean to the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO), and serve as a case study for the process of cataloguing and contextualizing albums for future researchers and museum staff. This paper includes a literature survey examining care and handling, social and historical evolutions, and cataloguing practices related to both photographic albums and scrapbooks. An historical analysis of the photographic album as a medium, vernacular photography and the donation process of the albums into the AGO's collection follows. A detailed analysis of the narrative, material orientation, annotation, layout and materiality qualities for each album is included. A cataloguing methodology that both accounts for the albums' unique layouts and holds to the established conventions for cataloguing albums at the AGO is discussed and described in detail.

iv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS First I would like to thank my thesis advisors, Sophie Hackett, current Associate Curator, Photography at the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO), for both her personal and professional advice and support in the development of this applied thesis project. I would also like to thank my second reader, Robert Burley, for his guidance and input throughout the thesis process. I am deeply grateful to have had access to my body of work from the photographic collection at the AGO. Additionally I am grateful for the assistance, support and professional advice from Dee Psaila, Conservator at the Archives of Ontario and Katharine Whitman, conservator at the AGO. I would also like to thank both Liana Radvak and Olga Zotova for their knowledge, guidance and willingness to assist during the cataloguing portion of this project. Finally, I wish to personally acknowledge my fellow colleagues in the program for their uplifting guidance and support, along with my family for their unrelenting belief in me and their constant encouragement throughout the course of this project.

Steven Kramer August, 2013

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Illustrations

iii iv v vi viii

Introduction Literature Survey Historical Background of Albums and Scrapbooks Understanding Albums Evolution of the Photographic Album Vernacular Photography and Albums Max Dean and the Albums Robert C. Kraut Albums Contextualizing Kraut Albums Methodology Approach to Cataloguing Peterkin Family Album Catalogue Analysis Cataloguing Methodology Structural Damage and Handling Concerns Conclusion

1 3 9 9 10 13 15 19 23 27 27 28 29 32 34

vi

Appendix A - Figures Appendix B - Maps Appendix C - TMS Records Bibliography

37 49 52 134

vii

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Fig 1 Fig 2 Fig 3

Peterkin Family (Theresa Bywater Peterkin) Album, Art Gallery of Ontario, 2009/180.1-.36 Max Dean, As Yet Untitled, 1992-1995. Portrait of Robert C. Kraut ( Album 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN), Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 109237.1a. gelatin silver print. Albums 1, 2 and 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102937.1-98, AGO.102938.1-.90, and AGO. 102939.1-.97 Example of broken binding 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102937.1-98 Page 1 of Album 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102937.1 Album 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102937.1-.98 [Page 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.3 [Al Diapolo climbing a tree] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.59b, gelatin silver print. [Robert C. Kraut, Al Diapolo, and 6 unidentified males at table with birthday cake] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.59f, gelatin silver print. [Making Eggnog] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.52e, gelatin silver print.

Fig 4

Fig 5

Fig 6

Fig 7

Fig 8

Fig 9a Fig 9b

Fig 9c

viii

Fig 10

Cover of Album II of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 109238.1-90 [Panoramic View of Mount Fuji], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.17e, chromogenic print. [Cherry Tree in blossom with Mt. Fujiyama in the background], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.6d, gelatin silver print. [Kegon Waterfall from viewing platform], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102939.57c, gelatin silver print, and [Print of Kegon Waterfall] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102939.57d, postcard. Album 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102939.1-.97 Page 44 and 46 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN. Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO 102939.44 and AGO. 102939.45
[Page 21 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF

Fig 11 Fig 12 Fig 13

Fig 14

Fig 15

Fig16

SO. PACIFIC SLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102939.21, banknotes.

Fig17

Portrait of Robert C. Kraut ( Album 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN), Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.109237.1a, gelatin silver print. Detail 5th Air Force patch. Snake-Tree Ave, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33a, gelatin silver print and Kiddie Tram Special. Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33b, gelatin silver print. Recto Snake-Tree Ave, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33a. gelatin silver print and Kiddie Tram Special. Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33b, gelatin silver print. Verso Page 3 of the Peterkin Family (Theresa Bywater Peterkin) Album, contains 4 photographs. Art Gallery of Ontario. 2009/180.3

Fig 18

Fig 19

Fig 20

ix

Fig 21

[Page 95 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.95 [Robert C. Kraut standing next to Showa Army Air Base Sign] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.95a

Fig 22

x

INTRODUCTION
There are at least two narratives to nearly every photographic album. First, there is the narrative the compiler consciously and deliberately created, and secondly there are additional narratives that manifest themselves and can be unearthed through an examination of the juxtaposition of the album's images, the varying material used throughout, as well as through external factors such as the identity of the album's compiler, the point in history when the album was created and where it was created. The purpose of this applied thesis project is to catalogue three photographic albums of post World War Two Japan complied by a US Army Air Force personnel, Robert C. Kraut, which are currently at the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO), to reveal some of these narratives through the examination of the present and available information within the albums. All of this will be accomplished through the application of various methods of handling, and cataloguing and will incorporate insight provided by numerous literary sources that have dealt with the concept of the photographic album as well as additional research regarding specificities of the album's content. It wasn't until the 1860s that commercially produced albums, specifically created to serve as photographic albums, were being mass produced. However, previous to the photographic album, scrapbooking, had been practiced for decades, thus providing a template for the attitudes and creative expression that became the trend for compiling the photographic album. While the primary focus of this thesis is the cataloguing of the albums, secondary contextualizing research will also be carried out in order to into provide a framework for better understanding this body of work. Additional research into the subjects photographed and the photographer will also help to formulate a context for these albums.

1

This thesis paper will also provide a step-by-step narrative of the challenges faced and decisions made regarding cataloguing methods, handling and preservation practices consistent with standards at the Art Gallery of Ontario. In addition to this narrative, catalogue entries will be provided within the appendix portion of these thesis. A visual geographical aid will also accompany the appendix material which will indicate the locations documented and photographed throughout the course of the three albums. During all of these practices and applied efforts, the goal of this thesis is to provide this body of work and the AGO with a comprehensive record of these objects, as well as additional information about the subjects of the photographs and their compiler, Robert C. Kraut. Such analysis will also provide the AGO staff and future researchers with additional context for these albums that will aid in their access, preservation and possible display.

2

LITERATURE SURVEY
To insure that this applied thesis project was done correctly and the decisions involving handling and cataloguing of the albums were carefully considered, I identified multiple areas of necessary research, all relating to elements of preservation and interpretation of the photographic album. By examining multiple sources, approaches, methodologies and theories a much broader understanding of how the object's uniqueness plays a role in the decision making of cataloguing and handling albums could be exposed, thus presenting options for handling this body of work. In addition to looking at handling and cataloguing methods, I also examined the social history of the photographic album. For this reason the following literature review will be split into two main areas of focus; literature based on the examination of the social aspects of the album, and literature that delves into preservation aspects of handling albums.
Preservation and Care of Albums and Scrapbooks

In his 2008 book The Printed Picture Richard Benson, examines that evolution of the techniques of print making from the Renaissance to the present day. The publication also serves as an aid for identifying photographic process and educating his readers about their differences. Benson's book not only explores the photographic medium but also photomechanical and nonphotographic print processes. One of the themes Benson investigates throughout his book is the phenomenon of publishing and reproducing images on a large scale in the form of books, albums and magazines.. While examining the role of multiple types of image making and their effects and uses throughout history and society, Benson attributes the album's creation to a demand for storage of people's growing image collection. In his 2009 book Photographs of the Past Process and Preservation, Bertrand Lavédrine's presents a wide range of issues on how to preserve pre-digital photographs and

3

photographic objects. Only a page, however, of Lavédrine's text delves into preservation concerns regarding the photographic album. Lavédrine expresses the importance of maintaining albums in their original state, in order that the narrative and individuality of the object is not lost. Increased chance of physical damage is cited as the main concerns and rationale for not removing photographic material from albums. However, Lavédrine does acknowledge that if kept in their original state photographic material does run the risk of possible degradation if images remain in albums constructed of low grade materials. Whereas Lavédrine only spent a page on photographic album preservation, Shannon Zachary's devotes her entire publication: Conservation of Scrapbooks and Albums: Postprints of the Book and Paper Group/Photographic Materials Group Joint Session at the 27th Annual Meeting of the American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, June 11, 1999, St. Louis, Missouri to examining various concerns and issues surrounding the photographic album. Unlike Lavédrine's publication, Zachary's is a compilation from different authors and contributors each focusing on specialized concerns, case studies, reports and other topics regarding the varying aspects of photographic albums. Chapters 2 and 3 of the publication, written by Richard Horton, examines what he calls, historical photographic albums, as well as providing the reader with a glossary of terms related to photographic albums. The remainder of the publication focuses primarily on historical contextualizing of multiple albums as well as the process through which the albums were conserved, treated and restored based on their unique structural damage and level of degradation. Such a source provides not only multiple case studies of album preservation and restoration, but also provides a vocabulary for albums and scrapbooks. In her 2012 thesis: "Housing the Family: Re-Housing the Peterkin Family (Theresa Bywater Peterkin) Carte-de-visite and Cabinet Portrait Album at the Art Gallery of Ontario"

4

author Melodie Hueber explores the multi-faceted nature of the photographic album. Not only does Hueber develop a historical contextualization of the medium found in the album she catalogued, in this case the cartes-de-visite, but she also describes the methods she chose as her preferred handling and cataloguing methods. Through her research into the various care and handling methods, Hueber is able to amalgamate various approaches to create a method of rehousing that works specifically for her body of work. This object-based specialization is carried over to her method of cataloguing as well. Hueber created a template for recording and imputing catalog data that describes the album's structure and arrangement but stays within the cataloguing format of the Art Gallery of Ontario's cataloguing database. Such a source provided a starting point for this thesis, as both the body of work covered by Hueber and the subjects of her thesis are part of the AGO's collection.

Social Aspects of Albums and Scrapbooks. Martha Langford's 2008 book Suspended Conversations: The Afterlife of Memory in Photographic Albums examines photographic albums not just from an historical or structural perspective, but from a cultural and social vantage point. Langford delves into concepts of visual narrative and communication and doesn't really address preservation treatments but she does discuss the importance in keeping albums intact in their original form so as not to disturb their narrative. Langford also discusses the need for an accompanying oral presentation as a way to eliminate, the mystery that so often surrounds albums after their creators are no longer around to tell their story. However, Langford also shows us how she was able to piece together clues from the album's materials, construction and presentation which provide valuable information about the history and narrative of the album.

5

Barbara Levine and Stephanie Snyder's 2006 Snapshot Chronicles: Inventing the American Photo Album examines the creative aspect of the photographic album. The bulk of the book is dedicated to visuals of various albums, displaying numerous layouts, album structures, subject matter and photographic process. Like Langford, attention to preservation is not the focus of the publication but rather the social aspect of album compilation and narration. Snyder also provides a historical narrative about the events that lead up the commercialization of the photographic album and how the rise of vernacular photography aided in the albums growth as a means of displaying and housing photographs. The book not only highlights the photographic aspect of the album but also notes the importance of annotation when interpreting an album. Verna Posever Curtis's book: Photographic Memory: The Album in the Age of Photography is a collaborative publication that draws on the expertise of multiple authors. The book provides an historical examination of not only the rise of the photographic album, but the origins of the album itself, dating back to the Renaissance. The remainder of the book examines and contextualizes several individual albums from the Library of Congress collection, with emphasis being on how the photographs in each album take on the central role. The publication is heavily illustrated, presenting both the album covers and several pages from each. The aim of this publication is to present the reader with the social and historical narratives of each album. However, the book does provide approaches to proper preservation and housing as well as explanations behind why structural degradation in albums can and will occur. In the final chapter of the book, "Preserving Photographic Albums" contributors Alan Haley and Adrienne Lundgren provide an historical timeline of the photographic album. Both identify causes and challenges when faced with physical and chemical changes. The overall stability of the album is also

6

discussed, as Haley and Lundgren state that the stability of any album is dependent on the materials used to consruct the album.1 While the book The Scapbook in American Life by Susan Tucker, Katherine Ott and Patricia P. Buckler, may not focus primarily on the photographic album, contributor Sarah McNair Vosmeier 's chapter "Picturing Land and Friendship: Photograph Albums and Networks of Affection in the 1860" does. Specifically, Vosmeier's chapter examines how romantic relationships were both represented in photographic form, during the mid 19th century, as well as how they were shared and displayed. Through the examination of multiple albums, Vosmeier is able to unearth much about youth culture and the presence of both hetero and homosexual displays of affection. Vosmeier explains that like other personal objects (i.e. a locket of hair) received from one's partner, lover, family member or close friend, photographs soon came to be seen as a memento of the individual. Thus the need for a means to store and display ones collection of photographs was created: the album. Much like Verna Posever Curtis's book, graphic designer Jessica Helfand's Scrapbooks: An American History examines the medium by presenting readers multiple scrapbooks that span time and are diverse in subject matter. All the albums, however, focus on various elements of US history from 1913 to 1989. Examination into composition, annotations, and material used reflect the culture of the American public and the methods of communication in their time. Through this examination, Helferd claims that the scrapbook moved away from the decorative craft it started out as, to that of a celebration of one's individualism. Due to Helfand's background as a graphic designer, the elements of composition and communication are the primary focus of this publication.

1

Alan Haley and Adrienne Lundgren, "Preserving Photographic Albums" Photographic Memory: The Album in the Age of Photography. By Verna Posever Curtis. New York, Aperture Foundation, 2011. 279

7

With the aid of these literary resources, I was able to develop my own approach in regards to the decision making process when I was determining the best methods of contextualizing, handling, and cataloguing the three albums involved in this thesis. The decisions chosen were selected not only for the albums' sake but also as a means to provide future researchers and AGO staff with as much contextual data about the albums as well as maintain the original essence of the albums and their narrative.

8

A HISTORIC BACKGROUND OF ALBUMS AND SCRAPBOOKS Understanding Albums In order to interpret and contextualize the albums, an examination into the history and social culture surrounding the concept of the photographic album is needed. The power and value of an album is derived not only from the subjects or events documented, but also in the authorship and artistic expression created through the juxtaposition of varying mediums and forms to formulate a narrative.2 Each album provides a unique study of visual communication expressing a story of both the compiler and the time they lived in. Much can be gleaned from the content of the photographs in the albums chosen for this thesis, however my focus will be limited to the album's significance in the context of a museum collection. Instead of looking at the history of the album's subjects, this thesis will examine the history of these objects and how they reveal their compiler, Robert C. Kraut, an enlisted man in US Army Air Force. More will be discussed regarding Kraut's identity during the contextualization portion of this thesis. What does the construction and the material layout of these albums say about Kraut himself, and what do they say about the time they were made in? To begin to better understand the aim of Kraut's album's narrative, a brief examination into the histories of the photographic album is, while expansive, necessary to at least provide a general background. Just as understanding the uses and purposes of a single photograph requires a broader understanding of the medium's history, so too does the medium of the photographic album. 3

2

Stephanie Snyder "Preface" in Snapshot Chronicles: Inventing the American Photo Album, Barbra Levine. (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, Portland: Douglas F. Cooley Memorial Art Gallery, Reed College, 2006), 13 3 Martha Langford Suspended Conversations: The Afterlife in the Age of Photography (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001) , 199.

9

Evolution of the Photographic Album The earliest examples of albums were not photographic or even pictorial, instead they were script based. The earliest pictorial use found in albums can be traced back to Europe during the Renaissance4. Centuries later, during the early years of Daguerreian photography, the concept of the photographic albums was still not widely practiced. This is due to the precious and delicate nature of photographic objects at the time. However, as years passed, technology advanced and the advent of paper based photography created an explosion of photographs that could suddenly be easily and cheaply produced, disseminated and acquired. Because of photography's newfound collectability, owners needed means to both house and display their rapidly growing image collection. During this time, due to the relative ease with which paper base photographs such as cartes-de-visite could be produced and disseminated photography became a medium collected by the masses.5 Because of their collectability and the need for a method of storing growing photograph collections, the album form became the most sought after approach. 6 Essentially, the creation of the early family albums arose out of the demand for a photographic storage system7 The earliest commercially manufactured photographic albums were being produced by the 1850's. The construction of these albums and the methods used to house photographs was greatly influenced by the standardized physical characteristics of the widely popular cartes-de-

4

Verna Posever Curtis "Page by Page: The Album as Object" in Photographic Memory: The Album in The Age of Photography, Verna Posever Curtis. (New York: Aperture, 2011), 7 5 Sarah, McNair Vosmeier, "Picturing Love and Friendship: Photograph Albums and Networks of Affection in the 1860s, " in The Scrapbook in American Life, ed Susan Tucker, Katherine Ott, and Patricia P. Buckler. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2006), 207-208 6 Verna Posever Curtis "Page by Page: The Album as Object" in Photographic Memory: The Album in The Age of Photography, Verna Posever Curtis. (New York: Aperture, 2011), 8 7 Richard Benson The Printed Picture (New York : Museum of Modern Art, 2008), 116.

10

visite and cabinet cards. 8 The introduction of the albumen process in 1850, introduced a new wave of albums types because these images had to be mounted on card stock. Albumen prints required pages that were thick enough and strong enough to support them and keep them flat as seen in the Peterkin album, another photographic album of albumen prints currently being housed at the AGO [Fig 1]. The next major change in the evolution of the photographic album came with the introduction of the gelatin silver print process in late 19th century, Around the same time thanks to the introduction of George Eastman's Kodak camera in 1888, the act of taking a photograph became possible for amateurs. Albums also evolved with the changes in the photographic medium, and with that evolution came new and more varied album types9. This lead to albums becaming less anchored to one particular format or type of photography, such as the cartes-devisite, cabinet cards or even tintypes, allowing creators new opportunities to customize in their albums. This aspect of customization allowed not only for the album's compilers to position different types and sizes of images in various arrangements, but also allowed for other, nonphotographic material to find its way into albums, As a result, the popular art of scrapbooking and the photographic album began to merge.10 The origins of scrapbook can be traced back as early as 1775, when Englishman James Gargner published a biographical history of England. The book came with blank pages that both

8

Verna Posever Curtis "Page by Page: The Album as Object" in Photographic Memory: The Album in The Age of Photography, Verna Posever Curtis. (New York: Aperture, 2011), 8 9 Richard Horton , "Historical Photo Albums and Their Structures" in Conservation of Scrapbooks and Albums: Postprints of the Book and Paper Group / Photographic Materials (Washington D.C.: Book and Paper Group [and] Photographic Materials Group, American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, 2000), 13 - 17. 10 Sarah, McNair Vosmeier, "Picturing Love and Friendship: Photograph Albums and Networks of Affection in the 1860s, " in The Scrapbook in American Life, ed Susan Tucker, Katherine Ott, and Patricia P. Buckler. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2006), 208

11

Gargner and others encouraged owners of the books to collect various engravings that could be added in by the books' owners.11 With the already well established practice of scrapbooking, and introduction of non photographic material, the advent of the gelatin silver print process began to see the replacement of the cartes-de-visite, in albums, with that of the gelatin silver print and photomechanical reproductions like postcards.12 Thanks to the creation of mounting corners, no photograph, postcard or other similar material was too big or uniquely proportioned to include in ones narrative. Compilers now had a greater flexibility when it came to album customization thanks to the advances in picture making and an evolving scrapbooking market. Standardization in regards to what material could be housed in an album, was no longer an issue, and this allowed for multiple types of artifacts to be part of an album's narrative. With each new advancement came a new sense of freedom and creativity.

11 12

Jessica Helfand Scrapbooks: An America History, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), xviii Richard Horton , "Historical Photo Albums and Their Structures" in Conservation of Scrapbooks and Albums: Postprints of the Book and Paper Group / Photographic Materials (Washington D.C.: Book and Paper Group [and] Photographic Materials Group, American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, 2000), 17.

12

VERNACULAR PHOTOGRAPHY AND ALBUMS
The presence of vernacular photography within the museum setting has increased over the last 10 to 15 years due to growing attention about the significant role vernacular photography has played in the history of photography. For decades vernacular photography was seen as too commonplace and too diverse to be considered worth studying, much less exhibiting in an institutionalized setting. 13 Yet for years artists and professional photographers alike have drawn inspiration from this genre. Despite snapshots existing for over one hundred years, reluctance to explore, preserve or celebrate the genre has persisted. But with growing interest and investment in collecting vernacular photographs, a new area of the field is now being examined. Social practices relating to how images were taken, how subjects were framed and how individuals presented themselves in photographs are just some of the areas of research and exploration vernacular collections can and have yielded thus far. 14 Due to the growing interest to preserve, collect, study and exhibit this area of photography and social behavior, more and more institutions have been bringing in vernacular photographs into their collection. Yet in the fine art institutional setting, vernacular photographic albums tend to be exhibited as just a part of a larger narrative, rather than focusing on the album itself. Works chosen are also more often than not decided upon based either on aesthetic qualities or because of some unusual characteristic, be it structural or content related. Historical institutions tend to explore the information and image content rather than focusing on the object as a whole. In both instances, what is neglected as vital information worth exploring and showcasing, is the narrative of the album, the primary reason for its existence.
13 14

Christian Skrien, Snapshots: The Eye of the Century, (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2004) 3-4 Sarah Greenough and Diane Waggoner, The Art of the American Snapshot 1888-1978: From the Collection of Robert E. Jackson, (Washington DC: National Gallery of Art, 2007) 13

13

The hurdle that each institution faces in regards to the photographic album is determining how it should be displayed. Because the purpose of most albums is a narrative, how to display the work in a way that doesn't emphasize aesthetic or hallmark some unusual aspect of the albums is crucial. Instead, display methods should manage to exhibit how the albums were used, present their materiality, narrative and subjects depicted in the images. Such a task is difficult but vital, as every annotation, scratch, tear and even missing elements offer contextual information regarding the subjects in the album and the history of the album itself. In doing so, the importance and qualities of a vernacular collection will not be lost, but instead deepen and contribute to an institutions' overall collection. In regards to this thesis, the types of images Kraut presents in his three albums can in most cases be described as "snapshots": casual photographs made typically by an amateur with a small handheld camera.15 But defining a snapshot this way can inadvertently change the perception of the photographer. For one, this definition can project either hastiness in regards to the amount of time to take the picture, or possibly discredit the photographic professionalism of Kraut himself. To avoid the latter, more is needed to be known about Kraut, such as his duties while serving.

15

Webster's New International Dictionary, 3d ed., s.v. "snapshot"

14

MAX DEAN AND THE ALBUMS The Kraut albums were part of a much larger donation by artist Max Dean, an artist who had no connection to Kraut or his family. As a result, what little contextual information about the albums came from interviewing Dean. Max Dean had collected the Kraut albums along with a variety of others created by a wide range of individuals in different times and places. Dean was born in Leeds, England, in 1949, and his family later immigrated to Canada. He received his B.A. in Art History in 1971 from the University of British Columbia. Since then, Dean has developed a vibrant and varied artistic practice and he continues to exhibit widely. 16 Over the course of many years, previous to his donation of albums to the AGO, Dean began to collect numerous vernacular and family photographic albums, as a result of a personal reaction he experienced after the creation of one of his earlier artistic installations. The albums that are the focus of this thesis were purchased at the Sunday Flea Market on West 26th Street in New York City in late 1990's. In regards to the albums which are the focus of this thesis, Dean was drawn to them because they were a set of three almost intact albums created by one individual. While there are a few images missing from the albums, the vast majority of the content remained in good condition. Dean also found the time and place of the album's narrative very unique.17 Unlike many photographic albums of family outings, these albums depicted a very important and very brief time in both Japanese and American history as witnessed and retold by a person who was actually there.

16

"Max Dean," National Gallery of Canada. Accessed June 30th, 2013. http://www.gallery.ca/en/see/collections/artist.php?iartistid=1345 17 Dean, Max. Interview by Steven Kramer. Personal interview. Toronto, July 5th 2013.

15

During Dean's album collection period, from 1992 to 2002, Max Dean amassed over 600 albums. The content, subject matter and date of this collection spanned nearly a 100-year period. While most of the albums in the collection are of North American origins, there are also several examples of foreign albums. The AGO could not take in the entire collection, due to the amount of space that was required, and the museum's mandate stipulates that all items possess justifiable historical relevance to the mission of the museum. However, an alternate solution was devised between Dean and the museum's photography curators Maia Sutnik and Sophie Hackett, whereby the AGO would acquire a selection of albums from Dean's collection and the remaining albums would serve as the basis for an interactive public art project. In the Spring of 2012, Dean and Hackett produced an interactive exchange exhibition of the albums titled Max Dean: Album which was featured at the annual Scotiabank CONTACT Photography Festival in Toronto, Canada, which ran through the month of May that year18. The origin of this project was an extension of Dean's previous interactive structures As Yet Untitled (1992 to 1995) [Fig. 2]. This interactive installation presented the viewer with the task of deciding whether or not an image, presented to them via a robotic arm, would be saved in a pile of other photographs or shredded right then and there while they watched. The machine would then resume destroying images regardless of whether a viewer was present or not. For this reason Dean was forced to search for photographic material to feed the installation. It was out of this need to have 4 x 6 inch photographs, that Dean began to collect photographic albums. After purchasing an album in Seattle, Dean returned to his hotel to begin his task of removing the images needed for his installation. However, as Dean examined the
18

For full account of this project, please see Heather Rigg's 2007 masters thesis "The Public Lives of Private Family Albums: A Case Study in Collection and Exhibition at the Art Gallery of Ontario and Max Dean: Album"

16

photographs and flipped through the pages of the Seattle album, he couldn't bring himself to remove a single image. The power of the images and intimacy of the narratives from people he had never met, rendered him incapable of subjecting them to the destructive nature of his installation.This newfound love for the photographic album resulted in a ten year project that ended with Dean amassing a collection of over 600 family photographic albums. 19 The three albums that are part of this thesis were from the 237 albums the AGO selected to acquire for the museum's collection. The goal of the selection process was to insure that a diverse range of the albums Max Dean had collected was represented as a part of the AGO's collection. While most were of Canadian and American subject matter, the AGO made sure that other locations, peoples, cultures and languages were part of the selected collection. Dates of the albums fall anywhere between the 1900's to the late 20th century. Albums that were selected by the AGO had to clear a 3-part examination before being considered for acquisition. "Personality", nationality and condition were the three major factors that determined whether an album would be accessioned into the collection or not. Albums that required extraordinary conservation treatments were rejected. The album's "Personality" was based on the quality of the album's photographs, caption layout, and the types of places and events depicted in the albums. Of the albums selected, 97 were Canadian, with 57 albums from the United States, 31 from Germany and 15 from the UK. The remaining 37 albums were from various locations around the world such as the Middle East and Scandinavia. 20 The Kraut albums were selected for their uniqueness and the historical content they possessed. Not only were they of an American armed service member's time abroad, but it was the when and where factor that attracted the eyes of the curatorial staff at the AGO. Unlike the

19 20

Dean, Max. Interview by Steven Kramer. Personal interview. Toronto, July 5th 2013. Hackett, Sophie. Interviewed by Steven Kramer. Personal interview. Toronto, June 30th 2013.

17

majority of the albums that Dean had amassed, these particular albums were not of a family or a vacation per se. Instead, these albums provide a glimpse into the world of Japan, just after World War Two during the US occupation, a pivotal moment in history of both countries. While the albums are part of a unified narrative of the journey of US Army Air Force personnel Robert C. Kraut (1925 - 1997) [Fig. 3] and they appear similar from the outside, the method of display and personality of each album varies from one to the next.

18

ROBERT C. KRAUT ALBUMS Each of the albums that are part of this thesis measures 30cm in width, 35cm in height and roughly 4cm in thickness, which varies between each album incrementally due to the different amounts and types of material mounted inside. [Fig. 4] All three albums are of the same maker, The House Co, Inc. Boston. Each album utilizes one of the more typical stubbing methods to hold their pages together, and each page is kept in place using a loose-leaf, side sewn pattern.21 At one point, the albums were held together via a length of cord that was fed through holes that were drilled through each of the page's edges and covers, closest to the spine. The cord would pass through all the album's pages and each covers thus binding the album together. However this particular style of binding meant the spine of the albums was exposed, leaving the pages edges visible. Due to the age of the albums, the binding cord was no longer intact leaving the albums entirely loose leaf. [Fig. 5] This will be discussed further in the care and handling portion of this thesis. Each album's exterior covers are black. On each album's front cover is printed the words "Scrap Book" in gold ink at the top left corner. Album I is the first and only album with an indicated title page [Fig. 6], which includes an a photograph of Robert C. Kraut and bears the title of the body of work PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN. Album I consists of 98 pages with 274 silver gelatin prints, 1 post card and a small paper menu. The first half of album documents US Army Air Force personnel Robert C. Kraut's aerial travels that start in Oahu, Hawaii. From there Kraut's narrative continues south to Palmyra Atoll. Heading west, Kraut lands on both Canton Island and Tarawa. From there Kraut crosses over

21

Richard Horton , "Historical Photo Albums and Their Structures" in Conservation of Scrapbooks and Albums: Postprints of the Book and Paper Group / Photographic Materials (Washington D.C.: Book and Paper Group [and] Photographic Materials Group, American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, 2000), 18.

19

into Oceania, where he surveys Los Negros Island, Papua New Guinea. From Papua New Guinea Kraut lands on the Indonesian island of Biak. From there he heads north to the Philippines, with a survey of Manila, the nations capital located in the Luzon province. After the Philippines, Kraut heads north to Okinawa ( ) and then on to Nagoya () Japan, located in the Chbu region () of the country's largest and main island Honshu (  ). The remaining two albums continue to survey Japan, and documents locations in me (  ), Osaka (  ) and Kyoto (  ). The album, at first, is filled with photographs of various army bases and aerial surveys, each accompanied by hand written annotations from Kraut indicating specifics about each location [Fig 7]. The language in these annotations is straightforward, but seems to lack a sense of personality one might associate with a family album. The majority of the photograph dimensions in the first half of the album are uniform, all roughly staying within a 16cm x 21cm layout [Fig. 8]. The regimented layout and standardization in image size at first gives the impression that the album could have been created and used for more official military purposes. Up until midway through Album I, all the material remained primarily gelatin silver prints, with the exception of a few pieces of adhered paper with inscribed annotations describing the contents of the photographs. This changes when Kraut finally reaches Showa Army Air base in Japan, December of 1945. It is from this point that not only does the incorporation of the nonphotographic material greatly increase, but the subject matter and annotation becomes less drenched in military jargon and begins to highlight more daily matters of both military and native Japanese life. Quickly the album takes on a familiar presentation to that of the more widely perceived concept of a photographic album. Images of smiling faces, social events and posed group shots at

20

various locations of importance begin to fill the pages of Kraut's album [Fig 9a, b, and c]. The remainder of the album chronicles Kraut's trip though rural and mountainous parts of Japan, accompanied at times by one other companion or by a small group of US military personnel. Album II continues Robert C. Kraut's journey through Japan, starting in January of 1946 [Fig. 10]. Album II has only 90 pages which most likely is a result of that album's condition which in fact was the worst of the three when Dean purchased them. Album II was not as well preserved as the other albums and unlike albums I and III, the binding cord was already severed. For this reason the album was no longer being held together. This could very well be the reason Album II possesses fewer pages then the other two, as pages may have fallen out. In addition to this possibility, Dean suspects, Album II could have been more heavily plundered as it may have contained a larger number of sought after photographs or ephemera. The contents of album II includes an increase in the amount of non-photographic material with the introduction of items such as travel pamphlets, maps, and postcards. The vast majority of the second album remains photographic, however the number is far less then either album I or III, with only 64 gelatin silver prints. It is in album II that the introduction of chromogenic photographs appear, 19 in total, all of which depict landscape views [Fig. 11]. The remainder of the album includes 7 pamphlets, 3 menu sheets, 2 maps, 28 postcards, and 1 newspaper clipping. Unlike the first album, the album II starts off with neither a title page nor does it focus on any military activity. Instead, the opening narrative and set of images highlights a hunting expedition and the hotel Kraut where was staying. A great deal of the second album focuses on Mount Fujiyama in the Chbu region of Honshu. Multiple pictures by Kraut's depict the mountain from all angles, including several from above, taken from an aircraft during a flyover. It is here a slower approach to Kraut's picture taking occurs, as attention to composition is more

21

evident. Kraut's images of Mount Fujiyama and its surroundings appear to be more thought out, as attention to foreground elements help highlight the mountain, such as its reflection from a nearby lake. Kraut also frames the mountain through the use of branches from nearby trees. [Fig.12] The rest of the album continues Robert C. Kraut's journey throughout Honshu. After Mount Fuji, Kraut travels east to Kanagawa Prefecture () cities of Kamakura (), Chigasaki( ), and Enoshima (). From there, Kraut head south west to Hakone () and Atami (). Kraut Then travels even further southwest when he visits one of the Three Great Gardens of Japan Kraku-en () in Okayama (). From there other historical sites in Kya-san () Nagoya (), and lastly Toyokawa () Through the album's narrative, in addition to photographs of the location Kraut visits, he also includes postcards and travel pamphlets in the album. Not only does Kraut collect and display these postcards and pamphlets, he also makes an effort of photographing and presenting his own images of the exact same landmarks, in some cases from the same or similar angle depicted in the postcards and pamphlets. [Fig. 13] Album III consists of 162 gelatin prints, 7 pamphlets, 2 menu sheets, 1 letter, 8 banknotes, 1 negative, 25 postcards, 4 newspaper clippings, and 2 packs of mounting corners. [Fig.14] Album III sees the largest collection of non-photographic material. The album also takes on a much more tourist like quality, serving a more memorial or souvenir function, rather than reflecting Kraut's daily life in the military. The album's subject matter remains in the Kant region with a great deal of emphasis on sights in Tokyo (  ) and Nikk (  ), which is located 140k north of Tokyo.

22

The album begins with street scenes of Tokyo, images of the Imperial Palace, as well as a few aerial photographs of bombarded cityscapes. As the album continues, the mood changes to that of a more tourist type expedition. Much like the second half of the first album, smiling faces, group shots and candid images fill the pages of the third album. [Fig.15] Kraut continues his Japanese adventure collecting tourist packets, postcards, and taking images of the places he visited. In addition to the collection of tourist material such as postcards and pamphlets Kraut also incorporates other material such as Japanese banknotes as well [Fig.16]. The third album is however the most incomplete as 31 of the last 32 pages are blank. Neither Kraut's pen nor any of his images grace the final pages of the album. Contextualizing Kraut Albums By the time of Robert C. Kraut's albums, (1945 - 1946) silver gelatin printing was the primary process of developing photographs. Also by this time, many other photomechanical processes existed and were being utilized such as letterpress and offset lithography. The ability to add non-photographic elements, such as postcards and other material produced photomechanically, to one's "photographic" album can be seen as not just simply a decorative musing by the compiler, but as validation or confirmation of ones narrative or presence in the narrative.22 Postcards provide a framed approach to the subject, usually glamorous or idealized.
23

This can however, in some ways rob the depicted location or object from it's natural everyday

scale or genuine appearance. Kraut's images of the landmarks, both man made and natural, establish not only his presence at the location, but also the accuracy of that object or location in contrast to what was presented in the postcard image. The exact reason as to why Kraut chose to
22 23

Jessica Helfand Scrapbooks: An America History, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), xviii Timothy Van Laar, "Views of the Ordinary and Other Scenic Disappointments" chapter. In Postcards: Ephemeral Histories of Modernity, edited by David Prochaska and Jordana Mendelson, (University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2010)

23

take a photograph and display a postcard, remains with him, however their presence in the albums among one another provide that, for the sake of Kraut's narrative, he felt both were necessary. Perhaps the postcards simply serve as additional proof of Kraut's presence at the locations depicted . In regards to Kraut's precise military involvement, all that is known at this time is that he served in the 5th Air Force unit. While this is not directly stated in any written text within the albums themselves, in several of the images of Kraut, a US 5th Air Force patch can be seen on the left shoulder of his uniform [Fig. 17]. Unlike most forces, the 5th Air Force was never based within the United States. The 5th also remained in Japan as part of the occupation effort after the war.24 The lack of an official or constant means of visually representing rank within the USAAF during World War Two also adds to the lack of available indicators that could help identify more about Kraut's role during his service and time in Japan. A constant and regulated means of visually indicating rank wasn't fully established, until the USAAF officially became the United States Air Force in 1948; it's own independent branch of the US Armed Forces in 1948.25
26

Due to the lack of information available regarding Kraut's role during his service, it is at this point too difficult to indicate whether the images in the albums are simply personal photographs of a military photographer, or the personal images of a solider who happened to have a camera with him. Personnel records containing information regarding Robert C. Kraut's

24

Air Force Historical Research Agency "FIFTH AIR FORCE (PACAF)" AFHRA.AF.mil. http://www.afhra.af.mil/factsheets/factsheet.asp?id=12364 (accessed June 30, 2013) 25 Barry L. Spink. A Chronology of The Enlisted Rank Chevron of the United State Air Force, (Air Force Historical Research Agency, 1992) 1 26 Charles A. Ravenstein. Organization and Lineage of the United States Air Force, (Washington DC: US Government Printing Office, 1986) 9-10

24

service as part of the US Army Air Force could not be located by the staff at the National Personnel Records Archives Center in St. Louis, Missouri. It is important to note that parts of the center was damaged by a fire on June 12, 1973. The fire resulted in both loss and damage to many army and air force records. This may explain why Kraut's files were not found. It is known however that Kraut did at least hold some of his images in higher regard, and that they all weren't considered or viewed as mere snapshots. Halfway through the album II, two loose images reveal an attempt made by Kraut to submit his work to the 1948 Popular Photography Contest [Fig. 18]. The photographs (AGO.102938.33a and AGO.102938.33b) are both of scenes from Kraut's time in Japan. On the verso of these prints are adhered forms, where Kraut listed information regarding the location where the images were taken, type of film used, film speed and camera [Fig 19]. It is important to understand that this is where Robert C. Kraut's name first appears. In all the preceding annotations and the whole first album, all images containing Kraut were simply labeled using pro-form language and words, such as "me" or "myself". Without these two images, very little would have been known about the compiler, which in and of itself says something very important about the albums. The fact that Kraut didn't list his name in either his annotations or the title of the albums, says that these albums were more than likely meant to be viewed by those who knew him, and therefore did not need an official introduction. This could also mean these albums were more than likely not used for any military purpose. Despite the regimented layout and military jargon at the beginning of the first album, it would seem highly unlikely that a service member would provide a set of photographic albums and not indicate his name, rank or even division within the

25

armed forces. For this reason, it seems more likely that these albums were compiled for personal and or family use. Not only is it believed that these albums served as a means for remembering one's time in a foreign place, but also to serve as a piece of that place. For a solider, the images they take can serve as souvenirs of their time at a certain location and the memories that destination holds. 27 Much like the early photographic family albums, these albums by Kraut resulted from being there and through a necessity to store a growing collection of objects that represented his fond memories. However, unlike a photograph, which is simply the visual validation of ones presence at a certain location, Kraut also collected objects (i.e. ticket stubs, menus, pamphlets, etc.) from the places he visited which are also included the album. While a photograph may be the most visually accurate depiction of a location, it may not contain the same level of authenticity or tactile tangibility of being from a foreign destination that an object from that physical location has. For this reason, the addition of non-photographic material could have been collected by Kraut for design reasons, in order to incorporate colour in the narrative, but also add an additional sense of tangibility, or at least more objects from which to conjure up and/or associate memories.

27

Janina Struk. Private Pictures: Soldiers' Inside View of War (London: I.B. Tauris, 2011)

26

METHODOLOGY
Approach to Cataloguing One of the main reasons this project was taken on was out of the necessity to have these albums cataloged and properly entered into the AGO's database, which uses The Museum System (TMS) computer software. Cataloguing not only helps place the object in the museum but also helps highlights the many different aspects, subjects, and characteristics the object has to offer to both museum staff and researchers. Cataloguing should be more than simple data entry and should contain an element of research and critical thought in regards to what is both present in the album, as well as what is not. Through the power of electronic cataloguing systems such as TMS, providing the object's titles, mediums, subject matter, creators, and any other descriptive detail aid to the items overall discoverability in the collection.. Cataloguing methods regarding albums must implement a degree of attention to the object's narrative as a whole, and not merely rely on the annotated description provided by the compiler. What isn't stated or said by the compiler of an album is just as important as what is present in the albums.28 Because of the necessity for continuity, standards and templates are used to insure that similar works or media are cataloged in the same manner. These standards and templates must be followed rigorously in order to make the retrieval and the return of the objects, easier29 For this reason, before the cataloguing efforts of this thesis began, an examination of how previous albums had been cataloged at the Art Gallery of Ontario was implemented. For this, a comparison of the work done by former Ryerson University graduate Melodie Hueber, and the Art Gallery of Ontario's Collection Manager, Liana Radvak was examined.

28

Martha Langford Suspended Conversations: The Afterlife in the Age of Photography (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001) , 199. 29 George Eaton and Conservation of Photographs (Rochester, NY: Eastman Kodak Co., 1985), 17.

27

Peterkin Family Album Catalogue Analysis

While the methods for cataloguing the Peterkin Family Album by Melodie Hueber, was ideal for this particular album, they did not translate well into an approach I could use for with Kraut Albums. For this reason, an adaptation of Hueber and Radvak's method was implemented. An adaptation that was different enough to suit the need of the Kraut albums, but also one that kept the records within a reasonable degree of continuity with the AGO's template for cataloguing albums, be they photographic or non-photographic. The main reasons for a varied and adapted approach to cataloguing the Kraut albums, was due to their condition, the presentation of the albums content, and their materiality. When I compared the two albums it was evident the Peterkin album was much older than the Kraut albums, dating back to the late 19th century. This meant the types of photographs in the album as well as the album format itself were very different from another. While the main photographic material in the Kraut albums is gelatin silver prints, the Peterkin album is created with mounted albumen prints. Therefore the method of presenting them in an album meant that the pages had extra mass making the Peterkin album much thicker than the Kraut's albums. The mounted images in the Peterkin album are held in place, not by adhesion or mounting corners but instead via mounting slots that enabled the complier to slide the mounted photograph into an open slip in the page itself. Once slid in, a precut frame on the page would hold the image in place concealing the mount the image was printed on and revealing the image and the subject it was depicting. Such albums were widely utilized during the mid to late 19th century, due to the popularity and dissemination of the carte-de-visite.30 Due to the almost complete standardization of the mounted

30

Shannon Zachary, editor., Conservation of scrapbooks and albums : postprints of the Book and Paper Group/Photographic Materials (Washington D.C.: Book and Paper Group [and] Photographic Materials Group, American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, 2000), 15.

28

photograph medium, albums like this have designated slots for their compiler's images, each measured to fit the average cabinet card or carte-de-visite. Unlike the Kraut album, whose pages were produced blank allowing Kraut to position the images anywhere on the page, the Peterkin album could not offer such customization. For this reason the manner in which each of these two albums was cataloged, differed to a degree. Because the Peterkin album only possessed a maximum of 4 photographs per page, and that each image was either located in the top left, top right, bottom left or bottom right, a straightforward approach to identifying each image's location on the page was represented in the albums TMS records [Fig. 20]. In order to help differentiate each photograph in the museum's database an alphabetic/numeric system was created. Images mounted on the top left of the page were indicated with the addition of the letter "a" at the end of their accession number. Images located at the top right were indicated with the addition of the letter "b", bottom left was indicated by the letter "c" and images that were mounted at the bottom right were indicated by the letter "d". 31

Cataloguing Methodology While the format of the Kraut photographs and their layout on each page, along with other material, was not the same as the Peterkin album, the same method for identifying each item was used. Similarly to the Peterkin album, objects in the Kraut albums, be they photographic or not, are identified by the addition of an alphabetic integer to the object record's number. The object number reflects the page number in the album. For example, the record for the Album I is (AGO.102937). Page 1 of album 1 is title (AGO.102937.1) The addition of the

31

Melodie Hueber. Housing the Family: Re-Houseing the Peterkin Family (Thesesa Bywater Peterkin) Carte-DeVisite and Cabinet Portrait Album at the Art Gallery of Ontario (Toronto, Ryerson University, 2007), 30.

29

period and number 1 indicates that the record refers to page 1. The record for the first photograph found on the first page of the first album is then titled as (AGO.102937.1a). Every adhered or present image is identified alphabetically beginning from top left with `a' and proceeding across the page, from left to right and top to bottom 32 Through the cataloguing process of the album, each record, be it page or image, was given Creator, Title, Date, Marks, Inscription, Medium and a Dimension fields to be filled out.

Creators: Unless indicated through written annotation or unless identified on the object itself, most of the Creator fields were credited to Robert C. Kraut. However, in the case of postcards or pamphlets, provided printer or publishing companies were listed as the objects creator.

Date: Unless specified through annotation, or other means of identification, objects were marked as being created between the years of 1945 to 1946, the years of the photographic survey indicated by Robert C. Kraut on the title page of Album I.

Marks: Any non-textual markings, such as pen strokes or stamps, were indicated as Marks. Their general shape and location were then noted and entered in the field.

Inscriptions: Any handwritten or typed text was transcribed and entered into the field, along with its location on the page or object.

32

Radvak, Liana. "TMS Cataloguing Albums" (presentation, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, On, Canada. February 22, 2013).

30

Medium: Identified the type of material or process used to create the object. In the case of page level records, this field indicates the types of material or process that are represented on each page, not the material or process of the page itself. If items appear to have been removed from the page prior to albums donation or if the page is blank it is noted in this field in the page level record. Dimension: Height and width of each album, page, and object were first measured in centimeters then converted into inches. In some instances, some images were found folded in half (panoramas), as they exceeded the album's width. In these cases their measurements reflect the object at its full length.

31

STRUCTURAL DAMAGE AND HANDLING CONCERNS Before any cataloguing could begin, the condition of the albums demanded attention and action to be taken in order to eliminate continued structural degradation. All three of the album's cords meant to bound the pages and covers together had come apart and had begun to unravel. Because of this, it was unsafe to open and close the albums without incurring physical damage to the pages, which were and still are brittle. With assistance and advice from AGO conservator Katharine Whitman, it was concluded that in order to any future damage, and to make viewing the objects easier, the cords had to be removed. Loose material, such as paper-based photographs or other non-photographic material was cataloged and kept in its original location within the album so as not to alter the album's overall narrative. The loose material was then encapsulated with archival tissue to reduce physical damage that might occur as a result of it rubbing against other material in the album [Fig. 21] [Fig. 22]. In order to maintain the album's original narrative, and due to the nature of the materiality of the Kraut album's photographs, the images and all other material in the albums remain in their original place, rather than being removed and housed separately. This is because un-mounted photographs, the majority of the photographic material in the Kraut albums, are at greater risk of physical damage, than mounted photographs, similar to the cartes-de-visite in the Peterkin album that were removed and rehoused. 33 34 Because these loose Kraut images are not as well protected by the support of a mount board/album page, there is a greater chance of these photographs being torn or creased if removed.

33

Bertrand Lavédrine, Photographs of the Past: Process and Preservation (Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2009), 124 & 291. 34 Melodie Hueber. Housing the Family: Re-Housing the Peterkin Family (Thesesa Bywater Peterkin) Carte-DeVisite and Cabinet Portrait Album at the Art Gallery of Ontario (Toronto, Ryerson University, 2007), 30.

32

Albums themselves were not specifically created with preservation in mind; therefore any action related to removing objects or even handling old albums must be considered carefully. 35 Not only would one run the risk of increasing the physical damage if the images were to be removed, but the uniqueness of the object as a whole could be lost. For this reason, both the album itself and the items it houses should together be considered as unique artifact, rather than separate entities. 36 Therefore it was decided upon that the Kraut albums and the material inside would remain as they were when they were donated, with the obvious exception of the binding cord, which, as mentioned, had to be removed, lest the albums incur any more damage.

35

Alan Haley and Adrienne Lundgren, "Preserving Photographic Albums" Photographic Memory: The Album in the Age of Photography. By Verna Posever Curtis. New York, Aperture Foundation, 2011. 277-279 36 Robert A. Weinstein and Larry Booth, Collection, Use and Care of Historical Photographs (Nashville : American Association for State and Local History, 1977), 77 - 80.

33

CONCLUSION The two-pronged objective of this thesis was to catalog three photographic albums as well as piece together a context through the examination their layout, structure, and the types of objects used throughout. As this thesis has shown, the examination of the material layout in albums offers not only information in regards to the narrative, but also the method by which one is to catalog and record the album's information. Cataloguing an album should appreciate both the narrative of an album and it's materiality. Uniqueness is an inherent quality of the album, and therefore each should be examined and cataloged according to their individual character. Though much can be explained about the evolution of the album style from one generation to the next, and while the contents of images may offer rich historical events to further explore, photographic albums and scrapbooks alone do not possess all the necessary contextual clues needed to express the fullness of their narrative. Their mysteries remain and to some degree this is what makes photographic albums so interesting as artifacts.. Due to Kraut's passing in 1997, we will never have the benefit of looking at the albums with him. His accompanying narration to his body of work will never be heard, nor will the answers to questions surrounding the albums' layout or why he wanted to create the albums in the first place, ever be revealed. For instance, despite the title on the first page of the first album - a pictorial review Kraut chose a scrapbook, rather than something designated as a photographic album. This may say something about these albums and how Kraut himself viewed the body of work. It is impossible to know whether the decision to house this narrative in a scrapbook rather than a photographic album, was intentional or not.

34

Though the histories of the various media found in albums, their formats and their basic function as a social practice can be explained to a degree and the contents of their pages can be explored. The entirety of the intellectual narrative that led the compiler to include, exclude and arrange the works the way they did may however never truly be understood. However, this shouldn't be viewed as a negative characteristic or a failure of information gathering, but rather simply as an inherent quality of each and every album. What can be determined by examining and contextualizing albums, is the uniqueness of the object and its creator. Rather then blanket all albums and scrapbooks with the generalization that they are simply vernacular musings of the common person, they should be cherished as individual collections of both expression and documentation. Each not only provides it's own style but also an individual's view of the world around them. They are a study in human creativity, communication, perception and response to the world and those around them. However, these distinctive qualities present numerous challenges for the staff of collecting institutions. Through the course of this thesis, previously established and initiated practices of cataloguing other like objects at the Art Gallery of Ontario was examined and then altered to meet both the needs for the museum database in order to maintain continuity as well as provide the most accurate and complete information regarding the object itself. In the case of the Kraut albums, they went from being simply labeled as albums compiled by an unknown American, to having their own narrative documented and their compiler indicated. With the ability to electronically catalogue the albums at the record, page and item levels in TMS, the albums will now be more effective as searchable objects within the collection and researchers along with staff will have easier access to information about the album and the materials in them. This access to the electronic records also gives the albums a longer life

35

expectancy. No longer will archivists or researchers have to open and turn the pages of each album to discover what is in them. If there is any aspect of a particular area of inquiry they desire to observe regarding any of the album's, the exact page and album can be identified via the museum's TMS catalog. This will save both the researchers time and will protect the albums from unnecessary overuse and will preserve Robert Kraut's humble and fascinating legacy.

36

APPENDIX: A FIGURES

Fig 1. Peterkin Family (Theresa Bywater Peterkin) Album, Art Gallery of Ontario, 2009/180.1-.36

Fig 2. Max Dean, As Yet Untitled, 1992-1995.

37

Fig 3. Portrait of Robert C. Kraut ( Album 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN), Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 109237.1a. gelatin silver print.

Fig 4. Albums I, II, and III of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102937.1-98, AGO.102938.1-.90, and AGO. 102939.1-.97

38

Fig 5. Example of removed binding of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102938.1-90

Fig 6. Page 1 of Album I of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102937.1

39

Fig 7. Album I of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102937.1-.98

Fig 8. [Page 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.3

40

Fig 9a. [Al Diapolo climbing a tree] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.59b. gelatin silver print.

Fig 9b. [Robert C. Kraut, Al Diapolo, and 6 unidentified males at table with birthday cake] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.59f. gelatin silver print.

41

Fig 9c. [Making Eggnog] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.52e. gelatin silver print.

Fig 10. Cover of Album II of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 109238.1-90

42

Fig 11. [Panoramic View of Mount Fuji], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.17e. chromogenic print.

Fig 12. [View of Mt. Fujiyama from Lake Yamanaka with Cherry Blossoms], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.10a. gelatin silver print.

43

Fig 13. [Kegon Waterfall from viewing platform], Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102939.57c. gelatin silver print. and [Print of Kegon Waterfall] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102939.57d. postcard.

Fig 14. Album 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 102939.1-.97

44

Fig 15. Page 44 and 46 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN. Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO 102939.44 and AGO. 102939.45

Fig 16. [Page 21 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102939.21. banknotes.

45

Fig 17. Portrait of Robert C. Kraut ( Album 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN), Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO. 109237.1a. gelatin silver print. Detail 5th Air Force patch.

Fig 18. Snake-Tree Ave, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33a. gelatin silver print and Kiddie Tram Special. Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33b. gelatin silver print. Recto

46

Fig 19. Snake-Tree Ave, Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33a. gelatin silver print and Kiddie Tram Special. Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102938.33b. gelatin silver print. Verso

Fig 20. Page 3 of the Peterkin Family (Theresa Bywater Peterkin) Album, contains 4 photographs. Art Gallery of Ontario. 2009/180.3

47

Fig 21. [Page 95 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.95

Fig 22. [Robert C. Kraut standing next to Showa Army Air Base Sign] Art Gallery of Ontario, AGO.102937.95a

48

APPENDIX: B MAPS Album 1: AGO.102937.1 - AGO.10297.97

49

Album 2 AGO.102938.1 - AGO.102938.91

12.) Mount Fuji 13.) Kamakura 14.) Chigasaki 15.) Enoshima 16.) Hakone

17.) Atami 18.) Okayama 19.) Kya-san 20.) Nagoya 21.) Toyokawa

50

Album 3 AGO. 102939.1 - AGO.102939.97

22.) Tokyo and the greater Tokyo area (Yokohama and Tachinkawa) 23.) Nikk (various Historical sites, Yunoko Lake, Tsh-g, and Nikk National Park)

51

APPENDIX: C TMS Records
Object Number Artist Name
AGO.102937.1-.97 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Object Name
Album

Title
Pictorial Review From April 1945 - August 1946 of SO. Pacific Islands, Philippines, Okinawa & Japan [Page 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Portrait of Robert C. Kraut]

Dated Medium
April 1945 August 1946 Album: 269 B&W gelatin silver prints, 1 Postcard, and 1 Print 1 gelatin silver print, and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Dimensions
Album: 35.5 × 30.9 × 4 cm (14 × 12 3/16 × 1 9/16 in.)

Description
Album: 269 B&W gelatin silver prints, 1 Postcards, and 1 menu sheet

AGO.102937.1

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

April 1945 August 1946

page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.1a

AGO.102937.2

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Page

[Page 2 PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Plane Engines]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 7.5 × 9 cm (2 15/16 × 3 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.2a

AGO.102937.3

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Page

[Page 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Aerial Photograph of Palmyra]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, and 1 adhered slip of paper, 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 13 × 22 cm (5 1/8 × 8 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.3a

AGO.102937.3b

AGO.102937.4

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Aerial Photograph of Canton Island]

Page

[Page 4 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver print, and 1 adhered slip of paper, 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 13 × 22 cm (5 1/8 × 8 11/16 in.) 22 × 13 cm (8 11/16 × 5 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver print, 2 adhered slip of paper, 8 mounting corners

52

AGO.102937.4a

AGO.102937.5

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Aerial Photograph of Canton Island Landing Strip] [Page 5 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Operation Shack on Canton Island]

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 24.5 × 16.5 cm (9 5/8 × 6 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.5a

AGO.102937.5b

AGO.102937.6

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Flying out of Canton Island]

Page

[Page 6 PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Landing in Tarawa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 13 × 22 cm (5 1/8 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 13 × 22 cm (5 1/8 × 8 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.6a

AGO.102937.6b

AGO.102937.7

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Tarawa Lagoon]

Page

[Page 7 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Coral Parking Space: Tarawa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 2 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 34.5 × 23 cm (13 9/16 × 9 1/16 in.) image: 15.5 × 23 cm (6 1/8 × 9 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.7a

AGO.102937.7b

AGO.102937.8

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Rusted Japanese Tanks: Tarawa]

Page

[Page 8 PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Early Moring Shot of Airstrip: Tarawa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 3 adhered slips of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 17.3 × 24 cm (6 13/16 × 9 7/16 in.) image: 12 × 16.3 cm (4 3/4 × 6 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.8a

Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

April 1945 -

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 12 × 16 cm (4 3/4 × 6

53

Assembled by AGO.102937.8b Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Japanese Wreckage: Tarawa]

August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print

5/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.9

Page

[Page 9 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Suicide Bakabomb]

AGO.102937.9a

AGO.102937.9b

AGO.102937.10

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Barracks on Tarawa]

Page

[Page 10 PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Blockhouse: Tarawa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 17 × 25 cm (6 11/16 × 9 13/16 in.) image: 15.5 × 23.7 cm (6 1/8 × 9 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.10a

AGO.102937.10b

AGO.102937.11

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Japanese Blockhouse Plaque: Tarawa]

Page

[Page 11 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Marine Corp Graveyard: Tarawa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 16.9 × 23.7 cm (6 5/8 × 9 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.11a

AGO.102937.11b

AGO.102937.12

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Two man Japanese Tank: Tarawa]

Page

[Page 12 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 2 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 16.9 × 23.5 cm (6 5/8 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 17.2 × 20 cm (6 3/4 × 7 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints, 2 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners

54

AGO.102937.12a

AGO.102937.12b

AGO.102937.13

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Island of Los Negros]

Photograph

[Camp area on Island of Los Negros]

Page

[Page 13 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Coastline of Los Negros Island]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 16.8 × 23.7 cm (6 5/8 × 9 5/16 in.) image: 16.8 × 23.7 cm (6 5/8 × 9 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.13a

AGO.102937.13b

AGO.102937.14

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Landing in Biak]

Page

[Page 14 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Native Huts]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.14a

AGO.102937.14b

AGO.102937.15

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Japanese "Tony" Fighter Plane]

Page

[Page 15 or PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Quiapo Church: Manila, Philippines]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

image: 15 × 23.5 cm (5 7/8 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 15.1 × 22 cm (5 15/16 × 8 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.15a

AGO.102937.15b

AGO.102937.16

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Downtown Manila: Tondo area]

Page

[Page 16 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES,

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 adhered slip of paper, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

image: 14.8 × 22.7 cm (5 13/16 × 8 15/16 in.) image: 15.2 × 22.7 cm (6 × 8 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 adhered slip of paper and 4 mounting corners

55

OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102937.17 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Page [Page 17 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Manila Shopping District] April 1945 August 1946 3 gelatin silver prints, and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.17a

AGO.102937.17b

AGO.102937.17c

AGO.102937.18

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Downtown Manila & Chinese Quarter]

Photograph

[Jones Bridge]

Page

AGO.102937.18a

AGO.102937.18b

AGO.102937.18c

AGO.102937.18d

AGO.102937.18e

AGO.102937.19

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 18 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Pier 7 and S.S. Evangeline]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 9.9 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 9.9 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 9.9 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Jones Bridge and Coast Guard Landing]

Photograph

[Beached Ships: Pasig River]

Photograph

[Bank of Manila]

Photograph

[Post Office: Manila]

Page

AGO.102937.19a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 19 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Machine Gunned San Juan De Letran]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 7.6 × 11 cm (3 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 11 × 7.7 cm (4 5/16 × 3 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

April 1945 August 1946

image: 7.7 × 11 cm (3 1/16 × 4 5/16 in.)

56

AGO.102937.19b

AGO.102937.19c

AGO.102937.19d

AGO.102937.19e

AGO.102937.20

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Church and Bilibid Prison]

Photograph

[Lords Cathedral, St. Augustine and Intramuros] [Shelled Church]

Photograph

Photograph

[St. Augustine]

Page

AGO.102937.20a

AGO.102937.20b

AGO.102937.20c

AGO.102937.20d

AGO.102937.20e

AGO.102937.21

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 20 to PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Street near University of Philippines]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 10 × 12.4 cm (3 15/16 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.4 cm (3 13/16 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 7.5 × 11 cm (2 15/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Wall of Intramuros]

Photograph

[Evangelical Church]

Photograph

[View of San Juan De Letran]

Photograph

[1530 Catholic Church]

Page

AGO.102937.21a

AGO.102937.21b

AGO.102937.21c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

[Page 21 PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Shelled Hole]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 9.9 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 10.1 × 12.5 cm (4 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Chinese Woman]

Page

[San Juan De Letran]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 -

image: 7.6 × 11 cm (3 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.6 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 7.6 × 11 cm (3 × 4 5/16

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

57

Assembled by AGO.102937.21d Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Aerial Shot of Department of Interior and finance, army and navy club and ayala apartments] [Caratella & San Binondo Church]

August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print

in.) image: 9.9 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.21e

Photograph

gelatin silver print

image: 9.8 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 30.3 × 34.5 cm (11 15/16 × 13 9/16 in.)

AGO.102937.22

Page

AGO.102937.22a

AGO.102937.22b

AGO.102937.22c

AGO.102937.23

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 22 PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Front of shelled legislature building]

3 gelatin silver prints, and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Rear of shelled legislature building]

Photograph

[Close up of bomb strike]

Page

AGO.102937.23a

AGO.102937.23b

AGO.102937.23c

AGO.102937.24

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 23 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Corregidor and Bataan]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 9.9 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 9.9 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints, and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[U.S. Marine occupied Corregidor]

Photograph

[E.M. Barracks: Corregidor]

Page

AGO.102937.24a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 24 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [22nd. Repl. Deport: Nilsson Fld.: Manila

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 34.5 × 12.9 cm (13 9/16 × 5 1/16 in.) image: 9.9 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 9.9 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

April 1945 August 1946

image: 9.7 × 12.5 cm (3 13/16 × 4 15/16 in.)

58

AGO.102937.24b

AGO.102937.24c

AGO.102937.24d

AGO.102937.25

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Philippino Women near Laoag: Luzon]

Photograph

[Coastline of Luzon]

Photograph

[View of street near University of Philippines] [Page 25 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut with monkey mascot

page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

image: 7.4 × 11.4 cm (2 15/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 7.3 × 11.2 cm (2 7/8 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.25a

AGO.102937.25b

AGO.102937.26

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Going over Laogo bridge]

Page

AGO.102937.26a

AGO.102937.26b

AGO.102937.27

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 26 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Caratella with horse and Philippino Women: Laoag] [Murray, Sanders with Monkey and Craig]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 8.3 × 14.2 cm (3 1/4 × 5 9/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.27a

AGO.102937.27b

AGO.102937.28

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 27 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Bay from Yontan Airstrip: Okinawa] [Navy PB-4Y-2 taking off over plane grave yard] [Page 28 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS,

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15 × 22 cm (5 7/8 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 15.8 × 23.3 cm (6 1/4 × 9 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints, and 8 mounting corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 17.2 × 24 cm (6 3/4 × 9 7/16 in.) image: 15.7 × 22.5 cm (6 3/16 × 8 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints, 8 mounting corners, and

59

PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102937.28a Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Plane Graveyard] April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

strips of tap adhesive gelatin silver print image: 17.2 × 24.3 cm (6 3/4 × 9 9/16 in.) image: 16.5 × 23.3 cm (6 1/2 × 9 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.28b

Photograph

[Sixth Marine Division Cemetery]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.29

Page

AGO.102937.30

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102937.30a

AGO.102937.30b

AGO.102937.30c

AGO.102937.30d

AGO.102937.31

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 29 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 30 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Tombs: Okinawa]

12 mounting corners

April 1945 August 1946

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Naha: Okinawa]

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut sitting on turret]

Photograph

[Naha University]

Page

AGO.102937.31a

AGO.102937.31b

AGO.102937.32

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 31 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Houses in Naha]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15.8 × 22 cm (6 1/4 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 5.9 × 8.4 cm (2 5/16 × 3 5/16 in.) image: 5.9 × 8.4 cm (2 5/16 × 3 5/16 in.) image: 7 × 10 cm (2 3/4 × 3 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Battle ground: Naha]

Page

[Page 32 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15.8 × 23.3 cm (6 1/4 × 9 3/16 in.) image: 16.2 × 22.9 cm (6 3/8 × 9 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints, and 12 mounting corners

60

AGO.102937.32a

AGO.102937.32b

AGO.102937.32c

AGO.102937.33

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Junkey Passenger Locomotive in Naha: Okinawa] [Okinawa near Yomtam: Naha]

Photograph

Photograph

[Naha shrine and gateway]

Page

AGO.102937.33a

AGO.102937.33b

AGO.102937.33c

AGO.102937.34

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 33 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese and American soldiers]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 13.5 × 22.2 cm (5 5/16 × 8 3/4 in.) image: 11.5 × 7.6 cm (4 1/2 × 3 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints, and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver prints

Photograph

[E Shima Island off Okinawa]

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.34a

AGO.102937.34b

AGO.102937.35

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut standing with unidentified solider next to cargo] [Page 34 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut in cockpit]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 10.1 × 12.5 cm (4 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 9.5 × 12.4 cm (3 3/4 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 11 × 16 cm (4 5/16 × 6 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Damaged Plane]

Page

AGO.102937.35a

AGO.102937.35b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 35 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Nine planes flying in formation]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 16.5 × 23.3 cm (6 1/2 × 9 3/16 in.) image: 12 × 16 cm (4 3/4 × 6 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Grounded Plane "Awaiting Autumn"]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 10.7 × 23.5 cm (4 3/16 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 6.8 × 11.1 cm (2 11/16 × 4 3/8 in.)

gelatin silver print

61

AGO.102937.35c

AGO.102937.35d

AGO.102937.36

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Wrecked plane]

Photograph

[Plane nose]

Page

AGO.102937.36a

AGO.102937.36b

AGO.102937.36c

AGO.102937.37

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 36 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Plane bulkhead design "White Wing"]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 12 × 16 cm (4 3/4 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 11.3 × 6.7 cm (4 7/16 × 2 5/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints, and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[2 Sunken vessels: Okinawa : August 1945] [Okinawian Gooks]

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.37a

AGO.102937.37b

AGO.102937.38

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 37 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Northwest Coast Road: Okinawa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 12 × 16 cm (4 3/4 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 6.5 × 11 cm (2 9/16 × 4 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Engineers Bridge: Okinawa]

Page

AGO.102937.38a

AGO.102937.38b

AGO.102937.38c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 38 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Mountain scape and Road]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 16 × 23 cm (6 5/16 × 9 1/16 in.) image: 16.3 × 23 cm (6 7/16 × 9 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints, and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Group shot of 5 US soldiers with Robert C Kraut] [Okinawan's]

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15 × 21 cm (5 7/8 × 8 1/4 in.) image: 7.5 × 11.5 cm (2 15/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 6.7 × 11 cm (2 5/8 × 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

62

AGO.102937.39

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102937.39a

AGO.102937.39b

AGO.102937.39c

AGO.102937.39d

AGO.102937.40

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 39 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Yontan Airstrip]

April 1945 August 1946

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[A-26 Slightly Battered]

Photograph

[Overturned C-46]

Photograph

[Damaged Hanger]

Page

AGO.102937.40a

AGO.102937.40b

AGO.102937.40c

AGO.102937.40d

AGO.102937.41

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 40 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Group shot of two soldiers with Robert C Kraut] [Camp Reconstruction]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 12 × 16 cm (4 3/4 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 7 × 9.9 cm (2 3/4 × 3 7/8 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 11.8 × 16 cm (4 5/8 × 6 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

[Reconstructed Tent]

Photograph

["Daily Routine" and Camp Tent]

Page

AGO.102937.41a

AGO.102937.41b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 41 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Tent Area After Storm]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 7 × 11.5 cm (2 3/4 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 7 × 11.8 cm (2 3/4 × 4 5/8 in.) image: 11.6 × 16 cm (4 9/16 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

STEEL FLAGPOLE BENT IN TYPHOON

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

63

AGO.102937.41c

AGO.102937.41d

AGO.102937.42

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Mess Hall After Typhoon]

Photograph

[New Mess Hall Under Construction]

Page

AGO.102937.42a

AGO.102937.42b

AGO.102937.43

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 42 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [More Rebuilding After Typhoon:]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 11.9 × 16 cm (4 11/16 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 12 × 16 cm (4 3/4 × 6 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Portrait of Robert C. Kraut]

Page

[Page 43 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View approaching Nagoya]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 12 × 16 cm (4 3/4 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 12.1 × 9.5 cm (4 3/4 × 3 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.43a

AGO.102937.43b

AGO.102937.43c

AGO.102937.44

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Approaching Nagoya]

Photograph

[View from C-47 of Mount Fujiyama]

page

AGO.102937.44a

AGO.102937.44b

AGO.102937.44c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Page 44 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Tachikawa Army]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

3 gelatin silver prints, 8 mounting corners, and a strip of adhesive tap gelatin silver print

image: 15.5 × 21.2 cm (6 1/8 × 8 3/8 in.) image: 15.5 × 21.2 cm (6 1/8 × 8 3/8 in.) image: 15 × 21.8 cm (5 7/8 × 8 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Aerial View of Showa Air Base]

Photograph

[Civilian Houses: Showa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August

image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

64

by AGO.102937.45 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Page [Page 45 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Welcome in Nippon.

1946 April 1945 August 1946 1 Adhered "Welcome Card" and 4 mounting corners woodblock print page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.45a

AGO.102937.46

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

Page

AGO.102937.46a

AGO.102937.46b

AGO.102937.46c

AGO.102937.46d

AGO.102937.47

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 46 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Showa Airstrip]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

page: 10 × 12.5 cm (3 15/16 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Ralph Jenning and his P-51 Mustang]

Photograph

[Portrait of Robert C. Kraut]

Photograph

[View from Robert C. Kraut's window: Mt. Fuji] [Page 47 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Showa A.B. Headquarters]

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 10.2 × 12 cm (4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 8.3 × 5.9 cm (3 1/4 × 2 5/16 in.) image: 8.7 × 7.9 cm (3 7/16 × 3 1/8 in.) image: 18 × 13.7 cm (7 1/16 × 5 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounted corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.47a

AGO.102937.47b

AGO.102937.47c

AGO.102937.47d

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Col. Flynn and Nurse]

Photograph

[Officers Club and Mess Hall: Showa]

Photograph

[View of Base: Showa]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 6.8 × 11 cm (2 11/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 4.9 × 6.5 cm (1 15/16 × 2 9/16 in.) image: 6.6 × 11 cm (2 5/8 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 6.5 × 11.4 cm (2 9/16 × 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

65

AGO.102937.47e

AGO.102937.47f

AGO.102937.48

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Bathroom: Showa]

Photograph

[Japanese Workers: Showa]

Page

AGO.102937.48a

AGO.102937.48b

AGO.102937.48c

AGO.102937.49

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 48 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Mechanic instructing on how to grease a Jeep] [WWII Jeep]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 12.2 × 9.9 cm (4 13/16 × 3 7/8 in.) page: 7.7 × 10.7 cm (3 1/16 × 4 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

[Showa Air Base Built 6x Truck]

Page

[Page 49 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] menu

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

image: 9.7 × 12.1 cm (3 13/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.1 cm (3 13/16 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 9.7 × 12.1 cm (3 13/16 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.49a

AGO.102937.49b

AGO.102937.49c

AGO.102937.50

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

print

Photograph

[Giant Airplane Wheels]

Photograph

[Crashed Bi-plane]

Page

AGO.102937.50a

AGO.102937.50b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Page 50 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Waitresses and Pedro]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

[2 gelatin silver prints, 12 mounting corners and paper menu] letterpress

sheet: 20.4 × 13.5 cm (8 1/16 × 5 5/16 in.) page: 15.8 × 12.9 cm (6 1/4 × 5 1/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 5.1 cm (2 13/16 × 2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Officers Club and Bar]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August

image: 12.3 × 10 cm (4 13/16 × 3 15/16 in.) image: 9.4 × 12.1 cm (3 11/16 × 4 3/4

gelatin silver print

66

by AGO.102937.50c Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Mess Hall: Interior]

1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print

in.) image: 9.4 × 12.1 cm (3 11/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.4 cm (3 13/16 × 4 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.50d

Photograph

[Soldiers at Soda Fountain Bar]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.51

Page

AGO.102937.51a

AGO.102937.51b

AGO.102937.51c

AGO.102937.51d

AGO.102937.52

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 51 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Col. Johnson's Speech: Christmas Party 1945]

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Col. Johnson at Rostrum: Christmas Party 1945] [Col. Flynn with Wig present: Christmas Party 1945] [Col. Johnson's Joke Present: Christmas Party 1945] [Page 52 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [E.M. Club and Xmas Tree]

Photograph

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 9.4 × 12.1 cm (3 11/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.1 × 12.4 cm (3 9/16 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.3 cm (3 13/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 9.5 × 11.9 cm (3 3/4 × 4 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.52a

AGO.102937.52b

AGO.102937.52c

AGO.102937.52d

AGO.102937.52e

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Unidentified Captain dressed as Santa Clause] [Stirring eggs to make eggnog]

Photograph

Photograph

[Pouring in eggs to make eggnog]

Photograph

[Making eggnog]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 9.4 × 11.8 cm (3 11/16 × 4 5/8 in.) image: 12 × 9.3 cm (4 3/4 × 3 11/16 in.) image: 12.2 × 9.5 cm (4 13/16 × 3 3/4 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.2 cm (3 13/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 9.7 × 12 cm (3 13/16 × 4 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

67

AGO.102937.53

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102937.53a

AGO.102937.53b

AGO.102937.53c

AGO.102937.53d

AGO.102937.53e

AGO.102937.54

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 53 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [1 Male and 2 Females standing in front of Jeep] [US Female in cockpit]

April 1945 August 1946

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

Photograph

[3 Japanese Female musical performers on stage] [2 US Females standing]

Photograph

Photograph

[6 Females and 2 Male musical performers on stage] [Page 54 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Portrait of Robert C. Kraut wearing chefs hat] [Main eatery]

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 7.1 × 11.1 cm (2 13/16 × 4 3/8 in.) image: 34.5 × 7.2 cm (13 9/16 × 2 13/16 in.) image: 9.9 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 11.6 × 7.3 cm (4 9/16 × 2 7/8 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.54a

AGO.102937.54b

AGO.102937.54c

AGO.102937.54d

AGO.102937.54e

AGO.102937.55

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

[Mess Hall Crew and Mess SQT. Al Diapolo]

Photograph

[Kitchen]

Photograph

[Mess Hall Crew and Interpreter]

Page

[Page 55 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 7.2 × 5.4 cm (2 13/16 × 2 1/8 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.5 cm (3 7/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 9.4 × 12.2 cm (3 11/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 15.1 × 14.2 cm (5 15/16 × 5 9/16 in.) image: 8.9 × 6.4 cm (3 1/2 × 2 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners

68

AGO.102937.55a

AGO.102937.55b

AGO.102937.55c

AGO.102937.55d

AGO.102937.55e

AGO.102937.56

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Steam Pots]

Photograph

[Mess Hall Cooks, Waiters, Dishwasher, etc] [Cooks and Bakers]

Photograph

Photograph

[Waiters and Inventory Keeper Mitsui Nasu Dietitian] [Al Diapolo, Jim Rizzo, and unidentified male]

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.56a

AGO.102937.56b

AGO.102937.56c

AGO.102937.56d

AGO.102937.56e

AGO.102937.57

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 56 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Fruit Juicer Press]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 19.7 × 14.9 cm (7 3/4 × 5 7/8 in.) image: 34.5 × 5.2 cm (13 9/16 × 2 1/16 in.) image: 7.5 × 5.2 cm (2 15/16 × 2 1/16 in.) image: 6.8 × 11 cm (2 11/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 7.5 × 5.2 cm (2 15/16 × 2 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Fruit Juicer Press with sliced fruit]

Photograph

[Inventory Keeper Mitsui Masu Dietitan]

Photograph

[Al Diapolo and additional mess hall staff] [Al Diapolo with 2 unidentified males standing with skinned chickens] [Page 57 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [1 Unidentified Male sitting with 8 Japanese Females] [2 Japanese Females leaning against a tree]

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 12.1 × 9.8 cm (4 3/4 × 3 7/8 in.) image: 12.1 × 9.8 cm (4 3/4 × 3 7/8 in.) image: 6.8 × 11.1 cm (2 11/16 × 4 3/8 in.) image: 7.5 × 5.2 cm (2 15/16 × 2 1/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.1 cm (3 7/8 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounted corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.57a

AGO.102937.57b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 -

gelatin silver print

image: 9.7 × 12.3 cm (3 13/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 11.6 × 7.2 cm (4 9/16 ×

69

Assembled by AGO.102937.57c Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [10 Japanese Females in traditional Japanese garb] [Portrait of Robert C. Kraut standing]

August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print

2 13/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 11.4 cm (2 13/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 5.5 × 5.5 cm (2 3/16 × 2 3/16 in.) image: 10 × 6.7 cm (3 15/16 × 2 5/8 in.) image: 7.5 × 11.6 cm (2 15/16 × 4 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.57d

Photograph

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.57e

Photograph

[2 Japanese Females standing in front of ambulance] [10 Japanese females standing in traditional Japanese garb] [Page 58 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Portrait of Robert C. Kraut standing with paper] [Robert C. Kraut standing with unidentified soldier wearing helmet [Unidentified First Sergeant]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.57f

Photograph

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.58

Page

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.58a

AGO.102937.58b

AGO.102937.58c

AGO.102937.58d

AGO.102937.58e

AGO.102937.59

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

[Al Diapolo sitting with 4 unidentified soldiers]

Photograph

[Al Diapolo with unidentified soldier in barracks] [Page 59 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Al Diapolo sitting at table]

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 12 × 9.5 cm (4 3/4 × 3 3/4 in.) image: 12.1 × 9.7 cm (4 3/4 × 3 13/16 in.) image: 11.5 × 6.9 cm (4 1/2 × 2 11/16 in.) image: 7.5 × 6.5 cm (2 15/16 × 2 9/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 11.5 cm (2 13/16 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounted corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.59a

AGO.102937.59b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Al Diapolo climbing a tree]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image 9.5 × 12.2 cm (3 3/4 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 10 × 5.8 cm (3 15/16 × 2 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

70

AGO.102937.59c

AGO.102937.59d

AGO.102937.59e

AGO.102937.59f

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Frank C. Kraut and 2 unidentified male soldiers with cake] [Unidentified male with toilet paper and scrub brushes] [Unidentified male standing in front of bushes] [Robert C. Kraut, Al Diapolo, and 6 unidentified males at table with birthday cake] [Page 60 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Al Diapolo standing on street corner]

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

image: 7.5 × 11.6 cm (2 15/16 × 4 9/16 in.) image: 7.1 × 5 cm (2 13/16 × 1 15/16 in.) image: 9.4 × 6.7 cm (3 11/16 × 2 5/8 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.1 cm (3 13/16 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.60

Page

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.60a

AGO.102937.60b

AGO.102937.60c

AGO.102937.60d

AGO.102937.60e

AGO.102937.61

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Unidentified Japanese Female standing in traditional garb] [Unidentified Japanese female in dark dress leaning against a tree] [2 unidentified Japanese females standing on pathway] [Unidentified Japanese female in light coloured dress leaning against a tree] [Page 61 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut, Al Diapolo standing with 2 unidentified male soldiers] [Unidentified Solider standing at chalkboard]

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 11.3 × 15.5 cm (4 7/16 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 11.4 × 6.9 cm (4 1/2 × 2 11/16 in.) image: 11.5 × 7 cm (4 1/2 × 2 3/4 in.) image: 11.5 × 7 cm (4 1/2 × 2 3/4 in.) image: 11.5 × 7 cm (4 1/2 × 2 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.61a

AGO.102937.61b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 6.3 × 8.7 cm (2 1/2 × 3 7/16 in.) image: 9.7 × 12 cm (3 13/16 × 4 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver print

71

AGO.102937.61c

AGO.102937.61d

AGO.102937.61e

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut standing among bushes] [Mout Fujiyama]

Photograph

Photograph

AGO.102937.62

Page

AGO.102937.62a

AGO.102937.62b

AGO.102937.62c

AGO.102937.62d

AGO.102937.62e

AGO.102937.63

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut with 2 unidentified males, and 10 females dressed in traditional garb [Page 62 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Side view of burning building at night]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 8.4 × 5.8 cm (3 5/16 × 2 5/16 in.) image: 8.4 × 12.5 cm (3 5/16 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 11 × 15 cm (4 5/16 × 5 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[View of burning building at night]

Photograph

[Full view of burning building at night]

Photograph

[Close up of burning building at night]

Photograph

[Daytime exterior view of burnt building]

Page

AGO.102937.63a

AGO.102937.63b

AGO.102937.63c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 63 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Interior view of burnt building]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 9 × 11 cm (3 9/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 9 × 11 cm (3 9/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 9 × 11 cm (3 9/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 9 × 11 cm (3 9/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 7.7 × 11.2 cm (3 1/16 × 4 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Exterior view of burnt building's staircase]

Photograph

[View of exterior wall from burnt building]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 7.5 × 12 cm (2 15/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 7.7 × 11.5 cm (3 1/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 11.5 × 7.7 cm (4 1/2 × 3 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

72

AGO.102937.63d

AGO.102937.64

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Interior of burnt building]

Page

AGO.102937.64a

AGO.102937.64b

AGO.102937.64c

AGO.102937.65

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 64 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Valley with stream and views of mountains] [Robert C. Kraut standing in front of tunnel] [View of tree lined mountain road]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 7 × 11.3 cm (2 3/4 × 4 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.65a

AGO.102937.65b

AGO.102937.66

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 65 to PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [3 Japanese Children one with basket on back] [Row of Japanese children standing in front of school] [Page 66 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View from river bed facing upstream at mountain] [View of above river, over looking valley, farming and mountains] [Page 67 PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View from above river with mountain in the

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 7.5 × 11.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 11.3 × 7.5 cm (4 7/16 × 2 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

image: 14.7 × 21.2 cm (5 13/16 × 8 3/8 in.) Image: 14.7 × 21.2 cm (5 13/16 × 8 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.66a

AGO.102937.66b

AGO.102937.67

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 16.2 × 22.5 cm (6 3/8 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 12 × 16.2 cm (4 3/4 × 6 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.67a

Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

April 1945 -

image: 22.2 × 15 cm (8 3/4 × 5

73

Assembled by AGO.102937.68 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Page

background] [Page 68 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View from street among rural homes with mountain in the background] [Page 69 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut with 6 Japanese children]

August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.68a

AGO.102937.69

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 22 × 15.5 cm (8 11/16 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 gelatin silver print and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.69a

AGO.102937.70

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.70a

AGO.102937.70b

AGO.102937.71

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Page 70 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut with 8 Japanese children and 1 unidentified adult male] [2 Unidentified adult males moving logs and 1 male child] [Page 71 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [1 unidentified Japanese male with cattle] [2 unidentified Japanese females with full baskets on back] [Page 72 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

image: 12.3 × 20.4 cm (4 13/16 × 8 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 12.5 × 18.5 cm (4 15/16 × 7 5/16 in.) image: 15.7 × 22 cm (6 3/16 × 8 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.71a

AGO.102937.71b

AGO.102937.72

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 11.9 × 16 cm (4 11/16 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 12 × 16.3 cm (4 3/4 × 6 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners.

74

AGO.102937.72a

AGO.102937.72b

AGO.102937.73

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut standing and Japanese locals celebrating Summer Festival] [Japanese locals celebrating the Summer Festival] [Page 73 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Children dressed for Summer Festival] [View looking across river at waterfall and mountains] [Page 74 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut standing on bridge]

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 16.3 × 23.5 cm (6 7/16 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 16.3 × 23.5 cm (6 7/16 × 9 1/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.73a

AGO.102937.73b

AGO.102937.74

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 16.3 × 23.5 cm (6 7/16 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.3 cm (3 13/16 × 4 13/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.74a

AGO.102937.74b

AGO.102937.74c

AGO.102937.74d

AGO.102937.74e

AGO.102937.75

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[View of bridge over river with snow]

Photograph

[View of bridge in snow ]

Photograph

Photograph

[Unidentified Japanese individual walking on snow covered street and two children] [View of bridge with mountain in the background] [Page 75 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese man at a store front]

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 7.5 × 11.2 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 11.3 × 7.5 cm (4 7/16 × 2 15/16 in.) image: 6 × 16.9 cm (2 3/8 × 6 5/8 in.) image: 7.5 × 11.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 7.5 × 11.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.75a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946

image: 15.5 × 22.2 cm (6 1/8 × 8 3/4 in.)

75

AGO.102937.75b

AGO.102937.75c

AGO.102937.75d

AGO.102937.76

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Street scene: me Japan]

Photograph

[Japanese individual carrying child on back]

Photograph

[Seated Japanese infant]

Page

AGO.102937.76a

AGO.102937.76b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 76 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Rural Japanese man at work]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 9.5 × 6.8 cm (3 3/4 × 2 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) image: 7.5 × 11.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

AGO.102937.76c

AGO.102937.76d

AGO.102937.76e

AGO.102937.76f

AGO.102937.77

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Japanese Man in front of sign that reads: I WAS HUNGRY. FLOUR COMES! I WILL WORK AGAIN. THANK AMERICA. [followed by Japanese text] [Close up of canal]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 11 × 9 cm (4 5/16 × 3 9/16 in.) page: 12.2 × 9.7 cm (4 13/16 × 3 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of canal and bridge]

Photograph

[View of canal, road and bridge]

Photograph

[View of canal through trees]

Page

AGO.102937.77a

AGO.102937.77b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Page 77 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of body of water and mountains]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 8.8 × 11.5 cm (3 7/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 8.8 × 11.5 cm (3 7/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 8.6 × 11.3 cm (3 3/8 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 8.7 × 11.4 cm (3 7/16 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of farmland in valley]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August

image: 9.9 × 12.4 cm (3 7/8 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 15.8 × 22.8 cm (6 1/4 × 9 in.)

gelatin silver print

76

by AGO.102937.78 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Page [Page 78 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Unidentified US Soldier sitting on bridge railing] [Tree lined street, with shadows]

1946 April 1945 August 1946 3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.78a

AGO.102937.78b

AGO.102937.78c

AGO.102937.79

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

[Tree lined street, without shadow]

Page

AGO.102937.79a

AGO.102937.79b

AGO.102937.79c

AGO.102937.80

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 79 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Unidentified US Soldier standing under arch] [Archway at bottom of stairs]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15.6 × 23.5 cm (6 1/8 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.5 cm (3 13/16 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 9.5 × 12.5 cm (3 3/4 × 4 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

[View of arch at bottom of stairs]

Page

AGO.102937.80a

AGO.102937.80b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 80 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Children playing in large body of water] [Unidentified US soldier with camera among Japanese Children near body of water] [Page 81 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES,

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 9.7 × 12.4 cm (3 13/16 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 6.5 × 9.8 cm (2 9/16 × 3 7/8 in.) image: 23 × 15.6 cm (9 1/16 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15.5 × 23.2 cm (6 1/8 × 9 1/8 in.) image: 15.2 × 23 cm (6 × 9 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.81

Page

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

77

OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102937.81a Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Japanese Children playing on shoreline] April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print image: 23 × 23.5 cm (9 1/16 × 9 1/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.82

Page

AGO.102937.82a

AGO.102937.82b

AGO.102937.82c

AGO.102937.82d

AGO.102937.83

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 82 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of road in Osaka, with streetcars pedestrian traffic] [Line of parked airplane fighters]

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

[View of rooftops: Osaka]

Photograph

[Parked airplane fighter]

Page

[Page 83 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Bridge: Osaka]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 14.8 × 22.5 cm (5 13/16 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 5.2 × 6.2 cm (2 1/16 × 2 7/16 in.) image: 6.5 × 4.9 cm (2 9/16 × 1 15/16 in.) image: 5.2 × 6.2 cm (2 1/16 × 2 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.83a

AGO.102937.83b

AGO.102937.84

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Panorama of rubbled Osaka]

Page

AGO.102937.84a

AGO.102937.84b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 89 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Street scene in Osaka: Bikes, Traffic Cop, and vehicle traffic] [Building Bubble: Osaka]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

3 gelatin silver prints, 8 mounting corners, and 3 strips of adhesive tap gelatin silver print

image: 15.8 × 22.5 cm (6 1/4 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 13.1 × 43 cm (5 3/16 × 16 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15.8 × 22.2 cm (6 1/4 × 8 3/4 in.) image: 14.2 × 22.2 cm (5 9/16 × 8 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver print

78

AGO.102937.85

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102937.85a

AGO.102937.85b

AGO.102937.85c

AGO.102937.86

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 85 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of canal and building rubble: Osaka]

April 1945 August 1946

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Waiters: Osaka]

Photograph

[Streetcar wires: Osaka]

Page

AGO.102937.86a

AGO.102937.86b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 86 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Streetcar tracks and wires: Osaka]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 11.5 × 16 cm (4 1/2 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 6.5 × 4.8 cm (2 9/16 × 1 7/8 in.) image: 11.5 × 16 cm (4 1/2 × 6 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints, and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

AGO.102937.86c

Photograph

Pictorial Review From April 1945 - August 1946 of SO. Pacific Islands, Philippines, Okinawa & Japan [View of temple in Tokyo]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 15.5 × 11.5 cm (6 1/8 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 6 × 5 cm (2 3/8 × 1 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

image: 6.5 × 4.8 cm (2 9/16 × 1 7/8 in.) image: 6.5 × 5 cm (2 9/16 × 1 15/16 in.) image: 16 × 11.4 cm (6 5/16 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.86d

Photograph

[Tokyo temple]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.86e

Photograph

[Unidentified Japanese Temple]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.87

Page

AGO.102937.87a

AGO.102937.87b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Page 87 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Aerial view of city devastation and river]

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounted corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of urban destruction over left wing]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August

image: 10 × 12.2 cm (3 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 10 × 12.2 cm (3 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

79

by AGO.102937.87c Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Aerial view of bombarded city]

1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print image: 10 × 12.2 cm (3 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 10 × 12.2 cm (3 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102937.87d

Photograph

[Aerial close up of bombarded city]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.88

Page

AGO.102937.88a

AGO.102937.88b

AGO.102937.89

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 88 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of mountain top covered in clouds]

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Aerial view above clouds of lake and mountains] [Page 89 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Aerial view of river and mountains]

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 14.3 × 22 cm (5 5/8 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 13.5 × 19.6 cm (5 5/16 × 7 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.89a

AGO.102937.90

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.90a

AGO.102937.90b

AGO.102937.91

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 90 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Unidentified US Soldier walking down hill] [Robert C. Kraut with 3 unidentified US soldier in front of mountain] [Page 91 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of valley and mountain]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounted corners. gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 11.6 × 15.7 cm (4 9/16 × 6 3/16 in.) image: 16.5 × 12 cm (6 1/2 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.91a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

April 1945 August 1946

image: 21 × 15.5 cm (8 1/4 × 6 1/8 in.)

80

AGO.102937.92

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102937.92a

AGO.102937.93

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 92 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View looking down mountain slop]

April 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Page

AGO.102937.93a

AGO.102937.93b

AGO.102937.94

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 93 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Unmounted: View looking up mountain slop] [View of snowcapped mount Fuji from across a lake] [Page 94 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Aerial view of lake and mountains]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 21.5 × 15.5 cm (8 7/16 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

2 gelatin silver prints and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Page

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

image: 22 × 15.4 cm (8 11/16 × 6 1/16 in.) image: 21 × 13.3 cm (8 1/4 × 5 1/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102937.94a

AGO.102937.95

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Page

AGO.102937.95a

AGO.102937.95b

AGO.102937.96

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Page 95 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut standing next to Showa Army Air Base Sign] [Aerial view of shoreline and airstrip]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

[2 uncounted gelatin silver prints]

image: 14.5 × 22.5 cm (5 11/16 × 8 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Page

AGO.102937.96a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 96 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View looking up mountain]

April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946 April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 7 × 11.5 cm (2 3/4 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 16 × 22.7 cm (6 5/16 × 8 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 gelatin silver print

April 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 15.4 × 22 cm (6 1/16 × 8 11/16 in.)

81

AGO.102937.97

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102938.1-.91

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Album

[Insides Back Cover of Pictorial Review From April 1945 - August 1946 of SO. Pacific Islands, Philippines, Okinawa & Japan] PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN

April 1945 August 1946

1 adhered identificatio n sticker

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1946 August 1946

AGO.102938.1

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102938.1a

AGO.102938.1b

AGO.102938.1c

AGO.102938.2

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Fuji New Grand Hotel Entrance]

June 1946 August 1946

Album: 165 B&W Gelatin Prints,17 Colour Prints, 1 Cyanotype, 3 Pamphlets, 4 Prints, 3 Maps, 2 Letters, 27 Postcards, and 1 Newspaper Clipping 3 Gelatin Prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Album: 35.5 × 30.9 × 4 cm (14 × 12 3/16 × 1 9/16 in.)

Album contains 46 sheets and 91 pages (sides of sheets)

Page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Front Terrace of Fuji New Grand Hotel]

Photograph

[View of Mt Fujiyama from hotel terrace]

Page

AGO.102938.2a

AGO.102938.2b

AGO.102938.3

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 2 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut calling dog in snow]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 11.5 × 7 cm (4 1/2 × 2 3/4 in.) image: 7 × 11.3 cm (2 3/4 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 21.5 × 15.7 cm (8 7/16 × 6 3/16 in.) Page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (14 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut, Jim Rizzo and motor pool soldier on boat] [Page 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS,

Page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 22 × 15.6 cm (8 11/16 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 21.5 × 15.5 cm (8 7/16 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

82

PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102938.3a Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Robert C. Kraut hunting with Japanese/Irish Setter] [Robert C. Kraut with Japanese/Irish Setter] June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 gelatin silver print image: 17 × 23 cm (6 11/16 × 9 1/16 in.) image: 11.3 × 14.3 cm (4 7/16 × 5 5/8 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.3b

Photograph

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.4

Page

AGO.102938.4a

AGO.102938.4b

AGO.102938.4c

AGO.102938.5

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

[Page 4 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Flying over Lake Yamanaka]

3 Gelatin Prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Japanese Irish Setter]

Photograph

[Lt. Ralph Miles on the terrace of The Fuji Hotel] [Page 5 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut standing on road along side Lake Yamanaka] [Japanese Woman sitting by Lake Yamanaka with Mt. Fujiyama in Background] [Page 6 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Mt. Fujiyama behind rugged mountain range] [Flying by Mt. Fujiyama]

Page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 15 × 22.5 cm (5 7/8 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 7 × 11.4 cm (2 3/4 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 9.2 × 7 cm (3 5/8 × 2 3/4 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

AGO.102938.5a

AGO.102938.5b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 15.5 × 21.6 cm (6 1/8 × 8 1/2 in.) image: 10.7 × 14.6 cm (4 3/16 × 5 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.6

Page

4 Gelatin Prints and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (14 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.6a

AGO.102938.6b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 9.8 × 12.2 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12.2 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

83

AGO.102938.6c

AGO.102938.6d

AGO.102938.7

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Mt. Fujiyama]

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.7a

AGO.102938.7b

AGO.102938.7c

AGO.102938.8

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Cherry Tree in blossom with Mt. Fujiyama in the background] [Page 7 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Lake Hakone]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 10.7 × 14.3 cm (4 3/16 × 5 5/8 in.) image: 10.5 × 14.2 cm (4 1/8 × 5 9/16 in.) page: 33.5 x 30.3 x 4 cm (14 x 11 15/16 x 1 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

3 Gelatin Prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of Mt Fujiyama from field]

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyamam form behind a Cherry Tree] [Page 8 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Older Japanese Woman]

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 16.6 × 23.5 cm (6 9/16 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 8.5 × 12 cm (3 3/8 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 Gelatin Prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.8a

AGO.102938.8b

AGO.102938.8c

AGO.102938.8d

AGO.102938.8e

AGO.102938.9

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[View of Mt Fujiyama from window of C-47]

Photograph

[Overhead view of Mt. Fujiyama]

Photograph

[View from above Mt. Fujiyama]

Photograph

[Close up of lip of Mt. Fujiyama]

page

[Page 9 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 9.5 × 11.5 cm (3 3/4 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 5.4 × 7 cm (2 1/8 × 2 3/4 in.) image: 9.2 × 11.3 cm (3 5/8 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 10.5 × 6.2 cm (4 1/8 × 2 7/16 in.) image: 9.2 × 11.5 cm (3 5/8 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 Gelatin Prints and 20 mounting corners

84

AGO.102938.9a

AGO.102938.9b

AGO.102938.9c

AGO.102938.9d

AGO.102938.9e

AGO.102938.10

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama from edge of Lake Yamanaka] [Aerial view of stopover place onto of Mt. Fujiyama] [Aerial view of Mt. Fujiyama's Lip]

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama's Crater (1)]

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama's Crater (2)]

page

AGO.102938.10a

AGO.102938.10b

AGO.102938.10c

AGO.102938.10d

AGO.102938.11

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 10 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Mt. Fujiyama from Lake Yamanaka with Cherry Blossoms] [Snow caped Mt. Fujiyama]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 7.5 × 5 cm (2 15/16 × 1 15/16 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 12 × 9.5 cm (4 3/4 × 3 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama from tourist site]

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama from above tourist site] [Page 11 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Cherry Blossoms and Mt. Fujiyama]

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 14.7 × 10.6 cm (5 13/16 × 4 3/16 in.) image: 8.6 × 11 cm (3 3/8 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 10.5 × 14.7 cm (4 1/8 × 5 13/16 in.) image: 10.5 × 14.7 cm (4 1/8 × 5 13/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 Gelatin Prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.11a

AGO.102938.11b

AGO.102938.11c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama from Mt. Woode]

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama from shore of Lake

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 -

image: 10.7 × 15 cm (4 3/16 × 5 7/8 in.) image: 10.5 × 14.5 cm (4 1/8 × 5 11/16 in.) image: 10.5 × 14.5 cm (4 1/8 ×

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

85

Assembled by AGO.102938.12 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by page

Yamanaka] [Page 12 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Mt. Fujiyama]

August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 4 Gelatin Prints and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

5 11/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.12a

AGO.102938.12b

AGO.102938.12c

AGO.102938.12d

AGO.102938.13

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[View of crater of Fujiyama from above]

Photograph

[Pine trees, lake and Mt Fujiyama at early morning] [View of Mt. Fujiyama shot through red filter]

Photograph

page

[Page 13 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 11 × 9 cm (4 5/16 × 3 9/16 in.) image: 9 × 11.5 cm (3 9/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 10.7 × 14.9 cm (4 3/16 × 5 7/8 in.) images: 9.8 × 11.2 cm (3 7/8 × 4 7/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.13a

AGO.102938.13b

AGO.102938.13c

AGO.102938.14

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[View of Mt. Fujiyama covered in clouds form airplane] [View of Mt. Fujiyama from airplane]

Photograph

Photograph

[Mt Fujiyama's crater covered in clouds]

page

AGO.102938.14a

AGO.102938.15

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

pamphlet

[Page 14 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Tourist Pamphlet]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 Gelatin Print, 2 chromogeni c 12 mounting corners, and 4 strips of adhesive tap. chromogeni c print

image: 7.5 × 13 cm (2 15/16 × 5 1/8 in.) image: 7.5 × 13.5 cm (2 15/16 × 5 5/16 in.) image: 18.2 × 24 cm (7 3/16 × 9 7/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

chromogeni c print

gelatin silver print

1 tourist Pamphlet and 3 strips of adhesive tap halftone

page

[Page 15 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August

pamphlet: 19 × 25.5 cm (7 1/2 × 10 1/16 in.) Album: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16

1 Gelatin Print, 4 mounting

86

by

SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Photograph [View of Mt. Fujiyama from C-47, March 1946] [Page 16 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Mt. Fujiyama, March 1946]

1946

AGO.102938.15a

AGO.102938.16

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

corners and 4 strips of adhesive tape gelatin silver print

in.)

image: 29 × 24 cm (11 7/16 × 9 7/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.16a

AGO.102938.17

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

[Page 17 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Mt Fujiyama from plane, May 1946]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 Gelatin Print, 4 mounting corners and 4 strips of adhesive tape gelatin silver print

image: 29 × 24 cm (11 7/16 × 9 7/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.17a

AGO.102938.17b

AGO.102938.17c

AGO.102938.17d

AGO.102938.17e

AGO.102938.17f

AGO.102938.18

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[View of top of Mt. Fujiyama with volcanic ash and rock] [View of snow caped Mt. Fujiyama from above] [View of Mt. Fujiyama covered in stratocumulus clouds form airplane] [Panoramic view of Mt. Fujiyama]

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

[Stratocumulus clouds and Mt Fujiyama]

page

AGO.102938.18a

Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

[Page 18 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Aerial approach of Mt. Fujiyama]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

5 Gelatin Prints, 1 chromogeni c print, and 24 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 7.5 × 12 cm (2 15/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 8 × 12.5 cm (3 1/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 11.5 × 7.2 cm (4 1/2 × 2 13/16 in.) image: 8 × 14.5 cm (3 1/8 × 5 11/16 in.) image: 7.8 × 13.2 cm (3 1/16 × 5 3/16 in.) image: 5.6 × 9.5 cm (2 3/16 × 3 3/4 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

chromogeni c print

gelatin silver print

3 Gelatin Prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

June 1946 -

image: 11 × 15.6 cm (4 5/16 × 6

87

Assembled by AGO.102938.18b Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Aerial approach to Mt. Fujiyama]

August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 gelatin silver print

1/8 in.) image: 11.2 × 15.4 cm (4 7/16 × 6 1/16 in.) image: 11 × 15.5 cm (4 5/16 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.18c

Photograph

[Mt. Fujiyama aerial approach]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.19

page

AGO.102938.19a

AGO.102938.19b

AGO.102938.20

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 19 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Town of Kamakua]

2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

Photograph

[Beach of volcanic ash, April 1946]

page

AGO.102938.20a

AGO.102938.20b

AGO.102938.20c

AGO.102938.20d

AGO.102938.21

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 20 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Anti-aircraft artillery in sand dunes near the coast of Chingasaki] [Abandon trolley cars along the shore of Chigasaki] [Japanese girl with baby standing in front of rice field] [Rice Paddies on Chigasaki shore]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 13.5 × 22 cm (5 5/16 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 12.9 × 21.8 cm (5 1/16 × 8 9/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

4 Gelatin Prints and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.21a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 21 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Sign in front of Buddha temple: Kamakua]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 10.7 × 15.5 cm (4 3/16 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 10.7 × 15 cm (4 3/16 × 5 7/8 in.) image: 6.5 × 10.3 cm (2 9/16 × 4 1/16 in.) image: 6.4 × 10.6 cm (2 1/2 × 4 3/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 Gelatin Prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

June 1946 August 1946

image: 6.4 × 10.7 cm (2 1/2 × 4 3/16 in.)

88

AGO.102938.21b

AGO.102938.21c

AGO.102938.21d

AGO.102938.21e

AGO.102938.22

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut and large Buddha idol; Kamakua] [Store front: Kamakura]

Photograph

Photograph

[Main street: Kamakura]

Photograph

[Street scene; Kamakura]

page

AGO.102938.22a

AGO.102938.22b

AGO.102938.23

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 22 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of homes from across a street: Kamakura] [View of shoreline: Enoshima]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 10.7 × 6.5 cm (4 3/16 × 2 9/16 in.) image: 11.5 × 15.5 cm (4 1/2 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 6.4 × 10.6 cm (2 1/2 × 4 3/16 in.) image: 6.4 × 10.7 cm (2 1/2 × 4 3/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.23a

AGO.102938.23b

AGO.102938.23c

AGO.102938.23d

AGO.102938.24

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 23 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Farmers in Rice Fields]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 15 × 22 cm (5 7/8 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 11.8 × 21.8 cm (4 5/8 × 8 9/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

4 Gelatin Prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Farmer an ox plowing field]

Photograph

[Farmer and horse in rice field]

Photograph

[2 Farmers and ox in rice field]

page

[Page 24 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9 × 12 cm (3 9/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

8 mounting corners

89

AGO.102938.25

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

page

[Page 25 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Unidentified Japanese female in traditional grab leaning against railing] Page 26 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] MAPS OF THE FIVE FUJI LAKES AND THE HAKONE DISTRICT [Page 27 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Street leading into Kowada]

June 1946 August 1946

AGO.102938.25a

AGO.102938.26

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 Gelatin print, 4 mounting corners, and 3 strips of adhesive tape gelatin silver print

page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 map and 4 strips of adhesive tape

image: 25.5 × 21.5 cm (10 1/16 × 8 7/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.26a

AGO.102938.27

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

map

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

ink on paper

map: 29 × 22.5 cm (11 7/16 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

AGO.102938.27a

AGO.102938.27b

AGO.102938.28

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[View of Beach, and mountains, from roadside] [Page 28 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of suspension bridge, mountains, and roadside] [Chitose Bridge: Haya River]

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 16.6 × 23.5 cm (6 9/16 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 15.5 × 22.3 cm (6 1/8 × 8 3/4 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners

AGO.102938.28a

AGO.102938.28b

AGO.102938.29

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.29a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Page 29 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of bridge crossing river]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 14 × 22.5 cm (5 1/2 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 15.2 × 21.5 cm (6 × 8 7/16 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 Gelatin Print and 4 mounting corners

June 1946 August

gelatin silver print

image: 22.5 × 15.2 cm (8 7/8 × 6 in.)

90

by AGO.102938.30 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by page [Page 30 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of river, mountain side and Japanese building] [View of building on the river side]

1946 June 1946 August 1946 5 Gelatin Prints, tourist pamphlet and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.30a

AGO.102938.30b

AGO.102938.30c

AGO.102938.30d

AGO.102938.30e

AGO.102938.30f

AGO.102938.31

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Photograph

[Souvenir store front]

Photograph

[Street scene with blurred figure in foreground] [Farmers in Fileds]

Photograph

Pamphlet

[Miyanosita (Hakone)]

page

AGO.102938.31a

AGO.102938.31b

AGO.102938.32

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 31 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Bridge Scene]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 21.5 × 15.2 cm (8 7/16 × 6 in.) image: 21.5 × 6.8 cm (8 7/16 × 2 11/16 in.) image: 7.1 × 6.9 cm (2 13/16 × 2 11/16 in.) image: 10.2 × 6.4 cm (4 × 2 1/2 in.) image: 16.5 × 23 cm (6 1/2 × 9 1/16 in.) pamphlet: 18.8 × 12.7 cm (7 3/8 × 5 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

letterpress halftone

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Moutian road over looking valley]

page

AGO.102938.32a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 32 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Miyanoshita Street Scene]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 15.7 × 21.5 cm (6 3/16 × 8 7/16 in.) image: 13.5 × 22 cm (5 5/16 × 8 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

June 1946 August 1946

image: 15.4 × 22.2 cm (6 1/16 × 8 3/4 in.)

91

AGO.102938.32b

AGO.102938.33

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[River Scene]

page

AGO.102938.33a

AGO.102938.33b

AGO.102938.33c

AGO.102938.33d

AGO.102938.34

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 30 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Snake-Tree Ave.

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 15.4 × 22.2 cm (6 1/16 × 8 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

4 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Kiddie Tram Special

Photograph

[Robert C, Kraut standing on bridge]

Photograph

[Colour River Scene]

page

AGO.102938.34a

AGO.102938.34b

AGO.102938.35

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 34 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of lake and mountain]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 17.5 × 25 cm (6 7/8 × 9 13/16 in.) image: 17.5 × 25 cm (6 7/8 × 9 13/16 in.) image: 22 × 14 cm (8 11/16 × 5 1/2 in.) image: 7.8 × 13.2 cm (3 1/16 × 5 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

chromogeni c print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of lake, mountains, valley and sky] [Page 35 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 16.5 × 23 cm (6 1/2 × 9 1/16 in.) image: 16.5 × 23 cm (6 1/2 × 9 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.35a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Colour lake and mountain scene]

June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 postcard, 2 Chromogeni c Colour Prints, 16 mounting corners, 4 strips of adhesive tape, and pamphlet chromogeni c print

image: 7.8 × 13.2 cm (3 1/16 × 5 3/16 in.)

92

AGO.102938.35b

AGO.102938.35c

AGO.102938.35d

AGO.102938.35e

AGO.102938.36

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

pamphlet

[How to see Huzi Hakone National Park pamphlet] [Rocky River Scene]

postcard

Photograph

[Two men on small sail boat]

Photograph

[Colour lake, mountain, and valley scene] [Page 36 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Bridge crossing rocking river bed]

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

Offset Lithograph

pamphlet: 18.8 × 12.7 cm (7 3/8 × 5 in.) postcard: 14 × 9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 9/16 in.) image: 9.8 × 12 cm (3 7/8 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 7.8 × 13.2 cm (3 1/16 × 5 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Collotype

gelatin silver print

chromogeni c print

1 gelatin silver print and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.36a

AGO.102938.37

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.37a

AGO.102938.37b

AGO.102938.38

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 37 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut sitting on road's edge]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 22.8 × 15.5 cm (9 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of building on lakes edge]

page

AGO.102938.38a

AGO.102938.38b

AGO.102938.39

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 38 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Hakone Lake]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 16.2 × 23.5 cm (6 3/8 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 15 × 22.5 cm (5 7/8 × 8 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners chromogeni c print

Photograph

[Japanese and German Civilians: Lake Hakone]

page

[Page 39 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS,

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 14.4 × 22.5 cm (5 11/16 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 15.5 × 22.5 cm (6 1/8 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 × 4 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 × 1 9/16 in.)

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 Chromogeni

93

PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

AGO.102938.39a

AGO.102938.39b

AGO.102938.39c

AGO.102938.39d

AGO.102938.39e

AGO.102938.40

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Pink Japanese Flower]

Photograph

[Sengokuhara Section Tunnel]

Photograph

View of Hakone Lake at about 5 P.M.

letter

[Typical Bomb Targets]

Newspaper clipping

Japan's 'goddess of fire' in winter finery

page

[Page 40 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Town of Hakone]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

c Colour Print, 1 newspaper clipping, and Bomb Target list chromogeni c print

image: 13.7 × 8.2 cm (5 3/8 × 3 1/4 in.) image: 10.7 × 15 cm (4 3/16 × 5 7/8 in.) images: 10.7 × 15 cm (4 3/16 × 5 7/8 in.) postcard: 26.5 × 20 cm (10 7/16 × 7 7/8 in.) sheet: 26.5 × 28.5 cm (10 7/16 × 11 1/4 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 × 4 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 × 1 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

Letterpress

ink on paper

AGO.102938.40a

AGO.102938.40b

AGO.102938.40c

AGO.102938.41

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

postcard

[Painting of two Japanese Woman]

Photograph

[Cyanotype of Japanese Shoreline]

page

AGO.102938.41a

AGO.102938.41b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

map

[Page 41 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Train Rout Map]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 postcard, 1 cyanotype and 12 mounting corners] gelatin silver print

image: 15.7 × 21 cm (6 3/16 × 8 1/4 in.) postcard: 14.2 × 9 cm (5 9/16 × 3 9/16 in.) image: 9 × 14 cm (3 9/16 × 5 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

offset lithograph

cyanotype

3 postcards and 1 map]

postcard

Mt. Fujiama

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August

offset lithograph

map: 9.9 × 19 cm (3 7/8 × 7 1/2 in.) postcard: 8.7 × 13.7 cm (3 7/16 × 5 3/8 in.)

collotype

94

by AGO.102938.41c Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by postcard [Japanese "Tori"]

1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 collotype postcard: 13.7 × 8.7 cm (5 3/8 × 3 7/16 in.) postcard: 8.7 × 13.7 cm (3 7/16 × 5 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.41d

postcard

Mountain Climbing Mt. Fuji

collotype

AGO.102938.42

page

[Page 42 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

AGO.102938.42a

AGO.102938.42b

AGO.102938.43

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Panoramic view of Mikawaya]

Photograph

[Entrance of Mikawaya Hotel]

page

AGO.102938.43a

AGO.102938.44

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 43 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Mikawaya Hotel: Miyanoshita]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 Chromogeni c print, 8 mounting corners, and adhesive tape strips gelatin silver print

image: 14.2 × 38.2 cm (5 9/16 × 15 1/16 in.) image: 8.7 × 13.7 cm (3 7/16 × 5 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

chromogeni c print

page

AGO.102938.44a

AGO.102938.44b

AGO.102938.45

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 44 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Another View from Mikawaya Hotel

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 removed print and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 14.8 × 21.7 cm (5 13/16 × 8 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Mikawaya Hotel Entrance from the Road: Miyanoshita] [Page 45 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 16.4 × 23 cm (6 7/16 × 9 1/16 in.) image: 14.9 × 22 cm (5 7/8 × 8 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners

95

AGO.102938.45a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

AGO.102938.46

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

page

PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN [Page 46 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut with unidentified US solider and Art Basch] [Page 47 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 48 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 22.4 × 15.5 cm (8 13/16 × 6 1/8 in.)

June 1946 August 1946

AGO.102938.46a

AGO.102938.47

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print 2 removed prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

image: 15.4 × 22.2 cm (6 1/16 × 8 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 removed print and 4 mounting corners

AGO.102938.48

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

page

June 1946 August 1946

AGO.102938.48a

AGO.102938.48b

AGO.102938.48c

AGO.102938.49

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Waitress at Mikawaya]

Photograph

[Japanese female in white shirt and black shirt] Waitress

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.49a

AGO.102938.49b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 49 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Tataka: Waitress at Mikawaya Hotel]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 chromogeni c colour print, and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

image: 35.5 x 30.3 x 4 cm (14 x 11 15/16 x 1 9/16 in.) image: 15.8 × 11.7 cm (6 1/4 × 4 5/8 in.) image: 13.7 × 8.3 cm (5 3/8 × 3 1/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

chromogeni c print

3 gelatin prints and 4 mounting corners

Photograph

[Four women in rice field]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 24 × 17.4 cm (9 7/16 × 6 7/8 in.) image: 15.6 × 23 cm (6 1/8 × 9 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

96

AGO.102938.49c

AGO.102938.50

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Two men plowing field]

page

AGO.102938.50a

AGO.102938.51

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 50 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Home for undernourished children] [Page 51 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Waitress

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 15.8 × 22.5 cm (6 1/4 × 8 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 gelatin silver print and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 15.5 × 23 cm (6 1/8 × 9 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.51a

AGO.102938.52

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.52a

AGO.102938.52b

AGO.102938.52c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

[Page 52 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Hotel Fujiya Hotel Card]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 22.3 × 15.6 cm (8 3/4 × 6 1/8 in.) Album: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

Photograph

Suite and single bedroom section of Fujiya Hotel "Flower Room" section [Reading Room]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

3 gelatin silver prints, 1 card, and 12 mounting corners offset lithograph

postcard: 6.4 × 10.7 cm (2 1/2 × 4 3/16 in.) image: 15.4 × 22.1 cm (6 1/16 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 5.3 × 8.1 cm (2 1/16 × 3 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

Album contains 46 sheets and 91 pages (sides of sheets)

AGO.102938.52d

Photograph

[Entrance of Fujiya Hotel]

gelatin silver print

image: 5.3 × 8.1 cm (2 1/16 × 3 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.53

page

AGO.102938.53a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 53 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Exterior of Dinning and Flower Rooms]

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

June 1946 August 1946

image: 22 × 15.4 cm (8 11/16 × 6 1/16 in.)

97

AGO.102938.54

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

page

AGO.102938.54a

AGO.102938.55

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

letter

[Page 54 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Hotel Fujiya Hotel information sheet]

June 1946 August 1946

page

AGO.102938.55a

AGO.102938.56

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.56a

AGO.102938.57

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

map

[Page 55 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut standing outside of Fujiya Hotel's dinning room] [Page 56 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Motor and walking trip information sheet]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 letter, 4 mounting corners, and 8 strips of adhesive tape letterpress

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

image: 22 × 15.4 cm (8 11/16 × 6 1/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 print, 4 mounting corners, and 8 strips of adhesive tape gelatin silver print

image: 22 × 15.1 cm (8 11/16 × 5 15/16 in.) Album: 35.5 x 30.3 x 4 cm (14 x 11 15/16 x 1 9/16 in.)

page

AGO.102938.57a

AGO.102938.58

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

pamphlet

[Page 57 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] "Poop" Sheet

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 print, 4 mounting corners, and 8 strips of adhesive tape letterpress

image: 31 × 22.8 cm (12 3/16 × 9 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

page

AGO.102938.58a

AGO.102938.58b

AGO.102938.59

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 58 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of mountain side]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 pamphlet, 3 mounting corners, and 7 strips of adhesive tape halftone

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

pamphlet: 23.3 × 13.2 cm (9 3/16 × 5 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Exterior of Fujiya Hotel]

page

[Page 59 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS,

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

Album: 14.3 × 24.5 cm (5 5/8 × 9 5/8 in.) image: 14.3 × 22.1 cm (5 5/8 × 8 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting

98

PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102938.59a Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph View from hallway around "Flower Rooms" [View of Fujiya Hotel in valley] June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

corners gelatin silver print image: 21.3 × 15.5 cm (8 3/8 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 7.6 × 11.8 cm (3 × 4 5/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.59b

Photograph

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.60

page

AGO.102938.60a

AGO.102938.61

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 60 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Steps leading to entrance of Fujiya Hotel] [Page 61 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Carpt Stream and Bridge Leading up to Hotel [Page 62 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Fujiya Hotel Hallway]

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 22 × 15.5 cm (8 11/16 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.61a

AGO.102938.62

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 23.5 × 16.2 cm (9 1/4 × 6 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.62a

AGO.102938.63

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

page

[Page 63 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Left side of bedroom in Fujiya Hotel]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 19.2 × 15.2 cm (7 9/16 × 6 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.63a

AGO.102938.63b

AGO.102938.63c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

Photograph

[Right side of bedroom in Fujiya Hotel]

Photograph

[Bedroom in Fujiya Hotel]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August

3 gelatin silver prints, 6 mounting corners and 4 strips of adhesive tape gelatin silver print

image: 14.4 × 21 cm (5 11/16 × 8 1/4 in.) image: 14.4 × 20.5 cm (5 11/16 × 8 1/16 in.) image: 15.4 × 21.8 cm (6 1/16 × 8 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

99

by AGO.102938.64 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by page [Page 64 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Fujiya Hotel Dinning Room]

1946 June 1946 August 1946 2 Gelatin Prints and 8 mounting corners image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.64a

AGO.102938.64b

AGO.102938.65

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Fujiya Hotel Waitresses]

page

[Page 65 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Dinner Menu Saturday 11th May 1946] [Dinner Menu Friday 10th May 1946]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 15.5 × 21.7 cm (6 1/8 × 8 9/16 in.) image: 15.4 × 22.2 cm (6 1/16 × 8 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.65a

AGO.102938.65b

AGO.102938.65c

AGO.102938.66

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

print

print

Photograph

[Seated Japanese man making a Tatami]

page

AGO.102938.67

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

page

AGO.102938.67a

AGO.102938.67b

AGO.102938.68

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

print

[Page 66 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 67 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Dinner Menu Sunday 12th May 1946]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

2 dinner menus, 1 gelatin silver print, and 8 mounting corners letterpress

print: 18 × 13 cm (7 1/16 × 5 1/8 in.) print: 13 × 18 cm (5 1/8 × 7 1/16 in.) image: 9 × 11.5 cm (3 9/16 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

letterpress

gelatin silver print

8 mounting corners

June 1946 August 1946

2 dinner menus and 4 mounting corners

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

print

[Dinner Wednesday 8th May 1946]

page

[Page 68 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August

ink on paper

print: 18 × 13 cm (7 1/16 × 5 1/8 in.) print: 8 × 13 cm (3 1/8 × 5 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16

letterpress

5 gelatin silver prints and 20

100

by

AGO.102938.68a

AGO.102938.68b

AGO.102938.68c

AGO.102938.68d

AGO.102938.68e

AGO.102938.69

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Fujiya Hotel Pool]

1946

mounting corners gelatin silver print

in.)

Photograph

[Fujiya Hotel Hallway]

Photograph

[Fujiya Hotel Pond]

Photograph

[Fujiya Hotel exterior]

Photograph

[Fujiya Hotel seating area]

page

AGO.102938.69a

AGO.102938.69b

AGO.102938.70

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 69 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Row of US soldiers]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 15.4 × 21.7 cm (6 1/16 × 8 9/16 in.) image: 6 × 10.5 cm (2 3/8 × 4 1/8 in.) image: 5.5 × 8.2 cm (2 3/16 × 3 1/4 in.) image: 5.6 × 8 cm (2 3/16 × 3 1/8 in.) image: 6 × 10.5 cm (2 3/8 × 4 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Row of US soldiers being saluted]

page

AGO.102938.71

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

page

AGO.102938.71a

AGO.102938.71b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 70 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 71 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of River and mountain]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 15.7 × 21 cm (6 3/16 × 8 1/4 in.) image: 15.5 × 21.8 cm (6 1/8 × 8 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

[EMPTY]

June 1946 August 1946

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Exterior shot of building with child at window]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 10 × 12.2 cm (3 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 11.5 × 6.8 cm (4 1/2 × 2 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

101

AGO.102938.71c

AGO.102938.72

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[View of downhill road]

page

AGO.102938.72a

AGO.102938.72b

AGO.102938.73

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 72 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Mountain side road]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 21 × 15.3 cm (8 1/4 × 6 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of valley and single tree]

page

AGO.102938.73a

AGO.102938.73b

AGO.102938.74

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 73 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Three Japanese woman]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 16.4 × 15.4 cm (6 7/16 × 6 1/16 in.) image: 15.7 × 21 cm (6 3/16 × 8 1/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of Mountain side from valley]

page

[Page 74 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 14.4 × 22 cm (5 11/16 × 8 11/16 in.) image: 14 × 21.7 cm (5 1/2 × 8 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.74a

AGO.102938.74b

AGO.102938.74c

AGO.102938.74d

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Sengoku Gold Course and Valley (left)]

Photograph

[Sengoku Gold Course and Valley (right)]

Photograph

[View of mountain side road and valley]

Photograph

[View of mountain side road and valley in colour]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August

3 gelatin silver prints, 1 chromogeni c colour print, 8 mounting corners and 5 strips of adhesive tape gelatin silver print

image: 5.7 × 8.8 cm (2 1/4 × 3 7/16 in.) image: 5.7 × 10 cm (2 1/4 × 3 15/16 in.) image: 5.7 × 16.1 cm (2 1/4 × 6 5/16 in.) image: 8.2 × 13.8 cm (3 1/4 × 5 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

chromogeni c print

102

by AGO.102938.75 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by page [Page 75 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Valley]

1946 June 1946 August 1946 2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.75a

AGO.102938.75b

AGO.102938.76

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[View of Golf Course]

page

[Page 76 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 15.8 × 21.5 cm (6 1/4 × 8 7/16 in.) image: 15.1 × 22.5 cm (5 15/16 × 8 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102938.76a

AGO.102938.76b

AGO.102938.76c

AGO.102938.77

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[View of ocean from mountain top]

Photograph

[View of ocean and town from mountain top] [View of ocean and town]

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.77a

AGO.102938.77b

AGO.102938.78

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 77 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of ocean and town]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

2 chromogeni c colour prints, 1 gelatin silver print and 12 mounting corners chromogeni c print

image: 8.2 × 13.7 cm (3 1/4 × 5 3/8 in.) image: 8.2 × 13.7 cm (3 1/4 × 5 3/8 in.) image: 14 × 23.2 cm (5 1/2 × 9 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

chromogeni c print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of beach and town]

page

[Page 78 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 14 × 22.5 cm (5 1/2 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 13.9 × 23.1 cm (5 1/2 × 9 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin prints, 1 chromogeni c colour print and 8 mounting corners

103

AGO.102938.78a

AGO.102938.78b

AGO.102938.78c

AGO.102938.79

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Panoramic view of town from beach (left)]

Photograph

[Panoramic view of town from beach (right)] [View of town and beach]

Photograph

page

AGO.102938.79a

AGO.102938.80

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 79 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of rooftops and ocean]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 14 × 21.5 cm (5 1/2 × 8 7/16 in.) image: 13.5 × 23.5 cm (5 5/16 × 9 1/4 in.) image: 8.2 × 13.7 cm (3 1/4 × 5 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

chromogeni c print

1 gelatin silver print and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page

[Page 80 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [E.M. Rest Hotel: Atami]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

image: 13.5 × 23 cm (5 5/16 × 9 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.80a

AGO.102938.80b

AGO.102938.81

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[E.M. Rest Hotel in colour: Atami]

page

[Page 81 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Atami upper bay]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 chromogeni c print and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 16.4 × 23 cm (6 7/16 × 9 1/16 in.) image: 8.2 × 13.8 cm (3 1/4 × 5 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

chromogeni c print

AGO.102938.81a

AGO.102938.81b

AGO.102938.82

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Atami shoreline]

page

[Page 82 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 chromogeni c print and 8 mounting corners chromogeni c print

image: 13.8 × 8.2 cm (5 7/16 × 3 1/4 in.) image: 23.2 × 16.5 cm (9 1/8 × 6 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 gelatin silver print, 1 chromogeni c print and 8 mounting

104

corners AGO.102938.82a Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [View from road south of Atami] June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 gelatin silver print image: 16.5 × 23.2 cm (6 1/2 × 9 1/8 in.) image: 8.2 × 13.7 cm (3 1/4 × 5 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.82b

Photograph

Beach at Atami

chromogeni c print

AGO.102938.83

page

AGO.102938.83a

AGO.102938.83b

AGO.102938.83c

AGO.102938.84

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 83 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Unidentified Shoreline]

postcard

[Coastal Postcard]

postcard

[Mt. Fuji]

page

AGO.102938.84a

AGO.102938.84b

AGO.102938.84c

AGO.102938.84d

AGO.102938.85

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

[Page 84 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Okayama Garden]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 2 postcards and 12 mouting corners gelatin silver print

collotype

image: 14.8 × 23.2 cm (5 13/16 × 9 1/8 in.) postcard: 13.7 × 8.8 cm (5 3/8 × 3 7/16 in.) postcard: 9 × 14 cm (3 9/16 × 5 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

offset lithograph

4 postcards and 20 mounting corners

postcard

[Okayama Pond]

postcard

[Koraku-en, Okayama]

postcard

[Koraku - En Okayama]

page

Page 85 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

collotype

postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

collotype

collotype

collotype

4 postcards and 16 mounting corners

105

AGO.102938.85a

AGO.102938.85b

AGO.102938.85c

AGO.102938.85d

AGO.102938.86

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

[Okayama Koraku waterfall]

postcard

[Kasuga Shrine]

postcard

[Bridge Near Koraku]

postcard

[Postcard of KorakuEn, Okayama]

page

AGO.102938.86a

AGO.102938.86b

AGO.102938.86c

AGO.102938.86d

AGO.102938.86e

AGO.102938.87

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

Page 86 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Postcard of Okayama, Koraku - En]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

collotype

postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) postcard: 9 × 14 cm (3 9/16 × 5 1/2 in.) postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

offset lithograph

collotype

collotype

5 postcards and 20 mounting corners

postcard

[Koyasan]

postcard

[Main gate: Tayakama]

postcard

[Koraku-En postcard]

postcard

[Koyasan postcard]

page

AGO.102938.87a

AGO.102938.87b

AGO.102938.87c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

Page 87 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Smoke rising from valley]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

collotype

postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) postcard: 14 × 8.9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/2 in.) postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

collotype

letterpress halftone

collotype

collotype

Photograph

[View from airstrip of rising smoke in valley]

Photograph

[view of smoke rising from valley]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 -

4 gelatin silver prints, 3 post cards and 28 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 7.7 × 10 cm (3 1/16 × 3 15/16 in.) Album: 7.7 × 10 cm (3 1/16 × 3 15/16 in.) image: 7.7 × 10 cm (3 1/16 × 3

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

106

Assembled by AGO.102938.87d Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [View of rising smoke from valley]

August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 gelatin silver print

15/16 in.) image: 7.7 × 10 cm (3 1/16 × 3 15/16 in.) postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102938.87e

postcard

[Postcard of Joyokawa Shrine]

letterpress halftone

AGO. 102938.87f

postcard

[Near Nagoya]

letterpress halftone

AGO.102938.87g

postcard

[Joyokawa Shrine Postcard]

letterpress halftone

AGO.102938.88

page

AGO.102938.88a

AGO.102938.88b

AGO.102938.88c

AGO.102938.88d

AGO.102938.88e

AGO.102938.89

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

Page 88 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Garden in Joyokawa]

postcard

[Oku - Jone]

Photograph

[Group of Japanese on road side]

Photograph

[Panorama: view from plane]

postcard

[Japanese structure: Joyokawa]

page

AGO.102938.89a

AGO.102938.89b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Page 89 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese female standing]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

3 postcards, 2 gelatin silver prints and 20 mounting corners letterpress halftone

postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) image: 7.2 × 6.5 cm (2 13/16 × 2 9/16 in.) image: 4 × 15 cm (1 9/16 × 5 7/8 in.) postcard: 8.9 × 14 cm (3 1/2 × 5 1/2 in.) page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

collotype

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

letterpress halftone

3 gelatin silver prints

Photograph

[Caucasian female in swimming suite on beach]

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 18 × 13 cm (7 1/16 × 5 1/8 in.) image: 25.5 × 20 cm (10 1/16 × 7 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver print

107

AGO.102938.89c

AGO.102938.90

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Caucasian female in swimming suite with water skis] Page 90 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [ Inside back cove of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Album 3 of 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN

page

June 1946 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 25.5 × 20 cm (10 1/16 × 7 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

[EMPTY]

AGO.102938.91

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Inside back cover

June 1946 August 1946

1 adhered identificatio n sticker

Album: 35.5 × 30.3 cm (14 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.1-.97

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Album

June 1946 August 1946

AGO.102939.1

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.1a

AGO.102939.2

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 1 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Ginza St. Tokyo]

June 1946 August 1946

Album: 162 B&W Gelatin Prints, 3 Pamphlets, 5 envelops, 2 booklets, 8 Currency Notes, 1 Negative, 3 Prints, 2 Letters, 20 Postcards, 4 Newspaper Clipping, 2 Packs of Mounting Corners 1 gelatin silver print, and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Album: 35.5 × 30.9 × 4 cm (14 × 12 3/16 × 1 9/16 in.)

Page: 33.5 × 30.3 cm (13 3/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Page

AGO.102939.2a

AGO.102939.2b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Page 2 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Rubble of Yokohama]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 21.1 × 17.3 cm (8 5/16 × 6 13/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

4 gelatin silver prints, and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Boats in Canal: Yokohama]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August

image: 11.4 × 15.6 cm (4 1/2 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 5.2 × 7.1 cm (2 1/16 × 2 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

108

by AGO.102939.2c Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Tokyo Street Scene]

1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print image: 9.5 × 6.5 cm (3 3/4 × 2 9/16 in.) image: 11.4 × 15.7 cm (4 1/2 × 6 3/16 in.) page: 30.3 × 33.5 cm (11 15/16 × 13 3/16 in.)

AGO.102939.2d

Photograph

[Yokohama Canal]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.3

Page

AGO.102939.3a

AGO.102939.3b

AGO.102939.3c

AGO.102939.3d

AGO.102939.3e

AGO.102939.3f

AGO.102939.4

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 3 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Ginza Street Open Air Market: Tokyo]

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Three children: Tokyo sidewalk]

Photograph

[Ginza Street Sidewalk Market]

Photograph

[Tokyo Policeman]

Photograph

[Rubble cityscape]

Photograph

[Mother and child standing on sidewalk]

Page

AGO.102939.4a

AGO.102939.4b

AGO.102939.4c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 4 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Happy New Year Banner Hanging from Building] [Aerial view canal and town]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 19463 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 9.8 × 12.4 cm (3 7/8 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 8 × 5.4 cm (3 1/8 × 2 1/8 in.) image: 10.1 × 12.4 cm (4 × 4 7/8 in.) image: 5.5 × 8.2 cm (2 3/16 × 3 1/4 in.) image: 7.4 × 12.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 8 × 5.5 cm (3 1/8 × 2 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

[Aerial view of city]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 8.7 × 11.4 cm (3 7/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 9.2 × 11 cm (3 5/8 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 9.7 × 12.3 cm (3 13/16 × 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

109

AGO.102939.4d

AGO.102939.4e

AGO.102939.5

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Street Scene]

Photograph

[View of city from street]

Page

AGO.102939.5a

AGO.102939.5b

AGO.102939.5c

AGO.102939.5d

AGO.102939.5e

AGO.102939.6

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 5 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Aerial view of Imperial Palace]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 7.2 × 11.2 cm (2 13/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 11.2 cm (2 13/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.9 cm (13 9/16 × 12 3/16 in.)

Photograph

[90 degree Aerial view of city rubble]

Photograph

[Aerial view of city rubble]

Photograph

[Aerial view of shore line]

Photograph

[Aerial view of ships]

Page

AGO.102939.6a

AGO.102939.6b

AGO.102939.6c

AGO.102939.6d

AGO.102939.6e

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

[Page 6 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Two Pulled Rickshaws]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1945

image: 9.2 × 11.6 cm (3 5/8 × 4 9/16 in.) image: 7.4 × 11.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 9.1 × 12 cm (3 9/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.1 × 11.7 cm (3 9/16 × 4 5/8 in.) image: 9.1 × 11.7 cm (3 9/16 × 4 5/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

[Fifth Air Force Headquarters and General Mac Arthur's Quarters] [Kimonos on Display at museum: Tokyo]

Photograph

[Imperial Hotel, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright: Tokyo] [Rickshaws waiting on sidewalks]

Photograph

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 -

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

image: 7.4 × 11.1 cm (2 15/16 × 4 3/8 in.) image: 7.4 × 11.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 7.6 × 11.5 cm (3 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 7.4 × 11.1 cm (2 15/16 × 4 3/8 in.) image: 6.5 × 10.8 cm (2 9/16

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

110

Assembled by AGO.102939.6f Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Two men standing in the middle of a street]

August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print

× 4 1/4 in.) image: 6.5 × 10.8 cm (2 9/16 × 4 1/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.7

Page

AGO.102939.7a

AGO.102939.7b

AGO.102939.7c

AGO.102939.7d

AGO.102939.7e

AGO.102939.7f

AGO.102939.8

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 7 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Railroad near Tachikawa]

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Private house]

Photograph

[Street Car stop outside Mitsukoshi Department Store] [Central Measuring Point for all of Japan]

Photograph

Photograph

[View of home and crop fields]

Photograph

[Two Turkish girls]

Page

AGO.102939.8a

AGO.102939.8b

AGO.102939.8c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 8 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Older Japanese Woman]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 10 × 12.2 cm (3 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 11 × 6.7 cm (4 5/16 × 2 5/8 in.) image: 11 × 7.5 cm (4 5/16 × 2 15/16 in.) image: 7 × 11.4 cm (2 3/4 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 5.3 × 7 cm (2 1/16 × 2 3/4 in.) image: 7 × 11.5 cm (2 3/4 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

7 gelatin silver prints, and 28 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Young Japanese Woman smiling]

Photograph

[Seated woman and standing man]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 11 × 7.3 cm (4 5/16 × 2 7/8 in.) image: 11 × 7.3 cm (4 5/16 × 2 7/8 in.) image: 11 × 7.3 cm (4 5/16 × 2 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver print

Album: 158 gelatin silver prints on 96 pages in a black album

111

AGO.102939.8d

AGO.102939.8e

AGO.102939.8f

AGO.102939.8g

AGO.102939.9

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Woman and small child]

Photograph

[Young Woman]

Photograph

[Four Woman]

Photograph

[Family of 12, with one individual off to the side] [Page 9 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Souvenir Shop: Tachikawa]

Page

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 11 × 7.3 cm (4 5/16 × 2 7/8 in.) image: 11 × 7.3 cm (4 5/16 × 2 7/8 in.) image: 7.3 × 11 cm (2 7/8 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 7.3 × 11 cm (2 7/8 × 4 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints, and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.9a

AGO.102939.9b

AGO.102939.9c

AGO.102939.9d

AGO.102939.10

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Souvenir Mountain Store]

Photograph

[Phinias Brown and group giving instructions] [Young woman wearing white mink scarf] [Page 10 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Tachikawa Railroad Station]

Photograph

Page

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 9.8 × 12.3 cm (3 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 12.7 × 10 cm (5 × 3 15/16 in.) image: 12.2 × 9.6 cm (4 13/16 × 3 3/4 in.) image: 12.2 × 9.6 cm (4 13/16 × 3 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.10a

AGO.102939.10b

AGO.102939.11

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Crowed Tachikawa Railroad Station]

Page

[Page 11 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 15.6 × 21.2 cm (6 1/8 × 8 3/8 in.) image: 15.8 × 21.5 cm (6 1/4 × 8 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners

112

AGO.102939.11a

AGO.102939.11b

AGO.102939.12

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Two Children]

Photograph

[Three parentless children: Yokohama]

Page

AGO.102939.12a

AGO.102939.12b

AGO.102939.12c

AGO.102939.13

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 13 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Imperial Palace Moat and Buildings]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 15.5 × 22.5 cm (6 1/8 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 15.5 × 22.5 cm (6 1/8 × 8 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Imperial Palace]

Photograph

[Sentry Guard outside Imperial Palace]

Page

AGO.102939.13a

AGO.102939.13b

AGO.102939.13c

AGO.102939.14

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 13 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Imperial Palace Moat and Guard House]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 18 × 24.3 cm (7 1/16 × 9 9/16 in.) image: 8.7 × 10.5 cm (3 7/16 × 4 1/8 in.) image: 7.4 × 11.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[U.S. Guards Outside Imperial Palace Grounds] [Palace Where Foreign Diplomats Were Entertained] [Page 14 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Diet Building: Tokyo]

Photograph

Page

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 7.4 × 11 cm (2 15/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 7.4 × 11 cm (2 15/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 6.8 × 11.5 cm (2 11/16 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.14a

AGO.102939.14b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Diet Building from front lawn: Tokyo]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 9.3 × 12 cm (3 11/16 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 19 × 24 cm (7 1/2 × 9 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

113

AGO.102939.15

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.15a

AGO.102939.16

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 15 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Two Waitresses at Officers Dinning Hall]

June 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Page

AGO.102939.16a

AGO.102939.16b

AGO.102939.17

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

[Page 16 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Kasugo Shrine Nara]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 25 × 17.5 cm (9 13/16 × 6 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Imperial Household Carriage]

Page

AGO.102939.17a

AGO.102939.17b

AGO.102939.17c

AGO.102939.18

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 17 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [General MacArthur at 5th Air Force Headquarters: Tokyo] [Shosenkyo]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 postcard, and 12 mounting corners offset lithograph

postcard: 9 × 14 cm (3 9/16 × 5 1/2 in.) image: 13.6 × 25 cm (5 3/8 × 9 13/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

postcard

Photograph

[Children on Jeep)

Page

AGO.102939.18a

AGO.102939.18b

AGO.102939.18c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

[Page 18 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Bombed Hamamatsu]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 postcard and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 17.7 × 25 cm (6 15/16 × 9 13/16 in.) postcard: 9 × 14.2 cm (3 9/16 × 5 9/16 in.) image: 6 × 9.5 cm (2 3/8 × 3 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.5 cm (13 9/16 × 12 in.)

offset lithograph

gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Mosque minaret]

negative

[Unidentified Interior]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 -

3 gelatin silver prints, 1 negative and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 6.5 × 4.8 cm (2 9/16 × 1 7/8 in.) image: 9.8 × 4.8 cm (3 7/8 × 1 7/8 in.) negative: 6.9 × 11.3 cm (2

gelatin silver print

silver gelatin on

114

Assembled by AGO.102939.18d Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Japanese Dance Hall]

August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

silver polyester film base gelatin silver print

11/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 6.8 × 11.4 cm (2 11/16 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.19

Page

AGO.102939.19a

AGO.102939.19b

AGO.102939.19c

AGO.102939.19d

AGO.102939.19e

AGO.102939.20

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 19 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Exterior of Mosque]

5 gelatin silver prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Japanese Crowd]

Photograph

[Woman Suicide in Canal - Tokyo]

Photograph

[Japanese Crowed outside of Building]

Photograph

[Suicide's body being relocated]

Page

AGO.102939.20a

AGO.102939.20b

AGO.102939.21

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

[Page 20 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Joyous Handshake]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 22.8 × 15.5 cm (9 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 6 × 5.2 cm (2 3/8 × 2 1/16 in.) image: 6 × 5.2 cm (2 3/8 × 2 1/16 in.) image: 6 × 5.2 cm (2 3/8 × 2 1/16 in.) image: 6 × 5.2 cm (2 3/8 × 2 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

1 postcard, 1 letter and 4 mounting corners

letter

[Letter to the People of Japan]

Page

AGO.102939.21a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

paper money

[Page 21 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [1946 - 1955: 100 Yen Banknote]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

halftone

postcard: 10.6 × 15.8 cm (4 3/16 × 6 1/4 in.) letter: 20 × 20.5 cm (7 7/8 × 8 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

letterpress

2 Menus, 5 banknotes and 20 mounting corners Letterpress on paper

June 1945 August 1946

bank note: 9.3 × 16.3 cm (3 11/16 × 6 7/16 in.)

115

AGO.102939.21b

AGO.102939.21c

AGO.102939.21d

AGO.102939.21e

AGO.102939.21f

AGO.102939.21g

AGO.102939.22

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

paper money

[Military Currency: 10 Sen]

paper money

[Korean 1 Yen Banknote]

paper money

[1946 - 1956: 10 Yen Banknote]

paper money

[50 Yen Note]

print

[Dinner Menu: Fuijya Hotel]

print

[Breakfast Menu: Fujiya Hotel

Page

AGO.102939.22a

AGO.102939.22b

AGO.102939.22c

AGO.102939.22d

AGO.102939.23

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

[Page 22 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of the Famous Place, Shimonseki: from the front] [1943: 5 Yen Banknote]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

letterpress on paper

bank note: 6.6 × 7.9 cm (2 5/8 × 3 1/8 in.) Album: 8.7 × 14.7 cm (3 7/16 × 5 13/16 in.) Bank note: 7.5 × 14 cm (2 15/16 × 5 1/2 in.) bank note: 6.5 × 10.4 cm (2 9/16 × 4 1/8 in.) print: 18.8 × 13.2 cm (7 3/8 × 5 3/16 in.) print: 15.8 × 11.1 cm (6 1/4 × 4 3/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

letterpress on paper

letterpress on paper

letterpress on paper

letterpress

letterpress

paper money

paper money

[1943: 50 Yen Banknote]

postcard

[View of the Famous Place, Shimonseki: from the side] [Page 23 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

Page

June 1945 August 1945 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

2 banks notes, 2 postcards, and 16 mounting corners collotype

postcard: 8.8 × 14 cm (3 7/16 × 5 1/2 in.) bank note: 7.5 × 13 cm (2 15/16 × 5 1/8 in.) bank note: 6.4 × 10.5 cm (2 1/2 × 4 1/8 in.) postcard: 8.8 × 14 cm (3 7/16 × 5 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

letterpress on paper

letterpress on paper

collotype

AGO.102939.23a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

newspaper clipping

[Clipping from LIFE magazine: Volcanic Island Forming]

June 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 newspaper clipping, and 4 mounting corners halftone and letterpress

print: 15.7 × 23.7 cm (6 3/16 × 9 5/16 in.)

116

AGO.102939.23b

AGO.102939.24

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[View of new volcanic island from B - 25]

Page

AGO.102939.24a

AGO.102939.24b

AGO.102939.25

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

Page

AGO.102939.25a

AGO.102939.26

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

newspaper clipping

[Page 24 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Close up of smoke and steam from newly forming volcanic island] [Trail of smoke and steam from newly forming volcanic island] [Page 25 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [An Island Is Born]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

Album: 14.1 × 21.7 cm (5 9/16 × 8 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 20.4 × 24.5 cm (8 1/16 × 9 5/8 in.) image: 8.2 × 10 cm (3 1/4 × 3 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.5 cm (13 9/16 × 12 in.)

gelatin silver print

1 newspaper clipping and 4 mounting corners halftone and letterpress 1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Page

AGO.102939.26a

AGO.102939.27

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 26 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Volcanic Island Rising out of Ocean]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1945

print: 12.7 × 14.1 cm (5 × 5 9/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Page

AGO.102939.27a

AGO.102939.27b

AGO.102939.27c

AGO.102939.28

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

[Page 27 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Nikko Japan]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 23 × 15.5 cm (9 1/16 × 6 1/8 in.) Album: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

3 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Yomei Gate Nikko]

Photograph

[Kegon Falls Nikko]

Page

[Page 28 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 -

image: 15.5 × 22.8 cm (6 1/8 × 9 in.) image: 8 × 11.7 cm (3 1/8 × 4 5/8 in.) Album: 11.7 × 8 cm (4 5/8 × 3 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints

117

Assembled by

AGO.102939.28a

AGO.102939.28b

AGO.102939.28c

AGO.102939.29

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Bob Ryan, his mother, Robert C. Kraut, and Minura Arita] [Bob Ryan's Mother sleeping on train]

August 1946

and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut standing in street in Nikko] [Page 29 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View from Porch of Onoya Hotel]

Page

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 15.5 × 22.5 cm (6 1/8 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 7.2 × 11.2 cm (2 13/16 × 4 7/16 in.) image: 15 × 11.4 cm (5 7/8 × 4 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.4 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.29a

AGO.102939.29b

AGO.102939.30

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Main St.: Nikko]

Page

AGO.102939.30a

AGO.102939.30b

AGO.102939.31

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 30 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Children in the Street: Nikko]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 14.8 × 43.6 cm (5 13/16 × 17 3/16 in.) image: 15.5 × 22.9 cm (6 1/8 × 9 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut sitting in Onoya Hotel Room]

Page

AGO.102939.31a

AGO.102939.31b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 31 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut wearing a Komono]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 13 × 21.2 cm (5 1/8 × 8 3/8 in.) image: 15.5 × 25.8 cm (6 1/8 × 10 3/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Onoya Hotel Room]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 10.9 × 6.5 cm (4 5/16 × 2 9/16 in.) image: 19.9 × 14.8 cm (7 13/16 × 5 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

118

AGO.102939.32

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.32a

AGO.102939.32b

AGO.102939.32c

AGO.102939.33

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 32 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese Waitress at Onoya Hotel]

June 1945 August 1946

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Drainage pouring into river]

Photograph

[Arita Minura and Japanese Waitress]

Page

AGO.102939.33a

AGO.102939.33b

AGO.102939.33c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 33 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut wearing Japanese Mask] [Japanese Store Front]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 15.5 × 11.5 cm (6 1/8 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 15.5 × 6 cm (6 1/8 × 2 3/8 in.) image: 11.1 × 15.5 cm (4 3/8 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

AGO.102939.34

Page

AGO.102939.34a

AGO.102939.34b

AGO.102939.35

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut wearing Japanese Mask in front of Japanese Chinaware Shop] [Page 34 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View of Railroad bridge and street bridge] [1943: 10 Yen Banknote]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 22.8 × 15.5 cm (9 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 6.4 × 10.9 cm (2 1/2 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 11.2 cm (2 13/16 × 4 7/16 in.) Album: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

paper Money

Page

[Page 35 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 banknote, and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 14.8 × 22.9 cm (5 13/16 × 9 in.) Album: 8.1 × 14.5 cm (3 3/16 × 5 11/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Letterpress on paper

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners

119

AGO.102939.35a

AGO.102939.36

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Children On Train]

Page

[Page 36 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 21.7 × 15.4 cm (8 9/16 × 6 1/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.36a

AGO.102939.36b

AGO.102939.36c

AGO.102939.37

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Tree lined Pathway]

envelope

[Tourist Envelope]

Photograph

[View of road and bridge: Nikko]

Page

AGO.102939.37a

AGO.102939.37b

AGO.102939.37c

AGO.102939.38

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

pamphlet

[Page 37 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [How to see Nikko: Nikko Garage Co.]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 envelope, 8 mouting corners and 2 strips of adhesive tape gelatin silver print

image: 21.1 × 14.8 cm (8 5/16 × 5 13/16 in.) print: 15.4 × 9 cm (6 1/16 × 3 9/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 11.2 cm (2 13/16 × 4 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

offset lithography

gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Shrine entrance: Nikko]

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut at entrance of Nikko shrine] [Page 38 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Japanese pedestrians on bridge]

Page

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 pamphlet and 12 mounting corners offset lithography

Album: 20.1 × 9.7 cm (7 15/16 × 3 13/16 in.) image: 22.8 × 15.3 cm (9 × 6 in.) Album: 7.4 × 11 cm (2 15/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30 cm (13 9/16 × 11 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.38a

AGO.102939.38b

AGO.102939.38c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

Photograph

Sacred Bridge Nikko

postcard

[Red Sacred Bridge: Nikko]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 -

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 postcard and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 15.8 × 22.5 cm (6 1/4 × 8 7/8 in.) image: 8.2 × 11.8 cm (3 1/4 × 4 5/8 in.) postcard: 9 × 13.5 cm (3 9/16

gelatin silver print

offset lithograph

120

Assembled by AGO.102939.39 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Page [Page 39 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Sacred Bridge of Nikko from railroad bridge]

August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

× 5 5/16 in.) image: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.39a

AGO.102939.39b

AGO.102939.39c

AGO.102939.40

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

Photograph

[Sacred Bridge of Nikko from road]

Photograph

[Sacred Bridge of Nikko from road bridge]

Page

[Page 40 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 6.4 × 10.9 cm (2 1/2 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 9.4 × 11.8 cm (3 11/16 × 4 5/8 in.) image: 15.8 × 22.5 cm (6 1/4 × 8 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.40a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

booklet

[How to see Nikko]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

AGO.102939.40b

Photograph

[Mibutsu-do Temple Stairs and Entrance]

3 gelatin silver prints, 1 pamphlet, 1 strip of adhesive tape and 16 mounting corners offset lithography and letterpress halftone gelatin silver print

pamphlet: 18.8 × 12.7 cm (7 3/8 × 5 in.)

AGO.102939.40c

Photograph

[Mibutsu-do Temple Grounds]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.40d

Photograph

[Mibutsu-do Temple and Building]

gelatin silver print

image: 7.2 × 11.1 cm (2 13/16 × 4 3/8 in.) image: 7.2 × 11.1 cm (2 13/16 × 4 3/8 in.) image: 13 × 21.1 cm (5 1/8 × 8 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.41

Page

AGO.102939.41a

AGO.102939.41b

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Page 41 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Mibustu-do Temple Entryway]

Photograph

[Mibustu-do Interior]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 postcard and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 14 × 21.1 cm (5 1/2 × 8 5/16 in.) image: 14 × 21.1 cm (5 1/2 × 8 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

121

by AGO.102939.41c Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by postcard [Mibustu Temple]

1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 offset lithograph postcard: 9 × 14 cm (3 9/16 × 5 1/2 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.42

Page

AGO.102939.42a

AGO.102939.42b

AGO.102939.42c

AGO.102939.42d

AGO.102939.42e

AGO.102939.43

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 42 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [View from Toshogu Temple Tower: Nikko]

5 gelatin silver prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Vertical of Toshogu Temple Tower: Nikko]

Photograph

[Toshogu Temple Tower]

Photograph

[View of Toshogu Temple Tower through archway] [Toshogu Temple Bell]

Photograph

Page

AGO.102939.43a

AGO.102939.43b

AGO.102939.43c

AGO.102939.44

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 43 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Entryway to Toshogu Temple]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 7.3 × 11 cm (2 7/8 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 10.4 × 7 cm (4 1/8 × 2 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 11.9 cm (3 3/4 × 4 11/16 in.) image: 12 × 9.5 cm (4 3/4 × 3 3/4 in.) image: 9.6 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Courtyard of Toshogu Temple]

Photograph

[Toshogu Temple Rooftop]

Page

[Page 44 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 15.5 × 22.8 cm (6 1/8 × 9 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints, 1 envelope with 4 postcards, and 12 mounting corners

122

AGO.102939.44a

AGO.102939.44b

AGO.102939.44c

AGO.102939.44d

AGO.102939.45

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Temple archway]

Photograph

[Pillar: Nikko]

Photograph

[Temple: Nikko]

envelop

[Nikko Postcard Envelop]

Page

[Page 45 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Tourist Booklet]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 11.5 × 15.5 cm (4 1/2 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 11.5 × 7.2 cm (4 1/2 × 2 13/16 in.) image: 9.5 × 12.3 cm (3 3/4 × 4 13/16 in.) envelop: 14.8 × 9.9 cm (5 13/16 × 3 7/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

colour halftone

AGO.102939.45a

AGO.102939.45b

AGO.102939.45c

AGO.102939.46

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

booklet

Photograph

[Temple entrance]

Photograph

[Temple Detail]

Page

[Page 46 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver print, tourist booklet, and 3 strips of adhesive tape offset lithograph and letterpress gelatin silver print

booklet: 15 × 21.1 × 0.8 cm (5 7/8 × 8 5/16 × 5/16 in.) image: 15 × 12.2 cm (5 7/8 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 12.2 × 9.5 cm (4 13/16 × 3 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.46a

AGO.102939.46b

AGO.102939.46c

AGO.102939.47

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

Photograph

[Stairway to Temple]

envelop

[Postcard Envelope]

Photograph

[Toshogu Temple Rooftop]

Page

[Page 47 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1946 August 1946 June 1945 August

2 gelatin silver prints, 1 envelope with 8 postcards , and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 22.7 × 16 cm (8 15/16 × 6 5/16 in.) envelop: 15.5 × 9.5 cm (6 1/8 × 3 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16

ink on paper

contains 8 postcards

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints, 1 postcard

123

by

AGO.102939.47a

AGO.102939.47b

AGO.102939.47c

AGO.102939.47d

AGO.102939.47e

AGO.102939.48

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Toshogu Temple]

1946

Photograph

[Toshogu Temple Entrance]

Photograph

[Toshogu Temple detail]

Photograph

[Toshogu Temple Roof detail]

Photograph

[Toshogu Temple pillar detail]

Page

AGO.102939.48a

AGO.102939.48b

AGO.102939.48c

AGO.102939.48d

AGO.102939.49

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 48 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Archway]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

and 20 mounting corners offset lithograph

in.)

postcard: 8.8 × 13.7 cm (3 7/16 × 5 3/8 in.) image: 9.3 × 12 cm (3 11/16 × 4 3/4 in.) Album: 9.3 × 11.5 cm (3 11/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 9.6 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 9.5 × 12.2 cm (3 3/4 × 4 13/16 in.) Album: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

4 gelatin silver prints and 16 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Shrine structure]

Photograph

[Temple Exterior]

Photograph

[Buddha sculpture]

Page

[Page 49 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 20.7 × 15.5 cm (8 1/8 × 6 1/8 in.) image: 11.9 × 9.4 cm (4 11/16 × 3 11/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 11 cm (2 13/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 12 × 9.2 cm (4 3/4 × 3 5/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.49a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

pamphlet

[Temple Procession]

June 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 1 pamphlet, 8 mounting corners, and 2 strips of adhesive tape offset lithography

print: 17.5 × 155 cm (6 7/8 × 61 in.)

124

AGO.102939.49b

AGO.102939.50

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Temple courtyard]

Page

AGO.102939.50a

AGO.102939.50b

AGO.102939.50c

AGO.102939.51

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

postcard

[Page 50 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Front of Toshogu Temple]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 11.5 × 16 cm (4 1/2 × 6 5/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

Photograph

[Artesian Well]

postcard

[Postcard of Artesian Well]

Page

AGO.102939.51a

AGO.102939.51b

AGO.102939.51c

AGO.102939.52

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 51 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Rooftop of Temple]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

1 gelatin silver print, 2 postcards, and 12 mounting corners offset lithograph

postcard: 3.5 × 12.5 cm (1 3/8 × 4 15/16 in.) image: 23 × 15 cm (9 1/16 × 5 7/8 in.) image: 13.7 × 8.8 cm (5 3/8 × 3 7/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

offset lithograph

postcard

[Temple in Winter]

Photograph

[Artesian Well in Forest]

Page

AGO.102939.52a

AGO.102939.52b

AGO.102939.53

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 52 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Stairs and archway leading to temple]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

2 gelatin silver print, 1 postcard and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 15 × 22 cm (5 7/8 × 8 11/16 in.) postcard: 14 × 9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 9/16 in.) image: 12 × 9.5 cm (4 3/4 × 3 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

woodblock print

gelatin silver print

2 gelatin silver prints and 8 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Close up of temple]

Page

[Page 53 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS,

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 21.5 × 15.7 cm (8 7/16 × 6 3/16 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

3 gelatin silver prints, 1 printed letter, and

125

PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102939.53a Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Kagura Dancers] June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

image: 10.5 × 8 cm (4 1/8 × 3 1/8 in.) image: 10.7 × 8.8 cm (4 3/16 × 3 7/16 in.) image: 7.2 × 11 cm (2 13/16 × 4 5/16 in.) sheet: 12.5 × 17.8 cm (4 15/16 × 7 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.53b

Photograph

[Kagura Danger]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.53c

Photograph

[Kagura Dancers on Steps of Temple]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.53d

letter

A brief explanation of the Kagura

ink on paper

AGO.102939.54

Page

AGO.102939.54a

AGO.102939.55

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 54 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Archer Statue]

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Page

AGO.102939.55a

AGO.102939.56

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 55 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Temple Priest]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 22.8 × 15.5 cm (9 × 6 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

1 gelatin silver print and 4 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Page

AGO.102939.56a

AGO.102939.56b

AGO.102939.56c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 56 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Temple entryway]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 21 × 14.8 cm (8 1/4 × 5 13/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

6 gelatin silver prints and 24 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Temple entryway with statues]

Photograph

[Statue of Archer]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 9.1 × 11.5 cm (3 9/16 × 4 1/2 in.) image: 9.5 × 11.7 cm (3 3/4 × 4 5/8 in.) image: 11.8 × 9.1 cm (4 5/8 × 3 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

126

AGO.102939.56d

AGO.102939.56e

AGO.102939.56f

AGO.102939.57

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Three Wise Monkeys]

Photograph

[Robert C Kraut and US soldier in cable car]

Photograph

[Mountain Cable Car]

Page

AGO.102939.57a

AGO.102939.57b

AGO.102939.57c

AGO.102939.57d

AGO.102939.57e

AGO.102939.57f

AGO.102939.58

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 57 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C Kraut in Bus: Nikko]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

gelatin silver print

image: 9.5 × 12.1 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) image: 11 × 7 cm (4 5/16 × 2 3/4 in.) image: 9.6 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

Photograph

[Kegon Waterfall]

Photograph

[Kegon Waterfall from viewing platform]

postcard

[Print of Kegon Waterfall]

Photograph

[Aerial lift and station]

Photograph

[Ice at Keagon Waterfall]

Page

AGO.102939.58a

AGO.102939.58b

AGO.102939.58c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C.,

Photograph

[Page 58 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Lake up in the Nikko Mountains

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

5 gelatin silver prints, 1 postcard, and 26 moutning corners gelatin silver print

image: 7.2 × 11 cm (2 13/16 × 4 5/16 in.) image: 13.9 × 9 cm (5 1/2 × 3 9/16 in.) image: 12.2 × 9.5 cm (4 13/16 × 3 3/4 in.) postcard: 12.4 × 3.5 cm (4 7/8 × 1 3/8 in.) image: 9 × 14 cm (3 9/16 × 5 1/2 in.) image: 11 × 7.5 cm (4 5/16 × 2 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

offset lithograph

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

5 gelatin silver prints and 20 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

[View of cloud covered mountains and lake]

Photograph

Yunoko Lake Nikko

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 -

image: 9 × 14 cm (3 9/16 × 5 1/2 in.) image: 6.5 × 10.8 cm (2 9/16 × 4 1/4 in.) image: 8.2 × 11.8 cm (3 1/4 ×

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

127

Assembled by AGO.102939.58d Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Photograph [Building along rocky shoreline]

August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 gelatin silver print

4 5/8 in.) image: 6 × 10.5 cm (2 3/8 × 4 1/8 in.) image: 9.5 × 12 cm (3 3/4 × 4 3/4 in.) Album: 35.6 x 30.9 x 4.3 cm (14 x 12 3/16 x 1 11/16 in.)

AGO.102939.58e

Photograph

[Sailboat of Yunoko Lake]

gelatin silver print

AGO.102939.59

Page

AGO.102939.59a

AGO.102939.59b

AGO.102939.59c

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 59 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Robert C. Kraut standing in front of waterfall] [Bob Ryan's Mother with three Japanese soliders on lake shore] [Children walking along shoreline]

3 gelatin silver prints and 12 mounting corners gelatin silver print

Photograph

Photograph

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

image: 11 × 7.2 cm (4 5/16 × 2 13/16 in.) image: 11 × 7.2 cm (4 5/16 × 2 13/16 in.) image: 15.7 × 21.4 cm (6 3/16 × 8 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

Album: 158 gelatin silver prints on 96 pages in a black album

AGO.102939.60

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.61

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.62

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.63

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

[Page 60 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 61 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 62 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 63 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Matson Line Wireless

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.5 cm (13 9/16 × 12 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

AGO.102939.63a

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled

pamphlet

June 1945 August

1 gelatin silver print, 2 newspaper clippings, and 1 pamphlet ink on paper

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

pamphlet: 30.3 × 23 cm (11 15/16 × 9 1/16

128

by AGO.102939.63b Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by newspaper clipping [Yacht race news story]

1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 halftone and letterpress halftone and letterpress gelatin silver print

in.) print: 17 × 21 cm (6 11/16 × 8 1/4 in.) print: 15.2 × 25.2 cm (6 × 9 15/16 in.) image: 25.5 × 17.6 cm (10 1/16 × 6 15/16 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.63c

newspaper clipping

Land out of Sea

AGO.102939.63d

Photograph

Hull of the Monterrey

AGO.102939.64

Page

AGO.102939.65

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.65a

AGO.102939.65b

AGO.102939.65c

AGO.102939.65d

AGO.102939.65e

AGO.102939.65f

AGO.102939.66

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Photograph

[Page 64 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 65 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] Lt. Basch. Showa Army Air Base

June 1945 August 1946

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut with bomb]

Photograph

[Aerial view of Airstrip]

Photograph

[Robert C. Kraut standing with solider]

postcards

[8 Postcards of Nikko attractions]

envelope

[2 envelopes of mounting corners]

Page

[Page 66 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN]

June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946

4 gelatin silver prints, 2 packets of mounting corners, and 8 postcards gelatin silver print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

image: 12.5 × 9.8 cm (4 15/16 × 3 7/8 in.) image: 11.5 × 8.3 cm (4 1/2 × 3 1/4 in.) image: 7.5 × 12.3 cm (2 15/16 × 4 13/16 in.) image: 12.3 × 9.5 cm (4 13/16 × 3 3/4 in.) postcard: 8.7 × 14 cm (3 7/16 × 5 1/2 in.) envelopes: 14 × 8 cm (5 1/2 × 3 1/8 in.) page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

gelatin silver print

collotype

ink on paper

129

AGO.102939.67

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.68

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.69

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.70

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.71

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.72

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.73

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.74

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.75

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.76

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

[Page 67 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 68 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 69 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 70 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 71 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 72 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 73 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 74 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 75 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 76 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS,

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

130

PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102939.77 Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Page [Page 77 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 78 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 79 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 80 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 81 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 82 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 83 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 84 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 85 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] June 1945 August 1946 page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.78

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.79

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.80

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.81

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.82

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.83

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.84

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.85

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

131

AGO.102939.86

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.87

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.88

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.89

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.90

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.91

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.92

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.93

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.94

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

AGO.102939.95

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

[Page 86 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 87 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 88 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 89 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 90 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 91 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 92 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 93 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 94 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Page 95 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS,

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30 cm (13 9/16 × 11 13/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

June 1945 August 1946

1 print

page: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

132

PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] AGO.102939.95a Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by print [Christmas Gift tag] June 1945 August 1946 June 1945 August 1946 offset lithograph print: 7.8 × 5 cm (3 1/16 × 1 15/16 in.) Album: 34.5 × 30.3 cm (13 9/16 × 11 15/16 in.)

AGO.102939.96

Page

AGO.102939.97

Kraut, Robert C., Assembled by

Page

[Page 96 of PICTORIAL REVIEW FROM APRIL 1945 - AUG 1946 OF SO. PACIFIC ISLANDS, PHILIPPINES, OKINAWA AND JAPAN] [Inside of Back Cover]

June 1945 August 1946

1 adhered identificatio n sticker

Album: 35.6 x 30.9 x 4.3 cm (14 x 12 3/16 x 1 11/16 in.)

133

BIBLIOGRAPHY Benson, Richard. The Printed Picture. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2009. Dean, Max. National Gallery of Canada. Accessed June 30th, 2013. http://www.gallery.ca/en/see/collections/artist.php?iartistid=1345 Dean, Max. Interview by Steven Kramer. Personal interview. Toronto, July 5th 2013. Greenough, Sarah and Diane Waggoner. The Art of the American Snapshot 1888-1978: From the Collection of Robert E. Jackson. Washington DC: National Gallery of Art, 2007. Haley, Alan and Adrienne Lundgren, "Preserving Photographic Albums" chapter. In Photographic Memory: The Album in the Age of Photography, edited by Verna Posever Curtis. New York: Aperture Foundation, 2011., 277-279 Hackett, Sophie. "Questions of Art: Photography in the Museum" lecture, The Public Life of Photographs Symposium, Toronto, ON. May 10, 2013. Hackett, Sophie. Interviewed by Steven Kramer. Personal interview. Toronto, June 30th 2013. Helfand, Jessica. Scrapbooks: An American History. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008. Hueber, Melodie. "Housing the Family: Re-Housing the Peterkin Family (Theresa Bywater Peterkin) Carte-de-visite and Cabinet Portrait Album at the Art Gallery of Ontario" master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2012. Langford, Martha. Suspended Conversations: The Afterlife in the Age of Photography. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001. Lavédrine, Bertrand. Photographs of the Past: Process and Preservation. Los Angeles: Getty Conservation Institute, 2009. Levin, Barbra and Stephanie Snyder. Snapshot Chronicles: Inventing the American Album. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2006. Radvak, Liana. "TMS: Cataloguing Albums" (presentation, Art Gallery of Ontario, 2012.) Ravenstein, Charles A. Organization and Lineage of the United States Air Force. Washington DC: US Government Printing Office, 1986. Ritzenthaler, Mary Lynn and Diane Vogt-O'Conner. Photographs: Archival Care and Management. Chicago : Society of American Archivists, 2006. Skrein, Christian Snapshots: The Eye of the Century. Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2004. Struk, Janina. Private Pictures: Soldiers' Inside View of War. London: I.B. Tauris, 2011. 134

Tucker, Susan and Katherine Ott and Patricia P. Buckler. The Scrapbook in American Life. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2006. Weinstein, Robert A. and Larry Booth. Collection, Use and Care of Historical Photographs. Nashville: American Association for State and Local History, 1977. Van Laar, Timothy. "Views of the Ordinary and Other Scenic Disappointments" chapter. In Postcards: Ephemeral Histories of Modernity, edited by David Prochaska and Jordana Mendelson, University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2010. Zachary, Shannon. Conservation of scrapbooks and albums : postprints of the Book and Paper Group/Photographic Materials Group joint session at the 27th annual meeting of the American Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, June 11, 1999, St. Louis, Missouri. Washington D.C.: The Book and Paper Group, The Photographic Materials Group, American Institution for Conservation of Historic Works, 2000.

135

