   THE  CALIFORNIA  GOLD  RUSH:     APPROACHES  TO  PRODUCING  DAGUERREOTYPE  VIEWS   AN  EXAMINATION  OF  VIEWS  IN  THE     MATTHEW  R.  ISENBURG  COLLECTION  AT  AMC  TORONTO      by   Marcos  R.  Armstrong   Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  September  2013         A  thesis   presented  to  Ryerson  University   and  AMC  Toronto   in  partial  fulfillment  of  the   requirements  for  the  degree  of     Master  of  Arts     in  the  Program  of     Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management   Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2013   ©  Marcos  R.  Armstrong  2013     

  

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  thesis,   including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or  by  other   means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose   of  scholarly  research.        I  understand  that  my  thesis  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.      Marcos  R.  Armstrong                             

  

ii  

  

ABSTRACT      Marcos  R.  Armstrong      The  California  Gold  Rush:  Approaches  to  Producing  Daguerreotype  Views.     An  Examination  of  Views  in  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto      Thesis  (M.A.)  Fall  2013  ­  Photographic  Preservation  and  Collections  Management,  Ryerson   University              This  thesis  examines  daguerreotypes  of  outdoor  views  made  during  the  California  Gold   Rush  from  1848  to  1856,  now  in  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.  The   views  were  made  for  private  commissions,  public  viewings,  and  as  models  for  engraving.   Daguerreotypists  encountered  a  number  of  challenging  working  conditions  in  the  field,   different  from  those  in  galleries  where  portraits  were  taken.  In  analyzing  18   daguerreotypes  from  the  Isenburg  Collection,  this  thesis  investigates  how  working   conditions  during  the  Gold  Rush  such  as  light,  climate,  and  terrain,  influenced   daguerreotypists's  decisions  when  making  views;  these  include  the  choice  of  camera   apparatus,  optics  and  aperture,  variations  in  exposure  times,  and  composition  and  vantage   points.  By  considering  the  purposes  of  such  views,  and  the  photographer's  approaches  to   making  them,  the  thesis  explains  the  appearance  of  these  early  visual  documents  of  the   western  American  frontier.                 
iii  

  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS      I  would  like  to  extend  my  gratitude  to  everyone  who  was  involved  in  this  thesis  project:   Matthew  R.  Isenburg  for  developing  this  extraordinary  collection  of  19th  century   photography  and  photographic  material;  AMC  Toronto  for  giving  this  collection  a  home,   and  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  study  it;  to  Mike  Robinson  for  his  valuable  input,   scholarship  and  expertise,  and  his  tireless  commitment  to  photography  history  and   processes,  and  everyone  at  AMC  Toronto  who  has  supported  my  research  there,  including   Jill  Offenbeck,  Andrea  Raymond,  Amanda  Shear,  and  Michelle  Wilson;  to  Gary  E.  Ewer  for   his  support  and  excellent  scholarship  in  the  field;  to  Grant  Romer  and  Dennis  Waters  for   their  insight;  to  Soledad  Abarca  and  Carla  Franceschini  who  during  my  internship  at   Biblioteca  Nacional  de  Chile  (National  Library  of  Chile),  introduced  me  to  some  of  the   collections  and  ideas  that  sparked  the  development  of  this  thesis  project;  to  everyone  at   Ryerson  University  including  Marta  Braun  for  her  insight,  support  and  for  introducing  me   to  various  archives  where  I  could  gain  the  knowledge  that  has  greatly  contributed  to  this   thesis;  to  Thierry  Gervais  and  David  Harris  for  their  guidance  throughout  this  thesis   project;  to  my  friends  and  colleagues  in  the  Master's  program  for  their  feedback  and   support;  to  Jesse  Carliner  for  his  encouragement  and  support  in  everything  I  do;  and  to  the   community  of  photography  collectors,  scholars,  and  historians,  who  have  been  an   invaluable  resource  throughout  my  research  for  this  thesis.                          
iv  

  

DEDICATION      This  thesis  is  dedicated  to  my  partner,  Jesse  for  all  of  his  support,  encouragement  and  love.   Also,  much  gratitude  to  my  parents,  Brian  and  Mary  Carmen,  for  fostering  in  me  a  curiosity   about  the  world,  and  for  putting  up  with  all  of  my  questions.                                                        
v  

  

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS     
LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS                                                                                                 vii     LIST  OF  APPENDICES                                                   x      INTRODUCTION                                                    1                             LITERATURE  REVIEW                                                 3                                                                              CHAPTER  1:  CALIFORNIA  GOLD  RUSH  VIEWS                                        7         Background                                                                                      7      Purposes                                                                  11     Public  Viewings  and  Engravings                                    11     Private  Commissions                                          15   Subject  Matter                                             18     Mining  Settlements                                          20     Mining  Scenes                                             20   Commercial  Properties                                                                  21   Dwellings                                                                          21   The  City  (San  Francisco)                                       22   Working  Conditions                                                             23        CHAPTER  2:  DECISIONS  AND  RESULTS                                       27                                                Obtaining  Correct  Perspective                                                       27                         Reflective  devices  for  correcting  lateral  perspective                                28      Lateral  perspective  left  uncorrected                                    30      Limitations  of  the  tripod  for  obtaining  correct  lateral  perspective                                                   31   Light  and  Exposure  Times                                                      34   Minimizing  exposure  times  with  the  Petzval  portrait  lens                           35      Obtaining  greater  depth  of  field  by  decreasing  the  aperture  of  a  portrait  lens                     36      Ensuring  greater  detail  and  focus  with  a  landscape  lens                           37      Addressing  low  light  conditions  with  a  portrait  lens                                                         39   Multiple  Views  of  the  Same  Subject                                                                  40         Multiple  views  for  engravings                                                       40                       42        Multiple  views  that  offer  various  perspectives  of  a  scene         Compositions  and  Mise  en  scène                                                                  44         Choosing  vantage  points  for  a  city  scene                                 44      Choosing  vantage  points  for  a  mining  scene                                 46      Arranging  a  scene                                          47         CONCLUSIONS                                                  49        ILLUSTRATIONS                                                                           50       APPENDICES                                                   88   BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                90  

  

vi  

  

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS        
Figure      1.   George  H.  Johnson,  Notion  Company  Works,  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River,  c.  1852  (whole  plate).      Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      2.     Unknown  Maker,  Outdoor  Scene  Of  Building  With  Shaving  Equipment  In  Background,                                   c.  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      3.   Unknown  Maker,  Moses  Warren's  Cabin,  California,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg      Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      4.     Unknown  Maker,  F.A.  Hornblower  Mining  Store,  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at      AMC  Toronto.      5.     George  H.  Johnson,  Mining  And  Assorted  Activity  On  The  American  River,  Near  Sacramento,      c.  1852  (whole  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      6.   George  H.  Johnson,  Diverted  River  at  Mining  Operation,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg      Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      7.   Silas  W.  Selleck,  Merchant  Tailor  Shop  With  Proprietor,  California,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate).      Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      8.     Unknown  Maker,  A  Main  Street  in  Orleans  Flats,  c.  1852  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.      9.     Unknown  Maker,  Street  View  Of  A  Cash  Store,  c.  1850  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.      10.     Robert  H.  Vance,  Portsmouth  Square,  San  Francisco,  c.  1854  (two  1/6  plate  stereo).   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      11.     Robert  H.  Vance,  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856  (whole  plate).  Isenburg  Collection   at  AMC  Toronto.      12.   Robert  H.  Vance,  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856  (whole  plate),  with  case.  Isenburg   Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.        13.     Unknown  Maker,  Group  Of  Miners  Working  A  Long  Tom  In  California  Gold  Camp,  1849  (half   plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.        14.     George  H.  Johnson,  Sterrett  &  Company,  c.  1851  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC   Toronto.        15.   Unknown  Maker,  S.  McDonnell's  Gold  Miner's  Store,  Garden  Valley,  c.  1851  (half  plate).   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.    

  

vii  

  

16.           17.      18.      19.    

Unknown  Maker,  Mining  Scene  With  Building  Made  Of  Sail  Cloth  ­  Seven  Miners  With  Board   Sluices,  c.  1850  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     George  H.  Johnson,  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC   Toronto.     George  H.  Johnson,  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  (half  plate).  Detail.  Isenburg  Collection   at  AMC  Toronto.     Unknown  Maker,  Fourteen  Man  In  Cut,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC   Toronto.     Unknown  Maker,  Busy  Mining  Scene  With  Group  Of  Workers,  c.  1853  (half  plate).  Isenburg   Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     `Notion  Company's  Works,  California,'  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room  Companion,  1854   (engraving).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     Robert  H.  Vance  advertisement,  Hutchings'  California  Magazine.  (San  Francisco,  CA:   Hutching  &  Rosenfield,  Publishers,  February  1859).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     American  1850s  style  sensitizing  boxes,  American  cast  iron  mercury  baths,  and  box   cameras  (1/4  plate  and  whole  4/4  plate  sizes).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     Mirror  for  reversing  images  (E).  Illustration  from  plate.  N.P.  Lerebours,  A  Treatise  on   Photography;  Containing  the  Latest  Discoveries  and  Improvements  Appertaining  to  the   Daguerreotype,  translated  by  J.  Egerton.  (London:  Longman,  Brown,  Green,  and  Longmans,   1843).      George  H.  Johnson,  Diggings  at  Grizzly  Flat,  El  Dorado  Co.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate).  Zelda   Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California  Berkley.     George  H.  Johnson,  Diggings  at  Grizzly  Flat,  El  Dorado  Co.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate),  detail.   Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California  Berkley.   George  H.  Johnson,  Settlement  and  Mining  Operation  in  Grizzly  Flats,  El  Dorado  County,   Calif.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate).  Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,  University   of  California  Berkley.   George  H.  Johnson,  Settlement  and  Mining  Operation  in  Grizzly  Flats,  El  Dorado  County,   Calif.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate),  detail.  Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,   University  of  California  Berkley.     Illustration  of  C.C.  Harrison's  camera  for  views.  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  November   15,  1850,  56.        Hand  crafted  diaphragm.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.      Cathan's  Reflector  and  Lens.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.    

  
20.      21.      22.      23.           24.         25.      26.        27.      28.        29.   30.   31.     

  

viii  

  

32.   33.         34.      35.      36.      37.      38.                                           

Voigtländer  Petzval-type  portrait  lens  on  box  camera,  ¼  plate  size.  Isenburg  Collection  at     AMC  Toronto.        Brass  stop  supplied  with  a  Lerebours  lens.  Front  and  back  views.  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.     Handbill  for  clipper  ship  to  California,  1850s.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.   Transaction  ­  Adams  &  Co.  (recto  and  verso).  Engraving  of  daguerreotype,  `Group  Of  Miners   Working  A  Long  Tom  In  California  Gold  Camp,'  1849  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC   Toronto.     Iron  center  tripod  with  ¼  plate  camera.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     French  landscape  lens.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     American  ¼  plate  box  camera.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.       

                                            
  
ix  

  

LIST  OF  APPENDICES        
Appendix      1.   Map  of  California,  J.H.  Colton  &  Co.  No.  172,  1855.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.        2.     Map  of  San  Francisco,  (detail  from  Map  of  California),  J.H.  Colton  &  Co.  No.  172,  1855.   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.    

                                                                 

  

  

x  

  

INTRODUCTION     
   Of  the  many  daguerreotypes  produced  during  the  California  Gold  Rush  from  1848  until  the   late  1850s,  most  were  portraits  taken  indoors:  outdoor  views  were  a  rarity.1  Yet  most   daguerreotypists,  as  part  of  their  practice,  produced  outdoor  views.  These  views  were  typically   taken  from  the  ground  level,  of  the  mining  activities,  landscapes,  buildings,  and  structures.  The   Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection  at  the  Archive  of  Modern  Conflict  (AMC)  in  Toronto  contains  55   daguerreotype  views  that  document  the  California  Gold  Rush  from  1848  until  approximately  1859.   A  close  analysis  of  18  of  these  views  is  the  subject  of  this  thesis.  They  include  three  whole  plates,   eight  half  plates,  six  quarter  plates  and  one  stereo  image  comprised  of  two  sixth  plates.  Ten  of  the   views  have  not  been  attributed  to  any  maker,  while  eight  have  been  attributed  to  George  H.  Johnson   (c.  1823),  Silas  Wright  Selleck  (c.  1828­1885)  and  Robert  H.  Vance  (1825­1876).        Outdoor  views  served  both  public  and  personal  use.  These  include  daguerreotypes  used  for   public  viewings;  as  sources  for  prints  and  engravings;  and  as  records  commissioned  by  individuals   and  businesses.  The  diversity  in  appearance  of  these  outdoor  views--compared  to  the  uniform   appearance  of  indoor  portraits--reflects  not  only  their  different  uses  but  also  the  varied  conditions   that  daguerreotypists  encountered  when  working  outdoors.  Compared  to  portraits  made  in  the   controlled  environments  of  indoor  galleries  and  saloons,  views  offer  insights  into  the  varied   conditions  that  daguerreotypists  confronted  when  working  in  the  field.        The  working  conditions  that  daguerreotypists  encountered  when  producing  outdoor  views,   that  would  have  differed  from  making  studio  portraits,  include  variable  light  conditions,  the   problems  of  transporting  and  operating  camera  apparatus  to  the  site  of  the  view,  and  of  preparing   and  developing  plates  in  a  variety  of  settings  and  temperatures.  This  thesis  project  investigates  in   detail  how  these  working  conditions  influenced  the  decisions  that  daguerreotypists  made  when   producing  views  of  the  California  Gold  Rush;  decisions  about  the  camera  apparatus  they  used,  their   choice  of  optics  and  aperture,  variations  in  exposure  times  and  decisions  made  about  composition   and  vantage  points.      This  thesis  project  will  describe  and  analyze  a  selection  of  outdoor  views  made  during  the   California  Gold  Rush  by  taking  into  account  how  their  appearance  (composition,  perspective,  depth   of  field,  focus,  lighting)  and  the  people,  objects  and  activities  integrated  into  the  views--were   affected  by  the  decisions  made  in  their  production.  The  investigation  will  consider  the  decisions  as  

                                                                                                                

1  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  Carleton  E.  Watkins:  Photographer  of  the  American  West  (Albuquerque,  NM:      University  of  New  Mexico  Press,  1983),  5.    

  

1  

  

responses  to  the  working  conditions  presented  by  the  outdoor  environments  in  which  the   daguerreians  operated  and  therefore  will  fully  account  for  the  first  time  the  appearance  of  these   early  visual  documents  of  the  western  American  frontier.    

                                                           
2  

  

LITERATURE  REVIEW  
     

Much  has  been  written  about  the  California  Gold  Rush  and  how  the  daguerreotype  was  used  

to  document  this  significant  historical  event.  Similarly  the  challenges  of  producing  outdoor  views   have  been  addressed  in  a  general  sense  by  many  historians,  practitioners  and  curators  of   nineteenth  century  photography.  However,  extensive  investigations  into  precisely  how   daguerreotypists  responded  to  these  challenges  at  this  particular  time  and  place,  and  how  the   appearance  of  daguerreotype  views  can  be  used  to  understand  these  responses,  is  lacking.        This  review  covers  literature  that  offers  a  range  of  information  and  analyses  about  the   practice  of  making  daguerreotype  views.  The  review  begins  with  publications  that  examine   daguerreotype  use  in  the  United  States,  followed  by  literature  about  views  made  during  the   California  Gold  Rush.  The  review  also  covers  literature  about  individual  daguerreotypists  and   specialized  studies  of  equipment  and  views.        General  histories  of  photography  describe  the  activities  of  some  of  the  more  widely  known   daguerreotypists  who  practiced  in  California  during  the  Gold  Rush  and  acknowledge  the  use  of  the   daguerreotype  to  document  mining  scenes  and  activities.  In  The  Daguerreotype  in  America  (1968),   Beaumont  Newhall  provides  a  detailed  survey  of  the  daguerreotype  in  which  he  refers  to  primary   sources  to  demonstrate  the  different  approaches  between  the  practice  of  producing  daguerreotypes   of  outdoor  views  and  daguerreotype  portraits  in  studios.2  Newhall  describes  the  technical   approaches  that  daguerreotypists  employed  when  composing  outdoor  scenes,  including  the  types   of  lenses  used  and  how  panoramas  were  made.  He  notes  the  subject  matter  of  many  early  outdoor   views  such  as  mining  activities  and  panoramas  of  cities.3  For  example,  he  describes  the  subject   matter  of  some  of  the  300  views  that  Vance  produced  and  featured  in  his  1851  exhibit,  Views  in   California.4  In  the  1971  publication,  Mirror  Image:  The  Influence  of  the  Daguerreotype  on  American   Society,5  photography  and  art  historian,  Richard  Rudisill  provides  a  historical  context  to  the   occupational  activities  of  daguerreotypists  that  documented  mining  scenes.  However,  he  does  not   address  the  process  of  producing  these  daguerreotypes  in  great  detail.  Some  of  the  equipment,  

Publications,  1968),  67­75.   3  Ibid.,  84­87.      4  Robert  H.  Vance,  Catalogue  of  Daguerreotype  Panoramic  Views  in  California  (New  York,  NY:  Baker,      Godwin  &  Company,  1851).  (From  Gary  W.  Ewer,  ed.,  The  Daguerreotype:  an  Archive  of  Source  Texts,  Graphics,   and  Ephemera,  http://www.daguerreotypearchive.org,  Ewer  Archive  F8510001).     5  Richard  Rudisill,  Mirror  Image:  The  Influence  of  the  Daguerreotype  on  American  Society   (Albuquerque,  NM:  University  of  New  Mexico  Press,  1971).  

                                                                                                                 2  Beaumont  Newhall,  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  2nd  revised  ed.  (New  York,  NY:  Dover     

  

3  

  

vantage  points  and  technical  approaches  that  daguerreotypists  used  to  document  outdoor  views   are  described  by  photography  historians  Floyd  and  Marion  Rinhart  in  their  1981  publication,  The   American  Daguerreotype.6  However,  their  text  does  not  provide  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  use  of   these  techniques  by  daguerreotypists  during  the  California  Gold  Rush.        In  a  more  recent  overview  of  daguerreotypes,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography:  from   Daguerreotype  to  Dry-plate,  1839­1885  (2007),  photography  curator  Keith  F.  Davis  examines  the   development  and  use  of  the  daguerreotype  in  the  Unites  States.7  Davis  provides  biographical   information  about  practitioners  during  the  California  Gold  Rush,  however  the  approaches  to   producing  outdoor  views  are  not  addressed  in  great  detail.          Photography  historian  Peter  E.  Palmquist  explores  the  role  of  the  daguerreotype  in  shaping   images  of  the  American  west  in  his  chapter  "Silver  Plates  on  a  Golden  Shore:  The  Real  Thing  Itself,"   in  the  1991  publication,  America  &  the  Daguerreotype.8  Palmquist  describes  how  daguerreotype   views  of  California  were  reproduced  in  painted  panoramas  and  engravings  that  reached  large   audiences  thus  influencing  their  images  of  the  West.9  These  images  drew  miners  to  California,  many   of  whom  subsequently  appeared  in  the  outdoor  scenes  that  were  documented  by  daguerreotypists.   Some  of  the  outdoor  views  produced  during  the  California  Gold  Rush  are  described  by  founding   president  of  the  Daguerreian  Society,  John  Wood,  in  his  essay,  "Theatrical  Narratives  and  the   Documents  of  Dream:  California  and  the  Great  American  Image,"  published  in  Drew  Heath  Johnson   and  Marcia  Eymann's  publication,  Silver  &  Gold:  Cased  Images  of  the  California  Gold  Rush  (1998).10   Wood  describes  the  social  context  in  which  daguerreotypists  worked,  however  this  essay  does  not   specifically  address  many  of  the  conditions  that  surrounded  the  production  of  daguerreotype   views.      Literature  about  daguerreotype  production  in  California  during  the  Gold  Rush  offers   information  about  the  daguerreotypists  that  worked  in  the  region.  In  their  2000  publication,   Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West:  A  Biographical  Dictionary  1840­1865,  Peter  E.  Palmquist  and   Thomas  R.  Kailbourn,  provide  detailed  biographies  of  daguerreotypists  including  Robert  H.  Vance,  

                                                                                                                
6  Floyd  and  Marion  Rinhart,  The  American  Daguerreotype  (Athens,  GA:  University  of  Georgia  Press,      1981),  354­55.   7  Keith  F.  Davis,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography:  From  Daguerreotype  to  Dry-Plate  1839­1885,   (Kansas  City,  MO:  Hall  Family  Foundation:  in  association  with  The  Nelson-Atkins  Museum  of    Art;  New  Haven,   CT,  2007).   8  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  "Silver  Plates  on  a  Golden  Shore:  The  Real  Thing  Itself,"  in  America  &  the      Daguerreotype,  ed.  John  Wood  (Iowa  City,  IA:  University  of  Iowa  Press,  1991).   9  Palmquist,  "Silver  Plates  on  a  Golden  Shore,"  134­58.      10  John  Wood,  "Theatrical  Narratives  and  the  Documents  of  Dream:  California  and  the  Great  American      Image,"  in  Silver  &  Gold:  Cased  Images  of  the  California  Gold  Rush,  eds.  Marcia  Eymann  &  Drew  Heath  Johnson.   (Iowa  City,  IA:  University  of  Iowa  Press  for  the  Oakland  Museum  of  California  1998),  23­42.  

  

4  

  

George  H.  Johnson  and  others,  while  describing  the  social  and  economic  contexts  in  which  they   worked.11  The  writers  chronicle  daguerreotypists'  movements,  studio  locations,  clients,  business   associates,  and  the  content  of  their  advertisements.  In  his  essay,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San   Francisco,"  in  the  1980  publication,  History  of  Photography,  Palmquist  draws  from  primary  sources   such  as  newspapers  and  advertising  to  explain  how  daguerreians  operated  and  promoted  their   businesses  during  the  California  Gold  Rush.12      In  the  chapter  "The  Sad  but  True  Story  of  a  Daguerreian  Holy  Grail"  in  Silver  &  Gold,   Palmquist  provides  insights  into  daguerreotypists'  approaches  to  producing  outdoor  views  by   describing  Vance's  activities  and  the  locations  of  his  panoramas  and  views.13  Similarly,  Vance's   work  activities  and  studio  locations  are  chronicled  by  the  Chilean  photography  historian,  Hernán   Rodríguez  Villegas,  in  his  2001  publication  Historia  de  la  Fotografía  en  Chile  Durante  el  Siglo  XIX   [History  of  Photography  in  Chile  in  the  19th  Century].  Rodriguez  argues  that  Vance's  documentation   of  Chilean  mines  and  other  views  from  1847  to  1850  may  have  influenced  his  subsequent  practice   in  California.14        Dolores  A.  Kilgo  describes  the  specialized  skills  used  to  produce  daguerreotype  views  and   some  of  the  reasons  for  making  them  in  her  1994  publication,  Likeness  and  Landscape:  Thomas  M.   Easterly  and  the  Art  of  the  Daguerreotype.15  Although  Likeness  and  Landscape  is  specific  to   daguerreotypist  Thomas  M.  Easterly  (1809­1882),  who  practiced  in  the  mid-western  Unites  States,   it  offers  clues  about  how  daguerreians  of  the  California  Gold  Rush  went  about  making  views.        Photography  historian  and  collector  Matthew  R.  Isenburg's  interest  in  the  events  of  this   period  is  reflected  by  his  collection's  books,  documents,  memorabilia,  photographic  equipment  and   materials  that  contextualize  and  offer  a  deeper  understanding  of  these  views.  Many  of  these   primary  sources  are  the  base  of  the  research  for  this  thesis.  Moreover  his  own  writing  such  as   the  essay  "Early  Equipment"  in  The  Daguerreian  Annual  1993,  16  contains  extensive  information   about  the  history  and  uses  of  equipment  by  daguerreotypists  in  both  indoor  and  outdoor  settings.      In  their  1998  book,  The  Silver  Canvas:  Daguerreotype  Masterpieces  from  the  J.  Paul  Getty   Museum,  art  historians,  Bates  and  Isabel  Barrett  Lowry  focus  on  the  aesthetic  qualities  of     

                                                                                                                 11  Peter  E.  Palmquist  and  Thomas  R.  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West:  A  Biographical     
Dictionary  1840­1865.  (Stanford,  CA:  Stanford  University  Press,  2000).   12  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  History  of  Photography  (July  1980):  207­ 38.   13  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  "The  Sad  but  True  Story  of  a  Daguerreian  Holy  Grail,"  in  Silver  &  Gold,  43­73.     14  Hernán  Rodríguez  Villegas,  Historia  de  la  Fotografía:  Fotógrafos  en  Chile  durante  el  Siglo  XIX.      (Santiago,  Chile:  Centro  Nacional  del  Patrimonio  Fotográfico,  2001),  56.   15  Dolores  A.  Kilgo,  Likeness  and  Landscape:  Thomas  M.  Easterly  and  the  Art  of  the  Daguerreotype,  (St.      Louis,  MO:  Missouri  Historical  Society  Press,  1994).     16  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  "Early  Equipment,"  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1993):  201­54.     

  

5  

  

daguerreotype  views  of  the  California  Gold  Rush,  including  those  made  by  Vance,  and  the  way  in   which  these  are  the  result  of  decisions  made  about  the  composition  of  the  scene  and  technical   decisions  including  light,  lens,  and  vantage  point.17        Most  literature  about  the  daguerreotype  and  about  daguerreotypists  who  worked  during   the  California  Gold  Rush  emphasizes  biographical  details  such  as  their  movements,  studio  locations,   business  practices,  and  the  subject  matter  and  historical  contexts  of  the  works  they  produced.  None   of  the  literature  surveyed  examines  in  great  detail  how  daguerreotypes  of  outdoor  views  produced   during  the  California  Gold  Rush  exhibit  qualities  and  characteristics  that  are  the  result  of  decisions   made  in  response  to  conditions  that  were  encountered  when  producing  daguerreotypes  outdoors.                                           

                                                                                                                
  

17  Bates  Lowry  and  Isabel  Barrett  Lowry,  The  Silver  Canvas:  Daguerreotype  Masterpieces  from  the  J.  

Paul  Getty  Museum  (Los  Angeles,  CA:  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum,  1998),  187­98.  

  

6  

  

CALIFORNIA  GOLD  RUSH  VIEWS    
   Background         From  its  presentation  to  the  world  by  the  French  government  in  1839,  the  daguerreotype   was  recognized  for  its  ability  to  accurately  translate  details  such  as  signage,  figures  and  machinery.   In  1852,  an  article  in  the  Photographic  Art-Journal  proclaimed,  "In  actual  nature,  we  could  not,   without  the  aid  of  a  telescope,  distinguish  these  small  objects:  the  magnifying  glass  is  the  telescope   of  Daguerrean  nature."18  The  daguerreotype's  strength--in  light  of  newer  processes  such  as  wet   plate  glass  used  in  the  United  States  by  the  mid-1850s--was  its  ability  to  capture  a  high  level  of   detail.  The  following  observation  made  in  1854  by  a  contributor  known  as  "S."--believed  to  be  San   Francisco  daguerreotypist,  William  Shew  (1820­1903)--in  the  publication,  Pioneer:  or  California   Monthly  Magazine  is  typical:  
  

         By  the  late  1840s,  some  of  the  improvements  to  the  daguerreotype  process  included  faster  lenses   and  more  sensitive  plates  that  allowed  for  shorter  exposure  times  and  the  gilding  of  plates  that   produced  more  enriched  tones  to  address  the  variety  of  light  and  dark  tones  of  the  outdoors.20   These  advancements  allowed  daguerreians  to  make  images  that  were  technically  better,  especially   with  respect  to  addressing  the  problems  of  movement,  often  associated  with  the  subject  matter  in   outdoor  views.      The  announcement  of  the  discovery  of  gold  by  James  W.  Marshall  at  Sutter's  Mill,  on  January   24,  1848  launched  a  monumental  transformation  of  the  California  region,  particularly  those  areas   where  the  majority  of  gold  extraction  and  related  activities  took  place:  in  the  goldfields  of  northern   California  and  the  Sierra  Nevada,  along  rivers  flowing  from  these  areas,  and  communities  including   Sacramento  and  San  Francisco.  The  daguerreotype,  still  less  than  ten  years  old,  was  witness  to  the   social  upheaval  and  changes  to  the  landscape.  The  incredible  economic  growth  in  this  region  was  

Paper  and  glass  photographs  .  .  .  are  not  equal  in  appearance  and  beauty  of  finish  to   daguerreotypes  and  probably  will  never  become  so,  as  the  paper  surface  is  not  capable  of   receiving  that  polish  which  the  silvered  plate  receives  in  daguerreotypes.19  

                                                                                                                
18  Francis  Wey,  "Heliography  on  Plates,"  trans.  J.R.  Snelling.  The  Photographic  Art-Journal,  Vol.  3.   (January  1852):  43.   19  S.,  (William  Shew,  attrib.),  "Photography,"  Pioneer;  Or,  California  Monthly  Magazine  (San  Francisco,   CA:  Le  Count  and  Strong,  July  1854):  34­40.  (From  Gary  W.  Ewer,  ed.,  The  Daguerreotype:  an  Archive  of  Source   Texts,  Graphics,  and  Ephemera,  http://www.daguerreotypearchive.org,  Ewer  Archive  P8540006).   20  Beaumont  Newhall,  History  of  Photography:  from  1839  to  the  Present.  Revised  Edition.  (New  York,   NY:  Museum  of  Modern  Art;  Boston:  Distributed  by  New  York  Graphic  Society  of  Books,  1982),  29.    

  

7  

  

paralleled  by  California's  population  increase  from  92,597  in  1850,21  to  300,000  by  1854.22   Between  1847  and  1849,  the  population  of  San  Francisco  alone  grew  from  400  inhabitants  to   20,000,23  and  from  "April  1849  through  April  1850,  62,000  would-be  miners  landed  in  San   Francisco's  harbor."24  (figure  34).  Migrants  traveled  from  the  eastern  states  to  California  overland,   through  the  mountains;  by  ship,  crossing  the  Isthmus  of  Panama;  or  a  longer  route  around  Cape   Horn.25  An  1852  census  noted  only  twelve  practicing  daguerreians  in  San  Francisco  and  throughout   rural  California,  although  Palmquist  believes  the  actual  number  was  higher.26  By  1854  "daguerreian   commerce  was  nearing  its  apex  in  San  Francisco.  The  city  was  home  to  a  number  of  excellent   artists."27  Newhall  estimates  that  fifty  daguerreians  worked  in  San  Francisco  between  1850  and   1864.28        Most  daguerreotypists  in  California  had  previous  experience  working  in  the  profession  and   therefore  they  often  came  with  some  equipment,29  which  would  have  served  them  well  since  at  the   time  in  San  Francisco  there  was  a  lack  of  equipment  and  suppliers  for  their  craft.30  Starl   characterized  the  average  daguerreotypist  as  ".  .  .  a  man  in  his  mid-thirties  with  a  professional   training  and  experience,  who  had  artistic  leanings  or  at  least  some  technical  knowledge."31   Advertisements  from  this  period  convey  the  competitive  approaches  daguerreotypists  took  to   running  their  businesses.  According  to  Drew  Heath  Johnson:     California  photographers  adopted  flamboyant  and  combative  business  practices.   Scrambling  to  obtain  a  slice  of  the  inexhaustible  demand  for  photographic  records  of  the   Gold  Rush,  photographers  made  extravagant  claims  about  the  technical  and  artistic  qualities   of  their  daguerreotypes.32      By  establishing  themselves  in  towns  such  as  Stockton,  Sacramento  and  Marysville  and  other  

  

                                                                                                                
21  U.S.  Census  Bureau,  "Historical  Census  Statistics  on  Population  Totals  By  Race,  1790  to  1990,  and   By  Hispanic  Origin,  1970  to  1990,  For  The  United  States,  Regions,  Divisions,  and  States,"   http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0056/tab19.pdf  (accessed  August  22,  2013).   22  Davis,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography,  137.        23  Ibid.,  56.      24  Marcia  Eymann,  "Introduction,"  in  Silver  &  Gold,  xxv.      25  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  "The  Pioneers:  Landscape  and  Studio,"  in  Capturing  Light:  Masterpieces  of   California  Photography  1850  to  the  Present,  ed.  Drew  Heath  Johnson  (Oakland,  CA:  Oakland  Museum  of   California,  2001),  7.   26  Palmquist,  "The  Pioneers:  Landscape  and  Studio,"  8.                                     27  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  329.   28  Newhall,  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  85.   29  Peter  E.  Palmquist,  "Carleton  Watkins.  A  Biography.  Chapter  3:  Shadow  Catching  in  El  Dorado      1849­1856,"  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1990):  181­82.   30  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  210.   31  Timm  Starl,  "A  New  World  of  Pictures:  The  Use  And  Spread  of  the  Daguerreotype  Process,"  in  A      New  History  of  Photography,  ed.  Michel  Frizot  (Köln:  Könemann,  1998),  44.   32  Drew  Heath  Johnson,  "Art  &  History,"  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1994):  168.     

  

8  

  

small  settlements  that  were  tied  to  mining  activities,33  daguerreotypists  benefited  through  close   contact  with  miners  who  wanted  their  portraits  taken.  Some  daguerreotypists  also  traveled  to   mining  camps  and  further  afield  where  they  found  people  eager  to  have  their  likenesses  taken.34  By   the  early  1850s,  daguerreotypists  were  visiting  many  mining  camps  and  settlements  and  continued   to  take  mostly  portraits,  however  "some  photographers  began  to  specialize  in  mining  scenes,   traveling  from  mining  boom  to  mining  boom  in  search  of  business."35  Palmquist  estimates  that   portraits  accounted  for  over  "95  percent  of  all  daguerreotype  images"36  and  most  "were  pictures  of   the  miners  and  others  far  from  home."37  Meanwhile,  views  taken  outdoors  that  document  the   mining  activities,  events  and  environments  of  the  period  are  rare.38  According  to  Keith  Davis,  "a   relative  handful  of  scenic  daguerreotypes  were  made  in  the  United  States."39      The  term  `view'  is  often  used  to  describe  visual  documents  of  outdoor  settings  produced  by   means  of  painting  and  photography  and  in  "this  early  era  of  photography,  the  term  `landscape'  was   frequently  used  synonymously  with  `view'  to  describe  any  scene  recorded  outside  the  gallery."40   Daguerreotypists  promoted  their  services  to  make  `views'  as  well  as  portraits  in  advertisements   published  in  illustrated  periodicals.  In  one  such  advertisement  in  the  San  Francisco  Daily  Pacific   News  on  January  21,  1851,  Vance  offered  "Views  taken  of  the  city,  or  any  part  of  it,  at  the  shortest   notice."41  In  another  advertisement  published  in  the  San  Francisco  Golden  Era  in  early  1854,  George   H.  Johnson  promoted  "Daguerreotypes  of  every  description--Single  Portraits,  Groupings,   Landscapes  or  views  of  Buildings,  taken  in  a  style  which  cannot  be  surpassed  for  beauty  or   accuracy."42        Daguerreotype  views  are  significant  historical  documents  of  the  California  Gold  Rush   because  of  their  subject  matter.  They  illustrate  how  river  mining  evolved  during  the  1850s--from   pan-washing  activities  by  individuals,  to  the  use  of  rockers  and  long-toms  (long  sluice  boxes)  by   small  groups,  to  wooden  flumes  constructed  by  groups  and  companies  in  order  to  divert  water  from  

                                                                                                                
  
35  Ibid.  

33  Palmquist,  "The  Pioneers,"  9.   34  Palmquist,  "Carleton  Watkins.  A  Biography.  Chapter  3,"  183.   36  Palmquist.  Carleton  E.  Watkins,  5.   37  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  209.  

38  "Outdoor  views  were  far  less  common.  Many  daguerreians  advertised  `views  of  residences  and   businesses,'  but  only  a  handful  (such  as  Robert  H.  Vance,  1825­76,  .  .  .)  had  actually  produced  an  extensive   series  of  outdoor  daguerreotypes  of  San  Francisco  and  the  California  goldfields  at  an  early  time."  Palmquist,   Carleton  E.  Watkins,  5.   39  Davis,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography,  210.     40  Kilgo,  Likeness  and  Landscape,  143.   41  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  216.  Published  in  San  Francisco  Daily  Pacific   News  on  January  21,  1851.   42  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  229.  Published  in  San  Francisco  Golden  Era,   January  1854.  

  

9  

  

rivers.43  Davis  writes,  "These  images  are  rich  in  information.  They  document  changes  in  mining   technology,  from  relatively  small  sluicing  operations  to  the  industrial  approaches  of  quartz  mining   and  hydraulic  mining."44  Many  of  these  views  include  miners,  prospectors  and  members  of   surrounding  communities.  Bates  Lowry  and  Isabel  Barrett  Lowry  have  observed  how  views  that   include  miners  can  offer  historians  "specific  facts  about  the  workers,  their  clothes,  their  relative   status,  and  their  tools--an  infinite  number  of  details."45  In  addition  to  documenting  the  events,   activities  and  miners  of  the  California  Gold  Rush,  views  offer  insight  into  the  conditions  that   daguerreians  encountered  outdoors  including  light,  climate  and  terrain.  In  turn,  these  working   conditions  offer  clues  about  the  approaches  that  daguerreians  took  to  produce  the  images.        The  daguerreotype  was  an  effective  tool  for  producing  views  of  the  many  scenes  and   activities  of  the  California  Gold  Rush.  As  the  German  photographer  and  painter  Eduard  Vischer   (1809­1878)  found  upon  visiting  the  Californian  mining  regions  in  1859:   The  daguerreotype  is  especially  suited  to  reproduce  all  these  mechanical  mining  devices.  In   the  mining  region  nature,  too,  seems  bare  of  all  cheerful  embellishment,  with  a  stark   contrast  between  the  naked  masses  of  rock  and  the  thin,  straggly  pine  woods.  Luxuriant   foliage  is  seen  but  rarely.46      Photographer  Ansel  Adams  (1902­1984)  noted  the  daguerreotype's  ability  to  produce  realistic   depictions  of  scenes.  Regarding  the  work  of  Vance,  he  observed  a  "clarity  of  line  and  edge,  .  .  .     beauty,  and  richness  of  tonal  values."47  Vance  himself  described  his  daguerreotype  views  as  being   "the  stereotyped  impression  of  the  real  thing  itself."48        The  clarity  of  daguerreotypes  resulted  in  documents  of  the  Gold  Rush  that  are  highly   descriptive,  in  terms  of  the  subjects  that  they  depict,  and  how  the  subjects  are  depicted.  In  what   follows,  I  will  examine  the  appearance  of  Gold  Rush  views  in  general  and  account  for  their   appearance  by  focusing  on  the  subjects  and  purposes  of  18  Gold  Rush  views  in  the  Matthew  R.   Isenburg  Collection,  and  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  produced.     

                                                                                                                
43  "Gold  Rush  Photographer,"  Image:  The  Bulletin  of  the  George  Eastman  House  of  Photography,  1,  no.  

9  (December  1952):  3.   44  Davis,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography,  137.      45  Lowry  and  Lowry,  The  Silver  Canvas,  118.      46  Newhall,  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  87.  Excerpt  by  Eduard  Vischer,  1859,  in  Quarterly  of  the   Calif.  Hist.  Soc.,  XI  (1932),  229.  Vischer's  observation  that  "Luxuriant  foliage  is  seen  but  rarely"  offers  insight   into  California's  outdoor  environment,  and  how  it  translated  into  daguerreotype  images.  The  green  colour  of   foliage  and  trees  would  register  as  very  dark  on  daguerreotypes,  and  contrast  against  lighter  coloured   hillsides  of  grass  and  rock.  Thick  forests  with  a  prominence  of  green  colour  would  register  as  very  dark  on  the   plate.   47  "Gold  Rush  Photographer,"  Image,  3.              48  Vance,  Catalogue  of  Daguerreotype  Panoramic  Views  in  California,  preface.      

  

10  

  

CALIFORNIA  GOLD  RUSH  VIEWS    
   Purposes         All  of  the  Gold  Rush  views  in  the  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto  are  documents  in  a   literal  sense  of  a  scene,  activity,  structure,  or  event.  Yet  the  purposes  for  their  production  vary  and   generally  fall  into  one  of  two  groups--those  that  were  used  in  the  public  realm  for  public  viewings   or  as  sources  for  prints  and  engravings  and  those  that  were  used  in  the  private  realm,  such  as   commissioned  works  of  personal  or  property  records.  The  approaches  that  daguerreotypists  took   to  address  the  working  conditions  they  encountered  in  the  field  took  into  account  the  view's   purpose.           Purposes     Public  Viewings  and  Engravings         Demand  for  daguerreotype  views  of  the  California  Gold  Rush  stemmed  from  a  growing   interest  in  events  that  were  quickly  unfolding  in  the  region,  with  San  Francisco  as  a  focal  point:  An   "international  curiosity  about  the  City  of  Gold  created  a  demand  for  pictures,  and  this  demand  the   daguerreotype  satisfied  in  part."49        While  daguerreians  focused  on  the  more  lucrative  activity  of  making  portraits  for  which   there  was  a  great  demand,  the  exhibition  and  sale  of  views  in  galleries  were  popular  enough  to   warrant  reports  in  contemporary  periodicals  and  advertisements.  For  example,  in  1851,  "[William   Shew  (1820­1903)]  began  advertising  his  `Moveable  Daguerreotype  Saloon'  on  Dupont  Street,   where  patrons  could  view  `his  collection  of  views  taken  from  the  most  interesting  scenery  in  the   interior  of  the  state."50  A  year  later,  during  the  brief  business  partnership  of  the  daguerreians,  Seth   Louis  Shaw  (1816­1872)  and  George  H.  Johnson,  they  placed  an  ad  that  "stressed  that  they  had   `some  beautiful  mining  views  on  hand'"51  in  their  San  Francisco  gallery.        One  of  the  most  notable  instances  of  a  public  viewing  of  daguerreotype  views  is  Vance's   New  York  City  exhibition,  Daguerreotype  Panoramic  Views  in  California,  in  1851.  The  exhibition  

                                                                                                                
  
49  Newhall,  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  85.   50  Ibid.,  497-99.  Shew  advertised  viewings  of  his  collections  in  the  San  Francisco  Alta  California,  July  

  

16,  22,  25,  September  28,  1851.   51  Palmquist  &  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  328.     

  

11  

  

featured  300  whole  plate  views,  listed  in  a  catalogue  that  accompanied  the  exhibition.52  Most  of   these  views  were  produced  in  the  first  part  of  1851.53  Vance  also  included  views  he  produced   during  his  time  in  South  America,  from  1847  to  1850.  In  addition  to  the  typical  views  featuring   what  Palmquist  describes  as  `man-centered  activity',  Vance's  exhibition  included  `scenics'  which   were  quite  rare.  Palmquist  explains,  "Since  virtually  all  daguerreotypes  were  commissioned  by   miners  or  the  owners  of  businesses,  there  was  simply  no  market  for  purely  scenic  views."54        In  addition  to  generating  public  interest,55  exhibiting  views  would  have  had  other   favourable  outcomes.  Abel  Alexander  has  observed  that  views  produced  in  Chile  during  Vance's   time  working  there  "formed  part  of  the  publicity  campaigns  to  increase  the  renown  and  prestige  of   the  daguerreotypists."56  Vance  certainly  achieved  this  goal  back  in  the  United  States,  where  his   exhibition  generated  great  interest  among  the  daguerreotype  community  in  the  eastern  states,57   and  garnered  praise  from  contributors  to  publications  such  as  Photographic  Art-Journal:     They  are  most  artistic  in  design,  and  executed  with  a  skill,  evincing,  not  only  a  perfect   mastery  of  the  manipulatory  art,  but  an  exquisite  taste  for  the  sublime  and  beautiful.  On   looking  upon  these  pictures,  one  can  almost  imagine  himself  among  the  hills  and  mines  of   California.58      Although  neither  a  popular  or  financial  success,  Vance's  exhibition  had  the  effect  of  immediately   establishing  him  "as  one  of  the  nation's  most  skillful  daguerreotypists."59      The  use  of  daguerreotype  views  as  sources  for  engravings,  lithographs,  paintings  and   drawings  has  been  widely  documented.  As  early  as  1840,  the  American  painter  and  inventor,   Samuel  F.B.  Morse  (1791­1872),  recognized  the  daguerreotype's  use  as  an  aid  for  landscape   views.60  In  1843,  the  publication,  Artist,  noted  that  the  "Daguerreotype  as  an  aid  to  artists  both  in   landscape  and  portraiture  is  not  yet  fully  appreciated;  nor  is  the  practice  of  producing  prints  from   photographs  so  general  as  it  is  likely  to  become."61  In  California  daguerreotypists  traveled  to   goldfields  and  settlements  to  produce  daguerreotypes  that  were  used  as  models  for  published  

                                                                                                                
  

        52  Vance,  Catalogue  of  Daguerreotype  Panoramic  Views  in  California,  excerpt  from  the  catalogue.     53  Palmquist,  "Carleton  Watkins.  A  Biography.  Chapter  3,"  179.   54  Palmquist,  "The  Pioneers,"  9.   55  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  220.   56  Abel  Alexander,  "Robert  Vance:  Pioneer  of  the  Daguerreotype  in  Chile,"  translated  by  Thomas  R.      Kailbourn.  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1993):  23.     57  However,  "[a]lthough  it  won  critical  acclaim,  Vance's  exhibition  was  not  a  resounding  popular   success."  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  561.   58  "Mr.  Vance's  Photographic  Views,"  Photographic  Art-Journal  Vol.  2  (October  1851):  252­53.      59  Lowry  and  Lowry,  The  Silver  Canvas,  200.   60  Rinhart  and  Rinhart,  American  Daguerreian  Art,  73.   61  "Uses  of  the  Daguerreotype,"  Artist,  (New  York)  1:5  (January  1843):  235.  (From  Gary  W.  Ewer,  ed.,      The  Daguerreotype:  an  Archive  of  Source  Texts,  Graphics,  and  Ephemera,   http://www.daguerreotypearchive.org,  Ewer  Archive  P8430003).  

  

12  

  

illustrations.        A  very  interesting  by-product  of  the  daguerreotype  popularity  was  their  rather  widespread   use  as  models  by  newspaper  artists  of  the  time.  In  the  absence  of  the  half-tone  process,   lithographic  artists  and  wood  engravers  produced  suitable  illustrations  for  the   contemporary  illustrated  newspapers.  Often  an  artist  or  editor  would  openly  acknowledge   the  daguerreotype  as  a  model.  62           Illustrations  based  on  daguerreotypes  were  recognized  as  influential  in  shaping  

impressions  about  the  Gold  Rush  region  among  readers  in  the  eastern  United  States:   On  October  23,  the  Alta  noted  that  [daguerreian,  William]  Shew  `is  about  taking  a  series  of   views  of  various  prominent  buildings  in  the  city  to  show  our  friends  on  the  Atlantic  that  we   are  not  living  altogether  in  canvas  tents.'63      This  observation  from  1851  reveals  the  degree  of  change  San  Francisco  underwent  in  a  short   period  of  time,  from  little  more  than  tents  and  temporary  structures,  to  buildings  and  an  urban   setting  that  must  have  surprised  and  shocked  readers  unfamiliar  with  the  region.        In  the  1850s,  American  publications  such  as  Boston's  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room   Companion  (1851),  New  York  Illustrated  News  (1853)  and  Harper's  Weekly  (1857),  began   publishing  illustrations  based  on  daguerreotypes.64  An  1854  issue  of  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing- Room  Companion  contains  an  illustration  entitled  Notion  Company's  Works,  California.  (figure  21).  It   is  one  of  four  illustrations  of  Gold  Rush  scenes  that  accompanied  an  article  entitled,  `Scenes  in   California'.65    This  illustration  was  modeled  from  a  whole  plate  daguerreotype  made  by  George  H.   Johnson  in  approximately  1852.66  This  daguerreotype,  or  a  variant  of  it,  is  in  the  Isenburg  Collection   (figure  1).        Daguerreotypes  intended  for  use  by  engravers  were  sometimes  left  laterally  reversed,   especially  if  they  included  signage  or  other  distinguishing  features  that  would  have  required  `right- reading'.  According  to  Newhall:   Since  a  daguerreotype  image  is  usually  reversed,  as  in  a  mirror,  a  prism  or  mirror  had  to  be   placed  over  the  lens--unless  the  daguerreotype  served  as  a  model  for  an  engraver,  who   needed  a  reversed  image.67        

                                                                                                                
62  Robert  A.  Weinstein  "Gold  Rush  Daguerreotypes,"  American  West:  Magazine  of  the  Western  History      Association,  (August  1967):  39.     63  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  497.          64  Davis,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography,  176.     65  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room  Companion,  Boston,  MA:  M.M.  Ballou,  (March  25,  1854),  185.   66  Isenburg  notes  that  "[t]his  very  daguerreotype,  or  one  taken  within  a  minute  or  two  of  it,  was  used   for  a  wood  engraving  in  the  1854    article  in  Gleason's."  Richard  S.  Field,  Robin  Jaffee  Frank,  Matthew  R.   Isenburg,  and  Alan  Trachtenberg,  American  Daguerreotypes  from  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection   (New  Haven,  CT:  Yale  University  Art  Gallery,  1989),  50.     67  Newhall,  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  84.  

  

13  

  

A  laterally  reversed  image  might  have  been  preferred  if  an  engraver  were  to  create  a  highly   accurate  reproduction  of  a  daguerreotype,  achieved  by  etching  directly  onto  the  daguerreotype   plate.68  However,  the  process  of  etching  was  not  widely  used,  instead,   Daguerreotypes,  like  field  sketches,  continued  to  be  redrawn  for  reproduction  on  the   surface  of  a  printing  plate.69      In  Sights  Once  Seen:  Daguerreotyping  Frémont's  Last  Expedition  Through  The  Rockies,  the   daguerreotypist  and  photography  historian  Robert  Shlaer  describes  how  John  Charles  Frémont   (1813­1890)  worked  with  daguerreotypist,  Solomon  Nunes  Carvalho  (1813­1890)  to  produce   daguerreotype  views.  Although  these  views  no  longer  exist,  illustrations  from  engravings  made   from  the  daguerreotypes  survive.70  In  1994,  Shlaer  used  these  engravings  to  locate  the  vantage   points  that  the  illustrations--and  therefore  Carvalho's  daguerreotypes--captured  to  produce  his   own  daguerreotypes.  Shlaer  explains  that   The  fact  that  daguerreotypes  are  usually  reversed  from  left  to  right  was  well  understood  by   the  artists  and  engravers  of  the  period.  When  presented  with  one  they  would  normally   correct  it  laterally  while  preparing  an  illustration  from  it  for  printing.71        Often  there  are  subtle  differences  between  a  daguerreotype  and  its  related  illustration.  For  

  

example,  in  Johnson's  daguerreotype,  there  are  more  figures  depicted  than  in  its  related  engraving   in  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room  Companion.  Furthermore,  in  the  engraving,  most  figures  face   the  camera,  while  they  are  more  randomly  positioned  in  the  daguerreotype.  These  differences  may   have  resulted  from  an  engraver  who  took  artistic  liberties.    According  to  Davis:     engravers  inevitably  altered  or  rearranged  the  data  of  the  photographs  to  `improve'  it--to   make  it  simpler  or  more  picturesque.  Such  manipulation  represented  a  further  move  away   from  the  gritty  specificity  of  the  original  image.72        Another  example  of  how  engravers  altered  images  can  be  found  in  an  illustration  entitled  

  

The  Riot  At  Sacramento  City,  published  in  Illustrated  California  News  (San  Francisco)  on  September   1,  1850.73    Alterations  are  apparent  since  the  moving  figures  appear  motionless,  a  feat  that  would   have  been  impossible  to  achieve  because  of  the  long  exposures  of  the  daguerreotype  process.  Text  

                                                                                                                
68  Martha  A.  Sandweiss,  Print  the  Legend:  Photography  and  the  American  West  (New  Haven  and   London:  Yale  University  Press,  2002),  97.   69  Ibid.   70  Shlaer,  Sights  Once  Seen:  Daguerreotyping  Frémont's  Last  Expedition  Through  The  Rockies  (Santa  Fe,   NM:  Museum  of  New  Mexico  Press,  2000),  vii­viii.   71  Ibid.,  48.     72  Davis,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography,  177.        73  "We  offer  our  thanks  to  Mr.  Johnson,"  Illustrated  California  News,  San  Francisco,  September  1,   1850,  5.  (From  Gary  W.  Ewer,  ed.,  The  Daguerreotype:  an  Archive  of  Source  Texts,  Graphics,  and  Ephemera,   http://www.daguerreotypearchive.org,  Ewer  Archive  P8500005)  

  

14  

  

accompanying  the  illustration  notes  that  Johnson  provided  the  newspaper  with  several  views  of  the   event:   We  offer  our  thanks  to  Mr.  Johnson,  the  clever  Daguerrean  artist,  for  his  courtesy  in   volunteering  to  further  the  purpose  of  our  visit  to  Sacramento  city,  by  furnishing  our   engraver  with  views  of  the  locality  where  the  battle  scene  was  enacted,  which  he  took   unweariedly,  one  after  another,  from  different  places  of  observation,  in  order  that  the   most  advantageous  points  of  view  might  be  decided  on  by  actual  comparison.74      This  example  illustrates  how  daguerreians  responded  to  the  demand  by  publishers  for  multiple   views  of  a  single  event.  It  also  reveals  the  role  that  daguerreians  played  in  satisfying  a  wide  interest   in  public  events,  by  producing  non-reproducible  daguerreotypes  that  were  used  as  models  for   engravings  that  appeared  in  popular  periodicals.         Purposes   Private  Commissions           The  rapid  population  growth  and  development--of  new  houses,  commercial  buildings  and   mining  operations--created  a  demand  for  commissioned  views.  Daguerreotypes  made  during  the   California  Gold  Rush  were  often  commissioned  for  use  as  personal  or  property  records.      In  the  goldfields,  daguerreians  found  a  lucrative  market  for  portraits  of  the  miners,   merchants  and  others  associated  with  mining  activities.  Palmquist  notes  that  by  "1851­53  .  .  .  visits   to  the  goldfields  were  commonplace."75  Portraits  were  often  sent  home  to  family  and  friends.  "By   early  1851  almost  every  Easterner  could  boast  a  friend  or  relative  who  had  `gone  West'."76  But   daguerreians  also  found  a  market  for  views  in  "diggings  and  towns  like  Timbuctoo,  Grizzly  Flat  and   Springfield,  in  order  to  provide  visual  witness  for  .  .  .  miners'  relatives  back  home."77  Many  of  these   views  depict  miners,  the  towns  and  encampments  where  they  lived,  and  mining  operations  where   they  worked.     Daguerreians  took  a  competitive  approach  to  promoting  their  services  to  make  views  for   personal  and  property  records.  They  promoted  their  services  with  broadsides  that  announced  their   arrival  to  gold  diggings  and  smaller  settlements.78  In  1852,  Johnson  offered  to  make  views  with  

                                                                                                                
74  Ibid.,  6.  

        

75  Palmquist,  "Carleton  Watkins.  A  Biography.  Chapter  3,"  182­83.   76  Palmquist,  "Silver  Plates  on  a  Golden  Shore,"  140.   77  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  50.   78  "This  type  of  advertisement  [broadside]  was  given  out  as  handbills  as  well  as  being  posted  

  

15  

  

little  advance  notice,  in  a  variety  of  weather  conditions.79  Vance's  approach  in  an  1853   advertisement  was  to  highlight  his  experience  producing  views  and  the  high  caliber  of  his  camera   apparatus:  "`Particular  attention  will  be  paid  to  taking  views  of  buildings,  machinery,  &e.;  having  an   entirely  new  and  improved  apparatus,  expressly  for  taking  views.'"80      In  an  1851  issue  of  the  Sacramento  City  Daily  Union,  an  article  promoted  George  H.   Johnson's  offer  to  produce  views  of  homes  and  businesses:      The  perfection  to  which  he  has  brought  his  pictures  has  excited  the  astonishment  of  all  who      have  ever  seen  them,  and  no  better  chance  of  presenting  friends  at  home  with  correct      likenesses  of  themselves,  or  views  of  their  residences,  can  be  had,  than  that  now  offered  by      Mr.  Johnson.81      Palmquist  has  identified  advertisements  from  as  early  as  1849  that  reveal  a  demand  for  views  of   the  homes  and  surroundings  of  those  who  moved  to  the  region.82  Many  advertisements  claimed  to   offer  views  that  were  visually  pleasing  including  "Landscapes  or  views  of  Buildings,  taken  in  a  style   which  cannot  be  surpassed  for  beauty  or  accuracy."83  An  advertisement  by  Vance  that  appeared  in   an  1859  issue  of  Hutchings'  California  Magazine  offered  large  sizes  of  views  and  asked  readers,   "Think  of  the  pleasure  which  it  would  give  friends  at  home,  to  receive  a  correct  picture  of  the  place   where  you  reside!"84  (figure  22).           Two  examples  of  commissioned  views  of  dwellings  include  Outdoor  Scene  Of  Building  With  

Shaving  Equipment  In  Background,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate)  (figure  2)  and  Moses  Warren's  Cabin,   California,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate)  (figure  3).  By  unknown  photographers,  both  views  were   commissioned  by  Moses  Warren,  a  carpenter  who  also  commissioned  the  view  of  storefronts  on  a   street  in  the  Californian  mining  community,  Georgetown,  F.A.  Hornblower  Mining  Store,  1850   (quarter  plate)  (figure  4).  A  resident  of  Georgetown  originally  from  Connecticut,  Warren  had  also   commissioned  two  portraits  and  "probably  sent  [them]  home  to  family  in  East  Lyme,  Connecticut,   to  illustrate  his  life  in  the  California  mountains."85  In  the  background  of  Outdoor  Scene  Of  Building   With  Shaving  Equipment  In  Background  (figure  2)  and  behind  a  cabin  that  may  have  been  Warren's  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
conspicuously  about  town."  Isenburg,  "Early  Equipment,"  252.   79  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  328.     80  Ibid.,  561.   81  "Daguerreotype  View,"  Daily  Union,  Sacramento  City,  May  30,  1851,  n.p.,  second  page  of  issue.   (From  Gary  W.  Ewer,  ed.,  The  Daguerreotype:  an  Archive  of  Source  Texts,  Graphics,  and  Ephemera,   http://www.daguerreotypearchive.org,  Ewer  Archive  N8510017).   82  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  207­38.   83  Ibid.,  229.  George  H.  Johnson  made  this  claim  in  an  1854  advertisement.   84  Hutchings'  California  Magazine,  (San  Francisco,  CA:  Hutching  &  Rosenfield,  Publishers,  February   1859).   85  Mark  S.  Johnson,  "Argonaut  Moses  Warren  &  The  Quinebaug  Gold  Company  From  The  Isenburg   Collection  at  AMC  Toronto,"  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (2012):  160.  

  

16  

  

dwelling  or  business  operation,  there  seems  to  be  both  a  sawmill  and  gold  digging.86                     As  the  cabin  is  shown  front  and  center  this  image's  intent  was  obviously  to  document  it     while  including  some  of  the  surrounding  landscape.  This  may  well  be  Moses  Warren's  home   or  his  business--or  most  likely,  both.  The  shaving  mirror  and  wind-blown  towel  suggests      this  was  somebody's  domicile.87   There  are  several  examples  in  the  Isenburg  Collection  of  daguerreotypes  that  depict  mining  

activities  that  appear  to  have  been  commissioned  by  the  owners  of  the  mine.  Lowry  and  Lowry   describe  a  daguerreotype  from  1852  that  depicts  the  construction  of  a  flume  on  the  American  River,   and  they  believe  it  was  commissioned  by  a  mining  company  in  order  to  provide  a  record  for  its   shareholders.88  Isenburg  notes  how  often  "the  owner(s)  or  other  well-dressed  visitors  would  be   prominently  featured  alongside  a  display  of  gold."89  Views  of  mining  activities  often  depict  miners   attempting  to  remain  still,  thus  allowing  the  slow  exposure  to  better  document  their  work  activities.   There  are  a  variety  of  mining  activity  scenes  where  "some  of  the  larger  groups  we  are  obviously   also  looking  at  hired  hands,  but  in  the  smaller  ones  we  know  these  people  all  have  a  stake  in  it   together  and  are  working  for  the  good  of  the  group."90  In  some  views,  the  mining  company  is  known   (figures  1,  14)  and  in  others  the  company  is  not  identified.  In  scenes  where  an  owner  or  authority   figure  is  not  visible  or  is  less  apparent,  it  becomes  even  less  certain  who  commissioned  the  view.                                         

                                                                                                                
86  Ibid.,  173.  

        

87  Ibid.  

88  Lowry  and  Lowry,  The  Silver  Canvas,  202.   89  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  50.     90  Wood,  "Theatrical  Narratives  and  the  Documents  of  Dream,"  37.  

  

17  

  

CALIFORNIA  GOLD  RUSH  VIEWS  
   Subject  Matter           The  eighteen  daguerreotypes--three  whole  plates,  eight  half  plates,  six  quarter  plates  and   one  stereo  image  comprised  of  two  sixth  plates--that  I  analyzed  for  this  thesis  are  views  made  from   c.  1849­1856  of  mining  settlements,  mining  scenes,  commercial  properties,  dwellings,  and  the  city   of  San  Francisco.91  I  chose  these  eighteen  views  as  a  representative  sample  of  all  55  views  of  the   California  Gold  Rush  in  the  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.  The  subjects  that  these  eighteen   plates  depict,  their  apparent  purposes  and  the  conditions  under  which  they  were  produced,  are   shared  among  most  of  the  55  outdoor  views.  By  identifying  the  shared  characteristics  of  the  views   in  this  collection--subject,  purpose,  and  the  outdoor  conditions  that  dictated  the  daguerreotypists'   decisions  (addressed  in  Section  4)--I  intend  to  explain  why  these  views  appear  the  way  they  do.      Of  the  eighteen  views,  only  eight  can  be  attributed--to  George  H.  Johnson,  Silas  W.  Selleck   and  Robert  H.  Vance.  What  we  know  about  these  daguerreians'  work,  clients  and  background,  offers   greater  context  to  the  subject  matter  depicted  in  their  views,  as  well  as  the  views  that  are  non- attributed.  This  information  may  also  provide  a  better  understanding  of  how  the  views  were  used,   the  conditions  under  which  they  were  produced,  and  general  practices  of  the  unknown  makers.      On  January  24,  1849,  Johnson  arrived  in  San  Francisco  by  ship  from  New  York  where  he  was   a  working  daguerreotypist.  By  July  of  that  year,  he  moved  to  Sacramento.92  His  gallery  was  among   the  earliest  to  be  established  in  California.93  He  made  "regular  trips  into  the  gold  fields,  producing   many  strong  images--often  in  the  half-  or  whole-plate  sizes--of  mining  towns,  encampments,   claims,  and  sluices."94  Wood  engravings  from  Johnson's  views  brought  his  work  to  the  wider  public:   "Industry  Bar,  Yuba  River,  was  based  on  one  of  his  views,  and  it  appeared  on  the  front  page  of  the   Sacramento  Union  on  October  30,  1852."95  In  November  1852,  Johnson  moved  to  San  Francisco   where  he  opened  a  gallery  and  continued  to  work  as  a  daguerreotypist.96       Selleck  moved  to  California  in  1851  from  New  York  City,  where  he  had  been  working  as  a  

                                                                                                                

91  The  creation  dates  of  these  daguerreotypes  range  from  approximately  1849  to  1856.  For  the  most   part  the  dates  have  been  estimated  by  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  and  by  other  researchers,  and  are  usually  based   on  the  following  criteria:  subject  matter  including  location  and  mining  technology;  accompanying  letters  and   documents  when  these  are  available;  and  the  case,  matting,  glass,  and  techniques  used  in  the  object's  creation.     92  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  328.   93  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  210.   94  Davis,  The  Origins  of  American  Photography,  57.   95  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  328.   96  Ibid.  

  

18  

  

daguerreotypist  since  1846.97  His  time  spent  mining  upon  his  arrival  in  California,98  would  have   given  him  a  familiarity  with  the  subjects  he  documented.  By  September  14,  1852,  "Selleck  was   working  as  an  operator  for  the  gallery  of  George  Howard  Johnson"99  in  Sacramento.  After  the   Sacramento  fire  in  November  1852,  Johnson  and  Selleck  opened  a  gallery  in  San  Francisco,  and  in   early  1854,  Johnson  opened  a  new  gallery.100  By  1853,  Selleck  and  Johnson  had  operated  a  field   studio  in  various  gold  diggings,101  which  Humphrey's  Journal  described  as  a  "fine  business  in  that   part  of  the  diggings."102  Situated  in  the  diggings  and  the  surrounding  settlements  and  encampments   would  have  provided  the  daguerreians  with  immediate  access  to  prospective  clients,  including   proprietors  with  commercial  properties  to  document.        Robert  H.  Vance  arrived  in  San  Francisco  from  Connecticut,  by  way  of  South  America.  A   skilled  daguerreian,  he  first  went  to  Valparaíso,  Chile,  where  he  opened  a  gallery  in  early  1847.103   Before  his  move  to  California  in  1850,  he  worked  in  Santiago  and  Valparaíso  and  photographed  in   the  gold  diggings  of  Copiapó.  None  of  the  daguerreotypes  taken  by  Vance  during  his  time  in  South   America  are  known  to  exist  today,  however  four--of  a  total  of  300  works--were  included  in  his   1851  New  York  City  exhibition,  Views  in  California.104  Between  1850  and  c.  1863,  Vance  operated   galleries  in  various  locations  throughout  California  including  San  Francisco,  Sacramento  and   Marysville.105  He  traveled  extensively  to  gold  diggings  and  encampments  where  he  produced   portraits  of  miners  and  others  connected  to  mining  activities,  in  addition  to  making  views  for   clients.                          

                                                                                                                
  
98  Ibid.   99  Ibid.   100  Ibid.,  486.   101  Ibid.  

97  Palmquist  and    Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  485.  

102  Humphrey's  Journal,  Vol  V,  (Oct  1,  1853),  190.   103  Alexander,  "Robert  Vance,"  14.   104  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  560.      

  

105  Ibid.,  559.  

  

19  

  

Subject  Matter   Mining  Settlements           Two  views  of  the  18  depict  mining  settlements.  In  one,  A  Main  Street  in  Orleans  Flats,  c.  1852   (half  plate),  signage  reveals  the  name  of  the  settlement  (figure  8).  The  view  entitled  Street  View  Of  A   Cash  Store,  c.  1850  (half  plate)  depicts  miners  and  other  people  in  front  of  a  commercial  property   with  a  sign  that  reads  `Cash  Store'  (figure  9).  Both  views  appear  to  emphasize  the  people,  the   structures,  and  the  use  of  space  in  the  settlements.  Although  the  daguerreotypes  depict  a  specific   view  of  each  settlement,  each  offers  a  sense  of  the  activities  that  one  might  expect  to  encounter  in   early  mining  communities.         Subject  Matter   Mining  Scenes            Five  mining  scenes  attributed  to  George  H.  Johnson  were  produced  between  1850  and  1852,  

during  which  time  he  mostly  operated  in  Sacramento.106  Of  them,  Mining  And  Assorted  Activity  On   The  American  River,  Near  Sacramento,  c.  1852  (whole  plate)  (figure  5),  would  have  been  produced   within  close  proximity  to  Johnson's  gallery  in  Sacramento,  while  three  others  would  have  required   that  Johnson  travel  further  afield,  to  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River,  and  to  Grizzly  Flats  (appendix  1).  In   Notion  Company  Works,  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River,  c.  1852  (whole  plate)  (figure  1)  the  figures  are   emphasized:   While  the  two  machines  in  the  foreground  are  operated  by  manpower,  those  just   discernible  in  the  distance  are  being  turned  by  the  paddlewheel  above  the  dam.  A  flume   leading  from  the  paddlewheel  presumably  is  supplying  water  for  the  Long  Toms  in   operation  at  the  right  (and  possibly  to  the  left).  Two  men  hold  up  the  traditional  pan   containing  gold  (carefully  punched  into  the  daguerreotype  plate  and  gilded)."107      Two  other  views  attributed  to  Johnson--a  half  plate  and  a  quarter  plate--depict  mining  scenes  in   which  the  mining  apparatus  and  surroundings  are  emphasized,  while  the  figures  are  given  less   prominence  (figures  6,  17).  One,  Diverted  River  at  Mining  Operation,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate)  (figure   6),  is  accompanied  by  an  inscription  on  a  note  within  the  case:  

                                                                                                                
106  "Although  he  was  only  one  of  the  many  daguerreians  who  took  their  cameras  to  the  mines,  his  are      among  the  very  few  such  images  that  can  be  linked  to  a  maker,  thanks  to  his  practice  of  embossing  his  cases   with  his  name."  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  327.     107  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  51.     

  

20  

  

A  typical  example  of  a  diverted  river.  The  entire  American  River  was  diverted  in  the  same   way  shown  here,  confined  in  a  wooden  sluice  to  drain  the  riverbed  to  get  at  its  golden   treasure  and  then  used  as  a  source  of  power  (note  the  paddle  wheels)  as  well.  
  

The  four  views  by  unknown  makers  that  depict  mining  scenes  include  three  half  plates  and  one   quarter  plate  (figures  13,  16,  19,  20).  For  the  most  part,  groups  of  miners  are  featured  amongst  the   mining  apparatus  as  in  the  views  by  Johnson.  In  some  of  the  views,  the  miners  appear  to  be  acting   out  or  demonstrating  their  work  activities  (figures  13,  20).  Spanning  from  1849  to  1853,  they   document  a  range  of  mining  techniques,  including  placer  mining  and  the  use  of  long  toms.  Most   include  what  might  be  owners,  prospectors,  and  other  members  of  mining  communities.  The   inclusion  of  trees,  buildings,  hills,  and  other  features,  provides  context  to  the  mining  activities.         Subject  Matter   Commercial  Properties            Commercial  properties  are  depicted  in  three  views  made  from  1850  to  1852.  They  include  

one  quarter  plate  view  attributed  to  Silas  W.  Selleck  (figure  7),  one  quarter  plate  and  one  half  plate,   both  by  unknown  makers  (figures  4,  15).  The  figures  in  all  of  the  views  appear  to  be  merchants,   proprietors,  and  others  who  are  associated  with  the  commercial  property  or  surrounding   community.  The  two  views  by  unknown  makers  include  foreground  and  background  details  that   offer  a  sense  of  how  the  structures  relate  to  their  surroundings.  The  exception  is  Selleck's  Merchant   Tailor  Shop  With  Proprietor,  California,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate)  (figure  7),  in  which  the  merchant's   building  has  been  isolated  from  its  surroundings.           Subject  Matter   Dwellings         Two  views  in  this  study  depict  dwellings  (figures  2,  3).  Both  views  are  quarter  plate  in  size   and  the  makers  are  unknown.  According  to  Mark  S.  Johnson,  these  dwellings  were  built  by  the   carpenter,  Moses  Warren,  and  were  located  close  to  the  Californian  mining  settlement,   Georgetown.108  Objects  that  one  might  expect  to  be  found  inside  the  dwelling  such  as  a  mirror,  table     

                                                                                                                   

108  Johnson,  "Argonaut  Moses  Warren,"  159,  173.  

21  

  

and  shovel,  are  depicted  outside.  These  objects  provide  details  about  the  interior  of  the  dwellings.   In  both  views,  the  dwelling  and  its  surroundings  are  emphasized--the  buildings  are  off  centre-- which  has  the  effect  of  communicating  information  about  the  space  in  which  they  are  located  as   much  as  the  structure  itself.           Subject  Matter   The  City  (San  Francisco)         The  two  views  by  Robert  H.  Vance  depict  the  city  environment:  Portsmouth  Square,  San   Francisco,  c.  1854  (two  1/6  plate  stereo)  (figure  10)  and  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856   (whole  plate)  (figure  11).  Vance's  two  views  prominently  feature  the  built  environment  of  San   Francisco  and  are  testament  to  the  incredible  architectural  development  that  took  place  in  this  city   from  the  late  1840s  to  the  mid  1850s.  The  Excelsior  Building  exemplifies  this  development:     Located  in  San  Francisco,  the  major  outlet  for  California's  gold,  this  brick  building  at  170   Montgomery  Street  could  not  have  existed  a  scant  half-dozen  years  earlier.  In  1848,  San   Francisco  was  nothing  more  than  a  collection  of  wooden  structures.109      While  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856,  depicts  a  group  of  people  standing  in  front  of  the   building  and  little  foreground,  Portsmouth  Square,  San  Francisco,  c.  1854  includes  several  elements   in  the  foreground  such  as  fencing,  trees,  the  square,  the  street,  horse-drawn  wagons  and  some   figures.  In  both  views  the  subject  is  as  much  the  architecture  as  it  is  the  surroundings  and  activities.   In  a  sense,  the  subject  appears  to  be  the  city  itself,  a  subject  that  generated  vast  interest  at  the  time:     But  of  all  American  cities,  San  Francisco  was  the  most  frequently  daguerreotyped.  Its  rapid   growth,  the  pride  of  its  citizens,  and  international  curiosity  about  the  City  of  Gold  created  a   demand  for  pictures,  and  this  demand  the  daguerreotype  satisfied  in  part.110     

     

                 

                                                                                                                
  

109  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  55.   110  Newhall.  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  85.  

  

  

22  

  

CALIFORNIA  GOLD  RUSH  VIEWS  
   Working  Conditions         The  daguerreotype  views  analyzed  in  this  thesis  project  include  a  diversity  of  subject   matter.  They  were  all  produced  outdoors  and  away  from  the  gallery.  Compared  to  the  gallery   setting,  where  daguerreotypists  carried  out  the  majority  of  their  business,111  outdoor  settings   presented  a  different  set  of  working  conditions  that  had  to  be  addressed.  To  adapt  to  these   conditions  required  a  high  degree  of  skill  and  "considerably  more  time  and  effort"  than  those  in  the   studio.112  Some  of  the  working  conditions  that  had  to  be  addressed  were  unpredictable  light  and   weather,  operating  camera  equipment  in  a  variety  of  settings,  transporting  supplies,  and  preparing   and  developing  plates  away  from  the  gallery.  Daguerreians  responded  by  developing  approaches   that  ensured  successful  outcomes.      The  direction  and  intensity  of  light  are  a  product  of  weather,  time  of  day  and  year.   Daguerreians  had  to  consider  these  factors  when  planning  and  making  views.  Lighting  conditions   dictated  the  ideal  vantage  points  from  which  to  successfully  document  a  scene.  The  light  and   climate  in  California  offered  daguerreians  favourable  conditions  to  produce  outdoor  views.  The   New  York  City  daguerreian,  Robert  A.  Carden  made  this  point  after  a  visit  to  California  in  1856:     The  Art  in  California  bids  fair  to  rival  the  cities  of  the  Eastern  States,  and  it  may  be  said  with   credit,  that  there  are  many  who  honor  the  profession  in  this  once  far  off  land.  There  are   some  advantages  possessed  in  that  portion  of  the  world  at  a  certain  season  of  the  year,  viz.   the  dry  season,  when  a  constant  succession  of  clear  weather  for  more  than  six  months,  can   be  depended  upon.  The  peculiar  clear  and  cloudless  sky  is  certainly  more  advantageous  to   the  practice  of  the  Art  than  our  uncertain  weather--now  rain  and  then  sunshine.  With  these   advantages  it  is  not  strange  that  there  are  many  specimens  well  worthy  of  note,  and  some   indeed  are  equal  to  any  produced  in  the  large  cities  of  the  Atlantic  States.113      Despite  its  advantages,  outdoor  conditions  in  California  could  never  be  as  predictable  as  

  

more  familiar  lighting  and  working  conditions  in  the  gallery  setting.  Contemporary  photography   manuals  and  journals  addressed  concerns  about  the  erratic  aspects  of  outdoor  light.  In  1852,  the   Photographic  Art-Journal  publication  recommended  that:  
111  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  225.  Palmquist  claims  that  outdoor  views  were      not  the  focus  of  business  activities  for  most  daguerreians  in  San  Francisco  because  of  the  profitability  and   higher  demand  associated  with  portraits:  "Scenic  views  aside,  it  was  the  `miniature'  or  portrait  which   provided  the  bulk  of  income  for  the  San  Francisco  daguerreian."   112  Kilgo,  Likeness  and  Landscape,  144.     113  Robert  A.  Carden,  "Photography  in  California,"  Photographic  and  Fine  Arts  Journal,  New  York,  10:4   (April  1857):  112­13.  (From  Gary  W.  Ewer,  ed.,  The  Daguerreotype:  an  Archive  of  Source  Texts,  Graphics,  and   Ephemera,  http://www.daguerreotypearchive.org  P8570003).  

                                                                                                                

  

23  

  

the  proper  time  for  the  light  to  act  upon  the  plate  depends  on  so  many  circumstances,  the   hour  of  the  day,  the  season  of  the  year,  and  the  preparation  of  the  plate,  that  it  is  impossible   to  give  any  rule;  but  the  time,  with  a  good  lens,  a  bright  day,  and  a  properly  prepared  plate,   in  the  open  air,  ought  not  to  exceed  ten  or  fifteen  seconds.114      In  their  A  System  of  Photography  published  in  1849,  the  daguerreotypists  S.D.  Humphrey  and  M.   Finley  claimed  that  the  ideal  light  condition  for  producing  views  is  "either  a  cloudy  day,  or  just  after   sunset."115  The  diffused  lighting  associated  with  these  conditions  resulted  in  less  contrast  and   shadows--more  favourable  for  documenting  details  across  the  entire  scene.      Daguerreians  encountered  a  variety  of  terrain  and  other  conditions  when  traveling  to   remote  locations.  Rinhart  and  Rinhart  note,  "The  traveling  daguerreian  artist  sometimes  brought   his  camera  into  remote  areas,  under  hazardous  conditions."116  The  effort  required  to  transport  and   set  up  equipment  such  as  tripods  with  nonadjustable  legs  on  uneven  surfaces  in  diverse  locations   presented  the  traveling  daguerreian  with  many  challenges  different  from  producing  portraits  in  the   gallery  where  equipment  and  supplies  were  readily  available.  More  impressive  is  the  fact  that   Vance,  Johnson  and  other  daguerreotypists  used  whole  plates  that  required  larger  sized   apparatus--camera,  optics,  sensitizer  box  and  mercury  bath--all  of  which  resulted  in  heavier  loads   and  greater  transport  challenges  (see  figure  23).        During  this  period  many  people  gave  advice  about  supplies,  equipment  and  transport.  In  the   1850  publication,  Some  Notes  on  Photography  on  Metal  Plates,  translated  from  Quelques  Notes  sur  la   Photographie  sur  Plaques  métalliques,  Jean-Baptiste  Louis  Gros  (1793­1870),  an  ambassador  and   daguerreian  who  traveled  and  made  views,  offered  advice  for  minimizing  volume  and  explained   how  the  camera  could  be  used  to  store  equipment  and  supplies.  To  further  assure  readers,  he   affirmed  that  the  "traveling  case"  he  prescribed  "was  made  to  travel  on  the  back  of  a  mule  in   mountains  that  are  almost  inaccessible."117  Back  in  the  United  States,  The  Daguerreian  Journal  also   offered  advice  about  what  traveling  daguerreians  should  carry  with  them:   Traveling  artists  were  also  advised  that  they  should  have  a  box  containing  all  complete   polishing  apparatus,  together  with  a  stock  of  chemicals,  a  coating  box,  and  a  supply  of   plates.  However,  it  was  suggested  that,  wherever  possible,  the  box  be  kept  at  the   photographer's  lodging  and  the  plates  buffed  and  coated  beforehand,  thus  saving  time  in  the  

                                                                                                                

114  Robert  J.  Bingham,  "Photographic  Manipulation,"  Photographic  Art-Journal  3,  (March  1852):  187.  

115  S.D.  Humphrey  and  M.  Finley,    A  System  of  Photography,  Containing  an  Explicit  Detail  of  the  Whole   Process  of  Daguerreotype,  According  to  the  Most  Approved  Methods  of  Operating;  Including  All  the  Late   Valuable  Improvements,  (Canandaigua,  NY,  1849),  in  Daguerreotype  Process:  Three  Treatises,  1840­1849.  (New   York,  NY:  Arno  Press,  1973),  56.   116  Rinhart  and  Rinhart,  The  American  Daguerreotype,  350.   117  Jean-Baptiste  Louis  Gros,  Some  Notes  on  Photography  on  Metal  Plates,  translation  (non-attributed)      of  Quelques  Notes  sur  la  Photographie  sur  Plaques  métalliques  (Paris,  1850),  101.  

  

24  

  

field.118      Portable  horse-drawn  studios  and  tents  provided  the  option  to  sensitize,  fix,  and  gild  plates  in  the   field,  away  from  the  gallery.  This  was  especially  useful  when  travel  to  and  from  the  gallery  within   the  same  day  was  not  possible.119  Many  accounts  document  methods  of  travel  and  transporting   apparatus.  William  Shew  operated  a  mobile  daguerreian  saloon  that  was  prominently  located  in  the   Portsmouth  Square  Plaza  in  San  Francisco.  On  July  25,  1851,  the  San  Francisco  Alta  California   observed:     It  is  to  be  a  traveling  daguerreotype  establishment,  with  which  the  proprietor  intends  to   travel  around  the  city  and  country,  taking  views  and  portraits.120        Palmquist  describes  how  the  daguerreians,  Isaac  Wallace  Baker  (1818­c.  1862)  and  Perez  Mann   Batchelder  (1818­c.  1873),  traveled  to  remote  towns  and  mines  with  a     portable  daguerreian  van.  This  horse-drawn  mobile  studio  featured  large  skylights  and   side-windows  .  .  .  Prospectors  could  pose  for  portraits  in  the  portable  studio,  or  in  some   cases  the  camera  was  taken  directly  to  miners  in  the  field  to  record  mining  operations.121          Working  with  plates  in  the  outdoors  presented  risks  such  as  dust  and  excess  light.  In  the   1858  publication,  American  Hand  Book  of  the  Daguerreotype,  S.D.  Humphrey  warned  "The  polished   plate  should  not  be  allowed  to  come  in  contact  with  a  strong  current  of  air,  for  it  tends  to  oxidize   the  surface."122  Considering  the  condition  of  working  in  the  outdoors  and  the  effect  it  had  on  the   process  taken  by  daguerreians  to  obtain  a  view,  it  is  not  surprising  that  The  Daguerreian  Journal   gave  Vance  such  praise  for  his  New  York  exhibition  of  300  views  in  1851:     We  must  say  the  operator  has  the  proof  of  untiring  industry  .  .  .  When  we  consider  the   disadvantage  of  operating  in  a  tent  or  the  open  air,  and  in  a  new  country,  we  are  much   surprised  by  such  success;  as  a  collection  we  have  never  seen  its  equal.123      Preparing  and  developing  plates  was  also  difficult.  The  outdoors  presented  less  than  pristine   conditions  for  maintaining  clean  plates  with  a  uniform  polish.  To  work  properly,  the  buffs  "needed   to  be  absolutely  dry,  for  damp  buffs  polished  poorly  and  produced  daguerreotypes  with  a  scummy,   gray  appearance."124  Also,  the  delay  in  time  between  exposure  and  development  meant  that  the  

                                                                                                                
        

118  Rinhart  and  Rinhart,  The  American  Daguerreotype,  354.     119  Mike  Robinson,  interviews  by  author,  Toronto,  ON,  June  2013.   120  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  496.     121  Palmquist,  "The  Pioneers,"  9.  

122  S.D.  Humphrey,  American  Hand  Book  of  the  Daguerreotype,  1858.  Reprint.  (New  York,  NY:  Arno   Press,  1973),  165.   123  "Daguerreotype  Panoramic  Views  in  California,"  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  2,  (November  1,      1851):  371.   124  Shlaer,  Sights  Once  Seen,  53.     

  

25  

  

latent  image  would  fade  to  some  degree.  Sensitizing  in  the  field  was  more  challenging  because  shifts   in  environmental  conditions  meant  less  uniformity  of  sensitizing  halogens  on  the  surface  of  the   plate.   Daguerreotypists  always  tried  to  maintain  uniformly  warm  coating  boxes  which  would   sensitize  the  plates  evenly.  In  cool  weather  a  fire  was  usually  left  overnight  inside  the   studio,  so  that  the  sensitizing  equipment  was  ready  for  immediate  use  the  next  morning.   Unevenly  warmed  coating  boxes  sensitize  plates  in  an  extremely  nonuniform  manner.125        Areas  of  the  plate  that  were  unevenly  sensitized  often  display  abrupt  shifts  in  tonal  value,  as   evidenced  by  the  darker  portion  of  the  half  plate,  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  made  by  Johnson  c.  1851.   (figure  17,  lower  centre)126        Daguerreotypists  responded  to  the  working  conditions  of  making  views--along  with  the   view's  purpose  and  subject  matter--by  making  decisions  that  took  into  account  their  obtaining   correct  perspectives;  choosing  optics  for  minimizing  exposure  times,  addressing  variable  light   conditions  and  obtaining  greater  detail  and  focus;  obtaining  multiple  views  of  the  same  subject;  and   composing  and  arranging  scenes.      

                                                                                                                      

125  Shlaer,  Sights  Once  Seen,  54.   126  Mike  Robinson,  interviews  by  author,  Toronto,  ON,  August  2013.  

26  

  

DECISIONS  AND  RESULTS    
   Obtaining  Correct  Perspective      Daguerreotypes  represent  the  subject  as  a  positive  mirror  image.  Daguerreians  could   laterally  correct  the  image  prior  to  its  formation  on  the  plate  by  using  a  prism  or  a  mirror  situated   on  a  45-degree  angle  to  the  lens  (figure  24).  The  result  was  an  image  with  the  same  lateral   perspective  as  the  subject  that  it  depicted.  Lateral  correction  was  not  as  frequently  carried  out  with   portraits  since  "people  were  accustomed  to  seeing  themselves  reversed  in  mirrors"127  As  noted   earlier,  views  were  sometimes  not  laterally  corrected  in  order  to  facilitate  their  use  for  engravers,   or  when  correction  devices  were  not  available  or  feasible  to  use.        As  well,  images  were  sometimes  not  laterally  corrected  due  to  the  lack  of  a  reflector  large   enough  for  use  with  a  portrait  lens--a  half  plate  view  would  have  required  a  whole-plate  sized   mirror  which  may  have  been  less  convenient  to  travel  with,  especially  since  the  camera  itself  was   sometimes  used  to  store  equipment  and  supplies.  The  Cathan's  Reflector  landscape  lens  with  a   prism  built  into  the  lens  addressed  this  problem.  However,  it  was  a  smaller  lens  (f/22  to  f/45)  and   therefore  required  longer  exposure  times--not  ideal  in  scenes  with  low  light,  people  or  other   moving  subjects.  The  use  of  reflectors  with  faster  portrait  lenses--most  of  which  were  Petzvals-- with  apertures  of  f/3.5  to  f/5.6,  could  be  problematic  since  removing  and  replacing  the  lens  cap  to   capture  the  exposure  had  to  be  carried  out  very  quickly,  sometimes  too  quickly,  in  order  to  prevent   overexposure  of  the  plate.128  This  problem  was  addressed  by  stopping  down  the  lens  with  a   diaphragm,  thus  lengthening  the  exposure  time.  Therefore,  making  images  right-reading  with  a   portrait  lens  could  be  carried  out  in  this  manner.  Hand-made  reflectors  and  diaphragms  provided  a   solution  for  many  daguerreians  who  only  used  faster  portrait  cameras.129      The  daguerreotype  views  in  the  Isenburg  Collection  demonstrate  examples  of  the  ways  in   which  daguerreotypists  laterally  corrected  views,  especially  where  signage  and  architecture  is   depicted.          

                                                                                                                
  
127  Weinstein,  "Gold  Rush  Daguerreotypes,"  36.     128  "The  Petzval  design  had  a  relatively  large  aperture,  too  large  for  convenient  use  outdoors  because   the  very  short  exposures  it  allowed  in  direct  sunlight  were  hard  to  control  with  a  lens  cap."  Shlaer,  Sights  Once   Seen,  55.     129  Mike  Robinson,  interviews  by  author,  Toronto,  ON,  June  2013.    

  

27  

  

Obtaining  Correct  Perspective   Reflective  devices  for  correcting  lateral  perspective:     Unknown  Maker,  A  Main  Street  in  Orleans  Flats,  c.  1852  (half  plate)            Literature  published  around  the  time  of  the  Gold  Rush  tended  to  promote  the  lateral   correction  of  views.  In  an  1849  publication,  Humphrey  and  Finley  declared  "views  are  always  most   desirable  when  taken  in  right  position;  that  is,  without  being  reversed  in  the  camera."130  In  1851,   Humphrey  wrote,  "landscapes  and  buildings  require  to  be  correct  as  regards  the  position  of  their   several  parts."131  Furthermore,  in  1850,  Baron  Gros  claimed  that  when  producing  views,  he  used   mirrors  or  prisms  to  laterally  correct  them.132        This  prescribed  approach  is  evident  in  the  view  entitled  A  Main  Street  in  Orleans  Flats,  c.   1852  (half  plate)  (figure  8).  The  right-reading  signage  along  the  main  street  of  this  mining   settlement  indicates  that  the  image  was  corrected  with  a  prism,  or  a  mirror  positioned  at  a  45- degree  angle  to  the  camera's  optic.  A  long  depth  of  field  resulted  in  much  of  the  image  being  in   focus--from  the  buildings  and  figures  in  the  foreground,  to  the  signage,  trees,  buildings  and  flag   mast  in  the  background.  This  long  depth  of  field  with  relatively  sharp  focus  along  the  perimeter  of   the  image,  is  characteristic  of  landscape  cameras,  such  as  the  camera  produced  by  C.C.  Harrison   beginning  in  1850,  over  one  year  before  the  estimated  creation  of  the  view  of  Orleans,  in  1852   (figure  29).  This  camera  was  made  for  taking  views,  and  as  noted  in  the  November  1,  1850  issue  of   The  Daguerreian  Journal,  "The  arrangement  is  simple  and  compact,  and  presents  the  landscape   without  being  reversed."133  An  announcement  in  the  next  issue  published  on  November  15,  1850,   claimed  that  this  view  camera  produced  images  without  distortion  and  that  it  had  a  very  long  focal   distance  of  nineteen  inches.134  Although  the  Cathan's  Reflector  and  French  Landscape  Lens  also  had   long  focal  lengths  ideal  for  producing  landscape  views  that  were  well  focused  throughout,  C.C.   Harrison's  view  camera  worked  faster.  The  Cathan's  Reflector  required  around  forty  to  ninety   seconds  for  an  exposure  on  a  sunny  day,135  and  the  French  landscape  lens  required  up  to  ten   seconds  on  a  sunny  day,  while  the  C.C.  Harrison  view  camera  could  produce  exposures  in  

130  Humphrey  and  Finley,  "A  System  of  Photography,"  55.      131  "Landscape  Camera,"  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  2  (August  15,  1851):  204.      132  Gros,  Some  Notes  on  Photography,  38.        133  "New  Invention­Mr.  C.  C.  Harrison,"  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.      Humphrey,  (November  1,  1850):  20.   134  "Camera  For  Views,"  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1,  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (November      15,  1850):  56.   135  As  noted  on  the  packaging  of  the  Cathan's  Reflector  (figure  31).  

                                                                                                                

  

28  

  

seconds.136  The  shorter  exposure  time  of  the  Orleans  view--quite  possibly  made  with  the  C.C.   Harrison  view  camera--was  facilitated  by  a  very  strong  midday  sun  (indicated  by  the  short,  well   defined  shadows)  and  is  suggested  by  the  relatively  motionless  figures  throughout,  as  well  as  the   flag,  which  is  quite  still  at  its  closest  point  to  the  flagstaff.  The  manner  in  which  the  figures   throughout  this  scene--even  those  in  the  far  distance--are  gazing  in  the  direction  of  the  camera   suggests  that  they  were  aware  that  a  view  was  being  made  and  that  they  were  directed  to  stay  still,   in  order  to  accommodate  the  slightly  longer  exposure  of  a  landscape  camera  with  a  long  focal   length.        If  the  view  of  Orleans  Flats  was  made  with  a  C.C.  Harrison  view  camera,  a  prism  instead  of  a   mirror  was  used  to  correct  the  reversed  image.  This  prism  was  similar  to  the  Cathan's  Reflector  that   came  before  it:  "Instead  of  being  placed  in  front  of  the  lens,  it  replaced  the  lens  elements."137  (figure   31).  The  prism  corrected  reversed  images  and  reduced  distortion  more  effectively  than  placing  a   reflective  mirror  on  a  45-degree  angle  to  a  portrait  lens.138  Despite  its  strengths,  the  use  of  prisms   had  its  limitations.  During  the  late  1840s  and  early  1850s,  there  were  few  suppliers  in  California   from  which  to  obtain  the  devices.139  In  addition,  in  March  1852,  the  Photographic  Art-Journal  noted   that  a  glass  prism  is  "very  much  more  expensive  and  difficult  to  obtain  perfect  and  free  from   striae."140  Also,  the  C.C.  Harrison  camera,  as  with  other  view  cameras,  required  more  time  for  its   exposures.  Therefore  many  daguerreians  chose  to  use  faster  portrait  cameras,  combined  with   reflective  mirrors  as  a  method  for  correcting  reversed  images.  141    Mirrors  used  to  laterally  correct   images  could  be  hand  crafted  with  readily  available  materials  including  a  plate  of  glass  and  a  sheet   of  tin,142  thus  eliminating  dependency  on  suppliers  of  ready-made  reverse  mirrors.  The  ability  to   travel  with  a  single  portrait  camera--which  would  have  been  used  to  produce  portraits  of  the   miners  and  others  in  the  mining  settlements--and  to  adapt  it  with  a  handmade  reflective  mirror  to   take  laterally  corrected  views,  meant  that  daguerreotypists  traveling  to  the  gold  diggings  and   mining  settlements  could  travel  with  just  one  camera  outfit.       

                                                                                                                
  
136  Mike  Robinson,  interviews  by  author,  Toronto,  ON,  March  2013.   137  Isenburg,  "Early  Equipment,"  248.   138  "Landscape  Camera,"  229.      139  Prior  to  1850,  "The  problem  of  obtaining  adequate  daguerreian  equipment  and  supplies  was  only      one  of  many  stumbling-blocks  during  this  period  of  intense  change."  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San   Francisco,"  209­10.     140  Bingham,  "Photographic  Manipulation,"  186.                                      141  "There  have  been  excellent  cameras  introduced  for  taking  views,  but  the  time  of  exposure,  which   is  increased  in  proportion  to  the  focal  length,  is  considered  an  objection;  consequently  many  adhere  to  the  old   plan  of  using  the  speculum,  or  rather,  substitute  a  mirror."  Humphrey,  American  Hand  Book,  70.     142  Humphrey  and  Finley,  "A  System  of  Photography,"  55.  

  

29  

  

Obtaining  Correct  Perspective   Lateral  perspective  left  uncorrected:   Unknown  Maker,  Group  Of  Miners  Working  A  Long  Tom  In  California  Gold  Camp,  1849     (half  plate)         A  long  depth  of  field  in  the  half  plate  view  entitled  Group  Of  Miners  Working  A  Long  Tom  In   California  Gold  Camp,  1849  (figure  13),  resulted  in  a  scene  that  is  relatively  well  focused   throughout--from  the  mining  apparatus  and  activities  in  the  foreground  to  the  buildings  and   signage  in  the  background.  However,  the  soft  focus  evident  along  the  edges  of  this  view  suggests   that  a  Petzval  portrait  lens  with  its  characteristic  wide  aperture  was  used  (figure  32).  The  small   aperture  required  to  obtain  the  long  depth  of  field  could  have  been  achieved  by  placing  a  brass  stop   or  a  hand  made  diaphragm  with  a  small  hole  in  it  over  the  portrait  lens  (figures  33,  39).      This  view  appears  to  have  been  used  as  a  model  for  a  steel  engraving  by  Adams  &  Co.  (figure   35).  The  unknown  maker  of  this  view  did  not  turn  the  camera  onto  its  side  to  obtain  the  more   common  horizontal  image.  Instead,  he  chose  a  vertical  plate  alignment,  which  was  quite  rare  for   views.143  Many  elements  of  the  mining  scene  are  included  such  as  wood  structures  in  the   background--one  identified  as  `Brooks  and  Campbell'.  The  reversed  letters  on  the  signage  and  the   incorrect  placement  of  buttons  on  the  men's  shirts  indicate  that  the  scene  was  not  laterally   corrected.      There  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  the  daguerreian  might  have  decided  to  not  laterally   correct  the  scene,  apart  from  lacking  a  mirror  to  carry  out  the  reversal;  it  may  have  been  left   laterally  reversed  if  its  intended  use  was  a  reference  for  an  engraving.  However,  the   daguerreotype's  surface  does  not  exhibit  the  damage  one  would  expect  if  it  had  been  traced  over  as   a  reference  for  an  engraving.  If  it  was  used  as  a  model  for  an  engraving,  perhaps  the  artist  instead   only  made  a  visual  reference  to  the  plate  and  thus  avoided  damaging  it.  Another  reason  why  the   view  may  have  been  left  laterally  reversed  is  that  placing  a  mirror  in  front  of  the  lens  would  have   obstructed  the  daguerreian's  ability  to  manually  remove  and  then  replace  the  lens  cover  fast   enough  to  prevent  overexposure.                

                                                                                                                
2013).    

143  The  Daguerreian  Society,  NEA  Resarch  Database,  http://www.daguerre.org  (accessed  July  1,  

  

30  

  

Obtaining  Correct  Perspective   Limitations  of  the  tripod  for  obtaining  correct  lateral  perspective:     George  H.  Johnson,  Sterrett  &  Company,  c.  1851  (half  plate),  and     Unknown  Maker,  S.  McDonnell's  Gold  Miner's  Store,  Garden  Valley,  c.  1851  (half  plate)         A  handwritten  sign  that  reads  `Sterrett  &  Company'  suggests  that  the  half  plate  view,   Sterrett  &  Company,  made  by  Johnson  c.  1851  (figure  14),  was  laterally  corrected.  This  is  further   supported  by  the  correct  placement  of  buttons  on  the  men's  shirts  and  trousers.  The  inclusion  of   the  sign  suggests  that  this  view  was  intended  as  a  record  of  the  company's  mining  operations.  The   soft  focus  evident  on  the  top,  right  and  left  sides  of  the  image,  the  small  depth  of  field  and  short   exposure  time  as  indicated  by  the  mostly  motionless  figures,  all  suggest  that  this  view  was  made   with  a  Petzval  portrait  lens.  It  is  likely  that  Johnson  laterally  corrected  the  view  with  a  reflective   mirror  attached  to  the  outside  of  the  camera.        Johnson's  chosen  vantage  point  allowed  him  to  document  the  activity,  apparatus  and   surroundings.  The  elevated  position  from  which  this  view  was  made  offers  a  comprehensive  record   of  the  miners  and  the  mine.  The  terrain  on  which  Johnson's  tripod  was  positioned  may  have  offered   a  more  even  surface  compared  to  the  rough  terrain  of  the  depicted  diggings.  Most  tripods  in  use   during  the  1850s  required  slight  modifications  in  order  to  be  used  on  uneven  surfaces.  This  would   involve  removing  the  rolling  base  (figure  36).   The  advantages  of  this  spider  dolly  base  is  its  stability  as  well  as  its  mobility  with  a  larger   camera  in  a  studio  setting,  yet  the  rolling  base  could  be  removed  to  allow  the  unit  to  be  used   in  the  field  as  a  normal  tripod  since  the  wheels  would  be  impractical  in  rough  terrain.  The   entire  tripod,  though  made  of  wood,  unscrewed  into  its  component  parts  for  compactness   when  traveling.144           There  were  only  three  ways  to  adjust  the  tripod;  tilt,  swivel  and  height.145  Leveling  the   camera  to  the  horizon  would  have  been  much  easier  on  a  flatter  surface.  Moving  and  adjusting  the   tripod  on  an  uneven  surface  would  have  required  time  and  effort  as  a  "change  of  position,  angle,  or   perspective  required  repositioning  of  the  tripod  or  stabilizing  device."146  The  corrective  mirror  on   the  outside  of  the  camera  would  also  have  had  to  be  adjusted  to  maintain  a  flat  horizon--a  further   investment  of  time.  
  

  

The  half  plate  view,  S.  McDonnell's  Gold  Miner's  Store,  Garden  Valley,  c.  1851  (figure  15),  

depicts  buildings  that  served  commercial  purposes--a  miner's  supply  store  and  an  `Express  and  

                                                                                                                
  
145  Ibid.,  247.  

144  Isenburg,  "Early  Equipment,"  222.   146  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  11.

  

  

31  

  

News  Office'.  The  over  two  dozen  people  assembled  in  front  of  the  buildings  mostly  gaze  in  the   camera's  direction.  Isenburg  has  identified  the  location  of  this  view  as  the  mining  town  of  Garden   Valley,  located  in  El  Dorado  County,  "a  meeting  point  for  those  who  worked  in  nearby  diggings."147   The  area  surrounding  this  town  would  have  likely  offered  the  daguerreotypist  additional  views  to   photograph.        Side  lighting  suggests  that  this  view  was  made  earlier  or  later  in  the  day.  The  many  poorly- lit  figures  illustrate  the  less  than  ideal  lighting  conditions.  Yet,  the  building's  façade  and  signage   were  exposed  well  enough  to  convey  detail.  This  was  achieved  with  a  longer  exposure.  A  mirror   was  used  to  laterally  correct  the  view,  thus  making  the  signage  right-reading.  Newhall  notes  that     "city  views  with  signs  reading  backward  were  not  acceptable,  particularly  if  merchants  had   commissioned  them."148  Decisions  about  lighting  and  lateral  correction  emphasize  the  building  and   not  the  people  in  this  view,  and  therefore  offer  clues  about  the  view's  commercial  purpose,  likely  as   a  property  record.      The  angled  horizon  of  the  view  and  obstruction  in  the  foreground  suggest  some  of  the   conditions  that  the  daguerreian  encountered.  The  awkward  angle  might  have  been  a  response  to   the  need  to  include  several  elements  into  a  single  view,  but  it  is  more  likely  that  it  was  a  response  to   the  uneven  terrain  on  which  the  tripod  was  positioned  and  a  limited  number  of  available  vantage   points  from  which  to  make  this  view  while  including  the  desired  elements--buildings  and  signage.   As  noted  above,  non-adjustable  tripod  legs  on  uneven  terrain  would  have  made  it  difficult  to   achieve  a  level  horizon,  and  adjustments  to  correct  this  would  have  required  time  that  the   daguerreotypist  may  not  have  considered  an  option,  in  light  of  the  large  group  of  people  waiting  for   the  view  to  be  made  and  less  than  ideal  light  conditions.  Furthermore,  laterally  correcting  this   scene  with  a  reverse  mirror  would  have  made  it  more  difficult  to  level  the  horizon,  since  the  camera   itself  could  only  be  adjusted  front  to  back,  which  only  allowed  the  camera  to  be  angled  up  and   down.  When  one  considers  the  deliberate  approach  the  daguerreotypist  made  to  properly  expose   important  elements  and  the  effort  he  made  to  laterally  correct  the  scene,  it  is  unlikely  that  the   uneven  horizon  and  distracting  post  in  the  foreground  were  accidental,  or  overlooked.  The   movement  of  the  camera,  tripod  and  mirror  to  obtain  a  level  view  would  have  made  it  difficult  to   straighten  the  horizon.  In  contrast  to  A  Main  Street  in  Orleans  Flats,  c.  1852  (figure  8),  in  which  the   camera  was  probably  located  on  a  flat  surface  of  a  wide  street,  S.  McDonnell's  Gold  Miner's  Store,   Garden  Valley,  c.  1851,  demonstrates  the  challenges  of  composing  scenes  when  there  are  limited  

                                                                                                                 147  Ibid.,  55.      

148  Newhall,  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  84.  

32  

  

options  to  make  adjustments  to  the  camera's  apparatus,  which  in  this  case  arose  from  limited   vantage  points  and  uneven  terrain.                                                                                               

  

33  

  

DECISIONS  AND  RESULTS    
   Light  and  Exposure  Times         Decisions  about  which  optic  to  use  and  how  it  was  used,  were  often  influenced  by  a  number   of  factors--the  view's  purpose  and  subject  matter,  and  the  conditions  associated  with  its   production.  The  Cathan's  Reflector  and  Lens  had  a  built  in  prism  enabling  it  to  produce  sharp,   laterally  corrected  landscape  views  (see  figure  31).  However,  it  required  long  exposure  times  of   forty  to  ninety  seconds  in  sunlight,149  and  probably  half  that  for  the  California  sun.150  Long  exposure   times  meant  that  the  Cathan's  Reflector  and  Lens  was  not  ideal  for  scenes  that  included  moving   subjects  such  as  tree  branches,  shadows  and  especially  people.  The  French  landscape  lens--not  as   widely  used  in  the  United  States--151  had  a  small  aperture  of  f/16  and  it  required  longer  exposure   times  of  approximately  ten  seconds  in  sunlight  conditions152  (see  figure  37).  Therefore  in  most  light   conditions  with  this  lens,  it  was  difficult  to  obtain  a  view  in  which  figures  remained  completely  still.        The  announcement  in  1851  of  C.C.  Harrison's  view  camera  addressed  the  problem  of  longer   exposure  times  required  by  existing  lenses  made  for  landscapes.  A  reverse  prism  was  attached  to   the  lens  that  had  a  focal  length  of  19  inches.153  Lenses  made  specifically  for  landscapes  had  longer   focal  lengths  compared  to  portrait  lenses,  longer  fields  of  view,  and  they  produced  sharper  images.   Landscape  lenses  used  with  larger  plates  sizes  could  produce  very  sharp  images,  as  noted  by  Baron   Gros:         I  always  use  a  large  plate  and  the  lenses  with  a  long  focal  point,  which  were  sent  to  me  from         America  or  supplied  by  M.  Charles  Chevalier  in  Paris,  have  always  given  me  images  with           a  very  striking  sharpness;  it  is  a  recognition  that  I  hasten  to  give  him.154   The  landscape  lens  could  be  used  to  produce  views  that  were  sharp  throughout  the  entire  image   because  of  its  flatness  of  field,  compared  to  portrait  lenses  that  could  also  produce  well-focused   images,  however  had  greater  curvature  and  less  flatness  of  field.  Yet,  most  of  the  Isenburg   Collection's  Gold  Rush  views  were  made  with  Petzval  portrait  lenses.  These  lenses  were  faster  and   offered  daguerreians  the  option  to  travel  into  the  field  with  a  single  camera  outfit  that  could  be   used  to  make  both  indoor  portraits  and  outdoor  views.  The  following  section  examines  four  views  

                                                                                                                
  
149  Isenburg,  "Early  Equipment,"  248.   150  Mike  Robinson,  interviews  by  author,  Toronto,  ON,  March  2013.   151  Shlaer,  Sights  Once  Seen,  55.   152  Mike  Robinson,  interviews  by  author,  Toronto,  ON,  March  2013. 153  "Camera  For  Views,"  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  56.     154  Gros,  Some  Notes  on  Photography,  60.  

  
  

  

  

34  

  

made  from  1850  to  1856.         Light  and  Exposure  Times   Minimizing  exposure  times  with  the  Petzval  portrait  lens:   George  H.  Johnson,  Mining  And  Assorted  Activity  On  The  American  River,  Near  Sacramento,     c.  1852  (whole  plate)         In  the  whole  plate  view,  Mining  And  Assorted  Activity  On  The  American  River,  Near   Sacramento,  c.  1852  (figure  5),  Johnson  used  a  Petzval  portrait  lens  to  document  what  Isenburg   described  as  a  "depiction  of  typical  river  mining  operations  of  the  early  1850s."155  Johnson's  view   includes  dozens  of  people,  mostly  miners,  and  "smartly  dressed  townsfolk"156  including  young   children.  Most  of  these  people  are  gazing  towards  the  camera  and  it  appears  that  they  made  an   effort  to  stay  still  for  the  duration  of  the  exposure,  perhaps  at  Johnson's  request.  A  fast  portrait  lens   enabled  Johnson  to  reduce  the  exposure  time  and  therefore  more  accurately  depict  the  people   associated  with  the  mining  scene  in  what  was  likely  a  commissioned  record.  This  would  be  very   difficult  to  achieve  with  a  slower  landscape  lens.        The  Petzval  portrait  lens  was  designed  by  Joseph  Petzval  (1807­1891)  and  produced  by   Voigtländer  in  1840157  (see  figure  32).  Portrait  lenses  were  produced  in  the  United  States  by  the   lens  manufacturers,  C.C.  Harrison,  and  Holmes  Booth  and  Haydens  by  the  mid-1850s  .158  The   shorter  exposure  times  associated  with  portrait  lenses  were  due  in  large  part  to  a  wide  aperture.   Views  made  with  a  portrait  lens  are  often  softly  focused  along  the  edges--particularly  in  the  left,   right  and  top  edges.  However,  the  bottom  edge  normally  included  foreground  that  was  within  the   range  of  focus.159  "Its  useful  angle  of  view  was  narrower  than  that  of  the  French  landscape  lens  [of   twenty  from  the  axis],  being  limited  to  about  twelve  degrees  from  the  axis."160           Johnson's  view  prominently  features  a  few  well-dressed  men  in  the  foreground,  some  

holding  a  pan  of  gold--perhaps  they  oversaw  the  mining  operations.  Positioning  them  along  the   bottom  edge  of  the  view  illustrates  that  Johnson  understood  the  properties  of  the  Petzval  portait  

                                                                                                                
155  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  50­51.   156  Ibid.,  50.   157  Isenburg,  "Early  Equipment,"  205.   158  Ibid.,  205.  

  

159  Ibid.,  204­205.  The  portrait  lens  was  developed  by  Joseph  Petzval  (1807­1891)  in  1840.  Its  wide  

aperture  of  f/3.5  meant  that  exposure  times  were  shorter,  and  therefore  it  was  ideal  for  making  portraits  of   people.  By  the  1850s,  variations  of  the  lens  were  produced  by  other  makers.  "Most  of  these  Petzval  type   copies  are  great  for  portraiture,  but  because  of  field  curvature  and  astigmatism  only  the  center  is  in  good   focus.  This  is  why  some  outdoor  scenes  are  critically  sharp  in  the  center  and  fuzzy  at  the  edges."     160  Shlaer,  Sights  Once  Seen,  37.  

  

35  

  

lens  well--that  the  soft  focus  would  be  limited  to  the  left,  top  and  right  edges,  and  not  the   foreground.        Despite  the  shortfalls  of  the  Petzval  portrait  lens--"its  large  size,  its  weight,  and,  for   landscape  use,  its  narrow  depth  of  view"161--its  use  as  an  all-purpose  tool  in  the  outdoors   prevented  the  need  to  also  bring  a  landscape  view  camera  into  the  field.  Travel  would  have  been   lighter  with  a  single  outfit,  especially  one  that  could  be  modified  to  produce  images  that  were  more   detailed--by  stopping  down  the  aperture,  at  the  expense  of  slightly  lengthening  the  exposure  time.   A  smaller  load  of  equipment  and  supplies  would  have  offered  Johnson  the  opportunity  to  travel   with  greater  ease  to  additional  locations  to  make  both  views  and  portraits.  The  portrait  lens's  short   exposure  time  was  suitable--and  perhaps  even  necessary--to  accurately  document  an  outdoor   scene  such  as  this  one  with  a  lot  of  activity  and  a  greater  likelihood  of  moving  people.162           Light  and  Exposure  Times   Obtaining  greater  depth  of  field  by  decreasing  the  aperture  of  a  portrait  lens:   Unknown  Maker,  Mining  Scene  With  Building  Made  Of  Sail  Cloth  ­  Seven  Miners  With  Board  Sluices,  c.   1850  (half  plate)            In  the  half  plate  view,  Mining  Scene  With  Building  Made  Of  Sail  Cloth  ­  Seven  Miners  With   Board  Sluices  (figure  16),  the  centre  of  the  image  is  more  focused  and  has  a  longer  depth  of  field   compared  to  the  rest  of  the  image;  more  than  one  might  expect  considering  that  this  view  was  likely   produced  with  a  Petzval  portrait  lens  that  has  a  wide  aperture  and  shorter  depth  of  field.       The  longer  depth  of  field  has  the  affect  of  providing  a  substantial  amount  of  information  about  the   mining  activities  and  the  surroundings  of  this  scene.  Perhaps  this  view  was  commissioned  by  the   mine's  owner  or  owners,  who  might  be  among  some  of  the  figures  depicted.        A  diaphragm  could  be  used  to  decrease  the  aperture  and  thus  increase  a  view's  area  of  focus   and  overall  sharpness.  In  the  article,  "Landscape  Camera,"  published  in  The  Daguerreian  Journal  in   1851,  this  approach  was  described  as  a  solution  to  focusing  on  the  various  depths  so  common  in   landscape  scenes:   In  such  cases,  where  the  diversity  of  distance  is  great,  a  diaphragm  is  required  between  the   lens  and  the  objects,  having  an  opening  in  its  centre  called  an  aperture,  which  by  more  or   less  contracting  the  surface  of  the  lens,  reduces  the  quantity  of  light  permitted  to  act  in  

                                                                                                                
161  Ibid.,  55.   162  Ibid.  The  daguerreian,  Carvalho's  reasons  for  using  a  Petzval  lens  instead  of  a  landscape  lens:      "Fifteen  seconds  of  exposure  needed  in  direct  sunlight  if  a  landscape  lens  had  been  employed.  By  contrast,   one  second  was  all  the  exposure  time  required  with  a  Petzval  lens  under  the  same  circumstances."    

  

36  

  

forming  the  image;  by  which  means,  .  .  .  it  is  formed  with  greater  accuracy  and  precision  of   outline  than  would  be  the  case  were  the  rays  permitted  to  pass  through  the  whole  surface  of   the  lens.163      Diaphragms  were  often  hand  crafted  by  punching  out  a  piece  of  board,  paper,  or  lens  cover  (see   figure  30).  Reducing  the  amount  of  light  going  into  the  camera  would  have  lengthened  the  exposure   time,  allowed  the  daguerreotypist  to  obtain  a  longer  depth  of  field  and  therefore  include  more   details  in  focus.  In  this  view  of  a  mining  scene  (figure  16),  the  movement  made  by  some  of  the   miners  and  attempts  by  others  to  remain  still  by  resting  on  their  tools,  is  evidence  of  a  longer   exposure  time.      The  daguerreotypist  chose  a  vantage  point  from  which  the  miners  would  receive  side   lighting  from  the  sun,  and  the  sluice  and  buildings  are  prominently  featured  in  the  foreground  and   background,  respectively.  Had  the  view  been  made  from  a  vantage  point  to  the  left  of  the  image,  the   miners  would  have  been  fully  lit,  but  the  buildings  and  the  contents  of  the  sluice  which  help   describe  the  mining  activity,  would  have  been  excluded.  By  choosing  a  vantage  point  that  includes   mining  activities  and  surroundings,  and  by  stopping  down  the  aperture  to  include  the  background   buildings  in  focus,  the  daguerreotypist  provided  greater  context  to  the  view.           Light  and  Exposure  Times   Ensuring  greater  detail  and  focus  with  a  landscape  lens:   Robert  H.  Vance,  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856  (whole  plate)         Isenburg  notes  that  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco  (whole  plate)  was  made  by  Vance  in   1856.164  (figure  11).  In  this  view,  a  diverse  group  of  people,  including  children  and  a  driver  on  a   horse-drawn  wagon,  gaze  upwards  towards  the  camera.  The  inclusion  of  well-dressed  people-- possibly  with  connections  to  businesses  in  the  building--suggests  that  this  view  might  have  been   commissioned  as  a  record  of  not  only  the  location,  but  also  an  event.165  Isenburg  claims  that  the   building's  new  signage  suggests  this  view  may  be  a  documentation  of  the  building's  opening.166   Having  been  laterally  corrected,  this  view  provides  an  accurate  record,  what  Kilgo  describes  as   "straightforward,  reportorial  .  .  .  a  backdrop  for  contextual  portraits  of  residents  or  business  

                                                                                                                
     
163  "Landscape  Camera,"  204.   164  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  55.   165  Ibid.   166  "The  occasion  for  this  superb  photograph  is  surely  the  opening  of  the  Excelsior  Building  in  March  

of  1856."  Ibid.  

  

37  

  

proprietors."167  The  relatively  sharp  corners  and  edges  of  the  image  strongly  suggest  that  Vance   used  a  view  camera  with  a  landscape  lens.  A  portrait  lens  would  have  produced  an  image  with   edges  that  were  softly  focused.        The  Exclesior  building  faced  west  and  was  located  at  170  Montgomery  Street.168  (appendix   2).  The  short,  defined  shadows  suggest  that  this  view  was  made  on  a  sunny  afternoon,  perhaps  just   after  midday.  The  small  aperture  of  view  cameras  meant  that  longer  exposure  times  were  required.   Vance's  approach  to  obtaining  accurate  and  well-focused  views  was  likely  a  result  of  techniques   described  by  Baron  Gros  in  his  thorough  and  detailed  manual  about  the  practice  of  daguerreotype   photography  with  a  landscape  view  camera:     I  always  work  with  large  plates,  I  use  long  focus  lenses,  I  correct  views  or  monuments  with   a  prism  or  a  parallel  mirror,  I  use  a  very  small  opening,  and  under  these  conditions,  which   demand  a  prolonged  action  of  light  on  the  sensitive  layer,  I  get  very  beautiful  images  in   eight  and  five  seconds  in  the  sun,  and  fifteen  or  twenty  if  it  is  cloudy.169        The  particularly  strong  sun  in  California  shortened  exposure  times,  170  and  benefited  the  use  of   slower  view  cameras  to  produce  accurate  and  sharp  outdoor  views.      When  Vance  made  this  view,  the  Excelsior  Building  was  located  a  couple  blocks  from  the   gallery  he  had  from  1854  to  1863,  located  at  119  &  121  Montgomery  Street.  171  172  (appendix  2,   figure  12).  The  short  distance  to  transport  his  view  camera,  whole  plates  and  other  equipment  was   much  more  manageable  compared  to  transporting  this  equipment  over  long  distances  into  the  field.        In  his  advertisements,  Vance  promoted  his  talent  and  abilities  for  making  high  quality   views.  For  instance,  he  emphasized  the  fact  that  he  used  specialized  equipment.  Palmquist  and   Kailbourn  describe  how  in  advertisements  from  1853,  Vance  declared  that  "'Particular  attention   will  be  paid  to  taking  views  of  buildings,  machinery,  &e.;  having  an  entirely  new  and  improved   apparatus,  expressly  for  taking  views.'"173  Therefore  it  is  not  surprising  that  Vance  used  what   appears  to  be  a  view  lens  to  produce  this  extremely  sharp  and  accurate  view  of  the  Excelsior   Building.  Vance  may  have  used  a  C.C.  Harrison  view  camera  since  it  would  have  allowed  him  to   capture  the  scene  in  much  less  time  than  other  view  cameras  (figure  29).  An  1852  advertisement   for  Harrison's  American  Cameras  republished  the  following  acclaim  by  The  Daguerreian  Journal:    

                                                                                                                
  

167  Kilgo,  Likeness  and  Landscape,  145.     168  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  55.   169  Gros,  Some  Notes  on  Photography,  41.   170  Mike  Robinson,  interviews  by  author,  Toronto,  ON,  March  2013. 171  Palmquist,  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco,"  208.  

  

172  Vance's  hallmark  and  the  locations  of  his  galleries--Marysville,  Sacramento,  and  San  Francisco--

are  embossed  in  the  interior  of  the  case  facing  the  daguerreotype  (figure  12).     173  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  561.     

  

38  

  

   `We  have  recently  seen  a  view  taken  with  one  of  Harrison's  View  Cameras,  which  is  certainly        one  of  the  best  that  has  ever  been  produced.  It  is  worked  with  a  clear  field,  and  with  a      sharpness  we  rarely  witness  in  an  ordinary  daguerreotype.'174      Most  of  the  people  depicted  in  this  scene  remained  quite  still.  They  may  have  known  to  stay  still  or   were  directed  by  Vance  to  do  so,  because  of  the  longer  exposure  time  compared  to  that  of  a  portrait   camera.  The  bright  light  conditions  and  time  of  day  would  have  helped  to  reduce  the  exposure  time,   therefore  lessening  the  amount  of  time  required  for  the  people  to  remain  still.        This  view  was  taken  from  the  vantage  point  of  the  second  or  third  floor  window  of  a   building  across  Montgomery  Street.  This  would  have  limited  the  amount  of  options  Vance  had  to   position  his  camera--backward  and  forward,  and  from  side  to  side.  It  is  therefore  impressive  that   he  was  able  to  include  all  elements  of  the  scene  in  his  composition.  Due  to  the  limited  space   available  for  Vance  to  position  his  camera,  he  likely  had  little  choice  but  to  include  important  details   of  the  scene  right  to  the  plate's  edges.  Had  he  used  a  portrait  lens,  the  edges  and  therefore  the   details  would  have  been  out  of  focus.           Light  and  Exposure  Times   Addressing  low  light  conditions  with  a  portrait  lens:   Silas  W.  Selleck,  Merchant  Tailor  Shop  With  Proprietor,  California,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate)            Silas  W.  Selleck's  view,  Merchant  Tailor  Shop  With  Proprietor,  California,  c.  1851  (quarter   plate)  (figure  7)  is  a  straight-on  perspective  of  a  building  façade.  The  narrow  field  of  focus  meant   that  a  portrait  lens  was  suitable  for  this  scene.  Selleck  likely  could  have  decided  how  far  back  to   position  his  camera.  He  positioned  it  further  away  from  the  merchant's  building  and  framed  the   building  with  empty  space.  Therefore,  the  softly  focused  edges--characteristic  of  views  made  with   portrait  lenses--did  not  affect  the  appearance  of  the  building.  The  right-reading  signage  indicates   that  Selleck  used  a  reverse  mirror  to  laterally  correct  the  scene.  The  low  light  level--suggested  by   the  scene's  lack  of  defined  shadows--meant  that  a  very  long  exposure  would  have  been  required  if   a  view  camera  was  used.  Selleck's  decision  to  use  a  portrait  lens--possibly  stopped  down  with  a   diaphragm--was  likely  a  response  to  less  than  optimal  lighting  conditions.          

                                                                                                                

174  C.C.  Harrison  View  Camera  advertisement,  1852,  Antique  and  Classic  Cameras,  

www.antiquecameras.net/18481875advertisements.html  (accessed  June  30,  2013).  

  

39  

  

DECISIONS  AND  RESULTS    
   Multiple  Views  of  the  Same  Subject         The  Isenburg  Collection  contains  evidence  that  daguerreians  produced  more  than  one  view   of  the  same  scene,  at  times  a  near  duplicate  and  at  other  times  taken  from  different  vantage  points.   By  examining  two  views  of  mining  scenes  that  were  produced  by  George  H.  Johnson  from  1851  to   1852,  this  section  will  explore  how  Gold  Rush  daguerreians  might  have  used  and  potentially   benefited  from  the  practice  of  making  multiple  exposures  of  a  scene  despite  their  adding  time  and   effort  to  the  daguerreian's  work  .           Multiple  Views  of  the  Same  Subject   Multiple  views  for  engravings:     George  H.  Johnson,  Notion  Company  Works,  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River,  c.  1852  (whole  plate)         In  1852  on  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River--far  away  from  his  gallery  in  Sacramento,  Johnson  set   up  his  daguerreotype  camera  and  exposed  a  whole  plate  to  the  scene  in  front  of  him.  The  result,   Notion  Company  Works,  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River,  c.  1852  (figure  1),  depicts  a  busy  mining  operation   with  most  miners  posed  in  the  diggings,  surrounded  by  a  variety  of  mining  apparatus,  including   conveyor  pumps,  a  flume  and  long  toms.175        As  noted  earlier,  Isenburg  discovered  a  wood  engraving  in  an  1854  issue  of  the  illustrated   pictorial,  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room  Companion  that  is  strikingly  similar  to  the   daguerreotype  (figure  21).176  There  are  variations  between  the  daguerreotype  view  and  the   illustration.  The  engraving  depicts  fewer  figures--thirteen,  mostly  facing  the  camera  and  in  pairs  or   discernible  groups.  Meanwhile,  the  daguerreotype  depicts  more  figures--at  least  sixteen--that  are   randomly  positioned,  some  facing  the  camera  and  others  standing  sideways.  The  mining  apparatus   in  both  views  is  featured  prominently,  although  apparatus  in  the  engraving  has  been  coloured  to   stand  out  from  the  surrounding  rocks.  The  colours  of  the  miner's  shirts  in  the  illustration  do  not   correspond  with  those  in  the  daguerreotype  in  which  reds  register  darker  while  blues  appear  

                                                                                                                
175  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  51.   176  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room  Companion,  (March  25,  1854),  185.  One  of  four  illustrations  of   Gold  Rush  scenes  that  accompanied  an  article  entitled,  `Scenes  in  California'  this  illustration  was  modeled   from  a  whole  plate  daguerreotype  made  by  George  H.  Johnson  in  approximately  1852.  This  daguerreotype,  or   a  variant  of  it,  is  in  the  Isenburg  Collection.  

  

40  

  

lighter.177  Interestingly,  a  man,  perhaps  an  operator  of  the  mine,  who  appears  in  the  daguerreotype   holding  a  pan  of  gold  and  standing  behind  the  miners,  does  not  appear  in  the  illustration.      Considering  all  of  the  variations  between  the  engraving  and  the  daguerreotype,  it  is  possible   that  the  engraver  took  artistic  liberty  to  make  alterations  to  what  the  daguerreotype,  or  a  near   duplicate  of  it,  depicted.  Another  explanation  for  discrepancies  between  the  daguerreotype  and   illustration  is  that  the  engraving  was  based  on  another  taken  around  the  same  time.  However,   considering  the  near  exactness  of  position  and  grouping  of  some  figures  and  activities,  this  seems   less  likely.      Johnson  and  other  daguerreians  would  have  been  aware  of  the  demand  for  views  of   significant  events  of  the  Gold  Rush  that  appeared  as  wood  engravings  and  lithographs  in   publications  that  had  global  reach.178  The  publication  of  illustrations  based  on  Johnson's  views  of   the  Gold  Rush  helped  to  promote  his  work:   Johnson's  daguerreotypes  of  the  goldfields  received  publicity  when  a  wood  engraving,   Industry  Bar,  Yuba  River,  based  on  one  of  his  views,  appeared  on  the  front  page  of  the   Sacramento  Union  on  October  30,  1852.179        His  work  in  the  field  making  both  commissioned  records  of  mining  operations  and  daguerreotypes   destined  for  use  by  engravers  would  have  provided  good  reason  to  make  multiple  exposures.      Johnson  used  a  whole  plate  to  make  Notion  Company  Works,  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River  c.   1852.  The  accompanying  whole  plate  camera  outfit  would  have  increased  the  weight  of  the  load  he   had  to  transport  to  mining  scenes  in  remote  locations  such  as  this  one  in  Yuba  River.  These   locations  were  a  significant  distance  from  his  gallery  located  in  Sacramento  at  the  time  (appendix   1).180  Whole  plate  views  contained  a  high  level  of  detail  that  would  have  provided  engravers  with   more  information  for  their  illustrations.  Whole  plates  required  longer  exposure  times.181    Johnson   would  have  reduced  this  time  by  using  a  fast  Petzval  portrait  lens.  Evidence  that  this  optic  was  used   is  indicated  by  the  soft  focus  along  the  edges  of  this  view.  By  positioning  himself  further  away  from   the  scene,  Johnson  prevented  the  soft  focus  from  affecting  the  subject  of  this  view--the  miners  and  

                                                                                                                
177  There  are  two  miners  holding  a  pan,  and  standing  to  the  far  right  of  the  daguerreotype.  In  the  

illustration,  one  of  the  miner's  shirts  has  been  coloured  light  blue.  Yet,  in  the  daguerreotype,  neither  of  these   miners'  shirts  is  light  blue,  since  this  colour  would  have  registered  as  very  light  in  the  daguerreotype.  This  is   further  evidence  of  a  discrepancy  between  the  daguerreotype  and  the  engraving.     178  Johnson,  "Art  &  History,"  168.     179  Palmquist  and  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  328.   180  Ibid.   181  N.P.  Lerebours,  "A  Treatise  On  Photography:  Containing  the  latest  Discoveries  and  Improvements      to  the  Daguerreotype,"  translated  by  J.  Egerton;  with  a  prefeace,  notes  and  alterations,  by  H.H.  Snelling.   Photographic  Art-Journal,  Vol.  1  (March  1851):  164.  A  chart  entitled,  "Duration  of  the  Exposition"  summarizes   the  exposure  durations  in  various  light  conditions:  "With  the  object  illuminated  by  the  sun"  and  "a  fraction  of   a  second  (1/6);  1  to  4  sec  (¼);  3  to  6  sec  (½);  6  to  10  sec  (whole)  .  .  ."    

  

41  

  

equipment,  the  very  part  of  the  view  that  engravers  would  have  been  most  interested  in   reproducing  and  therefore  required  to  be  most  detailed.             Multiple  Views  of  the  Same  Subject   Multiple  views  that  offer  various  perspectives  of  a  scene   George  H.  Johnson,  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  (half  plate)         Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  (figure  17),  is  one  of  a  number  of  half  plate  views  that   Johnson  took  of  the  mining  settlement  and  its  surroundings.  A  near  duplicate  of  this  scene  is   depicted  in  a  daguerreotype  attributed  to  Johnson  in  the  Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft   Library,  University  of  California  Berkley  entitled,  Diggings  at  Grizzly  Flat,  El  Dorado  Co.,  c.  1851­ 1852  (figure  25).  Also  a  half  plate,  the  view  was  taken  from  nearly  the  same  vantage  point,  yet  in  it   there  are  two  men  in  the  foreground,  compared  to  only  one  figure  in  the  foreground  of  the  view   from  the  Isenburg  Collection.  A  second  variant  view  at  the  Bancroft  Library--attributed  to  Johnson   on  the  case  pad--is  entitled,  Settlement  and  mining  operation  in  Grizzly  Flats,  El  Dorado  County,   Calif.,  c.  1851­1852  (figure  27).  It  depicts  the  same  location  as  the  view  in  the  Isenburg  Collection,   yet  there  are  no  figures  in  it  and  it  was  taken  from  a  vantage  point  further  away  and  to  the  left.  Of   the  two  variant  views  in  the  Bancroft  Library,  the  Online  Archive  of  California  claims,  "The  details   are  so  similar  they  are  presumed  to  have  been  taken  by  the  same  photographer  on  the  same  day."182      A  note  enclosed  in  the  case  of  the  Isenburg  Collection's  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  is   inscribed:  `Panorama  of  Grizzly  Flat,  famous  Gold  Rush  town,  33  miles  south  of  Hangtown   (Placerville).  In  foreground  are  mining  operations  of  Jacob  Phillips.'  Phillips  might  have   commissioned  Johnson  to  make  this  daguerreotype,  in  addition  to  the  variations  in  the  Bancroft   Library.  All  of  these  views  appear  to  be  property  records  intended  to  accurately  document  the   settlement  and  mining  operations--they  are  laterally  corrected  as  evidenced  by  signage  on  the   buildings;  much  of  the  scene  is  in  sharp  focus;  and  owners  and  others  often  appear  in  the   foregrounds  of  the  panoramas.          As  noted,  Johnson  previously  produced  variant  daguerreotype  views  that  were  used  as  the   basis  for  engravings.183  If  the  views  of  Grizzly  Flats  were  indeed  commissioned  as  property  records,  

                                                                                                                
182  Online  Archives  of  California.   http://www.oac.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/tf1199n5bx/?layout=metadata&brand=oac4  (Accessed  August  30,   2013).   183  We  offer  our  thanks  to  Mr.  Johnson,"  Illustrated  California  News,  San  Francisco,  (September  1,   1850),  6.  (From  Gary  W.  Ewer,  ed.,  The  Daguerreotype:  an  Archive  of  Source  Texts,  Graphics,  and  Ephemera,  

  

42  

  

Johnson's  approach  to  produce  variants  of  the  scene  could  have  been  motivated  by  a  desire  to   obtain  a  survey  of  the  location  consisting  of  many  views,  as  well  as  for  as  engravings.        The  different  light  conditions  apparent  in  the  three  views  suggest  that  Johnson  made  these   variants  at  different  times  of  the  day,  or  on  different  days  (figures  18,  26,  28).184  Therefore  it  is  also   possible  that  he  produced  multiple  variations  of  the  same  scene,  under  different  lighting  conditions,   in  order  to  test  plates,  or  to  test  exposures  for  other  views  that  were  produced  in  the  surrounding   area.  These  three  views  are  evidence  of  how  various  approaches  can  be  taken  to  document  a  single   scene--from  different  vantage  points  under  different  light  conditions--and  of  how  these  variations   might  have  offered  the  daguerreotypist  opportunities  to  use  these  views  for  different  purposes.                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
http://www.daguerreotypearchive.org,  Ewer  Archive  P8500005).  The  text  accompanying  The  Riot  At   Sacramento  City,  published  in  Illustrated  California  News  (San  Francisco)  on  September  1,  1850,  notes  that   Johnson  provided  the  newspaper  with  several  views  of  the  event.     184  Sunlight  is  directed  from  opposite  directions  in  two  of  the  views,  while  in  another  view,  there  are   no  pronounced  shadows.  

  

43  

  

DECISIONS  AND  RESULTS    
   Compositions  and  Mise  en  scène         The  choice  of  vantage  point  and  composition  were  often  determined  by  working  conditions   that  daguerreians  encountered  outdoors.  This  section  considers  the  decisions  that  daguerreians   might  have  made  about  composition  and  mise  en  scène  and  what  might  have  affected  those   decisions.           Compositions  and  Mise  en  Scène   Choosing  vantage  points  for  a  city  scene   Robert  H.  Vance,  Portsmouth  Square.  San  Francisco,  c.  1854  (two  1/6  plate  stereo)         In  Portsmouth  Square,  San  Francisco,  c.  1854  (figure  10),  approaches  taken  by  Vance  to   compose  the  scene  such  as  selecting  a  vantage  point  from  an  elevated  perspective  suggest  his   response  to  some  of  the  working  conditions  when  making  this  view.  This  view  depicts  the  former   Jenny  Lind  theatre  that  was  purchased  by  the  city  and  converted  into  City  Hall.185  At  the  time,   Vance's  gallery--located  on  the  corner  of  Sacramento  Street  and  Montgomery  Street--was  no  more   than  300  metres  away  (appendix  2).  Therefore,  Vance  only  had  a  short  distance  to  transport  his   equipment  and  he  may  not  have  had  to  bring  many  supplies  since  he  could  have  sensitized  and   developed  his  plates  in  his  gallery.        In  1856,  a  wet  plate  negative  of  Portsmouth  Plaza  attributed  to  English  photographer,   George  R.  Fardon  (1806­1886)  was  made  from  a  similar--if  not  the  same--vantage  point  as   Vance's  two  1/6  daguerreotype  stereo:   Although  attributed  to  G.  R.  Fardon,  there  is  some  possibility  that  the  negative  for  this  view   was  made  by  Watkins  from  the  window  of  J.M.  Ford's  San  Francisco  gallery  which   overlooked  Portsmouth  Plaza.186      Vance  likely  would  have  had  to  be  granted  permission  by  occupants  of  the  building--perhaps  J.M.   Ford--in  order  to  access  its  second  or  third  storey  and  to  position  his  camera  in  a  window  from   where  he  made  his  view.  By  choosing  an  elevated  vantage  point,  Vance  followed  some  of  the   approaches  to  making  views  of  buildings  that  literature  about  camera  techniques  prescribed  such  

                                                                                                                

185  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  A  Closer  Look,  DVD  (Cecil,  PA:  Dream  Catchers  Films,  Inc.,  c.  1998).   186  Palmquist,  Carleton  E.  Watkins,  7.    

  

44  

  

as  maintaining  correct  perspectives.  In  `A  Treatise  on  Photography',  which  appeared  in  an  1851   issue  of  Photographic  Art-Journal,  N.P.  Lerebours  argued:   It  is  also  requisite  to  choose  a  position  at  an  elevation  of  about  one-third  of  the  total  height   of  the  edifice;  otherwise  in  order  to  take  the  whole  of  it,  it  would  become  necessary  to   incline  the  camera,  and  then  the  vertical  lines,  which  ought  to  be  perpendicular  and  parallel   to  each  other,  would,  .  .  .  meet  at  an  accidental  point  of  incidence  of  the  sky,  and  cause  the   edifice  to  appear  as  if  falling.  187      The  vantage  point  for  Vance's  stereo  view  did  present  some  limitations,  however,  with  respect  to   what  could  be  included  in  the  view.  Situated  in  the  interior  of  a  building,  Vance  would  not  have  had   much  room  to  move  his  camera  back  or  forwards.  If  the  City  Hall  building  was  the  intended  subject   of  this  view,  the  distance  between  the  camera  and  the  City  Hall  building  required  the  inclusion  of   other  elements  such  as  the  fence  in  the  foreground,  the  El  Dorado  building  to  the  left  of  City  Hall   and  other  details  such  as  a  horse-drawn  carriage.        By  deciding  to  use  a  landscape  lens,  Vance  ensured  that  all  elements  in  the  view  were  in   sharp  focus  throughout  its  long  depth  of  field  and  along  the  scene's  edges.  Ample  light  on  the  City   Hall's  west  facing  façade  accounts  for  the  appearance  of  some  figures  and  horse-drawn  carriages   that  did  not  disappear  through  motion.  Planning  an  ideal  time  to  make  a  view--for  example,  when  a   building  is  fully  lit,  or  when  weather  conditions  are  optimal--was  not  always  possible,  as  noted  by   Gros:     One  will  not  have  studied  the  way  in  which  a  monument  is  lit  at  every  hour  of  the  day  so  as  to   take  a  picture  when  the  light  strikes  in  the  most  favorable  manner  the  most  picturesque  or   the  most  characteristic  aspect.188      It  is  likely  that  Vance  planned  the  ideal  time  to  make  this  view,  since  his  gallery  was  close  by  and   since  he  was  probably  familiar  with  this  building,  possibly  the  site  of  Ford's  gallery,  as  noted   above.189        The  appearance  of  Vance's  Portsmouth  Square,  San  Francisco,  therefore,  reflects  how  the   conditions  he  encountered  dictated  his  decisions,  such  as  selecting  a  high  vantage  point,  in  order  to   achieve  the  most  desired  results.                

                                                                                                                
     

187  Lerebours,  "A  Treatise  On  Photography,"  319.   188  Gros,  Some  Notes  on  Photography,  82.   189  Palmquist,  Carleton  E.  Watkins,  7.      

  

45  

  

Compositions  and  Mise  en  Scène   Choosing  vantage  points  for  a  mining  scene   Unknown  Maker,  Fourteen  Man  In  Cut,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate),     Unknown  Maker,  Outdoor  Scene  Of  Building  With  Shaving  Equipment  In  Background,     c.  1850  (quarter  plate)  and   Moses  Warren's  Cabin,  California,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate)         Fourteen  Man  In  Cut,  c.  1850  (figure  19),  is  a  quarter  plate  view  of  a  mining  scene  that  depicts   fourteen  miners,  some  situated  in  the  ditch  and  others  standing  on  higher  ground.  It  appears  that   the  daguerreotypist  chose  a  vantage  point  from  within  the  ditch,  while  including  surrounding   elements  such  as  a  building  on  a  hill  in  the  background.  This  is  a  tight  composition  in  which  the   miners  fill  the  frame  and  may  have  resulted  from  limited  space  available  for  the  placement  of  the   camera.  Yet  many  layers  of  activity  are  effectively  captured  in  this  view.  Furthermore,  strong   sunlight  directed  from  behind  the  camera  lights  the  entire  scene,  so  that  the  miners'  faces,  the   apparatus  and  the  surroundings  are  all  visible.  By  using  a  portrait  lens,  the  left,  right  and  top  edges   of  the  plate  are  in  soft  focus  and  the  depth  of  field  has  been  shortened  causing  some  figures  in  the   background  to  be  out  of  focus.      The  chosen  vantage  point--from  in  the  ditch  and  up  close--creates  the  effect  of  a  group   portrait.  Miners,  mostly  gazing  at  the  camera,  are  neatly  circling  the  perimeter  of  the  ditch,  while  a   fifteenth  person,  perhaps  the  mining  operator,  in  addition  to  the  `fourteen  man  in  cut',  gazes  to  the   side  in  an  authoritative  pose.  His  dagger  is  visible  and  his  patterned  sweater,  tinted  a  red  hue,  sets   him  apart  from  the  group.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  daguerreian  directed  everyone  in  regard  to   their  position,  since  they  are  mostly  well  lit,  the  composition  is  quite  symmetrical  and  balanced,  no   one  is  obstructed  and  the  scene  has  been  composed  so  everyone  fits  within  the  frame  of  the  view.           The  unknown  maker  of  Outdoor  Scene  Of  Building  With  Shaving  Equipment  In  Background,  c.  

1850  (figure  2),  composed  this  quarter  plate  view  by  selecting  a  vantage  point  to  include  the   dwelling  in  the  context  of  its  surroundings.190  As  a  record  of  Moses  Warren's  property  and  dwelling,   it  is  understandable  why  a  vantage  point  was  chosen  to  include  as  much  of  the  building  and  its   surroundings  as  possible.  Two  walls  of  the  building  are  depicted,  thus  providing  many  details  about   the  structure  and  its  inhabitant.  This  approach  of  including  the  utmost  amount  of  information  by   means  of  a  carefully  chosen  vantage  point  is  also  apparent  in  another  quarter  plate  view  

                                                                                                                
Built  by  Moses  Warren'.  

190  Johnson,  "Argonaut  Moses  Warren,"  173.  Johnson  refers  to  this  view  as  `Georgetown,  CA,  Cabin  

  

46  

  

commissioned  by  Warren,  Moses  Warren's  Cabin,  California,  c.  1850  (figure  3).191  In  both  views,  the   sun  is  high  in  the  sky,  the  direction  of  light  is  slightly  angled--as  evidenced  by  the  shadows--and   the  intensity  of  lighting  provides  depth  to  the  scenes  while  illuminating  the  subjects.  It  appears  that   the  portrait  lens  was  stopped  down  to  a  smaller  aperture,  thus  ensuring  a  long  depth  of  field  that  is   most  pronounced  in  the  centre  of  both  views.  An  absence  of  people  or  other  moving  objects--apart   from  a  towel  in  one  of  the  views  and  tree  branches--permits  the  use  of  a  small  aperture  with  the   associated  long  exposure  time.      The  vantage  points  of  both  views  capture  personal  possessions  that  impart  information   about  the  inhabitants  of  the  dwellings.  This  is  particularly  noticeable  in  Moses  Warren's  Cabin,   California,  in  which  objects  related  to  food,  transport,  mining  equipment  and  tools,  are  neatly   featured  in  an  unobstructed  manner  along  the  perimeter  of  the  dwelling.  These  objects  further  add   to  the  staged  and  deliberate  approach  taken  to  compose  these  scenes.         Compositions  and  Mise  en  Scène   Arranging  a  scene   Unknown  Maker,  Busy  Mining  Scene  With  Group  Of  Workers,  c.  1853  (half  plate)            In  the  half  plate  entitled,  Busy  Mining  Scene  With  Group  Of  Workers,  c.  1853  (figure  20),  an   unknown  maker  composed  the  view  so  that  the  miners  and  their  activities  were  depicted  in  the   foreground.  Mining  apparatus  is  depicted  in  the  middle  ground  and  offers  greater  context  to  this   mining  scene.  The  background  in  the  upper  half  of  the  view  features  the  natural  backdrop  of  a   valley,  which  defines  the  surroundings  of  the  mining  activities.      One  of  the  most  striking  features  of  this  view  is  the  staged  pose  of  many  of  the  miners  whose   activities  such  as  handling  tools  and  pans,  appear  to  be  frozen  in  time.  Meanwhile,  the  blurred   motion  of  some  of  the  other  figures  is  proof  that  a  longer  exposure  was  used  to  make  this  view.   Evidence  that  the  daguerreotypist  directed  the  miners  to  stay  still  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that  none   of  the  figures  are  gazing  at  the  camera;  this  approach  may  have  been  carried  out  to  create  an   illusion  of  spontaneous  activity,  or  to  minimize  noticeable  eye  movement  or  blinking.  The  duration   of  the  exposure  might  have  been  lengthened  as  a  result  of  stopping  down  the  portrait  lens  to  a   smaller  aperture  so  that  activity  in  the  middle  ground  would  be  in  focus.        This  mining  scene  is  a  literal  and  descriptive  record  of  mining  activities  and  could  have  been  a   commissioned  record,  or  made  for  an  engraving  in  an  illustrated  publication.  The  daguerreian's  

                                                                                                                   

191  Ibid.  174.,  Johnson  refers  to  this  view  as  `Cabin  Built  by  Moses  Warren'.  

47  

  

decisions  to  compose  and  arrange  the  scene  might  have  been  carried  out  to  meet  the  intended   purpose  of  the  view.                                                                                               

  

48  

  

CONCLUSIONS  
   This  thesis  introduces  a  methodology  that  considers  the  working  conditions  surrounding   the  production  of  daguerreotype  views  of  the  California  Gold  Rush  from  1848  to  1856.  These   conditions  include  unpredictable  light  and  weather,  the  necessity  of  operating  camera  equipment  in   a  variety  of  settings,  transporting  supplies,  preparing  and  developing  plates  away  from  the  gallery   and  the  subject  matter  of  the  view.  Combined  with  what  is  known  about  the  Gold  Rush  and  what   has  been  researched  about  the  daguerreotype  during  this  period,  this  methodology  may  be  applied   in  order  to  account  for  the  appearance  of  daguerreotype  views  and  to  better  understand  the   decisions  that  daguerreians  made  in  taking  these  views  according  to  their  intended  purpose.      Daguerreians  during  this  period  made  decisions  when  creating  outdoor  views  that  varied   significantly  from  the  approaches  they  took  to  make  portraits  in  more  controllable  and  familiar   indoor  environments.  These  decisions  included  using  apparatus  to  correct  perspectives;  using   optics  to  capture  greater  detail,  reduce  distortion,  address  variable  light  conditions,  and  minimize   exposure  times;  producing  multiple  views  of  the  same  subject;  and  composing  scenes  by  selecting   vantage  points,  and  arranging  elements  in  a  single  scene.      An  examination  of  the  considerable  number  of  outdoor  views  in  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg   Collection  at  the  Archive  of  Modern  Conflict  in  Toronto  offers  a  rare  opportunity  to  understand   daguerreotype  views  from  the  California  Gold  Rush  and  to  account  for  their  making.                    

  

49  

  

ILLUSTRATIONS  
     

Figure  1.  George  H.  Johnson,  Notion  Company  Works,  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River,  c.  1852     (whole  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                  

  

  

50  

  

     

   Figure  2.  Unknown  Maker,  Outdoor  Scene  Of  Building  With  Shaving  Equipment  In  Background,     c.  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                     

  

51  

  

     

   Figure  3.  Unknown  Maker,  Moses  Warren's  Cabin,  California,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg   Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                     

  

52  

  

     

   Figure  4.  Unknown  Maker,  F.A.  Hornblower  Mining  Store,  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg  Collection   at  AMC  Toronto.                                                     

  

53  

  

     

   Figure  5.  George  H.  Johnson,  Mining  And  Assorted  Activity  On  The  American  River,  Near   Sacramento,  c.  1852  (whole  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                     

  

  

54  

  

     

   Figure  6.  George  H.  Johnson,  Diverted  River  at  Mining  Operation,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg   Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                  

  

  

55  

  

     

                                      Figure  7.  Silas  W.  Selleck,  Merchant  Tailor  Shop  With  Proprietor,  California,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate).   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                 

  

56  

  

     

      Figure  8.  Unknown  Maker,  A  Main  Street  in  Orleans  Flats,  c.  1852  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.                                            

  

  

57  

  

     

      Figure  9.  Unknown  Maker,  Street  View  Of  A  Cash  Store,  c.  1850  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at     AMC  Toronto.                                                  

  

  

58  

  

     

                                     Figure  10.  Robert  H.  Vance,  Portsmouth  Square,  San  Francisco,  c.  1854  (two  1/6  plate  stereo).   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.  

  

59  

  

  

   Figure  11.  Robert  H.  Vance,  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856  (whole  plate).  Isenburg   Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.     

  

  

60  

  

     

      Figure  12.  Robert  H.  Vance,  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856  (whole  plate),  with  case.   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                                   

  

  

61  

  

           

                     Figure  13.  Unknown  Maker,  Group  Of  Miners  Working  A  Long  Tom  In  California  Gold  Camp,  1849   (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.          

  

62  

  

        

      Figure  14.  George  H.  Johnson,  Sterrett  &  Company,  c.  1851  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC   Toronto.                                              

  

  

63  

  

        

   Figure  15.  Unknown  Maker,  S.  McDonnell's  Gold  Miner's  Store,  Garden  Valley,  c.  1851  (half  plate).   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                 

  

  

64  

  

     

      Figure  16.  Unknown  Maker,  Mining  Scene  With  Building  Made  Of  Sail  Cloth  ­  Seven  Miners  With   Board  Sluices,  c.  1850  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                    

  

  

65  

  

        

      Figure  17.  George  H.  Johnson,  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.                                              

  

  

66  

  

        

      Figure  18.  George  H.  Johnson,  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  (half  plate).  Detail.  Isenburg   Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                          

  

  

67  

  

        

      Figure  19.  Unknown  Maker,  Fourteen  Man  In  Cut,  c.  1850  (quarter  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.                                                 

  

  

68  

  

        

  
   Figure  20.  Unknown  Maker,  Busy  Mining  Scene  With  Group  Of  Workers,  c.  1853  (half  plate).   Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                 

  

  

69  

  

     

      Figure  21.  `Notion  Company's  Works,  California,'  Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room  Companion,   1854.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                              

  

  

70  

  

     

                                     Figure  22.  Robert  H.  Vance  advertisement.  Hutchings'  California  Magazine.  (San  Francisco,  CA:   Hutching  &  Rosenfield,  Publishers,  February  1859).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.          

  

71  

  

     

      Figure  23.  American  1850s  style  sensitizing  boxes,  American  cast  iron  mercury  baths,  and  box   cameras  (1/4  plate  and  whole  4/4  plate  sizes).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                                                        

  

  

72  

  

     

                                      Figure  24.  Mirror  for  reversing  images  (E).  Illustration  from  plate.  N.P.  Lerebours,  A  Treatise  on   Photography;  Containing  the  Latest  Discoveries  and  Improvements  Appertaining  to  the   Daguerreotype,  translated  by  J.  Egerton.  (London:  Longman,  Brown,  Green,  and  Longmans,  1843).                                                           

  

73  

  

     

   Figure  25.  George  H.  Johnson,  Diggings  at  Grizzly  Flat,  El  Dorado  Co.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate).   Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California  Berkley.                                                       

  

  

74  

  

     

      Figure  26.  George  H.  Johnson,  Diggings  at  Grizzly  Flat,  El  Dorado  Co.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate),   detail.  Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California  Berkley.                                                  

  

  

75  

  

     

      Figure  27.  George  H.  Johnson,  Settlement  and  Mining  Operation  in  Grizzly  Flats,  El  Dorado  County,   Calif.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate).  Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,  University  of   California  Berkley.                                                  

  

  

76  

  

        

      Figure  28.  George  H.  Johnson,  Settlement  and  Mining  Operation  in  Grizzly  Flats,  El  Dorado  County,   Calif.,  c.  1851­1852  (half  plate),  detail.  Zelda  Mackay  Collection  at  the  Bancroft  Library,  University   of  California  Berkley.                                                 

  

  

77  

  

           

                                                                                       Figure  29.  Illustration  of  C.C.  Harrison's  camera  for  views.  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.   November  15,  1850,  56.                                                    

  

78  

  

           

                                                                                                Figure  30.  Hand  crafted  diaphragm.  Front  and  back  views.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                               

  

79  

  

           

      Figure  31.  Cathan's  Reflector  and  Lens.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                    

  

  

80  

  

           

      Figure  32.  Voigtländer  Petzval-type  portrait  lens  on  box  camera,  ¼  plate  size.  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.                                  

  

  

81  

  

           

                               Figure  33.  Brass  stop  supplied  with  a  Lerebours  lens.  Front  and  back  views.  Isenburg  Collection  at   AMC  Toronto.                               

  

82  

  

     

                                                             Figure  34.  Handbill  for  clipper  ship  to  California,  1850s.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                       

  

83  

  

           

      Figure  35.  Transaction  ­  Adams  &  Co.  (recto  and  verso).  Engraving  of  daguerreotype,  `Group  Of   Miners  Working  A  Long  Tom  In  California  Gold  Camp,'  1849  (half  plate).  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC   Toronto.                      

  

  

84  

  

        

                                          Figure  36.  Iron  center  tripod  with  ¼  plate  camera.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                   

  

85  

  

           

   Figure  37.  French  landscape  lens.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                         

  

  

86  

  

           

      Figure  38.  American  ¼  plate  box  camera.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.                                                              

  

  

87  

  

APPENDICES             

  

  

  

Appendix  1.  Map  of  California,  J.H.  Colton  &  Co.  No.  172,  1855.  Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.        George  H.  Johnson:  
·    Johnson's  gallery  listed  in  various  locations  (1851­1852)  within  close  proximity  on  J  Street,  Sacramento   1  Mining  And  Assorted  Activity  On  The  American  River,  Near  Sacramento,  c.  1852  (whole  plate)   2  Notion  Company  Works,  Barton's  Bar,  Yuba  River,  c.  1852  (whole  plate)     3  Grizzly  Flats,  California,  c.  1851  (half  plate)   3  Diverted  River  at  Mining  Operation,  c.  1851  (quarter  plate)     

                                            

  

88  

  

     

           Appendix  2.  Map  of  San  Francisco,  (detail  from  Map  of  California),  J.H.  Colton  &  Co.  No.  172,  1855.     Isenburg  Collection  at  AMC  Toronto.    

  

Robert  H.  Vance:  
·    Vance's  gallery  location  in  San  Francisco  (1854­1863),  located  "at  the  southwest  corner  of  Sacramento     and  Montgomery  Streets."192     1  Portsmouth  Square,  San  Francisco,  c.  1854  (two  1-6  plate  stereo)   2  Excelsior  Building,  San  Francisco,  1856  (whole  plate),  located  at  170  Montgomery  Street.193  

                                

                                                                                                                

192  Palmquist  &  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West,  562.   193  Field  et  al.,  American  Daguerreotypes,  55.  

  

89  

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY      Sources:  Secondary     
Alexander,  Abel.  "Robert  H.  Vance:  Pioneer  of  the  Daguerreotype  in  Chile."  Translated  by      Thomas  R.  Kailbourn.  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1993):  11­30.      Craig,  John  S.,  ed.  Craig's  Daguerreian  Registry,  Revised  Edition  Volume  2.  Torrington,  CT:  John  S.      Craig,  2003.      Davis,  Keith  F.  The  Origins  of  American  Photography:  from  Daguerreotype  to  Dry-plate,  1839­1885.      Kansas  City,  MO:  Hall  Family  Foundation:  in  association  with  The  Nelson-Atkins  Museum  of      Art;  New  Haven,  CT,  2007.        Dornin,  George  D.  Thirty  Years  Ago,  1849­1879:  Gold  Rush  Memories  of  a  Daguerreotype  Artist.      Edited  by  Peter  E.  Palmquist.  Nevada  City,  CA:  Carl  Mautz  Pub.,  1995.      Field,  Richard  S.,  Robin  Jaffee  Frank,  Matthew  R.  Isenburg,  and  Alan  Trachtenberg.  American      Daguerreotypes  from  the  Matthew  R.  Isenburg  Collection.  New  Haven,  CT:  Yale  University  Art        Gallery,  1989.   "Gold  Rush  Photographer."  Image:  The  Bulletin  of  the  George  Eastman  House  of  Photography,  1,  no.  9      (December  1952):  3.      Holliday,  J.S.,  Rush  For  Riches:  Gold  Fever  and  the  Making  of  California.  Berkley,  CA:  Oakland  Museum      of  California,  1999.      ----------.  The  World  Rushed  In:  The  California  Gold  Rush  Experience.  New  York,  NY:  Simon  and      Schuster,  1981.   Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  A  Closer  Look,  DVD.  Cecil,  PA:  Dream  Catchers  Films,  Inc.  c.  1998.        Isenburg,  Matthew  R.  "Early  Equipment."  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1993):  201­54.        Johnson,  Drew  Heath.  "Art  &  History."  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1994):  167­68        ----------,  ed.  Capturing  Light:  Masterpieces  of  California  Photography  1850  to  the  Present.  Oakland,      CA:  Oakland  Museum  of  California,  2001.      ----------.  &  Marcia  Eymann.  Silver  &  Gold:  Cased  Images  of  the  California  Gold  Rush.  Iowa  City,  IA:      University  of  Iowa  Press  for  the  Museum  of  California,  1998.          Johnson,  Mark  S.  "Argonaut  Moses  Warren  &  The  Quinebaug  Gold  Company  From  The  Isenburg      Collection  at  AMC  Toronto."  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (2012):  145­75.        Kilgo,  Dolores  A.  Likeness  and  Landscape:  Thomas  M.  Easterly  and  the  Art  of  the  Daguerreotype.          St.  Louis,  MO:  Missouri  Historical  Society  Press,  1994.  

  

90  

  

----------.  "Vance's  Views  in  St.  Louis:  An  Update."  The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1994):  211­12.     Kingslake,  R.  "Charles  Chevalier  and  the  `Photographe  a  Verres  Combines'."  Image:  The  Bulletin  of      the  George  Eastman  House  of  Photography,  10,  no.  5  (1961):  17­20.       Lowry,  Bates  &  Isabel  Barrett  Lowry.  The  Silver  Canvas:  Daguerreotype  Masterpieces  from  the  J.  Paul      Getty  Museum.  Los  Angeles,  CA:  J.  Paul  Getty  Museum,  1998.   Newhall,  Beaumont.  History  of  Photography:  from  1839  to  the  Present.  Revised  Edition.  New  York,      NY:  Museum  of  Modern  Art;  Boston:  Distributed  by  New  York  Graphic  Society  of  Books,      1982.   ----------.  The  Daguerreotype  in  America,  2nd  revised  ed.  New  York,  NY:  Dover  Publications,  1968.   Online  Archives  of  California.  http://www.oac.cdlib.org/  (accessed  August  1,  2013)      Owens,  Kenneth  N.,  ed.  Riches  For  All:  The  California  Gold  Rush  and  the  World.  Lincoln,  NB:      University  of  Nebraska  Press,  2002.      Palmquist,  Peter.  Carleton  E.  Watkins:  Photographer  of  the  American  West.  Albuquerque,  NM:      University  of  New  Mexico  Press,  1983.                                    ----------.  "Carleton  Watkins.  A  Biography.  Chapter  3:  Shadow  Catching  in  El  Dorado  1849­1856."      The  Daguerreian  Annual  (1990):  179­88.                           ----------.  "Robert  H.  Vance:  The  Maine  and  Boston  Years,  1825-1850."  The  Daguerreian  Annual      (1991):  199­216.        ----------.  "Silver  Plates  on  a  Golden  Shore:  The  Real  Thing  Itself."  In  America  &  the  Daguerreotype,      edited  by  John  Wood,  134­58.  Iowa  City,  IA:  University  of  Iowa  Press,  1991.      ----------.  "The  Daguerreotype  in  San  Francisco."  History  of  Photography  (July  1980):  207­38.        ----------.  "The  Sad  but  True  Story  of  a  Daguerreian  Holy  Grail."  In  Silver  &  Gold:  Cased  Images  of      the  California  Gold  Rush,  edited  by  Marcia  Eymann  and  Drew  Heath  Johnson.  43­73.  Iowa      City,  IA:  University  of  Iowa  Press  for  the  Oakland  Museum  of  California,  1998.      ----------.  "William  Herman  Rulofson  ­  The  P.T.  Barnum  of  American  Photography."  The      Daguerreian  Annual  (1993):  137­40.     ----------.  &  Thomas  R.  Kailbourn.  Pioneer  Photographers  of  the  Far  West:  A  Biographical  Dictionary                                   1840­1865.  Stanford,  CA:  Stanford  University  Press,  2000.              Rinhart,  Floyd  and  Marion.  American  Daguerreian  Art.  New  York,  NY:  Clarkson  N.  Potter,  Inc.,  1967.      ----------.  The  American  Daguerreotype.  Athens,  GA:  University  of  Georgia  Press,  1981.   Rodríguez  Villegas,  Hernán.  Historia  de  la  Fotografía:  Fotógrafos  en  Chile  durante  el  Siglo  XIX.      Santiago,  Chile:  Centro  Nacional  del  Patrimonio  Fotográfico,  2001.   Rudisill,  Richard.  Mirror  Image:  The  Influence  of  the  Daguerreotype  on  American  Society.      Albuquerque,  NM:  University  of  New  Mexico  Press,  1971.  

  

91  

  

Sandweiss,  Martha  A.  Print  the  Legend:  Photography  and  the  American  West.  New  Haven  and      London:  Yale  University  Press,  2002.   Scharf,  Aaron.  Pioneers  of  Photography:  An  Album  of  Pictures  and  Words.  New  York,  NY:  Harry                                   N.  Abrams,  1976.        Shlaer,  Robert.  Sights  Once  Seen:  Daguerreotyping  Frémont's  Last  Expedition  Through  The  Rockies.                                           Santa  Fe,  NM:  Museum  of  New  Mexico  Press,  2000.        Starl,  Timm.  "A  New  World  of  Pictures:  The  Use  and  Spread  of  the  Daguerreotype  Process."  In  A      New  History  of  Photography,  edited  by  Michel  Frizot,  32­57.  Köln:  Könemann,  1998.     Stilgoe,  John  R.  "Landscape  in  Limbo."  America  &  the  Daguerreotype,  edited  by  John  Wood,  58-72.      Iowa  City,  IA:  University  of  Iowa  Press,  1991.        Taft,  Robert.  Photography  and  the  American  Scene.  New  York,  NY:  Dover  Publications,  Inc.  1964.      The  Daguerreian  Society,  NEA  Resarch  Database,  http://www.daguerre.org  (accessed  July  1,  2013).      U.S.  Census  Bureau,  "Historical  Census  Statistics  on  Population  Totals  By  Race,  1790  to  1990,  and      By  Hispanic  Origin,  1970  to  1990,  For  The  United  States,  Regions,  Divisions,  and  States."      http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0056/tab19.pdf  (accessed      August  22,  2013).      Weinstein,  Robert  A.  "Gold  Rush  Daguerreotypes,"  American  West:  Magazine  of  the  Western  History      Association,  August  1967.      Wolf,  Daniel,  ed.  The  American  Space:  Meaning  in  Nineteenth-Century  Landscape  Photography.      Middletown,  CT:  Wesleyan  University  Press,  1983.   Wood,  John.  "Theatrical  Narratives  and  the  Documents  of  Dream:  California  and  the  Great      American  Image."  In  Silver  &  Gold:  Cased  Images  of  the  California  Gold  Rush,  edited  by  Marcia        Eymann  &  Drew  Heath  Johnson.  23­42.  Iowa  City,  IA:  University  of  Iowa  Press  for  the      Oakland  Museum  of  California,  1998.     

  

   Sources:  Primary          
Antisell,  T.  "Photography."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,      (November  15,  1850):  53­55.   Bingham,  Robert  J.  "Photographic  Manipulation."  Photographic  Art-Journal,  Vol.  3,  New  York,  NY:      W.B.  Smith,  (March  1852):  181­88.      Bisbee,  A.  "History  and  Practice  of  Daguerreotyping."  1853.  Reprint,  New  York,  NY:  Arno  Press,      1973.        

  

92  

  

"Camera  For  Views."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (November  15,      1850):  56.      Carden,  Robert  A.  (R.A.C.)  "Photography  in  California."  Photographic  and  Fine  Arts  Journal,  New      York,  10:4  (April  1857):  112­13.      Claudet,  A.  (Antoine).  "Researches  on  the  Theory  of  the  Principal  Phaenomena  of  Photography  in      the  Daguerreotype  Process."  London,  1849.  In  Daguerreotype  Process:  Three  Treatises,  1840-    1849.  New  York:  Arno  Press,  1973.      "Daguerreian  Artists'  Register."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,      (January  1,  1851):  128.      "Daguerreotype  Panoramic  Views  in  California."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  2.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.      Humphrey,  (November  1,  1851):  371.      "Dark  Tent  For  Landscapes."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,      (September  1,  1851):  231­33.      Dewy,  Geo.  W.  "Portraiture."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (May  1,    1851):  366­67.      Draper,  J.W.  "On  Certain  Spectral  Appearances,  And  On  The  Discovery  Of  Latent  Light."  The      Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (May  1,  1851):  353­54.      Fauvel-Gouraud,  François.  "Description  of  the  Daguerreotype  Process,  Or  a  Summary  of  M.        Gouraud's  Public  Lectures,  According  to  the  Principles  of  M.  Daguerre.  With  a  Description  of      a  Provisory  Method  for  Taking  Human  Portraits."  Boston,  1840.  In  Daguerreotype  Process:      Three  Treatises,  1840-1849.  New  York,  NY:  Arno  Press,  1973.      Fitzgibbon,  J.H.  "Daguerreotyping."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,      (August  1,  1851):  167-69.      Gleason's  Pictorial  Drawing-Room  Companion.  Boston,  MA:  M.M.  Ballou,  March  25,  1854.      Gros,  Baron  (J.  B.  Louis).  Some  Notes  on  Photography  on  Metal  Plates.  Translated.  Paris,  1850.      Humphrey,  S.D.  American  Hand  Book  of  the  Daguerreotype.  1858.  Reprint,  New  York,  NY:  Arno      Press,  1973.      Humphrey,  S.D.  and  M.  Finley.  "A  System  of  Photography,  Containing  an  Explicit  Detail  of  the  Whole      Process  of  Daguerreotype,  According  to  the  Most  Approved  Methods  of  Operating;  Including      All  the  Late  Valuable  Improvements."  Canandaigua,  NY,  1849.  In  Daguerreotype  Process:      Three  Treatises,  1840­1849.  New  York,  NY:  Arno  Press,  1973.   Humphrey's  Journal,  Vol.  5.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (October  1,  1853):  190.   Hutchings'  California  Magazine.  San  Francisco,  CA:  Hutching  &  Rosenfield,  Publishers,  (February      1859).     

  

93  

  

"Landscape  Camera."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  2.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (August  15,      1851):  204­06.      "Landscape  Camera."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  2.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (September  1,        1851):  229-31.      Lerebours,  N.P.,  "A  Treatise  On  Photography:  Containing  the  latest  Discoveries  and  Improvements      to  the  Daguerreotype."  Translated  by  J.  Egerton;  with  a  prefeace,  notes  and  alterations,  by      H.H.  Snelling.  Photographic  Art-Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  W.B.  Smith,  (March  1851):      146­68.      ----------.  "A  Treatise  On  Photography:  Containing  the  latest  Discoveries  and  Improvements  to  the      Daguerreotype."  Translated  by  J.  Egerton;  with  a  prefeace,  notes  and  alterations,  by  H.H.      Snelling.  Photographic  Art-Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  W.B.  Smith,  (April  1851):  212­321.      "Mr.  Vance's  California  Views."  The  Photographic  Art-Journal,  Vol.  2.  New  York,  NY:  W.B.  Smith,      (October  1851):  252­53.      "New  Invention­Mr.  C.  C.  Harrison."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.      Humphrey,  (November  1,  1850):  20.      "On  The  Application  Of  Science  To  The  Fine  And  Useful  Arts:  Improvements  In  Photography."  The      Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1.  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey,  (April,  15  1851):  328­30.      S.,  (William  Shew,  attrib.).  "Photography,"  The  Pioneer;  Or,  California  Monthly  Magazine.  San      Francisco,  CA:  Le  Count  and  Strong,  July  1854.          "The  Daguerreotype  Art;  Its  Present  State  And  Future  Prospects."  The  Photographic  Art-    Journal,  Vol.  2.  New  York,  NY:  W.B.  Smith,  (August  1851):  99­101.      "The  Difficulties  Of  The  Art."  The  Photographic  Art-Journal,  Vol.  2.  New  York,  NY:  W.B.  Smith,      (October  1851):  232­34.      "To  The  Public."  The  Daguerreian  Journal,  Vol.  1,  New  York,  NY:  S.D.  Humphrey  (November  1,  1850):      15­16.      Ure,  Andrew.  A  Dictionary  of  Arts,  Manufacturers,  and  Mines,  New  York,  NY:  D.  Appleton  &      Company,  1844.      "Uses  of  the  Daguerreotype."  Artist  (New  York),  1:5  (January  1843):  235.      Vance,  Robert  H.  Catalogue  of  Daguerreotype  Panoramic  Views  in  California.  New  York,  NY:  Baker    Godwin,  and  Company,  1851.      Wey,  Francis.  "Heliography  on  Plates."  Translated  by  J.R.  Snelling.  The  Photographic  Art-Journal,        Vol.  3.  New  York,  NY:  W.B.  Smith,  (January  1852):  41-45.           

  

94  


