Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Ted Rogers School of Information Technology Management Publications and Research 11-1-2008 Ted Rogers School of Information Technology Management

Are Users Up to Speed? The Demand Side of Sustainable Broadband
Catherine A. Middleton
Ryerson University, catherine.middleton@ryerson.ca

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/trsitm Part of the Technology and Innovation Commons Recommended Citation
Middleton, Catherine A., "Are Users Up to Speed? The Demand Side of Sustainable Broadband" (2008). Ted Rogers School of Information Technology Management Publications and Research. Paper 13. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/trsitm/13

This Conference Presentation is brought to you for free and open access by the Ted Rogers School of Information Technology Management at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Ted Rogers School of Information Technology Management Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Are Users Up to Speed? The Demand Side of Sustainable Broadband
Catherine Middleton Canada Research Chair Ted Rogers School of Management Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada

Broadband in Canada
· Early adopters · As of 2007:
­ 93% of households can access wired broadband service ­ 48% of households subscribe to broadband services (plus 16% using `lite') ­ >50% of broadband subscribers buy 5-9 Mbps service, but 25% choose service offering<1.5 Mbps

1

Broadband in Canada
· Perceived to be a leader in broadband, but:
­ Limited competition in the marketplace (despite LLU, open access), long contracts ­ Concerns about traffic shaping, restrictions on usage ­ Limited, expensive mobile broadband ­ No policy discussions about nextgeneration broadband networks

2

"Advertised speeds are typically the theoretical maximum for the employed technologies. Users commonly have lower speeds. Also, often only parts of country have been upgraded to allow for faster speeds." *Japan's actual figure is 93.7 Mbps

Can Canada learn from Australia?
· What is important in building a next-generation broadband network?
­ Capacity building (demand) ­ Infrastructure decisions (what to supply) ­ Private sector and public sector involvement (how to pay for it)

3

Can Broadband enable Sustainability?
· Issues involved in building infrastructure impact the extent to which it can contribute to sustainability · Two examples and a question:
­ Substitution of digital products for physical products ­ Substitution of online interaction for travel ­ Are we focusing on the right thing?

4

Canada: Online Activities
% of Canadian population (aged 16+) doing each online activity

5

Capacity
· There will always be a Flashing 12:00 problem · Broadband usage is not yet sufficiently integrated into average people's daily lives to result in benefits from substituting digital products for physical ones

6

What about Organizational Capacity?

Fixed vs. Mobile Broadband
· Not an either-or decision, but...
­ Fixed broadband is not yet delivering broader societal benefits to wide user base (e.g. e-health, e-learning) ­ Fixed broadband may end up being used primarily for entertainment purposes ­ Mobile devices as the primary tool for communication, networking, information retrieval, and some entertainment

7

Sustainability: PC vs. Mobile

Points to Ponder
· Fibre to the home is probably inevitable, but is the demand really there now?
­ Market forces vs. interventionist approaches? ­ Mobile vs. fixed

· What is needed to encourage a 'culture of use' that would encourage more sustainable outcomes?

8

catherine.middleton@ryerson.ca 0450 300 357 or 03 8344 1529 before December 11

9


