JUSTICE  AND  THE  PLANNING  PROCESS:   HOW  FAR  HAVE  WE  COME  AND  WHERE  ARE  WE  GOING?              by            Rebecca  Augustyn     B.A,  Vancouver  Island  University,  2012               A  Major  Research  Paper     presented  to  Ryerson  University         in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of           Master  of  Planning  in  Urban  Development                  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014                                                   ©Rebecca  Augustyn,  2014     

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  MRP         I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  MRP.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  MRP,   including  any  required  final  revisions.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.        I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by  other   means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose   of  scholarly  research.        I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.  

                                                                                
      ii  

JUSTICE  AND  THE  PLANNING  PROCESS:   HOW  FAR  HAVE  WE  COME  AND  WHERE  ARE  WE  GOING?           ©Rebecca  Augustyn,  2014      Master  of  Planning  in  Urban  Development      Ryerson  University  

     
   ABSTRACT   Justice  is  a  context-dependent,  multi-faceted  concept  that  has  historically  been  associated   with  planning  theory.    In  this  paper,  the  literature  surrounding  the  concept  of  justice  will  be   explored  to  understand  where  the  concept  of  justice  has  come  from,  how  it  has  evolved,   and  how  it  can  be  applied  to  the  planning  process.    In  addition,  how  justice  interacts  with   other  critical  concepts,  such  as  the  law,  morality,  and  ethics,  as  well  as  its  ability  to  function   within  the  institutional  context  will  also  be  assessed.    The  concept  of  justice  is  be  applied  to   the  planning  process  as  it  occurs  in  planning  practice  in  an  attempt  to  bridge  the  theory  -   practice  gap  that  exists  in  planning.    Using  Fainstein's  concept  of  justice,  with  her  three   criteria  of  equity,  diversity,  and  democracy,  the  planning  process  of  the  two   redevelopments  of  Regent  Park  is  assessed  through  the  lens  of  justice  in  an  attempt  to   apply  theories  of  justice  to  planning  practice.                               Keywords: Justice, Planning, Regent Park

  

     

iii  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS      I  would  like  to  thank  my  supervisor  Dr.  Joe  Springer  and  second  reader  Dr.  Pamela   Robinson.    Without  their  guidance  and  support  this  paper  would  not  have  been  possible.    I   would  also  like  to  thank  my  friends  and  family  who  tirelessly  listened  to  my  thoughts  and   ideas  and  provided  me  with  support  throughout  this  process.                This  research  was  supported  by  the  Social  Sciences  and  Humanities  Research  Council.                                                                                      

  

     

iv  

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS            ABSTRACT   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS     LIST  OF  FIGURES      INTRODUCTION   JUSTICE  IN  PLANNING  THEORY   HISTORY  OF  JUSTICE  IN  PLANNING  THEORY   JUSTICE,  MORALITY,  ETHICS,  LAW,  AND  LAND  USE  PLANNING   JUSTICE  AND  THE  INSTITUTIONAL  CONTEXT  OF  LAND  USE  PLANNING   POWER,  JUSTICE,  AND  PLANNING               JUSTICE  AND  THE  PLANNING  PROCESS               PLANNING  PROCESS,  OUTCOMES,  AND  JUSTICE            THE  CASE  STUDY  OF  REGENT  PARK                                                                                                                                                         REGENT  PARK  AS  SLUM  CLEARANCE   REGENT  PARK  AS  REVITALIZATION   CONCLUSION            BIBLIOGRAPHY              
     

III  

IV   VI  

  

1   3   5   8   12   17   20   28  

           

           

           

                                              32           
  
                                                       

        
  

        
  

        
  

        
  

  
  

        
  

33   41   53   55  

  

                                                        

     

v  

   LIST  OF  FIGURES      FIGURE  1.1                    REGENT  PARK  REDEVELOPMENT  REFERENDUM  POSTER  .............................................37        FIGURE  1.2                    REGENT  PARK  REDEVELOPMENT  CARTOON................................................................38

     

vi  

INTRODUCTION      In  order  to  understand  the  role  of  justice  in  the  planning  process,  justice  must  first   be  understood  in  the  context  of  planning  theory.    Justice  has  been  associated  with  planning   theory  since  its  beginnings,  however,  in  the  late  1990s  and  early  2000s,  there  was  a   renewed  interest  in  justice.    As  justice  gained  importance  in  theory,  it  came  into  conflict   with  the  concepts  of  ethics  and  morality,  as  well  as  the  legal  nature  of  planning.    Given  the   context-dependent  nature  of  these  concepts  and  the  legal  boundaries  in  which  they   function,  each  concept  is  modified  as  it  is  implemented.    Both  planning  practice  and  the   institutional  context  of  planning  affect  how  justice  is  implemented,  requiring  the   theoretical  perceptions  of  justice  to  be  modified.    The  role  of  the  planner  and  the   boundaries  set  by  planning's  institutional  framework  affects  how  justice  is  implemented  in   planning  practice.    Therefore,  while  planning  theory  has  had  a  strong  grounding  in  justice,   planning  practice  has  struggled  to  use  justice  as  a  guide  given  other  competing  concepts,   the  legal  nature  of  planning,  and  the  institutional  boundaries.    Despite  this  disconnect   between  planning  theory  and  planning  practice,  it  is  critical  to  close  the  divide  and   understand  how  justice  is  functioning  within  planning  practice.    As  planning  deals  with   wicked  problems  (Rittel  &  Webber,  1973),  justice  will  continue  to  be  an  important  concept   on  which  to  judge  planning  decisions.    For  the  purpose  of  this  paper,  justice  will  be  defined   as  Fainstein  (2010)  has  put  forth  with  her  three  criterion  of  equity,  diversity  and   democracy  and  will  be  applied  to  the  case  study  of  Regent  Park  in  an  attempt  to  close  the   theory  -  practice  gap.    The  concept  of  justice  will  be  used  to  assess  the  two  redevelopments   of  Regent  Park  located  in  Toronto,  Ontario.    Both  of  these  redevelopments  will  be  examined   in  order  to  understand  how  the  planning  process  has  evolved  over  time  in  its  incorporation  

1  

of  not  only  justice,  but  also  its  interaction  with  morality,  ethics,  and  the  legal  nature  of   planning.    This  will  allow  for  an  assessment  of  where  the  planning  process  has  come  from   and  where  it  is  going  in  terms  of  justice.                                                                                                                                     2  

JUSTICE  IN  PLANNING  THEORY      Throughout  the  history  of  planning,  there  have  always  been  elements  of  planning   that  have  been  associated  with  justice.    As  Fainstein  (2010)  has  noted,  justice  is  relevant  to   both  planning  theory  and  practice.  However,  in  order  to  explore  the  use  of  justice  regarding   the  planning  process,  the  theoretical  underpinnings  of  justice  must  first  be  considered.    To   do  this,  the  relationship  between  justice  and  planning  will  be  explored:  how  justice  is   conceptualized  in  relation  to  the  city  as  well  as  in  planning  theory  and  how  justice  interacts   with  other  core  concepts  of  planning,  such  as  morality  and  ethics.    As  Fainstein  (2010)   states,  to  consider  justice  in  planning,  the  literature  surrounding  the  concept  of  justice   must  first  be  explored.   Friedmann  (2000)  theorizes  about  justice  by  saying  that  we  may  react  strongly  to   what  we  perceive  to  be  an  injustice,  however,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  what  is  just.     While  there  is  a  significant  amount  of  literature  surrounding  the  concept  of  justice,  for  the   purpose  of  this  paper,  justice  will  be  explored  specifically  in  regard  to  the  institutional   context  in  which  it  is  being  applied,  in  this  case,  the  context  of  planning.    Grounding  justice   in  the  context  of  planning  is  critical,  because  as  O'Neill  (2000)  points  out,  there  is  a  specific   need  for  justice  to  be  concerned  with  the  practical.    This  is,  in  part,  because  the  concept  of   justice  is  context  dependent  which  indicates  that  it  must  be  theorized  about  in  the  context   in  which  it  is  being  used  to  ensure  it  functions  and  is  applicable  given  the  existing   institutional  boundaries.    Fortunately,  justice  is  not  a  new  concept  in  planning,  as  Campbell   and  Marshall  (2006)  note,  "conceptualizations  of  justice,  whether  implicit  or  explicit,  have   always  underpinned  the  development  of  intellectual  thought  about  planning"  (p.  240).     However,  despite  the  relationship  between  justice  and  intellectual  planning  thought,  the  

     

3  

application  of  justice  in  planning  practice  changes  how  justice  functions.                                                                        

     

4  

HISTORY  OF  JUSTICE  IN  LAND  USE  PLANNING   There  is  no  singular,  universal  definition  of  justice.    As  Johnston  (2011)  highlights,   justice  is  a  concept  that  is  conceived  and  refined  by  those  who  are  influenced  by  the  context   in  which  they  are  situated.  The  outcome  results  in  many  theories  surrounding  justice,  each   one  reflecting  the  context  in  which  it  has  been  conceived  (Johnston,  2011).  Theorizing   about  justice  in  the  context  of  the  city  is  not  a  modern  concept,  it  has  been  contemplated   throughout  history,  most  notably  in  Plato's  The  Republic.    In  The  Republic,  Socrates  puts   forth  the  notion  of  justice  and  the  city  by  arguing  that  the  qualities  of  justice  can  be   determined  at  the  city-state  level  easier  than  at  the  individual  level"  (Connolly  &  Steil  as   cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    As  a  result,  Socrates  puts  forth  what  would  characterize  a   just  city  (Connolly  &  Steil  as  cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    While  Socrates  refers  to  a  just   city  in  a  historical  sense,  in  many  ways  he  echoes  the  foundation  of  justice  in  planning   today.    For  Socrates,  justice  in  planning  functions  at  the  city-state  level,  a  concept  which   today  is  often  referred  to  as  the  public  interest,  rather  than  at  the  individual  level,   otherwise  known  as  the  individual  interest.    Furthermore,  Socrates's  early   conceptualization  of  justice  in  regard  to  the  city  has  another  commonality  with  theories  of   justice  in  planning  today,  the  occurrence  of  a  disconnect  between  the  normative  concepts   of  justice  in  theory  and  the  form  they  take  when  applied  in  practice  (Connolly  &  Steil,  as   cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).     While  historically  there  has  been  a  connection  between  justice  and  the  city,  many  of   the  contemporary  theories  of  justice  have  tended  to  be  from  liberal  philosophers,  such  as   John  Locke,  John  Rawls,  and  Martha  Nussbaum  (Connolly  &  Steil  as  cited  in  Marcuse,  2009).     Despite  these  theories  of  justice  not  being  situated  specifically  in  relation  to  the  city,  they  

     

5  

attempt  to  answer  the  same  questions  as  planning  theorists  (Connolly  &  Steil  as  cited  in   Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    In  addition,  rather  than  theorize  about  new  concepts  of  justice,   planning  theorists  look  to  contextualize  existing  concepts  (Harvey  &  Potter  as  cited  in   Marcuse,  p.  2009)  and  therefore,  those  theories  of  justice  that  have  been  put  forth  by   liberal  philosophers  are  often  drawn  upon.    John  Rawls  has  been  one  such  philosopher  that   has  arguably  had  a  significant  influence  on  the  concept  of  justice  in  planning  thought.    For   Rawls,  justice  is  an  extension  of  fairness;  it  increases  equality  by  benefiting  the  least   advantaged  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  1999).    In  planning  theory,  Rawls'  theory  of  justice  has   not  only  influenced  planning  thought,  but  it  has  influenced  those,  such  as  Susan  Fainstein   (2010)  and  David  Harvey  (2009),  who  have  tried  to  bridge  the  disconnect  between  the  two,   analyzing  planning  practice  based  on  justice.    Rawl's  concept  of  justice  that  is  used  in   planning  thought  and  is  linked  to  the  liberal  tradition  of  justice  but  also  differs  from  it  is  the   concept  of  social  justice.    For  Rawls,  social  justice  is  the  most  "comprehensive  and   fundamental"  type  of  justice  (Johnston,  2011).   The  concept  of  social  justice  is  raised  frequently  in  theories  of  planning,  but  has   largely  been  associated  with  David  Harvey's  work.    At  its  most  basic  level,  social  justice  is   the  degree  to  which  individuals  within  a  society  are  afforded  fair  treatment  (Fischer,  as   cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    However,  the  weakness  in  the  social  justice  literature  is  that   what  is  considered  to  be  fair  is  not  explicitly  stated  (Fischer,  as  cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,   2009).    Harvey  (2009)  has  built  upon  this  idea  of  social  justice;  he  sees  social  justice  as   consisting  of  a  set  of  principles  that,  to  be  relevant,  need  to  be  specific  to  the  context  in   which  they  are  being  applied.     Despite  the  perceived  similarities  between  libertarian  views  of  justice  and  social  

     

6  

justice,  there  are  some  significant  differences  between  the  two  views  of  justice.    As   Campbell  (2006)  notes,  the  libertarian  view  of  justice  perceives  rights  as  liberty  rights   whereas  social  justice  perceives  rights  as  being  moral  rights.    This  is  critical  because   planning  is  often  caught  between  these  two  differing  but  similar  concepts  of  justice   (Campbell  2006).    The  concept  of  morality  and  rights  being  internal  to  justice  is  further   complicated  as  justice  interacts  with  morality  and  ethics  externally  in  the  context  of   planning.                                                    

     

7  

JUSTICE,  MORALITY,  ETHICS,  LAW,  AND  PLANNING   Understanding  the  context  of  planning  requires  defining  what  planning  does.    Since   planning  is  based  on  values  and  context,  how  planning  is  defined  matters  since  this   influences  how  concepts  are  conceptualized  and  therefore,  used.    For  this  paper,  the   definition  of  planning  by  Campbell  and  Marshall  (2006)  will  be  used  because  of  its  inherent   concern  with  justice.    Campbell  and  Marshall  (2006)  define  planning  as,  "an  activity  which   is  concerned  with  making  choices  about  good  and  bad,  right  and  wrong,  with  and  for   others,  in  relation  to  particular  places.    It  is  about  making  ethical  choices  over  issues  which   are  often  highly  contested."  (p.  240).    The  dual  concepts  of  justice  and  morality  are  evident   in  this  definition  of  planning  (Campbell  &  Marshall  2006).    Furthermore,  for  Campbell  and   Marshall  (2006)  the  concept  of  justice  in  planning  recognizes  the  vulnerable,  the  poor,  and   the  weak.    However,  it  should  be  noted  that  this  definition  and  view  of  planning  does  not   have  universal  consensus.    For  instance,  Stein  and  Harper  (2005)  state  that  the,   "professional  responsibility  as  a  public  planner  is  to  reflect  her  liberal  democratic  society's   overlapping  consensus  (or  the  results  of  a  process  supported  by  this  consensus),  and  to  put   aside  her  private  moral  values"  (p.  151).    However,  the  consensus  of  a  liberal  democratic   society  may  have  no  reference  to  justice,  morals,  or  ethics.    In  addition  to  the  lack  of   consensus  on  the  definition  of  planning,  defining  planning  as  a  function  of  justice  has  its   own  consequences.    For  instance,  if  planning  acknowledges  justice  as  a  function  of  those   who  are  disadvantaged,  it  is  essentially  a,  "situated  ethical  judgment"  (Campbell  &   Marshall,  2006,  p.  241).    Furthermore,  justice  is  not  only  affected  by  planning's  concern   with  making  ethical  decisions  but  also  its  tendency  to  ground  justice  in  moral  norms   (Campbell,  2006).    Thus,  in  defining  the  activity  of  planning  in  regard  to  justice,  the  

     

8  

concepts  of  justice,  morality,  and  ethics  are  not  mutually  exclusive.    Rather,  justice,  in  many   ways  depends  on  the  concepts  of  morality  and  ethics  in  order  for  it  to  be  implemented.   The  need  for  planning  to  have  some  ethical  and  moral  components  in  order  to  be   just  conceals  the  conflict  that  may  arise  when  all  three  of  these  concepts,  justice,  morality,   and  ethics,  are  incorporated.    Furthermore,  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  what  formula  of   the  three  should  be  used  in  order  to  achieve  justice  within  planning,  both  in  theory  and   practice.    The  conflict  between  justice,  morals,  and  ethical  action  becomes  evident  when   planning  attempts  to  implement  the  public  interest.    Whether  it  is  reflecting  society's   overlapping  consensus  or  the  planner  making  choices  that  are  considered  to  be  `good'  or   moral,  as  Campbell  and  Marshall  (2003)  note,  planning  finds  its  legitimization  through  the   public  interest.    However,  the  public  interest  in  planning  is,  in  large  part,  legitimized   through  the  law  (Leung,  2003).    As  Leung  (2003)  states,  the  core  elements  of  the  public   interest  for  planning  include,  "health,  safety,  and  convenience;  the  ever-present   considerations  of  economic  efficiency  and  social  equity"  (p.  5).    Leung  (2003)  also  goes  on   to  include  environmental  quality,  energy  conservation,  and  other  controversial  and   emerging  issues  as  part  of  the  public  interest.    While  some  have  argued  the  public  interest   is  no  more  than  a  façade,  one  that  does  not  provide  a  basis  for  decisions  on  policies  to  be   judged  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  2002),  the  public  interest  is  the  basis  for  planning  practice.     The  difficulty  regarding  the  legalistic  nature  of  the  public  interest  is  that  it  may  conflict   with  other  concepts  that  support  it,  such  as  justice,  morality,  and  ethics.    Thus,  not  only  do   morality,  ethics,  and  justice  conflict  with  each  other,  they  also  come  into  conflict  with  the   legalistic  nature  of  the  public  interest,  the  very  concept  they  are  being  employed  to  achieve.    

     

9  

What  is  in  the  greater  public  interest  may  not  be  just,  and  in  turn,  what  the  law  dictates  in   terms  of  the  public  interest  may  not  be  moral  or  ethical.     An  example  of  the  conflict  between  ethics,  morality,  justice,  and  the  legalistic  nature   of  the  public  interest  is  evident  in  the  persistent  planning  problem  of  the  slum.    Urban   slums  have  been  documented  since  the  late  19th  century,  most  notably  in  Jacob  Riis'  (2008)   book  How  the  Other  Half  Lives.    Slums  have  posed  a  health  problem,  social  problem,  and   safety  problem  for  cities  and,  in  turn,  planners.    The  perceived  problems  with  slums  also   happen  to  be  the  core  components  of  Leung's  (2003)  public  interest.    Different  solutions   have  been  implemented  in  an  attempt  to  "clean  up"  slum  areas  throughout  the  19th  and  20th   centuries.    During  the  1930s  and  1950s,  slum  clearance  often  consisted  of  areas  being   cleared  and  new  public  housing  being  built  (Vale,  2013).    However,  rather  than  housing  the   slum  dwellers  who  had  lived  there,  very  few  residents  were  invited  back;  instead,  the  slum   dwellers  were  replaced  by  members  of  the  upwardly  mobile  working  class  (Vale,  2013).     The  public  interest  in  this  case  was  for  the  greater  population  of  the  city,  rather  than  just   the  slum,  therefore,  making  it  possible  and  legal  to  remove  people  who  may  have  moral  but   no  legally  enforceable  rights,  from  the  land.    However,  is  it  ethical  or  moral  to  force  people   from  land  because  it  is  in  the  public  interest  to  do  so,  furthermore,  is  this  just?    These   questions  are  further  complicated  by  the  values  embedded  in  the  context,  what  we   perceive  to  be  a  slum  is  actually  a  value-laden  judgment;  there  is  no  universal  measure  for   a  slum  that  transcends  context  spatially  or  temporally.    This  touches  on  another  difficulty   with  implementing  justice,  morality,  and  ethics,  no  two  cities  are  identical  in  their  context.     Thus,  these  concepts  must  be  specific  to  the  situation  in  which  they  are  applied;  they  must   be  situated  judgments.    These  situations  may  differ  within  cities  as  different  

     

10  

neighbourhoods  of  the  city  demand  different  ways  to  achieve  justice.    The  planning   profession  is  therefore  engaged  in  activities  that  may  conceptually  and  spatially  conflict   given  the  institutional  context  and  how  the  planner  is  situated  within  that  society.    Thus,   the  institutional  context  that  the  planner  is  functioning  in  and  the  role  of  the  planner   become  central  to  creating  a  profession,  and  in  turn,  a  process  that  is  just.                                                            

     

11  

JUSTICE  AND  THE  INSTITUTIONAL  CONTEXT  OF  PLANNING   Young  (1990)  echoes  the  importance  of  addressing  the  institutional  context  in   which  justice  is  being  implemented  by  stating  that,  "many  discussions  of  social  justice  not   only  ignore  the  institutional  contexts  within  which  distributions  occur  but  often   presuppose  specific  institutional  structures  whose  justice  they  fail  to  bring  under   evaluation"  (as  cited  in  Campbell  &  Marshall,  2006,  p.  246).    This  is  especially  relevant  to   the  planning  profession  since,  as  Klosterman  (1998)  points  out,  the  profession  has  been   shaped  by  two  different  intellectual  traditions,  the  rationalist  and  the  reform  tradition,   which  have,  in  turn,  created  a  profession  in  which  the  role  of  the  planner  is  conflicted  (as   cited  in  Blau,  La  Gory,  Pipkin,  1983).    Since  the  concept  of  justice  is  context  dependent,  the   institutional  context  will  not  only  determine  how  justice  is  defined  and  used,  but  whether   or  not  the  concept  of  justice  is  an  appropriate  concept  on  which  to  base  the  planning   process.    The  intellectual  thought,  or  theory,  behind  the  institutional  context  of  planning  is   important  to  consider  because  it  influences  the  actual  practice  of  planning.    Therefore,  the   contested  nature  of  theory  will  not  only  influence  how  justice  is  thought  in  the  theoretical   context  but  also  how  it  functions  in  planning  practice.    Thus,  the  institutional  context  needs   to  be  assessed.             To  understand  the  institutional  context,  Klosterman  (1998)  argues  there  are  two   main  traditions  that  need  to  be  explored:  the  rationalist  tradition  and  the  reform  tradition   (as  cited  in  Blau,  La  Gory,  Pipkin,  1983  p.  114).    The  first  tradition  that  will  be  explored  is   the  rationalist  tradition,  which  is  grounded  in  both  rationality  and  science  (Klosterman  as   cited  in  Blau,  La  Gory,  Pipkin,  1983,  p.  114).    Functioning  in  a  profession  defined  by  this   tradition,  the  role  of  the  planner  is  to  act  with  objectivity,  collect  and  analyze  data,  and  

     

12  

adhere  to  the  scientific  method  (Klosterman  as  cited  in  Blau,  La  Gory,  Pipkin,  1983,  p.  114).     Beauregard  (1987)  furthers  this  by  saying  that  in  order  to  be  objective  and  maintain   rationality  throughout  the  planning  process,  the  planner  must  ignore  his/her  own  thoughts   and  be  indifferent  to  the  outcomes.    Furthermore,  Faludi  (1996)  notes  that  at  a  higher  level,   planning  as  a  profession  is  concerned  with  being  efficient,  which  will  likely,  "maximize  the   attainment  of  the  relevant  ends"  (as  cited  in  Mandelbaum,  Mazza  &  Burchell,  1996,  p.66).       The  rational  model  allowed  planning  to  distribute  the  risks  in  such  a  way  as  to  share   the  responsibility  (Faludi  as  cited  in  Mandelbaum  et  al.  1996)  while  at  the  same  time   legitimizing  itself  (Sager,  1999).    Due  to  this,  justice  could  only  factor  into  the  decision  if  the   rationality  of  the  decision  would  increase,  otherwise,  it  would  undermine  the  legitimacy  of   the  process  and  therefore,  the  role  of  the  planner  and  the  planning  profession.     Furthermore,  using  the  concept  of  justice  in  a  planning  situation  grounded  in  rationality   could  lead  to  unjust  consequences.    In  the  case  that  the  decision  is  made  with  rationalistic   subjectivism,  in  other  words,  that  the  decision  is  made  taking  into  account  what  is  good  for   everyone  over  a  long  period  of  time  (Kutschera,  1977),  the  decision  could  be  considered  to   be  just  despite  the  inability  to  quantify  what  is  considered  good  for  everyone.     Furthermore,  what  is  good  is  a  value-based  decision,  which  does  not  necessarily  mean  it  is   associated  with  the  concept  of  justice.    Therefore,  in  the  rationalist  tradition,  the   institutional  context  may  make  it  appropriate  to  use  the  concept  of  justice,  however,  given   the  constraints  noted,  what  is  just  would  be  based  on  a  scientific  grounding  that  is   quantifiable  and  what  is  good  might  not  be  what  is  just.       According  to  Klosterman  (1998)  the  other  tradition  that  planning  is  based  on  is  the   reform  tradition  (as  cited  in  Blau,  La  Gory,  Pipkin,  1983).    In  this  tradition,  planning  as  a  

     

13  

profession  is  a  tool  with  which  to  improve  both  government  and  society  (Klosterman  as   cited  in  Blau,  La  Gory,  Pipkin,  1983).    In  addition,  the  role  of  the  planner  is  that  of  an   advocate  of  the  client's  best  interests  or  the  interests  of  the  greater  population  (Klosterman   as  cited  in  Blau,  La  Gory,  Pipkin,  1983,  p.  114)  and,  "would  plead  for  his  own  and  his  client's   view  of  the  good  society"  (Davidoff,  2007,  p.  333).    Much  like  rationalized  planning,  the   institutional  context  matters.    If  planners  are  to  advocate  on  behalf  of  themselves  or  their   clients,  it  is  their  own  values  that  determine  what  is  considered  to  be  just  or  good.    This   does  not  ensure  the  process  will  be  just  nor  that  the  outcomes  will  be  just.       The  dual  traditions  in  which  planning  is  grounded  show  the  complexity  of  trying  to   incorporate  the  concept  of  justice  into  the  planning  process.    Nevertheless,  as  Campbell  and   Marshall  (2006)  have  noted,  the  concept  of  justice  has  influenced  planning  thought   throughout  its  existence,  and  therefore,  the  connection  between  planning  and  justice  is  not   new.    Thus,  the  concept  of  justice  in  the  context  of  planning  should  be  explored  and   evaluated.  One  of  the  first  instances  of  justice  becoming  entwined  with  planning  is  the   influence  of  utilitarianism  on  planning  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  2006)  which  recognizes  the   inherent  conflict  between  public  and  private  interests  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  2002).     Furthermore,  as  Harvey  (2009)  has  noted,  the  main  definitions  of  social  justice  come  from   two  different  areas,  the  social  contract  and  utilitarianism.         In  the  case  of  utilitarianism,  as  Campbell  &  Marshall  (2002)  have  put  forward,  there   is  an  understanding  that  the  state  should  intervene  to  ensure  that,  "the  individual's  pursuit   of  private  pleasure  is  consonant  with  the  collective  good"  (p.  175).    However,  utilitarianism   does  not  go  so  far  as  to  theorize  how  this  conflict  is  to  be  balanced,  rather,  an  intervention   is  based  on  an  ethical  judgment  of  what  constitutes  the  public  good  and  the  trading  of  

     

14  

private  interests  to  ensure  the  public  good  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  2002).    Calculating  what   is  in  the  public  good  and  how  this  should  be  traded  against  private  interests  is  difficult,  if   not  impossible  and  has  been  one  of  the  main  criticisms  of  utilitarianism.  .    Putting  values  on   public  goods  or  private  goods  and  attempting  to  calculate  these  is  difficult  because  it  is  a   value  judgment.    Furthermore,  as  Sen  (1972)  has  pointed  out,  utilitarianism  does  not   necessarily  mean  that  the  outcomes  are  just  or  egalitarian  because  if  the  existing   distribution  is  not  taken  into  account,  then  the  end  result  may  not  be  more  egalitarian   distribution.    Thus,  decisions  based  on  utilitarianism  may  be  morally  unjust  (Campbell  &   Marshall,  1999).    Putting  utilitarianism  into  practice  shows  how  the  concept  of  justice   becomes  even  more  complex.    Utilitarianism  is  one  of  many  theories  that  attempt  to   conceptualize  justice,  however,  it  may  not  produce  more  equitable  or  just  outcomes.     Advocacy  planning  and  social  justice,  in  many  ways,  attempted  to  address  the  short  falls  of   utilitarianism.       Advocacy  planning  took  up  the  idea  of  justice  in  the  form  of  social  justice  (Campbell   &  Marshall,  1999).    Rather  than  be  concerned  with  the  public  good,  planning  became   concerned  with  fairness,  power  structures,  and  the  concept  of  social  justice.    Under   advocacy  planning,  it  is  proposed  that  the  planner  should  ensure  there  is  some  measure  of   fairness  in  the  planning  process  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  1999).    In  addition,  advocacy   planning  sees  planning  as  a  profession  that  is  charged  with  making  urban  life,  among  other   things,  more  just  (Davidoff,  2007).    In  this  view,  the  planner  acts  in  a  key  role  to  ensure  a   just  process  as  well  as  just  outcomes.    However,  the  planner's  ability  to  undertake  these   tasks  is  dictated  by  the  institutional  context  in  which  he/she  is  functioning.    In  this  case,  the   planner  would  be  a  tool  to  promote  social  justice  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  1999)  only  if  the  

     

15  

institutional  context  allowed  it.    According  to  Davidoff  (2007),  the  planner  would  be  an   advocate  of  what  he/she  or  the  client  deems  to  depict  the  good  society.    In  essence,   advocacy  planning  attempted  to  bring  values  to  the  planning  processes,  the  main  one  being   fairness  (Campbell  &  Marshall,  1999).    However,  Campbell  and  Marshall  (1999)  point  out   an  important  factor;  there  may  be  competing  plans,  but  within  these  plans  the  planner  or   political  process  would  have  to  be  the  decision  maker  on  which  plan  wins.    Therefore,   depending  on  who  is  chosen  and  the  criteria  the  choice  is  based  upon,  the  process  and   outcome  might  be  unjust.    As  Friedmann  (1965)  notes,  this  process  could  favour  those  who   are  already  favoured,  leading  to  a  process  that  is  unjust  (as  cited  in  Campbell  &  Marshall,   1999).                                             

     

16  

POWER,  JUSTICE,  AND  PLANNING   As  a  planner  acts  in  the  capacity  of  an  advocate,  technician,  or  however  else  they   have  defined  their  role,  the  existing  power  structures  need  to  be  considered  because  as   Hoch  (1992)  states,  planners  are  in  a  unique  position  to,  "both  reinforce  and  camouflage   the  perverse  effects  of  the  power  relations  that  planners  and  planning  analysts  hope  to   escape"  (p.  207).    Thus,  because  of  the  way  in  which  planning  is  situated,  it  can  perpetuate   power  structures  in  society  under  the  guise  of  achieving  the  just  city,  the  good  city,  or  even   the  ideal  city  without  the  planners  being  aware  of  this.    In  planning,  both  Forrester  (1989)   and  Flyvbjerg  (1998)  address  this  idea  of  power  and  its  link  with  institutional  structures,   the  public  interest,  and  planning.    Forrester  (1989)  acknowledges  the  effects  of  power   being  implicit  in  the  planning  process  by  stating,  "choosing  to  address  or  ignore  the   exercise  of  political  power  in  the  planning  process,  planners  can  make  the  process  more   democratic  or  less...still  more  dominated  by  the  established  wielders  of  power  or  less  so"   (p.  28).    If  planners  do  not  address  the  power  structures,  power  will  define  what  is   considered  to  be  a  democratic  or  just  planning  process.  By  influencing  the  information   provided  to  the  public,  who  gets  to  participate,  and  in  turn,  the  expectation  of  citizens,   planners  play  a  significant  role  in  shaping  what  is  considered  to  be  a  democratic  process   (Forrester,  1989).    Therefore,  the  role  of  the  planner  is  to  address  the  power  structures  in   the  institutional  context  of  planning,  how  they  shape  the  planning  process,  and  counteract   their  influence  to  ensure  the  process  is  democratic.       In  his  case  study  of  Aalborg,  Flyvbjerg  (1998)  described  how  power  played  a  role  in   protecting  certain  interests  and  that  power  was  exercised  throughout  the  process;   however,  the  role  of  power  was  hidden  behind  the  concept  of  the  public  interest.    Flyvbjerg  

     

17  

(1998)  found  that  the  institutions  that  were  charged  with  the  public  interest  were  those   which  power  had  infiltrated.    This  is,  in  part,  because,  "power  defines,  and  creates,  concrete   physical,  economic,  ecological,  and  social  realities"  in  which  planning  exists  (Flyvbjerg,   1998,  p.  229).    Therefore,  just  as  power  defined  a  democratic  planning  process  for   Forrester  (1989),  the  existing  power  structures  also  define  the  public  interest,  what  is   moral,  what  is  ethical,  and  the  actions  taken  to  achieve  these  concepts.    This  results  in  the   planning  profession  being  uniquely  situated  to  perpetuate  the  existing  power  structures   within  society  through  the  planning  process  but  also  through  its  use  of  the  public  interest   as  a  fundamental  source  of  legitimization.       In  order  to  achieve  a  just  planning  process,  the  role  of  power  structures  must  be   acknowledged  because  much  like  the  concept  of  rationality,  justice  is  context-dependent.     In  both  cases,  the  context  is  in  the  least,  affected  and,  at  most,  defined  by  power  and  is  in   essence,  a  discourse  of  power  (Flyvbjerg,  1998).    Thus,  without  recognizing  power   structures  and  their  impact,  what  is  perceived  as  just  may  be  just  only  to  those  who  hold   power  and  protect  their  interests.    Forrester  (1989)  echoes  this  by  saying  that  if  planners   were  to  understand  how  the  planning  process  is  influenced  by  power,  then  they  could   counteract  it  by  improving  their  knowledge  and  empowering  those  participating.    By   understanding  the  planning  process  and  critically  assessing  the  concepts  that  it  is   grounded  in  or  that  it  takes  for  granted,  such  as  rationality,  then  one  can  start  to   deconstruct  the  influence  of  power  on  the  planning  process.    Forrester  (1998)  builds  on   this  notion  by  stating  that  planners  need  to  be  able  to  understand  power  relations  to   improve  their  ability  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  a  planner.    By  assessing  the  planning  process   through  the  lens  of  power  structures  and  understanding  the  concept  of  just  in  a  society  

     

18  

characterized  by  inequalities  of  status  and  access  to  resources,  we  move  closer  to   understanding  what  a  just  planning  process  would  look  like.    In  the  case  of  justice,   questioning  what  is  just  and  how  we  can  come  to  a  just  process  needs  to  be  assessed  by   questioning  the  power  structures  and  power  relations  within  society.    However,  this  is  only   one  aspect  of  many  that  needs  to  be  considered  when  striving  to  achieve  a  just  planning   process.    Solely  understanding  the  role  that  power  plays  is  not  enough  to  achieve  a  just   planning  process,  there  must  be  other  criteria  available  to  guide  the  planning  process.                                                      

     

19  

JUSTICE  AND  THE  PLANNING  PROCESS   To  theorize  about  a  just  planning  process  that  would  solve  the  problem  of  injustices   in  the  current  planning  process,  one  must  think  in  a  utopian  manner  (Friedmann,  2000).     However,  to  achieve  a  just  planning  process  in  practice  is  not  the  same  as  theorizing  about   a  just  planning  process.    When  applied  to  planning  practice,  the  utopian  ideas  of  a  just   planning  process  cannot  ignore  the  complexities  that  face  both  the  concept  of  justice  and   the  planning  process.    In  reality,  planning  does  not  function  in  a  utopian  society;  it   functions  within  a  complex  society,  which  is  inherently  concerned  with  these  complexities.     In  addition,  exploring  what  a  just  planning  process  would  look  like  is  not  an  exercise  in   finding  a  universal  process  that  works  despite  the  situation  in  which  it  is  being  applied.     Attempting  to  put  forth  a  just  process  that  can  be  universally  applied  is  closer  to  the  rigid   structure  reflected  by  the  rational  approach,  rather  than  that  of  an  approach  grounded  in   justice  which  embraces  the  complexity  of  the  society  in  which  it  is  applied.    The   impossibility  of  defining  a  universal  just  planning  process  is  due  to  the  complexity  of   planning  and  the  tendency  of  planning  to  occur  as  a  response  to  a  problem.       This  tendency  of  planning  to  respond  to  problems  can  be  seen  in  the  advent  of  the  ideal  city   that  was  theorized  and  put  forward  by  those  looking  to  fix  the  social  and  urban  crisis  that   were  facing  cities  at  the  time  (Fishman  as  cited  in  Campbell  &  Fainstein,  2003).    Exploring  a   just  planning  process  is  not  unlike  this;  it  is  at  best,  solving  the  problem  of  an  unjust   process  and  at  worst,  filling  in  the  gaps  of  the  process  that  ignores  aspects  of  justice.    To   add  further  complexity,  there  is  not  a  singular  problem  of  unjustness  that  a  just  planning   process  looks  to  address;  rather,  the  concept  of  unjust  is  multi-faceted  and  is  a  product  of   the  time,  the  context,  and  the  locality  in  which  the  concept  is  defined.    Furthermore,  the  

     

20  

concept  of  a  just  planning  process  is  a  theoretical  ideal  that  when  applied  to  practice,  will   likely  change  given  the  circumstances.    In  practice,  it  is  bound  by  the  institutional  context  of   planning  and  the  underlying  structures  of  a  society  in  which  it  is  sculpted,  such  as  power   relations  and  the  values  held  by  both  the  participants  and  the  planners.   While  an  ideal  planning  process  has  been  theorized  about,  it  has  not  been  theorized   about  in  terms  of  the  concept  of  justice.    Rather,  an  ideal  planning  process  has  been  based   on  characteristics  like  inclusivity  and  openness,  such  as  in  communicative  planning  or   participatory  planning,  or  being  replicable,  such  as  in  the  rational  model.    Both  of  these  give   a  narrow  concept  of  what  a  better  planning  process  would  look  like  because  not  unlike  the   conception  of  the  ideal  city,  they  are  in  response  to  specific  problems  in  the  planning   process.    For  instance,  communicative  planning  sees  planners  as  actors  rather  than  neutral   experts  and  is,  in  large  part,  a  response  to  rational  planning  (Innes,  1995).    Furthermore,   when  theorizing  about  the  good  city,  such  as  Friedmann  (2000)  does,  or  the  just  city  as   Fainstein  (2010)  does,  they  address  the  planning  process  only  so  far  as  to  state  it  should  be   democratic;  however,  how  this  takes  shape  is  not  explicitly  stated.    This  is  important   because  a  democratic  process  does  not  necessarily  ensure  a  just  process  or  just  outcomes.     In  addition,  the  theories  surrounding  an  ideal  planning  process  have  shortcomings   themselves,  often  not  addressing  specific  issues  that  arise  due  to  their  implementation.     Despite  the  lack  of  literature  on  what  would  constitute  a  just  planning  process,  criteria  can   be  extracted  from  Susan  Fainstein's  (2010)  The  Just  City  as  well  as  from  those  theorizing   about  the  ideal  planning  process.       The  concept  of  the  just  city  has  been  explored  by  Susan  Fainstein  (2010).    In  her   book,  The  Just  City,  Fainstein  (2010)  puts  forth  criteria  to  measure  planning  outcomes  to  

     

21  

determine  whether  or  not  they  are  just.    The  characteristics  used  by  Fainstein  will  be  used   as  the  foundation  on  which  to  measure  a  just  planning  process.    These  specific  criteria  will   be  used  because,  as  Fainstein  (2010)  notes,  since  John  Rawls'  (1999)  Theory  of  Justice,   these  are  the  criteria  that  she  has  distilled  from  the  philosophical  and  theoretical   conversations  about  justice.    The  criteria  of  a  just  city  encompasses  three  specific  qualities:   equity,  diversity,  and  democracy  (Fainstein,  2010,  p.  58).    How  Fainstein  (2010)  has   defined  these  three  criteria  will  also  be  employed,  although  it  needs  to  be  acknowledged   that  these  concepts  are  context-dependent  and  thus,  in  practice,  the  context  will  dictate   how  these  concepts  should  be  defined  to  achieve  a  just  planning  process.    Furthermore,  the   formula,  or  degree  to  which  each  of  the  three  criteria  should  be  applied  in  relation  to  the   others  is  dependent  on  the  context  that  the  process  is  functioning  within.    This  is  critical   because  the  three  components  of  the  criteria  may  conflict  with  each  other,  and   understanding  the  context-dependent  nature  of  the  concepts  will  influence  the  way  in   which  they  are  invoked.     Equity  is  the  first  of  the  three  criteria  that  will  be  used  on  which  to  base  a  just   planning  process.    In  the  case  of  Fainstein's  (2010)  just  city,  equity  is  defined  as  the,   "distribution  of  both  the  material  and  non-material  benefits  derived  from  public  policy  that   does  not  favour  those  who  are  already  better  off  at  the  beginning"  (p.  35-36).    If  this   definition  of  equity  is  taken  and  applied  to  the  planning  process,  the  process  would  take   into  consideration  the  unequal  backgrounds  of  participants  and  favour  those  that  are   disadvantaged  in  the  process.    Favouring  those  who  are  disadvantaged  could  take  various   forms.    For  instance,  it  could  benefit  those  who  are  less  better  off  regarding  knowledge  or   resources,  those  who  hold  less  power,  or  even  those  who  will  be  affected  the  greatest.    

     

22  

Understanding  that  not  everyone  who  participates  in  the  planning  process  comes  with  the   same  knowledge,  status,  or  resources  is  critical  to  implementing  equity  as  a  criterion  of   justice  (Fainstein,  2010).    In  the  case  of  the  planning  process,  equity  is  not  the  same  as   equality.    If  achieving  equality  was  the  goal,  then  it  would  undermine  justice  by   perpetuating  inequalities  because  striving  for  equality  ignores  the  existing  power   imbalances  within  society  and  runs  the  risk  of  perpetuating  the  existing  inequalities.     Rather,  a  just  planning  process  should  recognize  the  inherent  inequalities  and  treat  people   accordingly.    The  role  of  the  planner  in  a  process  striving  to  achieve  equity  is  to   acknowledge  existing  inequalities  and  structure  the  process  to  address  them  in  a  way  that   ensures  greater  equity  among  participants.    Understanding  that  multiple  people  participate   in  the  planning  process,  ensuring  they  have  the  ability,  and  they  are  included  to  participate   leads  into  Fainstein's  second  concept  of  diversity.       The  second  criterion  to  achieve  a  just  city  is  diversity,  which  Fainstein  (2010)   defines  as,  "the  physical  environment  as  well  as  social  relations,  and  refers  to  policy   ambitions  that  go  beyond  encouraging  acceptance  of  others  to  include  the  social   composition  of  places"  (p.  66).    In  other  words,  diversity  is  defined  in  terms  of  both  social   diversity,  that  is  diversity  in  the  need  for  mixed  populations,  and  physical  diversity,   diversity  in  the  physical  structures  that  make  a  city  (Marcuse  as  cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,   2009).    However,  understanding  and  implementing  diversity  as  a  criterion  for  a  just   planning  process  is  complex  because  as  Fainstein  (2010)  goes  on  to  acknowledge,  diversity   in  planning  is  no  more  than  an  "aspirational  goal"  that  is  affected  by  the  context  and   process  in  which  it  is  achieved  (p.  76-77).    Diversity  is  measured  by  the  context  in  which  it   is  being  applied,  what  would  be  considered  diverse  in  one  city,  say  Toronto,  could  not  be  

     

23  

achieved  in  a  small  town,  such  as  Qualicum  Beach.    The  ambiguity  of  diversity  is  further   complicated  because  incorporating  diversity  into  the  planning  process,  whether  it  is  in  the   form  of  embracing  difference  or  ensuring  inclusion,  has  not  been  fully  addressed  by  either   Fainstein  or  other  theorists  (Marcuse  as  cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    The  lack  of   conceptualization  of  what  diversity  would  look  like  or  how  it  would  be  implemented  is  a   product  of  its  complexity  as  a  concept.  Despite  this,  diversity  must  be  included  if  planning   is  to  achieve  a  just  planning  process  since  it  not  only  embraces  multiple  representation  but   respects  different  ways  of  interacting  with  the  process.     Using  the  concept  of  diversity  in  the  planning  process  means  understanding  the   concept  of  diversity  in  the  context  in  which  the  process  is  being  applied.    This  could  take   the  form  of  an  understanding  that  would  ensure  there  is  inclusion  of  multiple  people  who   represent  different  positions,  perspectives,  and  backgrounds  in  the  process.    In  other   words,  the  planning  process  would  be  about  going  beyond  what  would  normally  be   considered  the  traditional  stakeholders,  looking  for  knowledge  from  other  members  of   society.    Incorporating  diversity  in  the  planning  process  this  way  is  not  unlike  the  process   that  the  communicative  model  promotes  which  includes  the  ideas  of  openness  and   diversity  (Fainstein,  2000).    It  looks  to  be  inclusive  of  a  variety  of  participants  and  in   practice,  states  that  the  planning  process  accepts  different  ways  in  which  people   participate  and  considers  all  the  ways  in  which  participants  may  know,  value,  or  give   meaning  to  things  (Healey  as  cited  in  Campbell  &  Fainstein,  2003).    Ensuring  the  planning   process  is  inclusionary  of  all  participants  means  accepting  different  forms  of  knowledge,   different  ways  of  conveying  knowledge,  and  opening  up  the  process  to  acknowledge,   engage,  and  accept  difference.    This  embraces  not  only  diversity  but  also  creates  a  more  

     

24  

democratic  process,  one  that  removes  itself  from  paternalism  to  a  more  inclusive  form  that   allows  for  participatory  planning  (Healey  as  cited  in  Fainstein  &  Campbell,  2006).    Thus,  in   a  just  planning  process,  diversity  has  to  be  defined  by  those  participating  in  the  process  as   well  as  those  implementing  the  process,  in  this  case,  the  planner.    Including  diversity  in  a   planning  process  leads  to  the  third  criterion  of  democracy.       Fainstein's  third  criterion,  democracy,  is  defined  loosely  as  a  consultation  regarding   urban  development  which  takes  into  consideration  the  broad  interests  of  the  city  (Marcuse   as  cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    Democracy  is  not  as  clearly  defined  as  the  other  two   criteria  due  to  its  ability  to  be  at  odds  with  justice  in  an  unequal  society  (Fainstein,  2010).     While  democracy  may  be  employed  in  the  planning  process,  this  does  not  mean  it  will   result  in  a  just  process  or  outcomes  because  democracy,  or  the  people  participating  in  the   process  as  part  of  the  democracy,  may  choose  unjust  outcomes  or  ways  of  progressing   forward  with  the  process.  Young  (1990)  echoes  this  reasoning  highlighting  that  the   distribution  of  goods  and  resources  is  central  to  reflections  on  social  justice  as  well  as  the   processes  and  relationships  that  produce  and  reproduce  those  patterns.    In  the  case  of   implementing  democracy,  the  role  of  the  planner  is  not  only  to  facilitate  democracy  but   also  to  consider  democracy  in  the  context  of  justice.    However,  overriding  democratic   choice  results  in  a  less  democratic  process,  the  seriousness  of  which  should  be  considered.     Fainstein  (2000)  expresses  this  challenge  when  she  states  that,  "democracy  is  desirable,   but  not  always"  (p.  469).    Democracy  alone  does  not  ensure  a  just  planning  process;  just   because  a  process  is  democratic  does  not  mean  it  is  fair  or  that  it  will  result  in  fair   outcomes.  In  this  case,  democracy  may  reproduce  inequalities  and  therefore  in  turn,   produce  unjust  outcomes.      

     

25  

Despite  democracy's  conflict  with  justice,  implementing  democracy  as  a  criterion  on   which  to  base  a  just  planning  process  is  appropriate  given  the  scale  at  which  the  process  is   functioning.    This  is  because  the  greatest  opportunity  for  democracy  is  at  a  small  scale,  such   as  the  neighbourhood  scale,  which  is  the  scale  at  which  the  planning  process  is  applied   (Marcuse  ac  cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    Ensuring  everyone  has  access  to  the  process  is   one  aspect  of  democracy;  however,  this  alone  does  not  ensure  a  democratic  process.     Meaningful  participation  is  just  as  important  as  access  because  without  it,  as  Arnstein   (1969)  highlighted  in  her  "ladder  of  participation",  the  process  becomes  something  similar   to  a  facade.    Ensuring  the  process  is  democratic  in  such  a  way  as  to  not  only  facilitate   participation  but  to  gain  buy-in  from  those  affected  by  planning  decisions  is  important.       Despite  these  three  criteria  facilitating  a  basis  on  which  to  ground  a  just  planning   process,  when  applied  jointly,  they  do  not  necessarily  complement  each  other  to  create  a   just  process.    Fainstein  (2010)  recognizes  that  these  three  components  have  conflicting   agendas  with  each  other,  which  is  further  complicated  by  each  concept  being  defined  by   multiple  meanings.    For  instance,  including  diversity  may  not  facilitate  a  democratic   process;  rather,  participants  may  perceive  the  process  to  be  undemocratic.    Thus,  how   these  concepts  are  employed,  how  they  interact  with  each  other,  and  the  formula  in  which   they  are  applied  are  dependent  on  the  context  in  which  they  are  used.    The  planner,  who   facilitates  the  planning  process  and  has  the  ability  to  assess  the  situation  from  a  broad   perspective,  needs  to  be  actively  involved  to  ensure  the  way  in  which  the  criteria  is  being   implemented  functions  to  achieve  the  goal  of  being  just.    To  do  this,  the  planner  needs  to   not  only  take  into  account  the  three  criteria  but  also  the  existing  power  relations  and  the   context  in  which  the  planning  process  is  occurring.    What  is  considered  democratic  or  

     

26  

diverse  in  one  situation  may  not  be  the  same  in  another  situation,  even  if  the  two  situations   are  occurring  in  the  same  city.    Another  important  aspect  that  affects  how  these  concepts   are  implemented  is  the  need  to  understand  the  social  concept  that  they  are  trying  to   achieve.    Defining  social  concepts,  in  this  case  justice,  affects  the  social  processes  in  which   social  processes,  in  this  case  equity,  diversity,  and  democracy,  are  implemented  (Marcuse   as  cited  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  2009).    Thus,  how  justice  is  defined  affects  the  processes  in  which   it  is  implemented;  the  concepts  and  processes  are  inherently  linked  and  dependent  on  each   other.    The  problems  surrounding  the  implementation  of  a  just  planning  process  are   numerous,  although  once  identified,  empower  the  planner  to  work  towards  a  just  planning   process.                                             

     

27  

PLANNING  PROCESS,  OUTCOMES,  AND  JUSTICE   While  it  is  important  to  consider  justice  in  regard  to  the  planning  process,  justice   cannot  be  considered  in  isolation  from  planning  outcomes.    This  is,  in  part,  because   focusing  only  on  processes  has  the  ability  to  minimize  concern  with  outcomes  (Campbell  &   Marshall,  1999).    This,  in  turn,  can  contradict  the  purpose  of  creating  a  just  planning   process  and  undermine  the  aspect  of  justice  in  the  process.    Furthermore,  as  Fainstein  has   noted,  planning  theory  has  suffered  a  theoretical  weakness  due  to  its  separation  of   planning  outcomes  and  the  planning  process  (Fainstein,  2005).    This  theoretical  separation   can  be  seen  in  the  early  theories  of  what  an  ideal  form  of  an  industrial  society  would  look   like;  Ebenezer  Howard,  Frank  Lloyd  Wright,  and  Le  Corbusier  all  worked  to  achieve  this   ideal  city  form  (Fishman  as  cited  in  Campbell  &  Fainstein,  2003).    To  achieve  the  ideal  city,   these  early  theorists  were  less  concerned  with  planning  processes;  making  planning   focused  on  outcomes  with  little  attention  given  to  the  process  of  how  they  came  to  these   outcomes.    Whether  it  was  Ebeneezer  Howard's  Garden  City  or  Daniel  Burnham's  City   Beautiful  movement,  the  focus  was  on  the  outcome  of  producing  the  ideal  city  (Fainstein,   2005).    Ignoring  the  process  was  necessary  as  the  planners  strove  to  implement  their  ideals   because  any  concern  with  process  would  have  interfered  with  their  vision.       This  separation  of  outcomes  from  process  did  not  only  exist  in  theory,  it   transcended  into  the  realm  of  planning  practice.    Again,  this  can  be  seen  in  the  theory  of  the   ideal  city  as  these  ideals  became  popular  in  planning  practice,  influencing  planning's  focus   on  outcomes.    As  Fishman  (1977)  notes,  these  proposals  of  the  ideal  city  have  influenced   how  cities  have  been  shaped  and  could  influence  the  future  of  our  cities  as  well.    The   process  that  planning  was  concerned  was  one  concerned  primarily  with  ways    to  facilitate  

     

28  

the  desired  outcomes  (as  cited  in  Campbell  &  Fainstein,  2003).    Taking  Howard's  concept  of   the  Garden  City  as  an  example,  planning's  focus  on  outcomes  becomes  evident.    The  Garden   City  movement  created  two  cities  based  on  its  ideals,  Letchworth  Garden  City  and  Welwyn   Garden  City,  and  influenced  a  variety  of  communities  in  Canada.     Regent  Park  also  offers  an  example  of  change  in  planning,  from  being  concerned   with  outcomes  to  being  concerned  with  processes  and  how  outcomes  can  influence  the   process.    Both  development  choices  for  Regent  Park  were  a  response  to  a  fundamental   problem,  housing  low-income  residents.    The  first  clearance  of  Regent  Park  and  the   construction  that  ensued  in  the  1940s  and  early  1950s  was  built  on  the  Garden  City   principles  which  was  the  popular  thought  at  the  time  (CBC,  2010).    Rather  than  focused  on   process,  planning  was  based  on  the  desired  outcomes,  in  this  case,  the  principles  of  the   Garden  City.    However,  despite  implementing  what  was  thought  to  be  the  ideal  physical   environment  ,  the  goal  of  a  successful  neighbourhood  was  not  achieved,  and  in  the  early   2000s,  a  proposal  to  revitalize  the  area  was  put  forth.    This  revitalization,  rather  than   focusing  solely  on  outcomes,  shifted  to  focus  more  on  the  process.    However,  the   revitalization  now  occurring  in  Regent  Park  is  based  on  the  current  popular  planning   thought:  mixed  income,  mixed-use,  and  an  integrated  neighbourhood  into  the  rest  of  the   city.    Despite  having  a  focus  on  a  specific  planning  process,  the  outcomes  that  are  being   sought  after,  those  grounded  in  planning  thought,  affect  the  process  and  in  part,  lead  it.     Even  though  a  process  was  followed,  it  is  not  a  coincidence  that  despite  the  process,  the   outcomes  are  in  line  with  the  popular  planning  thought.   This  separation  between  outcome  and  process  in  early  planning  theory  could,  in   part,  exist  and  be  acceptable  because  planning  was  engaged  with  fixing  specific  problems  

     

29  

arising  from  the  industrial  city.    For  instance,  Howard's  Garden  City  was  in  direct  response   to  the  problem  of  the  industrial  city  (Fainstein,  2005).    Solving  these  early  problems,  such   as  sanitation,  was  relatively  easy  given  that  the  problems  were,  "definable,  understandable,   and  concensual"  (Rittel  &  Webber,  1973,  p.  156).    In  contrast,  the  problems  that  planners   face  today  are  societal  problems  which  are  ill-defined,  never  solved,  and  are  often   symptoms  of  other  problems  (Ritell  &  Webber,  1973).    The  profession  of  planning  is  still   inherently  concerned  with  solving  problems,  which  means  as  the  problems  have  evolved,   so  too  has  planning.    This  will  continue  as  it  is  not  sufficient  to  base  planning  decisions   solely  on  an  outcome  or  a  process.    While  one  may  be  favoured  over  the  other,  neither   should  be  ignored.       Therefore,  when  assessing  what  constitutes  a  just  planning  process,  planning   outcomes  cannot  be  ignored  or  else  planners  act  in  a  capacity  no  better  than  those  early   visionaries  implementing  their  plans;  however,  assessing  outcomes  that  occur  from  a  just   planning  process  should  not  influence  the  process.    Thus,  to  base  a  planning  decision  on  a   perceived  just  outcome  becomes  an  exercise  in  complex,  value-laden  decision  making  that   will  likely  fail  in  its  objective  of  being  just,  rather  the  outcomes  should  be  acknowledged    in   terms  of  their  impacts,  who  they  benefit,  and  who  they  disadvantage.    Outcomes  are  critical   to  acknowledge  because  a  just  planning  process  does  not  ensure  just  outcomes;  on  the   contrary,  a  just  planning  process  is  a  product  of  the  context  in  which  it  is  defined  and   therefore,  may  not  only  be  unjust  in  a  different  context  but  produce  unjust  outcomes.     Furthermore,  since  the  problems  that  planners  face  stem  from  other  problems  (Rittell  &   Webber,  1973),  acknowledging  outcomes  and  their  impacts  can  help  to  anticipate  other   problems  that  may  arise.    Much  of  planning  can  be  seen  in  this  way.    Even  today,  planners  

     

30  

solve  problems  and  attempt  to  fix  outcomes  which  have  come  about  due  to  factors  they   may  or  may  not  have  direct  influence  over.     Theorizing  about  planning  allows  the  space  for  the  profession  to  attempt  to  answer   the  difficult  questions  of  planning.    However,  theory  has  long  been  criticized  for  being   inadequate,  and  being,  as  Beauregard  (2005)  states,  "less  about  what  planners  do  than  how   they  should  do  it"  (p.  203).    This  has  led  to  a  perception  that  planning  theory  is  not  relevant   to  planning  practice;  instead  it  is  often  thought  that  planners  learn  by  doing  (Friedmann,   2005).    However,  this  misses  the  value  of  planning  theory;  planning  theory  has  the  capacity   to  influence  and  improve  planning  practice  (Beauregard,  1987).    Even  though  planning   practice  seems  to  work  in  isolation  of  planning  theory,  in  practice,  planning  functions   under  some  thought,  whether  it  is  seeking  the  public  good  and  invoking  utilitarianism  or   acting  on  one's  belief  of  good  planning  and  representing  advocacy  planning.    The  leap  from   planning  theory  to  practice  is  large;  however,  it  must  be  made.    Bridging  this  gap  will   correct  the  division  planning  currently  experiences  and  allow  for  theory  to  become  more   relevant  to  practice  and  practice  to  be  improved  by  theory.    In  the  case  of  a  just  planning   process,  it  is  critical  to  theorize  about  what  it  looks  like  but  also  apply  it  to  practice  to   understand  how  it  affects  the  planning  profession  and  how  it  changes  once  put  into   practice.                   

     

31  

THE  CASE  STUDY  OF  REGENT  PARK   The  theoretical  exploration  of  the  concept  of  justice  as  well  as  what  a  just  planning   process  would  look  like  is  important  insofar  as  it  adds  to  the  theoretical  discussion  of   planning.    However,  adding  to  the  theoretical  discussion  is  not  enough;  applying  these   concepts  to  planning  practice  will  not  only  inform  practice  based  on  theory,  but  it  will  also   highlight  the  incompatibility  that  often  occurs  between  planning  theory  and  practice.    For   theory  to  be  relevant  to  planning  practice  it  must  be  applicable;  however,  this  means   theory  must  be  adaptable  if  is  to  be  applicable.    The  practice  of  planning  occurs  in  a   context-dependent  situation  in  which  theory  will  be  shaped  by  various  factors  including   the  values,  ideologies,  and  power  structures  in  which  it  is  functioning.    The  slum  clearance,   development  and  subsequent  revitalization  of  Regent  Park  will  be  used  as  a  case  study  in   which  to  apply  the  theoretical  concepts  of  a  just  planning  process  to  planning  practice.     This  will  allow  for  an  understanding  of  how  these  concepts  interact  with  each  other  given   the  complexity  of  the  situation  in  which  they  are  applied.                                 

     

32  

REGENT  PARK  AS  SLUM  CLEARANCE   Regent  Park,  located  in  Toronto,  Ontario,  is  widely  considered  to  be  the  oldest  social   housing  development  in  Canada  (CBC,  2010).    This  area  has  undergone  two   redevelopments,  one  in  the  late  1940s  and  early  1950s  and  the  second  in  the  early  2000s,   which  is  ongoing.    The  first  redevelopment  of  Regent  Park  occurred  between  1948  and   1959  in  what  was  formerly  known  as  Cabbagetown  South  and  is  widely  considered  to  be   slum  clearance  (James,  2010).    The  slum  clearance  of  Cabbagetown  South  was  undertaken   after  Herbert  A.  Bruce  put  forth  a  report  highlighting  the  "slum  districts"  in  Toronto  (Sahak,   2008,  p.  17).    This  report  was  the  foundation  on  which  a  committee  was  created  and  tasked   with  identifying  slum  areas  to  be  redeveloped  in  Toronto,  the  first  of  which  was  Regent   Park  (Sahak,  2008).    The  site  consisted  of  69  acres  in  the  heart  of  Toronto,  which  upon   completion,  would  house  approximately  10,000  residents  (James,  2010).    The  slum   clearance  was  approved  by  a  referendum  that  was  put  to  the  public  in  1946  (James,  2010).     The  referendum  was  one  way  in  which  the  architects  of  the  redevelopment  justified  the   slum  clearance.    A  referendum  allowed  for  the  action  of  slum  clearance  to  be  legally   acceptable.    Furthermore,  by  using  the  method  of  a  referendum,  it  evoked  the  notion  that  it   was  in  the  greater  public  interest  as  the  public  had  vocalized  their  desire  through  a   referendum.   While  the  slum  clearance  of  Cabbagetown  South  was  justified  as  a  legal  action,  much   of  the  language  surrounding  its  justification  had  a  moralistic  tone.    As  far  back  as  Jacob  Riis'   (2008)  How  The  Other  Half  Lives,  the  slums  were  seen  as  places  of,  "deadly  moral   contagion"  and  for  Riis,  "This  is  their  worst  crime,  inseparable  from  the  system"  (p,  3).     More  recently,  slums  have  been  described  as  having,  "human  and  moral  costs"  as  well  as  

     

33  

threatening  the,  "health,  safety,  and  morals"  of  the  city  (Vale,  2013,  p.  7,  40,).    Therefore,  in   many  ways,  slum  clearance  was  seen  as  an  act  to  bring  morality  back  into  the  areas,  in  this   case  the  slums,  where  morality  had  previously  been  perceived  to  be  absent.  James  (2010)   echoes  this  by  noting  that  the  slum  clearance  of  Cabbagetown  South  was  aimed  at,  "the   moral  regulation  of  the  poor  and  working  class"  (p.70).    Slum  clearance  then  becomes  an   activity  that  is  concerned  with  the  moral  and  as  a  result,  is  an  ethical  action  to  undertake.     Therefore,  slum  clearance  is  not  only  justified  through  legal  means,  it  is  also  in  the  public   interest,  and  is  a  moral  and  ethical  action  to  bring  morality  back  into  those  parts  of  the  city   in  which  it  is  absent.    However,  a  closer  look  into  the  process  of  the  slum  clearance  of   Cabbagetown  reveals  inconsistencies  in  using  the  law,  morality,  and  the  public  good  as   justifications.     The  process  of  the  first  redevelopment  of  Regent  Park  has  been  highly  criticized   today  for  its  lack  of  public  consultation  and  is  often  referred  to  as  an  example  of  planning  in   which  the  planner  and  other  professionals  adopted  the  role  of  experts.    The  process  of  slum   clearance  of  Cabbagetown  South  was  widely  recognized  by  the  dwellers  and  architects,   such  as  Albert  Rose,  as  paternalistic;  however,  the  architects  felt  as  though  this  role  was   necessary  and  desirable  (James,  2010).    Given  their  legal  rights  to  impose  a  redevelopment,   their  solid  grounding  in  the  public  interest,  and  their  ability  to  evoke  morality  as  their   purpose,  this  type  of  process  was  seen  in  the  least  necessary,  if  not  desirable.    However,   was  the  process  itself  moral,  ethical,  and  just?    The  process  was  legal,  and  given  the  concern   with  reinstating  morality  into  the  area,  it  could  be  argued  that  it  was  moral  and  therefore,   ethical.    Using  Campbell  and  Marshall's  (2006)  definition,  a  choice  was  made;  in  this  case   slum  clearance  was  seen  as  good  and  right.    In  addition,  using  Stein  and  Harper's  (2005)  

     

34  

idea  of  a  planner's  professional  responsibility  as  a  planner,  given  the  situation,  the  experts   implementing  slum  clearance  were  reflecting  a  consensus  of  liberal  democratic  society.     Thus,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  process  was  legal,  moral,  and  ethical  as  they  were   envisioned  by  those  making  the  decisions.    Acknowledging  the  presence  of  these  three   concepts,  the  three  characteristics  of  a  just  planning  process  as  identified  by  Fainstein   (2010):  democracy,  diversity,  and  equity  will  be  applied  to  see  how  the  process   incorporated,  if  at  all,  these  concepts  and  how  they  interact  with  the  law,  morality,  and   ethics.       The  first  of  the  three  of  Fainstein's  (2010)  criteria  that  will  be  assessed  is   democracy.    Veronis  (1999)  touches  on  the  role  of  the  residents  and  their  participation  in   the  process.    The  process  by  which  the  decision  to  undertake  slum  clearance  was  reached   could  be  argued  to  be  democratic  because  it  was  put  to  the  public  in  the  form  of  a   referendum.    This  echoes  Fainstein's  (2010)  statement  that  given  a  society  characterized   by  inequality,  democracy  and  justice  are  often  at  odds.    While  an  action  may  be  democratic,   it  may  not  be  just,  especially  if  the  population  which  it  is  affecting  is  already  disadvantaged.     Upon  further  examination,  the  planning  process  that  occurred  in  direct  relation  to   implementing  the  slum  clearance  could  be  characterized  as  undemocratic.    As  Veronis   (1999)  highlights,  "the  construction  of  Regent  Park  itself  was  imposed  in  such  a  way  that   the  local  population  had  no  say  in  a  project  that  affected  them  directly.    The  experts  worked   without  consulting  the  residents  and  without  their  participation."  (p.  58).    Excluding  people   from  the  process,  especially  those  who  were  directly  affected,  meant  that  nobody  affected   was  consulted  and  that  residents  were  not  included  in  the  decision  making  process.    The   lack  of  inclusion,  and  therefore,  participation  among  those  affected  by  slum  clearance,  

     

35  

resulted  in  a  process  that  was  undemocratic.    Given  that  the  area  was  perceived  to  lack   morality,  and  the  architects  of  the  slum  clearance,  the  experts,  "knew  best",  it  is   unsurprising  that  the  process  was  undemocratic.    Rather  than  acting  in  the  capacity  of  a   facilitator  of  democracy,  experts  acted  in  a  paternalistic  fashion  that  suppressed   democracy;  however,  this  was  justified  given  the  perceived  lack  of  morality  existent  among   the  residents  of  Cabbagetown  South.    Just  because  a  democratic  process  takes  place,  such   as  a  referendum,  it  does  not  ensure  it  is  just  or  moral.    Furthermore,  the  planning  process   might  be  implemented  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  undemocratic,  which  may  undermine  how   just  the  process  is,  despite  how  democratic  the  process  to  initiate  the  action  was  presented.       The  second  characteristic,  diversity,  was  considered  in  the  process;  however,  not  in   such  a  way  as  to  create  a  just  process.    In  the  case  of  the  referendum,  just  because  a   referendum  was  democratic  did  not  mean  it  incorporated  diversity;  a  referendum  does  not   automatically  equate  to  inclusion  of  a  spectrum  of  respondents  that  can  reflect  diversity.     Rather,  diversity  is  dependent  on  the  way  in  which  the  referendum  was  carried  out  and  the   process  by  which  people  were  included.    A  poster  for  the  public  encouraging  the  people  to   vote  shows  that  not  everyone  was  eligible  to  vote,  for  instance,  a  tenant  would  have  to  have   a  lease  that  extended  for  a  period  over  21  years  and  has  covenanted  to  pay  municipal  taxes   to  be  eligible.    Purdy  (2005)  echoes  this  by  noting  that  only  property  owners  and  those   with  long-term  leases  had  the  option  to  vote.    This  meant  that  besides  the  poster  being   confusing  and  hard  to  understand,  not  everyone,  even  if  they  understood  the  poster,  was   eligible  to  vote  on  the  matter.    The  voters  would  include  only  a  homogenous  group  of   people  with  a  certain  level  of  income  and  stability.  Thus,  the  referendum  process  did  not   account  for  diversity.      

     

36  

   Figure  1.1  (Bradburn,  2013)        Figure  1.2  (Bradburn,  2013)  

The  process  to  implement  slum  clearance  acknowledged  the  diversity  of  the  area   which  was  to  be  cleared.    As  Rose  (1958),  referring  to  Cabbagetown  South,  pointed  out,   "The  residents  of  a  slum  area  are  by  no  means  as  homogenous  as  a  specific  racial  or  ethnic   group  or  the  residents  of  a  middle-class  or  upper-middle-class  neighbourhood.    They  are  by   no  means  adept  at  settling  their  problems"  (as  cited  in  Sahak,  2008,  p.  19).    In  this  case,   Rose  perceived  diversity  as  a  justification  for  acting  in  a  paternalistic  fashion.    Rather  than   diversity  being  seen  as  a  prerequisite  for  a  just  planning  process,  it  was  seen  as  the  reason   to  stifle  participation  in  the  planning  process.    Had  the  process  valued  diversity,  it  would   have  included  not  only  those  being  displaced  by  the  clearance,  but  also  those  who  would  be   affected  in  the  adjacent  neighbourhoods.    Furthermore,  the  ways  in  which  knowledge  was   shared  and  the  methods  used  to  come  to  a  decision  should  have  been  diverse  and  reflect  

     

37  

those  participating.      This  did  not  happen  as  the  only  participation,  and  therefore   knowledge,  that  was  taken  into  account  was  that  from  the  experts.    Neither  the  referendum   process  nor  the  process  of  slum  clearance  embraced  diversity,  resulting  in  an  unjust   process.         

Finally,  the  last  characteristic  of  the  three,  equity,  was  not  evident  in  the  process.     The  process  of  the  referendum  was  not  equitable  as  it  favoured  those  who  could  vote.    In   addition,  it  did  not  assist  the  disadvantaged  in  any  way  to  allow  them  to  be  a  part  of  the   process.    The  referendum  was  characterized  as  a  formal  election  as  a  part  of  democracy,   which  does  not  necessarily  result  in  people  being  treated  equitably.    The  question  on  the   referendum  reflects  the  influence  of  power.    The  undertone  of  rationality  and  the  way  in   which  the  question  was  worded  was  influenced  by  a  rhetoric  of  power.    The  question  put   forth  was  spun  in  a  positive  manner,  giving  no  hint  of  the  disruption  or  impact  on  the   people  living  in  the  community.    It  was  framed  as  being  a  rational,  positive,  and  desirable   project.    Furthermore,  in  the  way  the  referendum  was  set  up,  only  those  who  held  the   proper  credentials  could  vote.  Thus,  power  also  defined  who  could  vote  and  how.    The   process  made  no  attempt  to  include  those  who  were  disadvantaged,  rather  it  perpetuated   the  existing  power  imbalances.       The  process  of  conducting  the  actual  slum  clearance  was  not  equitable  and  was   highly  influenced  by  power  as  well.    The  process  did  not  consult  with  residents  or  the   public  as  a  whole.    Rather,  only  the  people  with  power,  who  were  deemed  to  be  experts   were  allowed  to  participate  in  the  decision  about  slum  clearance.    Through  this,  those  with   power  were  able  to  define  the  process  and,  in  turn,  the  outcomes  that  would  occur.    An   equitable  process  would  have  advantaged  those  who  were  disadvantaged  and  worked  to  

     

38  

make  their  voices  heard.    Instead,  the  opposite  happened,  residents  were  deemed  not  to  be   worthy  of  consultation.    Setting  up  a  process  to  favour  themselves,  the  experts  showed  the   implicit  and  explicit  influence  of  power.    Not  only  was  power  implicit  in  defining  the   process,  it  was  explicit  in  justifying  why  experts  should  be  the  ones  to  plan  the  new  Regent   Park.    Because  of  their  access  to  power,  the  planners  assumed  they  knew  what  was  best,   and  therefore,  were  able  to  carry  out  their  vision  disregarding  any  concern  for  equity.       Following  Fainstein's  (2010)  criteria,  it  becomes  clear  the  process  for  the   referendum  and  of  the  actual  slum  clearance  was  not  just.    While  it  could  be  argued  to  be   legal,  moral,  and  ethical,  this  did  not  mean  it  was  just.    Rather,  it  was  the  opposite  of  just,  it   further  disadvantaged  a  group  of  people,  excluded  people  from  participating,  and  took  on   undemocratic  characteristics.    This  shows  that  while  something  may  be  upheld  as  moral,   the  morality  in  which  it  is  grounded  might  be  a  source  of  why  it  is  unjust.    The  lack  of   diversity  and  democracy  were  both  acknowledged  and  justified  because  of  the  moral  right   that  experts  felt.    Thus,  morality  does  not  necessarily  result  in  a  just  process  and  can  be   used  to  justify  unethical  actions,  such  as  implementing  an  unjust  process.    The  end  result  of   this  slum  clearance  brings  into  question  the  use  of  morality  as  a  justification.    Of  the  people   who  were  displaced  due  to  slum  clearance,  only  23%  returned  to  the  new  Regent  Park  due   to  a  variety  of  reasons,  such  as  refusal  to  apply,  did  not  qualify,  or  were  deemed  to  be   morally  unfit  (Purdy,  2003).    Thus,  the  slum  clearance  brought  morality  back  to  the  area   but  not  by  assisting  those  who  had  lived  there.    Instead,  new  people,  who  were  deemed  to   be  morally  fit  were  allowed  to  move  in.    Thus,  this  slum  clearance,  it  could  be  argued,  was   not  in  the  public  interest  as  people  were  moved  from  one  site  to  another.    Moving  a   community  of  people  causes  upheaval  and  shifts  the  problem  to  other  areas  of  the  city.    In  

     

39  

addition,  while  it  can  be  claimed  to  be  moral  to  bring  better  housing  and  services  into  an   area,  the  morality  is  lost  if  the  people  for  which  it  was  supposedly  intended  are  not  allowed   to  return,  and  thus,  are  not  beneficiaries  of  the  redevelopment.                                                                  

     

40  

REGENT  PARK  AS  REVITALIZATION   Not  long  after  Regent  Park  was  built,  rather  than  be  described  as  a  success,  it  would   be  described  as  a  failure  (James  2010).    In  1968,  Rose,  who  was  an  advocate  and  had   praised  the  expert-led  planning  for  the  slum  clearance  of  Regent  Park,  described  the   failures  of  this  approach;  Regent  Park  was  a  planning  failure  (James,  2010).    Regent  Park   was  not  only  a  space  of  marginalization  and  community  fragmentation  but  it  was  once   again  thought  of  as  a  slum  (James,  2010).    In  2002,  new  plans  to  revitalize  the  area  were   put  forth  because  once  again  Regent  Park  was  described  as,  "a  neighbourhood  that   hopelessly  leads  to  violence,  substance  abuse  and  community  fragmentation  due  to  its  built   environment"  (James,  2010,  p.  76).    The  landowner,  Toronto  Community  Housing   Corporation  (TCHC),  initiated  this  revitalization.    In  July  2003,  City  Council  approved  plans   to  revitalize  all  69  acres  of  Regent  Park  over  the  next  12  to  15  years  (City  of  Toronto,   2014).   While  the  second  revitalization  has  been  described  by  some  as  the  answer  to  Regent   Park's  problems,  others,  such  as  James  (2010)  have  called  into  question  the  revitalization   by  stating  that,  "Once  again,  the  drastic  modification  of  this  environment  is  being  posited  as   a  monolithic  solution  to  these  problems"  (p.76).    Modifying  the  built  environment  in  the   hopes  to  "improve"  an  area  is  comparable  to  the  first  slum  clearance  of  Regent  Park.     However,  this  new  revitalization  attempted  to  learn  from  its  past,  correcting  the  expert   driven  planning  approach,  acknowledging  the  value  of  community  input  and  the   importance  of  considering  the  social  aspects  beyond  just  the  "bricks  and  mortar"  of  Regent   Park  (Toronto  Community  Housing,  2007).    The  revitalization  is  once  again  based  on   popular  planning  thought;  the  new  Regent  Park  will  be  a,  "mixed  income,  mixed-use  

     

41  

community,  integrated  into  the  mainstream  of  city  life"  (City  of  Toronto,  2014).    However,   it  has  also  been  described  in  contradictory  ways,  some  have  called  it  practical  and  being   characterized  as  just  while  others  have  described  it  as  another  moral  regulation  of  the  poor   and  working  class,  much  like  the  first  redevelopment  of  Regent  Park  (James,  2010).    By   assessing  the  revitalization's  planning  process,  it  will  not  only  allow  for  an  assessment  of   the  concepts  of  moral,  ethics,  and  justice  in  regards  to  the  revitalization,  it  will  also  offer   insight  into  how  far  the  planning  process  has  incorporated  these  concepts.       Much  like  the  first  redevelopment  of  Regent  Park,  two  main  processes  took  place:   the  first  was  the  process  that  allowed  the  revitalization  to  take  place  and  the  second  was   the  actual  process  of  undertaking  the  revitalization.    Since  TCHC  owns  the  land  on  which   Regent  Park  is  located,  their  action  to  revitalize  was  justified  through  its  legality.    As   recipients  of  subsidized  housing,  even  though  the  residents  of  Regent  Park  occupied  the   buildings,  they  had  no  legal  rights  to  the  land.    The  decision  to  initiate  the  revitalization   could  be  considered  moral  because  the  area  was  characterized  by  physical  and  social   problems.    The  design  of  the  neighbourhood  did  not  function  for  the  residents  and  the   buildings  were  in  a  state  of  disrepair  (Schippling,  2007).    Thus,  revitalizing  the  area,  it   could  be  argued,  was  the  right  thing  to  do  given  the  available  options  to  TCHC.    However,   this  morality  can  be  called  into  question  as  the  residents,  while  expressing  dissatisfaction   with  their  neighbourhood  and  allowed  to  give  input,  were  not  able  to  participate  in  the   decision  to  initiate  the  revitalization.     The  process  that  was  undertaken  by  TCHC  to  implement  the  revitalization  has  been   described  as  being  unique,  a  process  of  collaboration,  and  an  engagement  to  strengthen  the   community  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2003).    TCHC  partnered  with  two  consultants  to  undertake  

     

42  

the  consultation  aspect  of  the  process  because  they  wanted  more  than  a  community   consultation;  they  wanted  to  actively  engage  with  the  community  (Meagher  &  Boston,   2003).    TCHC  and  the  Community  Engagement  Team  identified  three  specific  goals  to  be   achieved  as  a  result  of  the  community  engagement,  "1)  Ensure  the  community  had  a   distinct  voice  in  the  planning  process.    2)  Strengthen  existing  and  emerging  community   infrastructure  through  the  consultation  process.    3)  Assist  TCHC  staff  in  building  new  and   effective  long-term  relationships  with  residents"  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2003,  p.9).    To   achieve  these  goals,  the  consultation  process  occurred  in  three  phases,  which  unfolded  in  a   linear  fashion  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2003).    The  first  phase  was  to  get  a  sense  of  what   residents  liked  and  disliked  about  Regent  Park,  and  what  they  hoped  and  feared  regarding   the  revitalization  whereas  phase  two  asked  more  specific  questions  about  the   neighbourhood,  such  as  questions  about  the  parks,  buildings,  streets,  and  commercial  areas   (Meagher  &  Boston,  2008).    Finally,  in  phase  three  there  was  a  presentation  of  the  draft   plan  from  the  other  two  phases  of  consultation  that  asked  what  the  participants  liked  and   disliked  about  the  plan  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2008).       Throughout  the  consultation,  people  from  the  community  were  employed  as   animators  and  engaged  with  the  community  throughout  the  process,  which  assisted  in  the   accommodation  for  language  and  cultural  differences  within  the  community  (Meagher  &   Boston,  2008).    This  reflects  the  understanding  that  community  members  held  important   knowledge  about  the  community  and  would  be  instrumental  in  making  the  revitalization   work.    The  result  of  the  community  consultation  was  the  creation  of  12  guiding  principles   that  became  part  of  the  community's  foundation  moving  forward  (Micallef,  2013).    In   addition,  these  guiding  principles  became  the  foundation  for  the  Social  Development  Plan,  

     

43  

which  put  forth  75  recommendations,  all  of  which  were  influenced  by  these  guiding   principles  (Micallef,  2013).    As  stated  in  the  plan  itself,  "the  goal  of  the  social  development   planning  process  is  to  put  in  place  the  mechanisms  that  will  focus  on  achieving  greater   levels  of  equity,  access,  participation,  social  cohesion  and  community  capacity"  (Toronto   Community  Housing,  2007,  p.  2).    While  many  documents  were  put  forth  at  the  start  of  the   revitalization,  such  as  the  social  development  plan,  the  master  plan,  community  services   and  facilities  plan,  and  housing  issues  report  (Gladki  Planning  Associates,  2013),  the   process  of  revitalization  is  long-term  and  puts  the  community  in  a  state  of  flux.    While  many   of  the  documents  were  created  at  the  beginning  of  the  revitalization,  they  have  been   referenced  throughout  the  revitalization,  including  in  the  Planning  Report  for  Phases  3,4,5   (Gladki  Planning  Associates,  2013).    As  the  revitalization  continues  to  move  forward,   Regent  Park  is  changing,  and  how  the  community  is  consulted  through  these  changes  must   also  be  assessed.    Thus,  it  is  not  enough  to  assess  the  planning  process  at  the  beginning  of   the  revitalization,  rather  the  continual  process  that  occurs  must  also  be  taken  into  account.       The  planning  process  throughout  the  revitalization  will  be  assessed  to  understand   how  it  interacted  with  the  concepts  of  morality,  ethics,  and  justice.    Fostering  inclusion,  and   facilitating  residents  to  define  the  process  for  themselves  would  be  considered  to  be  both   moral  and  ethical.    The  process  undertaken  is  often  referred  to  as  a,  "participatory  design"   which  means  the  process  was  a  collaboration  between  stakeholders  and  residents   (Greaves,  2011).    Part  of  this,  as  stated  by  the  community  engagement  document,  "was  to   ensure  that  as  many  residents  as  possible  were  a)  informed  about  the  redevelopment  plans   and  b)  offered  the  opportunity  to  have  input  and  participate  in  the  planning  process"   (Meager  &  Boston,  2008,  p.  33).    In  this  case  both  TCHC  and  City  staff  directed  these  

     

44  

consultations  (Greaves,  2011),  which  gives  rise  to  a  power  dynamic  which  not  only  affected   how  residents  were  informed  but  also  their  opportunities  to  contribute.    This  raises  the   question  of  morality  and  ethics;  more  precisely,  the  moral  and  ethical  nature  of  directly   influencing,  and  therefore,  controlling  the  consultation.    How  much  participation  and  input   should  residents  have  in  defining  both  the  process  and  the  subsequent  outcomes?    For   instance,  during  a  community  consultation  on  the  park  that  was  to  be  developed  in  Regent   Park,  the  community  was  given  different  options  put  forth  by  landscape  architects   (Greaves,  2011).    Community  members  were  not  only  confined  to  the  options  that  were   given  to  them  but  also  were  not  able  to  have  the  final  say  (Greaves,  2011).    Thus,  those   involved  in  the  planning  and  implementation  of  the  revitalization,  much  like  in  the  previous   slum  clearance,  were  seen  as  the  experts.       In  addition,  as  Greaves  (2011)  found,  the  revitalization  is  market  driven  which   means  that  even  the  provision  of  office  and  program  space  is  provided  based  on  the   market.    Thus,  the  space  for  community  programming  could  not  be  available  for  free,  rather   it  needed  to  be  rented  so  that  it  would  be  based  on,  "a  business  model  that  makes  sense"   (Greaves,  2011,  p.  99).    However,  given  that  Regent  Park  is  characterized  by  subsidized   housing,  the  morality  of  using  a  market  driven  business  model  for  the  revitalization  is   questionable  given  that  residents  may  not  be  able  to  compete  in  the  market  to  acquire   space  for  programming.    Thus,  because  of  the  revitalization,  not  all  residents  may  have   access  to  the  space  in  the  neighbourhood.    While  this  process  is  considerably  more  moral   and  ethical  than  the  first  slum  clearance,  certain  values  still  linger.    Experts  still  largely   drive  the  final  decisions  of  the  revitalization  and  have  the  power  to  do  so.    Furthermore,   there  is  a  power  dynamic  that  controls  the  degree  of  morality  that  is  involved  and  where  

     

45  

the  two  conflict,  the  decision  rests  with  those  who  possess  the  power.    In  the  case  of  the   revitalization,  there  is  inclusion  of  morality  to  the  extent  that  it  does  not  interfere  with  the   market-driven  basis  of  the  revitalization.     The  process  of  revitalization  also  needs  to  be  assessed  in  terms  of  Fainstein's  three   criteria  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  planning  process  and  revitalization  of  Regent  Park   is  just,  or  at  least,  more  concerned  with  justice  than  the  first  redevelopment.    Using  the  first   of  the  three  criteria,  democracy,  the  planning  process  of  the  revitalization  uncovers  the   complexity  of  grounding  these  concepts  in  practice.    The  community  engagement  process   could  be  considered  to  be  democratic  in  that  it  engaged  with  residents  and  facilitated  input   into  the  revitalization  plan.    In  addition,  stakeholders  and  community  members  from   neighbourhoods  that  were  in  close  proximity  were  also  consulted  and  their  input  taken   into  account  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2008).    However,  as  Fainstein  notes,  "genuine  democratic   deliberation  requires  background  conditions  of  equality"  (Fainstein,  2009,  p.  2).    The   Regent  Park  revitalization  planning  process  was  not  premised  on  equality;  participants   were  not  equal  with  each  other  or  in  comparison  to  TCHC  representatives  and   representatives  of  the  Daniels  Corporation.    For  instance,  the  rezoning  public  consultation   that  took  place  on  September  17,  2013  highlighted  the  City  of  Toronto  and  TCHC  taking   into  account  consultation  feedback  from  the  previous  meeting  of  June  10,  2013  (Toronto   Community  Housing,  2013).    The  heights  of  buildings  were  adjusted  and  the  density  would   be  re-distributed.    However,  there  were  non-negotiables,  such  as  the  increase  in  density,   and,  to  ensure  residents  understood,  they  were  told  the  density  would  occur,  "through   good  planning  and  urban  design  principles"  (Toronto  Community  Housing,  2013).    In  many   ways,  this  type  of  language  fails  Fainstein's  test  that  deliberative  democracy  should  occur  

     

46  

in  conditions  which  have  undistorted  speech  (Fainstein,  2009).    In  addition,  some  residents   felt  as  though  their  input  was  not  taken  into  account.    Schippling  (2007)  found  that  some   residents  felt  as  though  the  redevelopment  was  not  collaborative  and  that  some  of  the  "real   decision-making  was  made  without  them"  (p.  109).    Thus,  the  process  was  democratic  only   insofar  as  TCHC  allowed  for  democracy  to  occur  on  specific  decisions  regarding  the   revitalization.     Incorporating  democracy  within  the  planning  process  is  further  complicated  when   land  ownership  comes  into  the  equation.    The  question  arises,  to  what  extent  should  a   landowner  take  into  account  the  broader  interests  of  the  residents  and  the  city?    Fainstein,   in  her  definition,  comments  on  this  by  saying  democracy  involves,  "consultation  about   urban  development;  it  takes  the  broader  interests  of  the  city  into  consideration"  (Fischer  as   quoted  in  Marcuse  et  al.,  p.  61).    This  becomes  complex  because  while  the  city  will  be   affected  and  therefore,  should  be  taken  into  account,  the  degree  to  which  this  may/  can   occur  is  unclear.    In  addition,  this  is  dependent  on  people  participating  and  the  broader   interests  being  known.    The  organization  Public  Interest,  which  was  involved  in  the   community  engagement,  states  that  consistently,  1,000  Regent  Park  residents  participated   (Public  Interest,  n.d.).    This  equates  to  about  10%  to  12%  of  Regent  Park  residents,  further,   one  assumption  is  that  this  group  was  diverse  enough  to  represent  the  larger  population.     At  the  same  time,  getting  a  clear  sense  of  the  interests  represented  by  a  group  of  1,000   would  be  difficult.    In  order  for  the  broader  interests  of  the  city  to  be  taken  into  account,   people  must  be  engaged.    While  the  process  was  more  democratic  than  the  previous   redevelopment  in  that  it  included  residents  and  community  members  and  stakeholders,  it   lacked  a  few  elements.    First,  participants  and  their  input  was  not  equal  to  that  of  other  

     

47  

"experts"  in  the  process  and  second,  the  degree  of  representation  of  the  interests  of  the   broader  city  is  unclear  because  the  elements  of  power  were  never  acknowledged.    In  this   case,  power  relations  defined  the  scope  of  input,  what  was  considered  to  be  "valued"  input,   and  in  turn,  the  boundaries  of  democracy,  which  limited  the  extent  to  which  democracy   could  function.       The  second  characteristic  of  diversity  will  be  used  to  assess  the  revitalization   process.    The  consultation  process,  according  to  Fainstein's  criteria,  could  be  considered  to   be  diverse.    An  effort  was  put  forth  to  accommodate  language  and  cultural  differences  in   the  process,  which  in  turn,  ensured  residents  and  their  diversity  was  represented  in  the   process  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2008).    Furthermore,  residents  in  neighbouring  communities,   such  as  Cabbagetown,  were  invited  to  participate.    The  community  engagement  process   accommodated  seven  main  languages  and  also  identified  opportunities  to  engage  those  not   represented  in  these  seven  groups  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2008).    However,  since  only  10%  to   12%  of  Regent  Park  residents  were  consistently  engaged,  it  raises  the  question  of  how   much  diversity  was  accommodated  and  if  there  were  barriers  to  achieve  higher   engagement.    In  addition,  how  residents'  participation  was  incorporated  dictates  how   diverse  the  process  was.    As  Greaves  (2011)  in  his  thesis  quotes  the  developer  saying,  "the   planning  is  very  challenging  because  there  are  so  many  people.    So  we  listen  we  try  to,  you   know,  incorporate  people's  different  ideas.    But  ultimately  we  have  a  pretty  good  sense  of,   number  one  from  a  condo-marketing  perspective,  what's  going  to  sell"  (p.  99).    Thus,   diversity  is  not  only  including  participants  in  the  process,  it  is  dependent  on  the  degree  to   which  their  input  is  taken  into  account.    In  addition,  when  faced  with  specific  requests,  such   as  for  a  mosque,  the  developer  shied  away  from  incorporating  due  to  the  diversity  of  the  

     

48  

area  and  the  potential  for  other  faiths  to  ask  for  space  (Greaves,  2011).    Diversity,  in  this   context  was  seen  as  a  potential  complication  that  needed  to  be  avoided  because  of  the   feared  inability  to  accommodate  all  groups.           The  outcome  of  the  revitalization  ensures,  at  least  in  the  short  term,  that  the  area  is   more  diverse.    The  creation  of  a  mixed-use  and  mixed-income  community  embraces  the   diversity  of  which  Fainstein  speaks.  In  addition,  the  right  to  return  for  existing  residents   ensures  the  diversity  that  existed  in  Regent  Park  would  be  protected  (City  of  Toronto,   2007).    However,  the  ratio  between  social  and  market  housing  is  in  a  state  of  flux.    In  phase   1  of  the  revitalization,  the  desired  social  mix  was  40%  social  housing  and  60%  market   housing  (Toronto  Community  Housing,  2012).    By  phase  3,  a  rezoning  application  for  more   density  is  looking  to  implement  30%  social  housing  and  70%  market  housing  (Toronto   Community  Housing,  2013).    This  is  compounded  by  the  Regent  Park  Secondary  Plan  policy   3.1.2  which  states,  "Each  replacement  social  housing  unit  will  be  maintained  as  a  social   housing  unit  for  not  less  than  25  years  from  the  date  on  which  it  was  first  occupied"  (City  of   Toronto,  2007,  p.8).    Therefore,  while  diversity  is  present  now,  there  are  no  measures  to   protect  and  ensure  the  types  of  diversity  that  includes  affordable  housing  as  a  significant   element  will  be  a  feature  of  the  Regent  Park  neighbourhood  in  the  future.     The  last  of  the  three  criteria,  equity,  is  critical  to  look  at  given  the  context  of  Regent   Park.  As  Fainstein  defines  equity,  those  who  are  the  worst  off  should  benefit  the  most.     Since  Regent  Park  prior  to  the  revitalization  was  100%  public  housing,  if  the  process  were   to  be  equitable,  then  it  would  favour  those  who  are  disadvantaged,  in  this  case,  the   residents  who  live  there  but  have  no  legal  right  to  the  land.    Meagher  &  Boston  (2003),  in   their  community  engagement  document,  characterize  the  neighbourhood  as  being  

     

49  

impoverished  and  state  that  residents  have  experienced  a  history  of  disappointments.     Thus,  through  the  extensive  community  engagement,  there  was  a  recognition  that  the   community  needed  to  benefit  (Meagher  &  Boston,  2003).    Residents  who  participated  did   benefit,  it  can  be  argued,  because  they  influenced  the  plan.    The  Community  Engagement   Team  claims  that,  "Virtually  every  aspect  of  the  plan  bore  the  mark  of  the  community  and   the  presentation  of  the  plan  articulated,  clearly,  the  impact  community  input  had"   (Meagher  &  Boston,  2003,  p.  51).    This  impact  can  be  seen  in  some  of  the  elements  of  the   revitalization,  such  as  ensuring  all  social  housing  units  are  replaced  (City  of  Toronto,  2007).     However,  the  relocation  of  residents  outside  of  Regent  Park  during  the  revitalization  was   not  to  their  benefit.    This  undermines  equity,  because  as  Fainstein  notes,  "If  people  are   moved  against  their  will,  then  democracy  and  equity  are  not  served."  (Fainstein,  2010).     This  forced  relocation  undermines  the  equity  of  the  process  since  residents  who  were   already  disadvantaged  were  further  disadvantaged  short-term  through  relocation  and  may   be  even  longer  if  they  lost  the  accumulated  social  capital  developed  during  their  tenure  in   the  older  community.   Many  of  the  outcomes  of  the  revitalization  benefit  the  residents.    The  deteriorated   buildings  are  being  replaced  and  the  dysfunctional  design  of  the  neighbourhood  is  being   corrected,  reintegrating  the  community  with  the  rest  of  Toronto.    In  addition,  new   community  space,  such  as  the  Aquatic  Centre,  the  Daniels  Spectrum,  and  the  Daniels  Centre   of  Learning  are  incorporated.    Thus,  the  residents  did  benefit  from  the  outcomes  of  the   revitalization.    However,  as  (Schippling,  2007)  found,  "Some  residents  believed  that  the   interests  in  gentrifying  the  Regent  Park  neighbourhood  superseded  the  best  interests  of   residents"  (p.110).    This  would  result  in  the  process  being  inequitable  because  residents,  

     

50  

who  are  already  disadvantaged,  perceived  their  interests  as  coming  second  to  the  interests   of  the  revitalization.    However,  to  assess  if  residents  benefited  more  from  the  process  in   comparison  to  other  actors,  such  as  TCHC  and  the  Daniels  Corporation  is  difficult  to  assess   since  this  is  a  relative  measure.    What  is  considered  to  be  a  benefit  is  a  value  judgment  that   can  be  difficult  to  compare.    For  instance,  Daniels  may  value  making  a  profit  whereas  the   residents  may  value  community  amenities.    Also,  given  that  phase  one  of  the  revitalization   lost  a  significant  amount  of  money,  phase  two  also  lost  money,  and  phase  three  will  almost   break  even  (Skinner,  2013),  TCHC  may  not  perceive  itself  to  have  benefited  significantly  in   comparison  to  the  residents  who  gained  amenity  space  and  new  units.     The  two  redevelopments  of  Regent  Park  offer  a  unique  perspective  into  how   planning  processes  have  shifted  throughout  the  last  70  years.    The  first  redevelopment  of   Regent  Park  was  expert-driven  and  lacked  many  of  the  criteria  that  make  it  just.    The   process  of  redevelopment  was  undemocratic  towards  the  residents,  lacked  inclusion  of   diversity,  and  did  not  benefit  the  residents  relative  to  other  stakeholders.    In  addition,  the   people  who  lived  there  were  further  disadvantaged  as  some  did  not  meet  the  requirement   to  move  back  into  the  area.    The  second  redevelopment  of  Regent  Park  known  as  the   revitalization  was  more  concerned  with  being  just.    The  process  was  more  democratic  in   that  its  residents  and  community  stakeholders  were  allowed  to  participate.    However,  the   limiting  of  participation  to  certain  aspects  of  the  plan  and  privileging  the  experts  with  the   final  say  undermined  the  degree  to  which  the  process  was  democratic.    The  revitalization   process  also  made  an  effort  to  incorporate  the  diversity  that  existed  in  Regent  Park.    This  is   in  contrast  to  the  first  redevelopment  where  diversity  was  seen  as  hindering  the  process   and  therefore,  was  avoided.    However,  the  low  rates  of  consistent  participation  from  

     

51  

residents  raises  the  concern  that  there  were  barriers  to  accommodating  resident  diversity.     In  regard  to  equity,  the  first  redevelopment  lacked  equity  as  residents  did  not  benefit  from   the  redevelopment,  rather,  they  were  further  disadvantaged.  The  revitalization  of  Regent   Park  may  be  more  equitable  in  comparison;  however,  the  degree  to  which  it  is  equitable  is   difficult  to  determine,  given  that  the  concept  is  subjective  and  the  complexity  of  the   stakeholders  involved.    Despite  the  revitalization  falling  short  of  fully  meeting  the  criteria   of  justice,  its  incorporation  of  these  criteria  to  a  degree  means  it  is  more  just  than  the  first   redevelopment  of  Regent  Park.                                                   

     

52  

CONCLUSION   The  case  study  of  the  Regent  Park  redevelopments  highlights  how  planning  has   evolved.    As  is  seen  in  the  case  of  Regent  Park,  planning  has  had  an  increasing  concern  with   justice  as  it  recognizes  how  planning  decisions  significantly  affect  residents  of  a  city  and   how  the  city  functions.    However,  the  way  in  which  planning  approaches  justice  has  been   bounded  by  its  institutional  context  and  influenced  by  its  historical  roots.    The  legal  nature   of  the  public  interest  and  role  of  the  planner  as  an  expert  are  areas  in  which  the  profession   has  struggled  to  incorporate  justice  in  a  meaningful  way.    Furthermore,  the  profession's   concern  with  being  moral  and  ethical  ensure  that  any  concern  with  justice  will  cause   conflict  when  applied  in  practice.    Despite  these  difficulties,  planning  is  a  unique  profession   that  acknowledges  and  learns  from  its  past  mistakes.    As  can  be  seen  through  the   redevelopments  of  Regent  Park,  what  was  thought  to  be  moral  and  ethical  planning   processes  at  the  time  have  now  changed;  planning  is  once  again  renewing  its  vision  of  a   moral,  ethical,  and  just  planning  process  while  functioning  within  legal  and  financial   constraints.    While  planning  theory  has  historically  been  disassociated  from  planning   practice,  it  is  becoming  more  influential  as  planning  problems  are  increasingly  complex  and   multi-faceted.    While  planning  theory  does  not  neatly  transfer  to  practice,  it  has  the  ability   to  guide  the  profession  to  ensure  the  concepts  of  justice,  morality,  and  ethics  are   incorporated  into  practice  as  planning  seeks  to  serve  the  public  interest.       As  we  move  forward  as  planners,  we  need  to  progress  with  our  concern  of  justice,   both  in  the  planning  process  and  the  outcomes  of  these  processes.    In  order  to  achieve  this,   making  justice  as  prominent  as  the  concept  of  the  public  interest  and  the  legal  framework   that  planning  has  embedded  itself  in  is  critical.    While  we  can  theorize  about  the  concept  of  

     

53  

justice  as  being  universal  and  normative,  this  is  not  sufficient  for  planning  practice.    In   practice,  planners  need  to  apply  justice  in  response  to  the  context  in  which  it  is  being  used,   which  means  applying  justice  in  a  way  that  allows  participants  to  assist  in  its  definition  as   they  hold  unique  insights  and  knowledge.    While  justice  must  function  in  the  moral,  ethical,   and  legal  framework  of  planning,  as  cities  continually  become  the  sites  of  disparities,  our   role  as  planners  is  to  favour  the  concept  of  justice  where  possible  to  ensure  those  who  are   disadvantaged  become  advantaged  through  their  interactions  with  us.    We  will  never   achieve  a  universal  just  planning  process  because  much  like  people,  cities  are  constantly   changing,  but  concerning  ourselves  with  the  concept  of  justice  along  with  the  public   interest  allows  planners  to  embrace  this  change  as  it  manifests  itself  in  the  diversity,   equity,  and  democracy.                                      

     

54  

BIBLIOGRAPHY   Arnsetin,  S.  R.  (1969).  A  Ladder  Of  Citizen  Participation.  Journal  of  American  Institute  of   Planners,  35  (4),  pp.  216-224.  Retrieved  from   http://www.tandfonline.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/doi/abs/10.1080/01944366908 977225#.UzYUdNw6ZMJ      Beauregard,  R.  A.  (1987).  The  Object  of  Planning.  Urban  Geography,  8  (4),  pp.  367-373.      Beauregard,  R.  A.  (2005).  Introduction:  Institutional  Transformations.  Planning  Theory,  4   (3),  pp.  203-207.  doi:10.1177/1473095205058493      Blau,  J.  R.  (1983).  Professional  and  Urban  Form.  Albany,  New  York:  State  University  of  New   York  Press.      Bradburn,  J.  (2013,  September  28).  Historicist:  Moving  Into  Regent  Park.  Retrieved  from   http://torontoist.com/2013/09/historicist-moving-into-regent-park/      Campbell,  H.  (2006).  Just  Planning:  The  Art  of  Situated  Ethical  Judgment.  Journal  of   Planning  Education  and  Research,  26(1),  pp.  92-106.   doi:10.1177/0739456X06288090      Campbell,  S.,  Fainstein,  S.  (2003).  Readings  in  Planning  Theory.  Second  Edition.  Oxford,   United  Kingdom:  Blackwell  Publishing  Ltd.     

     

55  

Campbell,  H.,  Marshall,  R.  (1999).  Ethical  Frameworks  and  Planning  Theory.  International   Journal  of  Urban  and  Regional  Research,  23  (3),  pp.  464-478.  doi:  10.1111/1468- 2427.00208      Campbell,  H.,  Marshall,  R.  (2002).  Utilitarianism's  Bad  Breath?  A  Re-Evaluation  of  the  Public   Interest  Justification  for  Planning.  Planning  Theory,  1(2),  pp.  163-187.   doi:10.1177/147309520200100205        Campbell,  H.,  Marshall,  R.  (2006).  Towards  Justice  in  Planning:  A  Reappraisal  .  European   Planning  Studies,  14  (2),  pp.  239-252.  doi:  10.1080/09654310500418192      CBC.  (2010).  Toronto's  Mosiac:  Regent  Park.  Retrieved  01  19,  2014,  from  CBC:   http://www.cbc.ca/mosaic/      Crisp,  R.  (2000).  Aristotle  Nicomachean  Ethics.  Cambridge,  New  York:  Cambridge  University   Press      Davidoff,  P.  (2007).  Advocacy  and  Pluralism  in  Planning.  Journal  of  the  American  Institute  of   Planners,  31  (4),  pp.  331-338.  doi:10.1080/01944366508978187      Dobbs,  D.  (1994).  Choosing  Justice:  Socrates'  Model  City  and  the  Practice  of  Dialectic.  The   American  Political  Science  Review,  88  (2),  pp.  263-277.  Retrieved  from   http://www.jstor.org/stable/2944702  

     

56  

Fainstein,  S.  (2000).  New  Direction  in  Planning  Theory.  Urban  Affairs  Review,  35  (4),  pp.   451-478.  doi:  10.1177/107808740003500401      Fainstein,  S.  (2005).  Planning  Theory  and  the  City.  Journal  of  Planning  Education  and   Research,  25,  pp.  121-130.  doi:  10.1177/0739456X05279275      Fainstein.  S.  (2009).  Spatial  Justice  and  Planning.  Retrieved  from  http://www.jssj.org/wp- content/uploads/2012/12/JSSJ1-5en1.pdf      Fainstein,  S.  (2010).  The  Just  City.  Ithaca,  New  York:  Cornell  University  Press.      Flyvbjerg,  B.  (1998).  Rationality  and  Power:  Democracy  in  Practice.  Chicago,   Illinois:University  of  Chicago  Press.      Forrester,  J.  (1989).  Planning  in  the  Face  of  Power.  Los  Angeles,  California:  University  of   California  Press.      Friedmann,  J.  (2000).  The  Good  City:  In  Defence  of  Utopian  Thinking.  International  Journal   of  Urban  and  Regional  Research,  24  (2),  pp.  460-472.  doi:  10.1111/1468-2427.00258      Friedmann,  J.  (2005).  Why  do  Planning  Theory?  Planning  Theory  ,  2  (1),  7-10.     doi:  10.1177/1473095203002001002     

     

57  

Gladki  Planning  Associates.  (2013,  October  3).  Regent  Park  Planning  Report  Phases  3,  4  and   5.  Retrieved  from   http://www1.toronto.ca/City%20Of%20Toronto/City%20Planning/Community%20 Planning/Files/pdf/R/Regent_planning_rationale.pdf      Greaves,  A.  (2011).  Urban  Regeneration  in  Toronto:  Rebuilding  the  Social  in  Regent  Park.   Retrieved  from  ProQuest  Dissertations  and  Theses.  (MR77018)      Harvey,  D.  (2009).  Social  Justice  and  the  City.  Athens,  Georgia:  University  of  Georgia  Press.      Heikoff,  J.  M.  (1967).  Justice,  Politics,  and  Urban  Planning.  Urban  Affairs  Review,  3  (1),     pp.  46-61.  doi:  10.1177/107808746700300104      Hoch,  C.  J.  (1992).  The  Paradox  of  Power  in  Planning  Practice.  Journal  of  Planning  Education   and  Research,  11  (3),  pp.  206-215.  doi:  10.1177/0739456X9201100305      Innes,  J.  (1995).  Planning  Theory's  Emerging  Paradigm:  Communicative  Action  and   Interactive  Practice.  Journal  of  Planning  Education  and  Research,  14  (3),  pp.  183-189.   doi:  10.1177/0739456X9501400307      James,  R.  K.  (2010).  From  `slum  clearance'  to  `revitalisation':  planning,  expertise  and  moral   regulation  in  Toronto's  Regent  Park.  Planning  Perspectives,  25  (1),  pp.  69-86.   doi:10.1080/02665430903421742  

     

58  

Johnston,  D.  (2011).  A  Brief  History  of  Justice.  Chichester,  West  Susex,  United  Kingdom:   Wiley-Blackwell.      Kutschera,  F.  (1977).  Subjective  Preferences,  Rationality,  and  Justice.  Erkenntnis  ,  11  (1),  pp.   97-111.  Retrieved  from  http://www.jstor.org/stable/20010535      Leung,  H.  (2003).  Land  Use  Planning  Made  Plain:  Second  Edition.  Toronto,  Canada:   University  of  Toronto  Press  Incorporated.      Mandelbaum,  S.  J.,  Mazza,  L.,  Burchell,  R.  W.  (Eds.).  (1996).  Explorations  in  planning  theory.   New  Brunswick,  New  Jersey:  Centre  of  Urban  Policy  Research.        Marcuse,  P.,  Connolly,  J.  Novy,  J.,  Olivo,  J.,  Potter,  C.,  Steil,  J.  (Eds.).  (2009).  Searching  for  the   Just  City:  Debates  in  Urban  Theory  and  Practice.  New  York,  New  York:  Routledge.      Meagher,  S.,  Boston,  T.  (2003).  Community  Engagement  and  the  Regent  Park  Revitalization.   Retrieved  from   http://www.publicinterest.ca/sites/default/files/T&R%20Regent%20Park%20Com munity%20Engagement.pdf      Micallef,  S.  (2013).  Regent  Park:  A  Story  of  Collective  Impact.  Metcalf  Foundation.  Retrieved   from  http://metcalffoundation.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/Regent-Park.pdf     

     

59  

O'Neill,  O.  (2004).  Bounds  of  Justice.  Cambridge,  New  York:  Cambridge  University  Press.      Public  Interest.  (n.d.).  Community  Engagement  ­  Regent  Park  Redevelopment.  Retrieved   from  http://www.publicinterest.ca/projects/community-engagement-­-regent-park- redevelopment      Purdy,  S.  (1975).  "Ripped  Off"  By  the  System:  Housing  Policy,  Poverty,  and  Territorial   Stigmatization  in  Regent  Park  Housing  Project,  1951-1991.  Labour  /  Le  Travail,  52,   45-108.  doi:  10.2307/25149384      Rawls,  J.  (1999).  A  Theory  of  Justice.  Cambridge,  Massachusetts  :  Belknap  Press  of  Harvard   University  Press.      Riis,  J.  (2002).  How  the  Other  Half  Lives.  Washington,  DC:  American  Psychological   Association.      Rittel,  H.  W.  J.,  Webber,  M.  M.  (1973).  Dilemmas  in  a  General  Theory  of  Planning.  Policy   Sciences,  4  (2),  155-169.  Retrieved  from  http://www.jstor.org/stable/4531523      Sager,  T.  (1999).  The  rationality  issue  in  land-use  planning.  Journal  of  Management  History,   5  (2),  87-107.  doi:  10.1108/13552529910249869     

     

60  

Sahak,  J.  (2008).  Race,  Space  and  Place;  Exploring  Toronto's  Regent  Park  from  a  Marxist   Perspective.  (Major  Research  Paper).  Ryerson  University,  Toronto      Schippling,  R.  M.  (2007).  Public  housing  Redevelopment:  Residents'  Experiences  with   Relocation  from  Phase  1  of  Toronto's  Regent  Park  Revitalization.  (MR34391).   Retrieved  from  ProQuest  Dissertations  and  Theses      Sen,  A.  (1972).  Utilitarianism  and  Inequality.  Economic  and  Political  Weekly,  7  (5),  pp.  343- 344.  Retrieved  from  http://www.jstor.org/stable/4361011      Skinner,  J.  (2013,  June  12).  Revamped  Revitalization  Plans  for  Regent  Park.  InsideToronto.   Retrieved  from  http://www.insidetoronto.com/news-story/3835650-revamped- revitalization-plans-unveiled-for-regent-park/      Stein,  S.  Harper,  L.  (2005).  Rawls's  Justice  As  Fairness':  A  Moral  Basis  for  Contemporary   Planning  Theory.  Planning  Theory,  4  (2),  147-172.  doi:  10.1177/1473095205054603      Toronto  Community  Housing  (2007).  Regent  Park  Revitalization:  Social  Development  Plan.     Retrieved  from  http://www.torontohousing.ca/webfm_send/4213/1      Toronto  Community  Housing.  (2012).  Regent  Park  Revitalization:  Building  a  Great   Neighbourhood.  Retrieved  from  

     

61  

http://www.ryerson.ca/content/dam/graduate/programs/ensciman/forms/RemoA gostino_RegentParkRevitalization_EnSciMan2013.pdf      Toronto  Community  Housing.  (2013).  Community  Consultation:  Regent  Park  Update.     Official  Plan  Amendment  and  Re-zoning  Application.  Retrieved  from   http://www1.toronto.ca/city_of_toronto/city_planning/community_planning/files/p df/regentpark_tchc_presentation_17sep13.pdf      Toronto  Community  Housing  (2014).  Regent  Park.  Retrieved  from   http://www1.toronto.ca/wps/portal/contentonly?vgnextoid=72c1dfbf1e5c0410Vgn VCM10000071d60f89RCRD&vgnextchannel=a283d08099380410VgnVCM10000071 d60f89RCRD      Vale,  L.  J.  (2013).  Purging  the  Poorest:  Public  Housing  and  the  Design  Politics  Twice-Cleared   Communities.  Chicago,  Illinois:University  of  Chicago  Press      Veronis,  L.  (1999).  Exploring  the  Margin:  The  Borders  Between  Regent  Park  and   Cabbagetown.  (MQ46011).  ProQuest  Dissertations  and  Theses      Young,  I.  M.  (1990).  Justice  and  the  Politics  of  Difference.  Princeton,  New  Jersey:  Princeton   University  Press.  

     

62  


