Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Economics Publications and Research Economics

10-1-2008

Trade, growth, and convergence in a dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin model
Claustre Bajona
Ryerson University

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/economics Part of the Economics Commons Recommended Citation
Bajona, Claustre and Kehoe, Timothy J., "Trade, growth, and convergence in a dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin model" (2008). Economics Publications and Research. Paper 30. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/economics/30

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Economics at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Economics Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report 378 Revised October 2008 (First version: September 2006)

Trade, Growth, and Convergence in a Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin Model*
Claustre Bajona
Ryerson University

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, and National Bureau of Economic Research

ABSTRACT____________________________________________________________________ In models in which convergence in income levels across closed countries is driven by faster accumulation of a productive factor in the poorer countries, opening these countries to trade can stop convergence and even cause divergence. We make this point using a dynamic HeckscherOhlin model -- a combination of a static two-good, two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin trade model and a two-sector growth model -- with infinitely lived consumers where international borrowing and lending are not permitted. We obtain two main results: First, countries that differ only in their initial endowments of capital per worker may converge or diverge in income levels over time, depending on the elasticity of substitution between traded goods. Divergence can occur for parameter values that would imply convergence in a world of closed economies and vice versa. Second, factor price equalization in a given period does not imply factor price equalization in future periods. ________________________________________________________________________________
*A preliminary version of this paper with the title "On Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin Models II: Infinitely-Lived Consumers" was circulated in January 2003. We are grateful for helpful comments from participants in conferences and seminars at the 2003 American Economic Association Meeting, the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, the University of Pennsylvania, the International Monetary Fund, the Centre de Recerca en Economia del Benestar, the Instituto Autónomo Tecnológico de México, the 2004 CNB/CERGE-EI Macro Workshop in Prague, the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Stanford University, the University of Texas at Austin, the Banco de Portugal, and the University of Michigan. We also thank Joann Bangs and Jaume Ventura for helpful discussions. Kehoe thanks the National Science Foundation for support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System.

1. Introduction In 2007, GDP per capita in the United States was roughly 46,000 U.S. dollars. Using exchange rates to convert pesos to dollars, we calculate GDP per capita in Mexico in 2007 to be roughly 9,600 U.S. dollars. In 1940, the United States had income per capita of about 9,400 2007 U.S. dollars. To predict what will happen in the Mexican economy over the next 70 years, should we study what happened to the U.S. economy since 1940? Or should we take into account that, in 1940, the United States was the country with the highest income per capita in the world, while, in 2007, Mexico had a very large trade relation with the United States -- a country with a level of income per capita approximately five times larger? In other words, does the ability to trade internationally radically change a country's growth path? In particular, does international trade accelerate growth in poor countries and, thus, lead to faster income convergence, or does it cause poor countries to grow at a slower rate than rich countries, leading to income divergence? Much of the discussion of convergence of income levels in traditional growth theory relies on models of closed economies. (See, for example, Barro and Sala-i-Martin 2003.) In this paper we ask: Do the convergence results obtained in closed economy growth models change when we introduce trade? We answer this question using a dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin model -- a combination of a static two-good, two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin trade model and a two-sector growth model -- with infinitely lived consumers where borrowing and lending are not permitted. We find that introducing trade into the growth model radically changes the convergence results: In many environments where income levels converge over time if the countries are closed, for example, they diverge if the countries are open. This is because favorable changes in the terms of trade for poor countries reduce their incentives to accumulate capital. In models like the neoclassical model in which convergence in income levels across closed countries is driven by faster accumulation of a productive factor in the poorer countries, opening these countries to trade can stop convergence and even cause divergence of income levels. The model that we use is a special case of the general dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin model studied by Bajona and Kehoe (2006). There are n countries that differ only in their population sizes and their initial endowments of capital. There are two traded goods that are produced using capital and labor; one of the goods is more capital intensive than the other. Time is discrete, and there is a nontraded investment good that is produced using the two traded goods. Consumers have utility

1

functions that are homothetic and identical across countries, and derive utility from the consumption of the two traded goods. The model that we study is both a classic Heckscher-Ohlin model and a classic growth model in the sense that the two factors of production are identified as labor and physical capital. A country that is capital abundant in the terminology of Heckscher-Ohlin theory is rich in the terminology of growth theory. It would be straightforward to redo the analysis for a model in which the two factors of production were labor and human capital. It would be more complicated to extend the analysis to a model with more than two factors of production. Nevertheless, even in models with more than two factors, we would expect the central message of this paper to carry over: Consider a model of closed economies in which countries become richer because they accumulate a factor, or factors, of production. Suppose that convergence in income levels is driven by returns to a factor being higher in countries that are poorer because they have less of the factor. Opening the economies in this model to international trade will reduce the returns to the factor, thereby reducing incentives to accumulate the factor and reducing the tendency towards convergence. There is a large literature that is at least partially related to the topic studied here. Bardhan (1965) and Oniki and Uzawa (1965) study the patterns of specialization and trade in a HeckscherOhlin model in which consumers have fixed savings rates. Deardorff and Hanson (1978) consider a model in which these fixed savings rates differ across countries and show that the country with the higher savings rate will export the capital intensive good in the steady state. Stiglitz (1970) also considers models with fixed savings behavior, in this case a Marxian specification where all labor income is consumed and all capital income is saved. In addition, he considers a model in which there are infinitely lived, utility-maximizing consumers with different discount rates in each country. Stiglitz studies the pattern of trade and specialization in the steady state of this model and studies dynamic equilibrium paths in a small open economy version of the model. Chen (1992) studies the long-run equilibria of two-country, dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin models with utility-maximizing agents and identical preferences in both countries under the assumption that both countries produce both goods. He finds that there is a continuum of steady states in such models and that, unless initial capital-labor ratios are equal, there is trade in the steady state. Chen also shows that cycles are possible in such models when one good is the consumption good and the other is the investment good if the consumption good is capital 2

intensive. Baxter (1992) considers a model similar to Chen's but in which tax rates differ across countries. She shows that the pattern of trade and specialization in the steady state is determined by these taxes. Brecher, Chen, and Choudhri (2002) consider a model with differences in technologies across countries. Nishimura and Shimomura (2002), Bond, Trask, and Wang (2003), Doi, Nishimura, and Shimomura (2002), and Ono and Shibata (2005) study dynamic HeckscherOhlin models with endogenous growth or externalities. A number of researchers have studied dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin models using the small open economy assumption: Findlay (1970), Mussa (1978), Smith (1984), Atkeson and Kehoe (2000), Chatterjee and Shukayev (2004), and Obiols-Homs (2005). Atkeson and Kehoe and Chatterjee and Shukayev are of particular relevance to our paper. Atkeson and Kehoe study a model in which the rest of the world is in its steady state and the small open economy starts with either a lower or a higher capital-labor ratio. They show that, if the small open economy is outside the rest of the world's cone of diversification, then the country converges to the boundary of this cone. If the small country starts inside the cone of diversification, then it too is in steady state and stays there. This result is in sharp contrast to our result that, for certain parameter values and initial conditions, even if all countries start in the cone of diversification, some necessarily leave it. Contrasting our results with those of Atkeson and Kehoe shows how strong are their assumptions that the rest of the world is in its steady state and that there are no general equilibrium price effects. Chatterjee and Shukayev consider a model similar to that of Atkeson and Kehoe in which there are stochastic productivity shocks and show that the comparative advantage conferred by different initial endowments can disappear over time. The paper most closely related to ours is Ventura (1997), who studies trade and growth in a dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin model with utility-maximizing consumers and identical preferences across countries. He assumes that there are two traded goods -- one capital intensive and one labor intensive -- that are used in consumption and investment. Ventura abstracts away from studying the patterns of specialization by assuming that each good uses only one of the factors in its production process. Under this assumption, factor prices are equalized across countries independently of their relative factor endowments. Ventura studies the evolution of capital stocks over time. Our paper differs from his in that (1) we use discrete time rather than continuous time because it makes it easier to obtain analytical results, although we show how our results can be extended to a continuous-time version of the model, (2) we study the evolution of income levels as 3

well as of capital stocks, (3) in models with more general production structures, we obtain conditions under which factor price equalization in a given period ensures factor price equalization in future periods, and (4) we complete Ventura's (1997) analysis by considering the possibility of corner solutions in which one or more countries have zero investment in some periods and showing that convergence results may break down in such cases. (Ventura analyzes only interior solutions.) It is also worth mentioning the work of Cuñat and Maffezzoli (2004), who present numerical experiments using a three-good, two-factor version of the Ventura model. In this paper, we study the patterns of trade, capital accumulation, and income growth over time as a function of the countries' initial relative endowments of capital and labor. We find, as does Ventura (1997), that, if both countries diversify over the entire equilibrium path, the elasticity of substitution between traded goods is crucial in determining convergence behavior. This is no longer true when one of the countries specializes in production in some period. For a given elasticity of substitution, whether countries converge or diverge depends on the pattern of specialization over time. We present an example in which countries' income levels converge in equilibria without factor price equalization for an elasticity of substitution that implies divergence in income for equilibria with factor price equalization along the equilibrium path. We also present an example in which corner solutions in investment cause our convergence results to break down. 2. The general model There are n countries, i  1,..., n . Each has a continuum of measure Li of identical, infinitely lived consumer-workers, each of whom is endowed with k0i units of capital in period 0 and one unit of labor in every period t , t  0,1,... . There are three goods: an investment good, x ,

which is not traded, and two traded goods, y j , j  1, 2 , which can be consumed or used in the production of the investment good. Utility functions and technologies are the same across countries. Each traded good j , j  1, 2 , is produced with a continuously differentiable, constant returns to scale function that uses capital, k , and labor,  : y j   j (k j ,  j ) .
(1)

4

We assume that good 1 is relatively capital intensive and that the production functions are such that there are no factor intensity reversals. Producers minimize costs taking prices as given and earn zero profits. The first-order conditions from the producers' problems are

r  p j jK (k j ,  j ) ,  if k j  0

(2)

w  p j jL (k j ,  j ) ,  if  j  0 for each j , j  1, 2 , where r is the rental rate, w is the wage, and p j is the price of good j ,
j  1, 2 . Additional subscripts --  jK ( k j ,  j ) ,  jL (k j ,  j ) -- denote partial derivatives.

(3)

The investment good is produced according to the constant-returns production function
x  f ( x1 , x2 ) .

(4)

Letting q be the price of the investment good, the first-order conditions for profit maximization are
p1  qf1 ( x1 , x2 ) ,  if x1  0 p2  qf 2 ( x1 , x2 ) ,  if x2  0 .

(5) (6)

In each period, consumers decide how much of each traded good to consume, c1t , c2t , and how much capital to accumulate for the next period, kt 1 . We assume that there is no international borrowing or lending. Bajona and Kehoe (2006) prove that international borrowing and lending ensures factor price equalization but results in indeterminacy of production and trade. The representative consumer in country i solves the utility maximization problem
max



 t 0

i  t u (c1it , c2 t)

i i i i i i s.t. p1t c1it  p2t c2 t  qt xt  wt  rt kt

(7)

kti1  (1   )kti  xti
c ijt  0 , xti  0
i k0  k0i ,

where  , 0    1 is the common discount factor and  , 0    1 , is the depreciation rate. The feasibility condition for good j , j  1, 2 , is

5



n i 1

Li (c ijt  x ijt )   i 1 Li y ijt .
n

(8)

Labor and capital are perfectly mobile across sectors within a country, but not across countries. Therefore, the feasibility conditions in each country i , i  1,..., n , are
i i k1it  k2 t  kt

(9) (10)

i1t  i2t  1 . Likewise, the investment good is nontraded and the feasibility condition in each country i is
i xti  f ( x1it , x2 t).

(11)

It is easy to show that allowing for trade of the investment good would only generate indeterminacy of trade in this model, without otherwise changing the set of equilibria. Before analyzing the properties of the model, we list the main assumptions:
A.1. There are n countries, which are populated by infinitely lived consumers. Countries differ

only in their population sizes, Li  0 , and their initial endowments of capital, k0i  0 .
A.2. There are two traded goods, which can be consumed or used in the production of the

investment good. The production functions of the traded goods,  j (k , ) , are increasing, concave, continuously differentiable, and homogeneous of degree one.
A.3. Traded good 1 is relatively capital intensive, and there are no factor intensity reversals: For

all k /   0,

1L (k / ,1) 2 L (k / ,1)  . 1K (k / ,1) 2 K (k / ,1)
A.4. Labor and capital are perfectly mobile across sectors but are not mobile across countries.

(12)

A.5. There is an investment good in each country, which is not traded. The production function

for the investment good, f ( x1 , x2 ) , is increasing, concave, continuously differentiable, and homogeneous of degree one.

6

A.6. The period utility function u (c1 , c2 ) is homothetic, strictly increasing, strictly concave, and

twice continuously differentiable, and it satisfies lim c j 0 u j (c1 , c2 )   .
Definition 1: An equilibrium of the world economy is sequences of prices,  p1t , p2t , qti , wti , rti  ,
i i i consumptions, investments, and capital stocks c1it , c2 t , xt , kt  , production plans for the traded

i goods,  y ijt , k ijt , ijt  , and production plans for the investment goods  xti , x1it , x2 t  , such that: i i 1. Given prices  p1t , p2t , qti , wti , rti  , the consumptions and capital stocks c1it , c2 t , kt  solve the

consumers' problem (7).
i 2. Given prices  p1t , p2t , qti , wti , rti  , the production plans  y ijt , k ijt , ijt  and  xti , x1it , x2 t  satisfy the

cost minimization and zero profit conditions (2), (3), (5), and (6).
i i i i i 3. The consumption, capital stock, c1it , c2 t , kt  , and production plans,  y jt , k jt ,  jt  and

x , x
i t

i 1t

i , x2 t  , satisfy the feasibility conditions (1), (4), (8), (9), (10), and (11).

Notice that, since trade equalizes the prices of the traded goods across countries, the prices of the investment good are also equal, qti  qt . Since the cost minimization problems are the same across countries, this is true even if some country i does not produce the investment good in period t . The homogeneity of the budget constraints in (7) and the cost minimization and zero profit conditions (2), (3), (5), and (6) in current period prices allow us to impose a numeraire in each period. We set qt  1 , t  0,1,... (13)

It is worth noting that the assumption of no international borrowing and lending implies that trade balance holds:
i i i p1t ( y1it  c1it  x1it )  p2t ( y2 t  c2 t  x2 t )  0 .

(14)

This condition can be derived from the budget constant in the consumer's problem (7) and the cost minimization and zero profit conditions (2), (3), (5), and (6).

7

Definition 2. A steady state of the world economy is consumption levels, an investment level, and
i ^i , factors of production and output for each traded industry, y ^i , l^i , ^1i , c ^2 ^i , k ^ ij , k a capital stock, c ,x j j i ^i , x ^1i , x ^2 j  1, 2 , factors of production and output for the investment sector  x  , and prices









^ ,p ^ ,w ^ ,r ^  , for i  1,..., n , p
i i 1 2

that satisfy the conditions of a competitive equilibrium for

^i . Here we set    ^ for all t , where  appropriate initial endowments of capital, k0i  k t

represents a generic variable. We say that a steady state is a nontrivial steady state if at least one of the countries has a
^ i  0 for some i  1,..., n. The steady state results for positive level of capital in that steady state: k

general dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin models with infinitely lived consumers derived in Bajona and Kehoe (2006) apply to the Ventura model. The following propositions state them without proof.
Proposition 1: Under assumptions A.1-A.6, in any nontrivial steady state factor prices are

equalized.
Proposition 2: Under assumptions A.1-A.6, if there exists a nontrivial steady state, then there
^ . These exists a continuum of them, which have the same prices and world capital-labor ratio, k

^1 ,..., k ^n . steady states are indexed by the distribution of capital-labor ratios across countries, k
^i  k ^ for some i . Furthermore, international trade occurs in every steady state in which k

3. The integrated economy

The characterization and computation of equilibrium of the model described in the previous section is difficult in general, since it involves determining the pattern of specialization in production over an infinite horizon. (See Bajona and Kehoe 2006 for some results on the equilibrium of the general model.) Numerical methods are usually needed to compute equilibrium. The characterization and computation of equilibrium becomes much easier, however, when the model specification is such that we can solve for the equilibrium by disaggregating the equilibrium of the integrated economy -- a closed economy with initial factor endowments equal to the world endowments -- which is equivalent to a two-sector growth model. (See Dixit and Norman 1980 for a description of the methodology.) In this case, the equilibrium prices and aggregate 8

consumption, production, and investment of our economy coincide with the equilibrium prices, consumption, production, and investment of the integrated economy. Consider the social planner's problem
max




t 0

 t u (c1t , c2t )
(15)

s.t. c1t  x1t  y1t  1 (k1t , 1t ) c2t  x2t  y2t  2 (k2t ,  2t ) kt 1  (1   )kt  xt  f ( x1t , x2t ) k1t  k2t  kt
1t   2t  1

c jt  0 , x jt  0 k0  k0 , where k0   i 1 Li k0i /  i 1 Li . Notice that assumption A.1 implies that k0  0 .
n n

Proposition 3: Suppose that the allocation c1t , c2t , kt  ,  y1t , k1t , 1t  ,  y2t , k2t ,  2t  ,  xt , x1t , x2t 

solves the social planner's problem (15). Then this allocation, together with the prices

 p1t , p2t , qt , wt , rt  , is an equilibrium of the integrated economy where

qt  1 , p1t  f1 ( x1t , x2t ) ,

p2t  f 2 ( x1t , x2t ) , rt  p1t1K (k1t , 1t ) , and wt  p1t1L (k1t , 1t ) . Conversely, suppose that

 p1t , p2t , qt , wt , rt  , c1t , c2t , kt  ,  y1t , k1t , 1t  ,  y2t , k2t ,  2t  ,  xt , x1t , x2t  is an equilibrium of the
integrated economy. Then the equilibrium allocation solves the social planner's problem (15). Furthermore, if the social planner's problem has a solution, then it is the unique equilibrium allocation of the integrated economy.
Proof: The first claim is just the second theorem of welfare economics, and the second claim is the

first theorem. In our setting, it is straightforward to prove these claims by showing that the firstorder conditions and transversality condition for the social planner's problem are equivalent to the equilibrium conditions in the definition of equilibrium where there is only one country, n  1 . If the utility function is bounded on the constraint set of the social planner's problem, there exists a solution to this problem. Since the function u is strictly concave and the functions 1 , 2 , and f 9

are concave, the solution to the planner's problem is unique, which implies that there is a unique equilibrium to the integrated economy.  Once we have the equilibrium of the integrated economy, to compute an equilibrium of the world economy, we need to disaggregate the consumption, investment, and production decisions across countries. Whether an equilibrium can be solved this way is a guess-and-verify approach. First consider the disaggregation of production decisions. If capital-labor ratios are very different across countries, assigning nonnegative production plans for both goods to all countries is not consistent with their having the same factor prices, and solving for equilibrium using the integrated approach is not possible. Figure 1, known as the Lerner diagram, shows the endowments of capital and labor that are consistent with using the integrated economy approach to solve for equilibrium for a static Heckscher-Ohlin model. Let p1 , p2 be the equilibrium prices of the traded goods in the integrated economy. The rays k1 / 1 and k2 /  2 represent the capital-labor ratios used in the production of each good in the equilibrium of the integrated economy. The area between both rays is called the cone of diversification. If all countries have endowments of capital and labor in the cone of diversification, the equilibrium prices of the integrated economy are consistent with nonnegative production plans for both goods in all countries. To find the cone of diversification, we solve the problem max p11 (k1 , 1 )  p22 (k2 ,  2 ) s.t. k1  k2  k
1   2  1

(16)

kj  0 ,  j  0.
i If p1 and p2 are the equilibrium prices of the integrated economy, then, since c1it and c2 t are both

strictly positive by assumption A.6, the solution to this problem is such that 1 (k1 , 1 )  0 and

2 (k2 ,  2 )  0 . Assumption A.1 implies that k1 / 1  k2 /  2 . The cone of diversification is
specified by these sector-specific capital-labor ratios, which depend only on relative prices,

1 ( p2 / p1 ) and  2 ( p2 / p1 ) . It is the set of country specific capital-labor ratios k i such that 1 ( p2 / p1 )  k i   2 ( p2 / p1 ) .
10 (17)

In our dynamic economy, the cone of diversification changes over time since the capitallabor ratio and, consequently, the equilibrium prices of the integrated economy, change over time. Therefore, to solve for an equilibrium using the integrated economy approach, we need to disaggregate the investment decisions in such a way that countries stay in the corresponding cone of diversification for all time periods. Given that the period utility function is identical and homothetic across countries, factor price equalization implies that we can use the integrated economy approach to solve for equilibrium in a static model. In our dynamic economy, there is an additional possible complication: If one of the countries has a corner solution in which it chooses zero investment in some period while another country chooses positive investment, then we cannot disaggregate the consumption and investment decisions of the integrated economy. Later, we will show how this possibility makes it difficult to characterize equilibria. In the rest of the paper, we assume that consumers combine the two traded goods in consumption in the same way that producers of the investment good combine these two goods in production: u (c1 , c2 )  v  f (c1 , c2 )  ,where v is a strictly concave, strictly increasing function. This assumption simplifies the dynamics of the model, since it makes the integrated economy equivalent to a one-sector growth model and, therefore, cycles and chaos are ruled out as possible equilibrium behavior of the integrated economy. Nevertheless, the dynamics of the simplified model are rich enough for the purpose of the paper: to illustrate the different convergence behavior between trade and closed economies. To further simplify the analysis we assume, as does Ventura (1997), that the function v is logarithmic.
A.7. The period utility function u takes the form u (c1 , c2 )  log  f (c1 , c2 )  .

Consider the production function defined by solving F (k , )  max f ( y1 , y2 ) s.t. y1  1 (k1 , 1 ) y2  2 (k2 ,  2 ) k1  k2  k
1   2  

(18)

11

kj  0 ,  j  0. Assumptions A.5 implies that f is strictly quasi-concave, which, together with the concavity of 1 and 2 , implies that for any (k , ) there is a unique solution to this problem. It is straightforward to prove that F is increasing, concave, continuously differentiable, and homogeneous of degree one. Like f , F is strictly quasi-concave. Assumption A.7 is useful because it allows us to solve the two-sector social planner's problem (15) by solving the related one-sector social planner's problem
max




t 0

 t log ct
(19)

s.t. ct  xt  F (kt ,1) kt 1  (1   )kt  xt ct  0 , xt  0 k0  k0 .

We state the following proposition without giving a proof because, first, the proof is just a straightforward application of the maximum theorem, and, second, we will not employ the proposition in its general form, but rather will only consider production functions for which we can analytically solve problem (18).
Proposition 4. Let y1 (k , ) , y2 (k , ) , k1 (k , ) , 1 (k , ) , k2 (k , ) ,  2 (k , ) denote the solution to

(18). If c1t , c2t , kt  ,  y1t , k1t , 1t  ,  y2t , k2t ,  2t  ,  xt , x1t , x2t  solves the two-sector social planner's problem (15), then ct , kt , xt  solves the one-sector social planner's problem (19) where ct  f (c1t , c2t ) . Conversely, if ct , kt , xt  solves the one-sector social planner's problem (19), then

c1t , c2t , kt  ,  y1t , k1t , 1t  ,  y2t , k2t ,  2t  ,  xt , x1t , x2t  solves the two-sector social planner's problem
(15) where y jt  y j (kt ,1) , k jt  k j (kt ,1) ,  jt   j (kt ,1) , c jt   ct /(ct  xt )  y j (kt ,1) , and
x jt   xt /(ct  xt )  y j (kt ,1) .

We first consider a version of the model in which the production function  j for each traded good uses only one factor of production. Under this assumption, factor prices equalize 12

along the equilibrium path independently of initial conditions. Since this is the assumption made by Ventura (1997), we call this version of the model the Ventura model. By disaggregating the equilibrium of the integrated economy, we derive results on the evolution of the world distributions of income and of capital in the Ventura model. We also show by means of an example that, even though factor price equalization holds in every equilibrium of the Ventura model, there may be equilibria in which there is zero investment in some countries and in which our convergence results do not hold. It is worth pointing out that Ventura (1997) considers a continuous-time version of our model. For completeness, we sketch out our results for the continuous-time model in appendix A. We then consider a version of the model in which the more general production functions  j have the same constant elasticity of substitution as does the production function for the investment good f . In such models, factor prices need not equalize along the equilibrium path, but, if they do, the equilibria have the same properties as those of the Ventura model. We refer to this version of the model as the generalized Ventura model. For this model, we derive the cone of diversification analytically, and give conditions under which, if countries are in the cone of diversification, they stay there. We also derive conditions under which, even if countries start in the cone of diversification, they leave it in a finite number of periods.
4. Ventura model

Following Ventura (1997), we assume that the production function for each of the traded goods uses only one factor of production: y1  1 (k1 , 1 )  k1 y2  2 (k2 ,  2 )   2 . This assumption implies that the cone of diversification is the entire nonnegative quadrant, independently of the prices p1t and p2t , and that factor prices equalize along any equilibrium path: rti  rt  p1t and wti  wt  p2t . Notice that, in this case, F (k ,1)  f (k ,1) . Furthermore, we assume that the production function of the investment good has a constant elasticity of substitution between the inputs of the two traded goods: (20) (21)

13

b f ( x1 , x2 )  d  a1 x1b  a2 x2 

1/ b

(22)

if b  0 , and f is
a2 f ( x1 , x2 )  dx1a1 x2

(23)

in the limit where b  0 . Here ai  0 and a1  a2  1 . The elasticity of substitution is   1/(1  b) . In what follows, we can easily translate statements involving b into statements involving  . Suppose that we find the equilibrium of the integrated economy by solving the one-sector social planner's problem (19). To disaggregate consumption and investment, we solve the utility maximization of the representative consumer i :
max




t 0

 t log cti
(24)

s.t. cti  xti  wt  rt kti kti1  (1   )kti  xti
c ijt  0 , xti  0
i k0  k0i .

i If we solve (7), we can obtain a solution to (24) by setting cti  f (c1it , c2 t ) , and, if we solve (24), we i i i i i i can obtain a solution to (7) by setting c1it  cti kt /( wt  rt kti ) , c2 t  ct /( wt  rt kt ) , x1t  xt kt /( wt  rt kt ) ,
i i i x2 t  xt /( wt  rt kt ) .

The necessary and sufficient conditions for a sequence of consumption levels and capital stocks to solve (24) are that



1 1   i (1    rt 1 )  0 , with equality if xti  0 i ct ct 1 cti  kti1  (1   )kti  wt  rt kti ,

(25) (26)

and that the transversality condition limt   t 1 i kt 1  0 cti (27)

14

holds. If xti  0 for all i and all t , then we are justified in using the integrated economy approach. We solve for the integrated economy equilibrium in the Ventura model by solving for the equilibrium of a one-sector growth model. Notice, however, that the two sectors matter a lot for disaggregating the equilibrium. In particular, we cannot solve for the equilibrium values of the variables for one of the countries by solving an optimal growth problem for that country in isolation. Instead, the equilibrium path of a specific country's capital stock and its steady state value depend not only on the country's initial endowment of capital but also -- through the interest rate rt and wage wt -- on the equilibrium path of the world's capital stock, and its steady state value. If there is positive investment in every period, then the equilibrium path for the integrated economy is determined by the difference equations
ct 1   1    r (kt 1 )  ct

(28) (29)

ct  kt 1  (1   )kt  f (kt ,1) , the initial condition k0  k0 



n i 1

Li k0i /  i 1 Li , and the transversality condition
n



limt   t Here r (kt ) is the rental rate of capital,

1 kt 1  0 . ct

(30)

a1ktb 1d (a1ktb  a2 )(1b ) / b if b  0  r ( kt )   a1 1 if b  0.  a1dkt

(31)

Standard results for one-sector models (for example, Rebelo 1991) say that the equilibrium of the integrated economy has sustained growth for some values of the parameters. The existence of steady state depends upon whether the rental rate of capital as a function of initial endowments,

r (k ) , can take the value 1/   1   for some k  0 . If r (k )  1/   1   for all k , then kt
converges to 0. If, however, r (k )  1/   1   for all k , then kt grows without bound. Consider an economy without labor, where feasible allocations satisfy
1/ b ct  kt 1   da1  1    kt .

(32)

15

1/ b This economy has a sustained growth path in which ct  1     da1  1    kt and

1/ b kt 1    da1  1    kt .

Definition 3. We say that an equilibrium converges to the sustained growth path of the

corresponding economy without labor if
1/ b limt  ct / kt  1     da1 1  
1/ b limt  kt 1 / kt    da1 1   .

(33) (34)

Standard results from, for example, Stokey, Lucas, and Prescott (1989) provide the following characterization of the equilibrium of the integrated economy.
Lemma 1: The behavior of the equilibrium of the integrated economy of the Ventura model

depends on parameter values:
1/ b , the trivial steady state is the unique steady state, and the unique 1. If b  0 and 1/   1    da1

equilibrium of the integrated economy converges to it.
1/ b 1/ b 2. If b  0 , if b  0 and 1/   1    da1 , or if b  0 and 1/   1    da1 , there is a unique

^)  1/   1   , nontrivial stable steady state characterized by the solution of the equation r (k and the unique equilibrium of the integrated economy converges to it.
1/ b , there is no nontrivial steady state, and the unique equilibrium 3. If b  0 and 1/   1    da1

of the integrated economy converges to the sustained growth path. In the case where b  0 and   1 , there is an analytical solution to the one-sector social planner's problem (19) for the integrated economy: kt 1  xt   a1dkta1 ct  (1   a1 )dkta1 For other parameter values, we need to use numerical methods to solve for the equilibrium. Nevertheless, we can derive analytic results on the evolution of the distribution of income levels over time that depend on the values of variables in the integrated economy equilibrium. 16 (35) (36)

Qualitatively characterizing the integrated economy equilibrium then allows us to qualitatively characterize the evolution of income levels. In particular, we can find conditions under which relative income levels converge and conditions under which they diverge. The next proposition derives a formula that compares the level of income per capita in a given country measured in current prices, yti  wt  rt kti , to the world's average at any given period, yt  wt  rt kt , to the same relative income position in the previous period. This formula is key to our analysis, since a decrease in the ratio  yti  yt  / yt over time indicates convergence in income levels (countries become closer to the mean) and an increase in the ratio indicates divergence in income levels.
Proposition 5. In the Ventura model, if xti  0 for all i and all t , the income level of country i

relative to the world's income level evolves according to the rule
yti  yt s  y i  y  s  y i  y0   t  t 1 t 1   t  0 , yt st 1  yt 1  s0  y0 

(37)

where st  rt ct 1 / yt , t  1, 2,... , and s0  r0 c0 /   (1  r0   ) y0  . When there is complete depreciation,   1 , st  ct / yt , t  0,1,... .
Proof: Subtracting the first-order condition for the consumer's problem in the open economy from

the same condition for the integrated economy, we obtain: cti1  ct 1 cti  ct .  ct 1 ct It is here that the assumption of no corner solutions in investment is essential, allowing us to impose the first-order conditions (25) and (28) as equalities. Manipulating the first-order conditions (25) and the budget constraints (24), we obtain the familiar demand function for logarithmic utility maximization: (38)

   s 1 cti  (1   )   s t   t 1 1  r    
Notice that, since we have factor price equalization,

  i  ws  (1  rt   )kt  .  

(39)

cti  ct  (1   )(1  rt   )(kti  kt ) . 17

(40)

Using (40) at two different dates and (28), we derive the expression: kti1  kt 1  ct (kti  kt ) . ct 1 (41)

The difference between a country's income per worker and the world's income per worker is yti1  yt 1  rt 1 (kti1  kt 1 ) . Using the expression for kti1  kt 1 in (41), we obtain
yti1  yt 1 rt 1ct / yt 1  yti  yt   yt 1 rt ct 1 / yt  yt  . 

(42)

(43)

We can use the first-order condition (28) to rewrite this expression as
yti  yt s  y i  y  s  y i  y0   t  t 1 t 1   t  0 , yt st 1  yt 1  s0  y0 

(44)

where st  rt ct 1 / yt for t  1, 2,... and s0  r0 c0 /   (1  r0   ) y0  . When   1, ct / ct 1   rt and st becomes st  ct / yt . The proof of this proposition relies on factor price equalization occurring in every period and on there never being a corner solution in investment. If factor prices are not equal in some period in the future, the demand functions (39) for each individual country and for the integrated economy would have different prices in that period and, therefore, equation (40) would not hold. Likewise, if a corner solution in investment occurs, equation (38) need not hold. We later provide examples in which lack of factor price equalization and the lack of interior solutions for investment cause the characterization of behavior of relative income in proposition 5 to fail. Equation (37) in the previous proposition compares a country's income relative to the world average. Whether countries converge or diverge in their income levels depends on whether the ratio rt ct 1 / yt decreases or increases over time. If the ratio increases, countries' incomes move further away from the world's average income and, thus, there is divergence in income levels. If the ratio decreases, countries' income levels become closer to the world's average income level, and there is convergence in income levels. If the ratio is constant, countries maintain their initial income differences and, therefore, the distribution of income stays constant over time. We should 18

stress that here convergence means that countries' income levels become more similar over time. It does not mean that they converge to the same level of income: Although the absolute value of ( yti  yt ) / yt can be strictly decreasing over time, in general it converges to a constant different from 0. Using proposition 5, we can reduce the characterization of the convergence properties of equilibria in the case with complete depreciation to a characterization of the behavior of st  ct / yt in the solution to the one-sector social planner's problem (19).
Lemma 2. In the unique equilibrium of the integrated economy of the Ventura model with

complete depreciation, the behavior of st  ct / yt depends on parameter values:
1/ b , then st is a strictly decreasing sequence that converges to 1   . 1. If b  0 and 1/   da1 1/ b ^,1)  k ^] / f (k ^,1) where k ^ is the unique , then st converges to [ f (k 2. If b  0 and 1/   da1

^ , s is a strictly increasing sequence; if k  k ^ , s is a nontrivial stable steady state. If k0  k t 0 t

strictly decreasing sequence. 3. If b  0 , then st  1   a1 is constant.
1/ b ^,1)  k ^] / f (k ^,1) . If k  k ^ , s is a strictly , then st converges to [ f (k 4. If b  0 and 1/   da1 0 t

^ , s is a strictly increasing sequence. decreasing sequence; if k0  k t
1/ b , then st is a strictly decreasing sequence that converges to 1   . 5. If b  0 and 1/   da1

Proof: Since the result for the case 3, where b  0 , follows trivially from equation (36), we

concern ourselves with the other cases, where b  0 or b  0 . Multiplying and dividing the Euler equation, (28), by kt / yt and using the feasibility condition, (29), we obtain
 1  st   1   ht ,  st 1 

(45)

where st  ct / yt and ht  (rt kt ) / yt . We define the function

19

a1k b r (k )k  . h( k )  f (k ,1) a1k b  a2

(46)

Notice that h '(k )  0 if b  0 and that h '(k )  0 if b  0 . In the limit where b  0 , h(k )  a1 and h '(k )  0 . We use the monotonicity of the sequence kt in any solution to the one-sector social planner's problem (19) to establish monotonicity properties for the sequence ht . The theorem is then established by showing that the monotonicity properties for the sequence ht imply the desired monotonicity properties for the sequence st . Consider the different cases enumerated in the statement of the theorem. In case 1, where
1/ b b  0 and 1/   da1 , kt is a strictly decreasing sequence that converges to 0, which implies that

1/ b ht is a strictly increasing sequence that converges to 1. In case 2, where b  0 and 1/   da1 ,
1/ b ^ , kt is a strictly increasing sequence that converges to k and in case 4, where b  0 and 1/   da1

^ and a strictly decreasing sequence that converges to k ^ if k  k ^ . In case 2, this implies if k0  k 0 ^ and a strictly increasing sequence if k  k ^ . In that ht is a strictly decreasing sequence if k0  k 0 ^ and a decreasing sequence if k  k ^. case 4, however, ht is a strictly increasing sequence if k0  k 0 ^b /(a k ^ b  a ) no matter what the initial value of k . In case 5, In both cases, ht converges to a1k 1 2 t
1/ b where b  0 and 1/   da1 , kt is a strictly increasing sequence that grows without bound, which

implies that ht is an increasing sequence that converges to 1. We now argue that, if ht is strictly increasing along a solution path to (19), then st is strictly decreasing and, if ht is strictly decreasing, then st is strictly increasing. We begin with the case where ht is strictly increasing. Suppose, to the contrary, that, although ht is strictly increasing, st is not strictly decreasing, that is, there exists T such that sT  sT 1 . Since ht is strictly increasing, equation (45) implies that
1   1  sT 1   1  sT   1 .  sT   sT 1 

(47)

Since sT  sT 1 , this implies that

20

1  1  sT 1   1  sT   1 ,  sT   sT 

(48)

which implies that sT 1  sT . Iterating, we find that, for all t  T , the sequence st is strictly increasing. Using equation (48), for all t  T , we obtain:
ht  st 1  1  st  1  1  st .   1    1    st    st  

(49)

^) /  . Equation In the limit, the sequences ht and (1  st ) /  both converge to the same limit, (1  s (49) implies that ht  ^ 1 s



,

(50)

which contradicts our assumption that ht is strictly increasing. We prove that, when ht is strictly decreasing, st is strictly increasing, using the same argument and just reversing the inequalities. The next proposition provides our main results on convergence in income levels for the Ventura model. It follows immediately from proposition 5 and lemma 2.
Proposition 6. (Convergence in relative income levels) In the Ventura model with complete

depreciation, if xti  0 for all i and all t :
1/ b , then there is convergence in relative income levels. 1. If b  0 and 1/   da1 1/ b ^ and , then there is divergence in relative income levels if k0  k 2. If b  0 and 1/   da1

^. convergence in relative income levels if k0  k

3. If b  0 , relative income levels stay constant.
1/ b ^ and , then there is convergence in relative income levels if k0  k 4. If b  0 and 1/   da1

^. divergence in relative income levels if k0  k
1/ b 5. If b  0 and 1/   da1 , then there is convergence in relative income levels.

21

We have analyzed all of the cases enumerated in the statement of proposition 6 for the sake
^ are less interesting than the others. The of completeness. Case 1 and cases 2 and 4 where k0  k

contrast of the remaining results with the analogous results for a world of closed economies is striking: In cases 2, 3, and 4, if the countries are closed to trade, we know that relative income levels converge over time because all countries have equilibria that converge to the steady state of the integrated economy. If we open the countries to trade, however, relative income levels diverge if b  0 and stay fixed if b  0 . Notice that, if b  0 , relative income levels converge, but not to the same level as they do in a world of closed economies. In case 5, if the countries are closed to trade, we know that relative income levels diverge over time because growth accelerates over time and countries that start with lower income levels because they have lower initial capital stocks grow more slowly. If we open these economies to trade, however, income levels converge. The intuition for the results in proposition 6, at least for the cases where b  0 and
1/ b 1/   da1 and where b  0 , is obvious: In a world of closed economies, poor countries -- that is,

countries with lower initial capital stocks -- grow faster than rich countries because lower capital stocks lead to higher returns on investment. Trade equalizes the return on capital in poor and rich countries, eliminating the incentive for higher investment in poor countries. The results in proposition 6 were derived under the assumption that xti  0 for all i  1,..., n and t  0,1... . The next proposition derives necessary and sufficient conditions on parameter values and initial capital endowments under which there exists an equilibrium with positive investment for all countries and all periods. Roughly speaking, the proposition states that the only problematic cases are the ones where proposition 6 would imply income divergence and one of the countries' initial endowment of capital is low enough that it is optimal for the country to eventually eat up its capital stock and specialize in the production of the labor intensive good. Even though the cases with zero investment may be empirically irrelevant, they are theoretically valuable, since they signal that the results in proposition 6 may no longer be valid if one of the countries reaches the border of the cone of diversification. Our analysis of the general version of the Ventura model in section 5 corroborates this suspicion.
Proposition 7. In the Ventura model with complete depreciation, (i) for the cases enumerated in

the statement of lemma 2 where the sequence st  ct / yt in the equilibrium of the integrated 22

economy is constant or strictly decreasing, there exists an equilibrium where xti  0 for all i and all t . (ii) For the cases where st is strictly increasing, let zt  ct 1 / kt , z0  c0 /   r0 k0  , and ^  limt  z ct 1 . kt (51)

This limit is well defined. Let imin be the country with the lowest initial endowment of capital per worker, k0imin  k0i , i  1,..., n . If
^  k0imin  k0  z    1 , z0  k 0 

(52)

then there exists an equilibrium where xti  0 for all i and all t . Otherwise, there is no equilibrium where xti  0 for all i and all t . When there exists an equilibrium with no corner solutions in investment, it is the unique such equilibrium.
Proof: Notice that, since

zt 

st , 1  st

(53)

the sequence zt has the same monotonicity properties as the sequence st . (i) In the cases where st converges to 1   , zt converges to (1   ) /  . (ii) In the cases where st converges to ^,1)  k ^ / k ^ ^,1)  k ^  / f (k ^,1) , z converges to  f (k  f (k t     . Equation (41) implies that
kti  kt zt  kti1  kt 1  zt  k0i  k0      . kt zt 1  kt 1  z0  k0 

(54)

Since assumption A.1 implies that k0i  0 , we know that (k0i  k0 ) / k0  1 . If zt is weakly increasing, or if zt is strictly decreasing but condition (52) holds, then xti  kti  0 for all i and all t . If, on the other hand, zt is strictly decreasing and condition (52) does not hold, then the investment decisions in the integrated economy equilibrium cannot be disaggregated as in proposition 5 to assign nonnegative investment to each country in every period.

23

Uniqueness of the disaggregation of the integrated economy equilibrium, if it exists, follows from the uniqueness of the solution to the one-sector social planner's problem (19). Uniqueness of the disaggregation of the integrated economy equilibrium is easy to establish because this equilibrium solves a social planner's problem. It is more difficult to say anything about uniqueness of equilibria, if they exist, that involve corner solutions in investment or, in the more general model in the next section, that involve lack of factor price equalization. In such equilibria, Pareto improvements are possible if we allow international borrowing and lending.
5. Generalized Ventura model

Consider a generalization of the Ventura model in which the production functions f ,  1 , and  2 are general constant returns to scale production functions. Propositions 3 and 4 indicate that we can find the integrated economy of the generalized Ventura model by solving the onesector growth social planner's problem (19). In this generalized Ventura model, factor price equalization need not occur at any given period of time. Countries can specialize in the production of one of the traded goods, factor prices can differ across countries and, therefore, in general, the equilibrium cannot be solved using the integrated approach and the results in proposition 6 no longer apply. In what follows, we consider a specific version of the generalized Ventura model for which the cone of diversification can be solved analytically and derive conditions under which factor price equalization in a given period implies factor price equalization in every subsequent period. In such cases, the results of the Ventura model on the evolution of the distribution of income apply to the generalized Ventura model. For situations where factor prices do not equalize after a finite number of periods, the analysis done in the Ventura model is no longer valid. In fact, using a numerical example, we show that the predictions of the Ventura model can actually be reversed. Our example illustrates the restrictiveness of the factor price equalization assumption.
5.1. The C.E.S. model

Let us consider a model, which we refer to as the C.E.S. model, where all production functions are C.E.S. In particular, assume that the production functions have the form:

24

b y j   j (k j ,  j )   j  j k b j  (1   j ) j



 

1/ b

for j  1, 2 ,

(55) (56)

b b f ( y1 , y2 )  d a1 y1  a2 y2



1/ b

where b  1 , and a2  1  a1 . Notice that, since we have assumed no factor intensity reversals in the production of the traded goods, the production functions  j , j  1, 2 , need to have the same constant elasticity of substitution   1/ (1  b) . Setting this elasticity equal to that of the production function for investment good f allows us to analytically solve for the function F : F (k , )  D  A1k b  A2 b  where
1 1  b 1 b b 1 b   a   a    2 2 2   1 1 1    , A2  1  A1 , (58)  1 b 1 1 1 1 b      a2 2 2b 1b    a1 (1  1 )1b 1b   a2 (1   2 ) 2b 1b     1 b 1/ b

(57)

A1 

1  b 1 b a      1 1 1 

and
1 1 1 b 1 1 1 b  b     b 1b b 1 b  b 1b b 1 b  D  d   a111    a2 2 2     a1 (1  1 )1    a2 (1   2 ) 2    ,        1

(59)

if b  0 , and in the Cobb-Douglas case ( b  0 ): F (k , )  Dk A1  A2 A1  a11  a2 2 , A2  1  A1
2  d 1a111 (1  1 )11   2 a2 2 (1   2 )1 2      . D A1 A2 A1 A2
a1 a2

(60) (61)

(62)

To determine when factor price equalization occurs and when it does not, we need to characterize the cone of diversification in the integrated economy and how it changes with the world capital-labor ratio. Solving the maximization problem that defines F , (18), we find that

 j  p2 (kt ) / p1 (kt )    j kt , j  1, 2 ,
25

(63)

where the constants 1 ,  2 that determine the cone of diversification have the form, for b  0 ,
 i    1  i 
1 1 b

j 

 a1 (1  1 )1b 1b   a2 (1   2 )2b 1b a   
j 
 j  1 j 
1 b 1 b 1 1 1

1

1

  a2 

1 b 1b 2 2



, j  1, 2 .

(64)

For the Cobb-Douglas case the constants are

 A2 , j  1, 2 .   A1 

(65)

The next propositions establish conditions under which, for the C.E.S. model, factor price equalization in a given period implies factor price equalization in all subsequent periods.
Proposition 8: In the C.E.S. model with complete depreciation, suppose that the sequence

st  ct / yt in the equilibrium of the integrated economy is weakly decreasing. Suppose that factor

price equalization occurs in period T . Then there exists an equilibrium in which factor price equalization occurs at all t  T . Furthermore, this equilibrium is the only such equilibrium.
Proof: Assume that all countries are in the cone of diversification at period T . Define kti , t  T ,

using the formula
i kti  kt zt  kT  kT    , kt zT  kT 

(66)

where zt  ct 1 / kt and z0  c0 /(  r0 k0 ) are defined as in the statement of proposition 7. We need to show that disaggregating capital this way keeps countries in the cone of diversification and that it solves the equilibrium of our model economy. To prove that the countries remain in the cone, we need to show that, for all t  T ,

 2 kt  kti  1kt .
That is, for all t  T ,

(67)

2 1 

kti  kt  1  1 . kt

(68)

26

Since we have assumed that sequence st is weakly decreasing, we know from the proof of proposition 7 that the sequence  kti  kt  / kt is weakly decreasing, implying that the inequalities above are satisfied. To prove that these sequences of capitals, together with the equilibrium prices of the integrated economy, are a solution to the model economy, we define    s   1 i cti  (1   )   s t   t 1  ws  rt kt  , 1  r       (69)

where ws and rs are equilibrium prices of the integrated economy, and show that consumptions and capital stocks defined this way solve the equilibrium of our model economy. For the Cobb-Douglas model ( b  0 ), if factor price equalization occurs along the equilibrium path, we can actually solve for the equilibrium analytically. The next proposition describes how the capital sequence of the integrated equilibrium is split across countries in order to determine the trade equilibrium. The complete analytical solution is given in appendix B.
Proposition 9: In the Cobb-Douglas model with complete depreciation, suppose that factor price

equalization occurs in period T . Then factor price equalization occurs at all t  T . Furthermore,
kti   i kt ,
i where  i  kT / kT and kt 1   A1DktA1 for t  T .

(70)

Proof: The proof of this proposition is a special case of the proof of proposition 8. Proposition 10: In the C.E.S. model with complete depreciation, suppose that the sequence st is

strictly increasing. Again let zt  ct 1 / kt , z0  c0 /(  r0 k0 ) , and ^  limt  z
ct 1 . kt

(71)

Let imin be the country with the lowest initial endowment of capital per worker, and let imax be the country with the highest, k0imin  k0i  k0imax , i  1,..., n . If

27

1  1 

^  k0imax  k0  z ^  k0imin  k0  z       2 1 , z0  k 0  z0  k0 

(72)

then there exists an equilibrium with factor price equalization in every period. When such an equilibrium exists, it is unique. If, however, either of the conditions (72) or
Error! Reference source not found. is violated, there is no equilibrium with factor price

equalization in every period. .
Proof: This proof is an obvious generalization of the proof of proposition 7 using the definitions in

proposition 8. Even though its proof is trivial given the machinery that we have developed, proposition 9 is a powerful result. Under some general conditions, even if factor price equalization occurs at a given period, at some point in the future factor prices will differ across countries. In the case where
1/ b b  0 and 1/   DA1 , for example, the unique equilibrium of the integrated economy converges

to the nontrivial steady state, but, if initial endowments of capital per worker are sufficiently different in the sense that either of the conditions (72) is violated, then there is no disaggregated equilibrium that corresponds to it. Even if the world economy starts with all countries diversifying in production and factor prices equalized, at some point at least one country necessarily has its capital-labor ratio leave the cone of diversification. Abstracting away from the patterns of specialization, as Ventura (1997), Chen (1992), and many others do, misses out on some important dynamics precisely in the interesting cases, the cases in which there is potentially divergence of income levels. In such cases, we cannot use the integrated economy approach to solve for the equilibrium, and none of the analysis in propositions 3, 4, and 5 applies. Instead, we need to use numerical methods to compute the equilibrium. In what follows we present numerical examples that violate the assumptions of proposition 6 or of condition (72) or in proposition 10. In all these examples, the convergence results drastically differ from the convergence predictions under factor price equalization in proposition 6. We explain how to compute equilibrium for the generalized Ventura model in section 6. We present three numerical examples that illustrate different equilibrium patterns for the Ventura model when there are corner solutions in investment and for the generalized Ventura model when countries are not in the cone of diversification along the entire equilibrium path. In 28

each of the examples, we consider a two-country economy. We set   0.95 ,   1 , and
L1  L2  10 .
Example 1 (Ventura model): This example shows that ignoring the possibility of corner solutions

in the Ventura model can lead to the wrong predictions on convergence in income levels. Suppose that
0.5 f ( x1 , x2 )  10  0.5 x10.5  0.5 x2  , 2

(73)

and that k01  6 and k02  2 . The equilibrium paths for kti are depicted by the solid line in figure 2. Notice that country 2 has xti  kti  0 starting in period 3. Figure 3 depicts the relative income of country 1. Symmetry implies that ( yt2  yt ) / yt  ( yt1  yt ) / yt . Proposition 5 gives us no indication of what happens to the distribution of income across countries: ( yt1  yt ) / yt increases from 0.3063 in period 0 to 0.3211 in period 1 and then steadily declines, until it equals 0.2977 in the steady state. Notice that relative incomes converge between periods 1 and 2 even though investment is strictly positive in both countries in both periods. For the sake of comparison, we also plot in figures 2 and 3 the equilibrium paths of capital stocks and income distribution for an economy with initial endowments k01  5 and k02  3 (in dashed lines). In this case, xti  0 for all
i and t and proposition 6 applies. In the economy with more similar initial capital stocks, both

countries accumulate capital over time, and income levels diverge over time, with ( yt1  yt ) / yt increasing from 0.1531 in period 0 to 0.1707 in the steady state.
Example 2 (Cobb-Douglas model): In this example, the initial endowments are different enough

so that one of the countries (country 2) specializes in production along the equilibrium path. Suppose that

1 (k , )  10k 0.6  0.4 2 (k , )  10k 0.4 0.6
0.5 f ( x1 , x2 )  x10.5 x2 ,

(74) (75) (76)

29

and that the initial endowments are k01  4 and k02  0.1 . Figure 4 shows the evolution of capital stocks in each country, kti (depicted in solid lines), and the cone of diversification,  1 ,  2 (depicted in dashed lines). The labor abundant country, country 2, specializes in the production of the labor intensive good, and the capital abundant country, country 1, diversifies. This pattern of production is maintained along the equilibrium path, with kt2 asymptotically converging to the boundary of the cone of diversification. Figure 4 also plots the cone of diversification of the integrated economy associated to our model economy (depicted in dotted lines),  1kt ,  2 kt . Notice that the cone of diversification of the integrated economy differs from the cone of diversification of the trade economy. Therefore, the pattern of specialization cannot be determined by using the former. Figure 4 illustrates this clearly: in periods 0, 1, and 2, kt1 is inside the cone of diversification (country 1 diversifies), even though it is outside the cone of diversification of the integrated economy. The evolution of relative income levels is presented in figure 5. Income levels in our economy converge even though proposition 6 says that relative incomes would stay constant if both countries were to diversify.
Example 3 (C.E.S. model with b  0 ): This example complements proposition 10 by presenting

an economy where one of the countries exits the cone of diversification after a finite number of periods. Suppose that

1 (k , )  10  0.8k 0.5  0.2 0.5 

2

(77) (78) (79)

2 (k , )  10  0.2k 0.5  0.8 0.5 

2

0.5 f ( x1 , x2 )   0.5 x10.5  0.5 x2  , 2

and that k01  5 and k02  2 . Figure 6 shows the evolution of equilibrium capital stocks over time (solid lines). The cone of diversification is depicted in dashed lines. Notice that country 1 diversifies along the equilibrium path. The evolution of kt2 is depicted in more detail in figure 7, a blowup of the detail in figure 6. As seen in the figure, country 2, the labor abundant country, produces both goods in periods 0 and 1. In period 2, kt2 jumps outside the cone of diversification and country 2 specializes in the production of the labor intensive good. (We could say that the 30

boundary of the cone of diversification jumps over kt2 .) Over time, kt2 converges back to the boundary of the cone of diversification. Since country 1 diversifies along the equilibrium path, factor prices are equalized in periods 0 and 1, but not afterward. Figure 8 shows that relative incomes converge monotonically over time. This example illustrates the limited scope of proposition 6. Under the assumption that factor prices equalize along the equilibrium path, the model reduces to a Ventura model with b  0.5 and proposition 5 stipulates divergence in income levels. As the example shows, however, even if factor prices equalize in the initial periods, the opposite convergence result can hold if factor prices do not equalize along the entire equilibrium path. The dotted lines in figures 6, 7, and 8 depict the equilibrium of the Ventura model with
0.5 f ( x1 , x2 )  5.7328  0.5 x10.5  0.5 x2  , a model with the same integrated economy equilibrium as 2

our C.E.S. model. Notice how different are the convergence properties of relative incomes in the two equilibria.
6. Computation of equilibrium

In this section we describe how we compute equilibrium for the examples in the previous section. In characterizing the cone of diversification of the integrated economy as the set of capital-labor ratios kti that satisfy  2 kt  kti  1kt , we have relied heavily, not just on the assumption of specific functional forms for 1 , 2 , and f , but also on the assumption that all countries produce both goods. Under these assumptions, we derive optimal capital-labor ratios in each industry as functions of the world capital-labor ratio. If capital-labor ratios for all countries are inside the cone of diversification, we are justified in using the integrated economy approach. If not, and at least one of the countries specializes, p2t / p1t does not, in general, equal its value in the integrated equilibrium. Consequently, we cannot use  j  p2 (kt ) / p1 (kt )    j kt to characterize the cone of diversification and to determine the pattern of specialization. Instead, we must calculate

1 ( p2 / p1 ) and  2 ( p2 / p1 ) by solving (16).
In the C.E.S. model, the cone of diversification is determined by the capital-labor ratios    1 ( p2 / p1 )   1   1  1 
1/(1b )

 (1   2 )1/(1b ) ( 2 p2 / p1 )b /(1b )  (1  1 )1/(1b ) 1b /(1b )    11/(1b )1b /(1b )   21/(1b ) ( 2 p2 / p1 )b /(1b )  

1/ b

(80)

31

    1  1   1 ( p2 / p1 )   2      1   2   1  

1/(1b )

 2 ( p2 / p1 ) .

(81)

In Cobb-Douglas model, the limiting case where b  0 , these become
 p / p    2  1   1 2  2 1 ( p2 / p1 )   2 2 1  2        1        1 1 1  
1/(1  2 )

(82)

1 ( p2 / p1 )  

  2   1  1     2 ( p2 / p1 ) .  1    2  1 

(83)

If the integrated economy approach is valid because there are no corner solutions in investment and all countries have capital-labor ratios that remain in the cone of diversification, then we need only solve for the sequence of capital stocks for the integrated economy by solving the one-sector social planner's problem (19) to solve for equilibrium. Given this solution, we can then use propositions 3 and 4 to calculate the equilibrium prices and the formula
i kti  kt zt  kT  kT     kt zT  kT 

(84)

to disaggregate consumption and investment decisions. We disaggregate production decisions by requiring that all countries use capital and labor in the optimal proportions, k ijt / ijt   j kt , and satisfy the feasibility conditions (9) and (10). If the integrated economy approach is not valid, the situation is far more complicated. To keep our discussion simple, we ignore the possibility of corner solutions in investment and instead focus on the case where complications arise because of specialization in production. The approach that we take is to guess the sequence of capital stocks for all countries and the sequence of prices for good 1. Given the price of good 1, we use the first-order conditions
i i i f1 ( x1it , x2 t )  f1 (c1t , c2 t )  p1t

(85)

i i i to determine the ratio x1it / x2 t  c1t / c2 t . Given this ratio, we can determine the price of the second

good using the first-order condition
i f 2 ( x1it , x2 t )  p2 t .

(86)

32

Given the prices p1t and p2t , we can determine the cone of diversification by solving for

1 ( p2 / p1 ) and  2 ( p2 / p1 ) . Given the cone of diversification, we can solve for the pattern of
production and the factor prices in each country. We can divide total income into consumption and investment by fixing investment at the level needed to accumulate capital for the next period. For computation, we need to reduce the remaining equilibrium conditions to a finite number of equations in the same finite number of unknowns, which are the sequence of capital stocks for all countries and the sequence of prices for good 1 that we have guessed. We do this by truncating the time horizon at some period T by assuming that the equilibrium approximately converges to a steady state -- or a sustained growth path, depending on parameter values -- by that period. Bajona and Kehoe (2006) argue that any steady state of the generalized Ventura model has factor price equalization across countries. In addition, they show that factor prices equalize as countries converge to a sustained growth path. They also argue that, in our particular environment, equilibrium cycles are not possible. In appendix C, we provide further details on the algorithm that we use to compute equilibria.
7. Concluding remarks

This paper presents results that some economists may find surprising. First, proposition 6 says that introducing international trade into a model that reduces to a one-sector growth model can completely change the results on convergence of income levels. For example, if b  0 and   1 , and if the economy is productive enough to converge to a nontrivial steady state and capital starts below this steady state, there is convergence of income in a world of closed economies but divergence in a world of open economies. This example illustrates the danger of using closed economy models to study development in environments where trade may be important. Not only do results change, but they may be completely the opposite of what the closed economy analysis suggests. Second, proposition 10 says that factor price equalization in a given period does not imply factor price equalization in the future. In fact, for some parameter values and initial conditions, factor price equalization in a given period implies that factor prices cannot be equalized in the future. This result cautions against blindly assuming factor price equalization when working with dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin models. 33

Third, our numerical example 3 shows that, unless we can guarantee factor price equalization in all periods, our characterization of equilibria -- in particular, the convergence patterns of relative incomes -- is not useful even when there is factor price equalization in the current period. In fact, in a situation where we would expect divergence of income levels if we could somehow guarantee factor price equalization in the future, we can get convergence of income levels even while we are in the cone of diversification. This example illustrates the danger of ignoring the possibility of specialization in production. Not only can results change when we allow for specialization, but they may be the opposite of what the analysis that assumes factor price equalization suggests. Another aspect of our convergence results is worth commenting on. In the case where
b  0 and   1 , and where the economy is productive enough to converge to a nontrivial steady

^ , opening a closed economy that is poorer than state and capital starts below this steady state, k0  k

the world average to free trade slows down its growth and leads to convergence to a steady state with a lower capital-output ratio than the country would have reached had it remained closed. It is easy to show, however, that opening to trade leads to a gain in utility. Free trade guarantees higher utility, not higher growth rates.

34

Appendix A: Continuous-time Ventura model

In this section, we derive the properties of convergence in income levels for the continuoustime version of the Ventura model. The utility function becomes





0

e  t log f (c1 ,c2 ) dt ,

(87)

where   0 is the discount rate. As in the model with discrete time, the production functions of the traded goods are
y1  k1 y2   2 ,

(88) (89)

and the production function for the investment good is
x  f ( x1 , x2 ) ,

(90)

where f is specified as in (22) and (23). We can find the integrated economy equilibrium by solving the social planner's problem
max

s.t. c  x  f (k ,1)  k  x k c0, x0 k (0)  k0 .





0

e  t log c dt

(91)

Given that the cone of diversification is the whole nonnegative quadrant, factor prices equalize at all equilibrium prices, and, if there are no corner solutions in investment, we can derive formulas relating the equilibrium levels of capital and income to the levels of capital and income in the integrated economy equilibrium. In particular, Ventura (1997) shows that the capital-labor ratios satisfy
k i (t )  k (t ) c(t ) / k (t )  k i (0)  k (0)  z (t )  k i (0)  k (0)      , k (t ) c(0) / k (0)  k (0) k (0)  z (0)  

(92)

and draws phase diagrams in (k , z ) space to analyze convergence and divergence of k i and k . Notice that this is not the same as convergence and divergence of y i and y , where
y i  w  rk i  f (k i ,1) .

(93)

Since we are more interested in studying convergence in relative income levels than convergence in capital-labor ratios, we instead study the behavior of
y i (t )  y (t ) s (t )  y i (0)  y (0)     y (t ) s (0)  y (0) 

(94)

where

35

s (t ) 

r (t )c(t ) ( f K (k ,1)   )c(t ) g '(k )c(t )   , y (t ) f (k ,1) g (k )

(95)

by analyzing phase diagrams in (k , s ) space. Here g (k )  f (k ,1)   k . We use the first-order conditions and feasibility conditions
 c  g '(k )   c  g (k ) c k   k k k to obtain a system of differential equations in the (k , s ) space:
  g '(k ) 2  g (k ) g ''(k )  s  g '(k )       g '(k )  s  s g '(k ) 2  
 k g (k )   g '(k )  s  . k g '(k )k

(96) (97)

(98) (99)

Figures 9­11 depict phase diagrams in (k , s) space for different values of the parameter b . Notice that the results we obtain are similar to the results obtained in section 4 for the discrete-time 1/ b version of the model. Figure 9 shows that, for b  0 and da1     , s decreases over time and ^ , relative relative incomes converge. Figure 10 shows that, for b  0 and da1/ b     , if k  k
1
0

incomes diverge initially for k0 small enough, but later converge. Divergence of income everywhere along the equilibrium path is only obtained for very negative values of b and only for 1/ b ^ , as in figure 11.     , and k0  k cases where there is positive depreciation, where da1 Examining equation (92), we see that the continuous-time model can have the same sort of problems with corner solutions in investment as does the discrete time model. If z increases over time, then there are initial endowments of capital per worker sufficiently different so that the equilibrium will necessarily involve corner solutions in investment, making the integrated economy approach -- and the corresponding phase diagrams -- invalid. As example 1 indicates, even if we allow reversibility of investment and require only that k i  0 , we can still have corner solutions where some countries have zero capital stocks.
Appendix B: Analytical solution to the Cobb-Douglas model

Notice that, when all k0i are in the cone of diversification, we can use proposition 10 to obtain analytic solutions for all variables. Let  i  k0i / k0 , where  2   i  1 . rt  A1 DktA1 1 , wt  A2 DktA1
2  (  1) 2 2   a2 (1  2 )  (1   2 )111  a1 (1  2 ) p1t  a1d  1 k p a d kt ,  2t 2  t 1  2  (1  )   (  1)     2 1 1  2 2    1
a2 a1

(100) (101)

36

xti  kti1   i  A1 DktA1 D  (1   2 )111  c   2  d  (1  1) 2 2 
i 1t a2 a2 i i

(102)

D  (1   2 )111  i 1  A1   A1    A1  k , x  d  (  1)  2    A1kt1 (103) 2 2   1
1 t
i 1t

D  (  1) 2 2 2  c   1  d  (1   2 )111 
i 2t

a1

2  i D  (1  1) 2 2 x A A A k 1      A1kt 2 (104)    ,   1 1  1 1  d  (1   2 )11 
i i

a1

2 t

i 2t

y1it 
i 2t

 i  2  i  2  i  2  i  1 kt ,  1  1 1kt  , k1it  t 1   2 1   2 1   2
1 2

(105) (106)

1   i 1   i 1   i  i i y  k,    k  , k2t  1   2 2 t 2 t  1   2 1   2 2 2 t
where
1 kt   A1 DktA 1    A 1D 

t (1 A1 ) /(1 A1 )

k0A1 .

t

(107)

Appendix C: Algorithm used in the numerical examples

We first consider the case where the parameter values are such that the equilibrium of the integrated economy converges to the nontrivial steady state. To solve the model, we choose a truncation period T large enough so that the integrated economy equilibrium numerically converges to this steady state. ^)  1/   1   . 1. Compute the steady state of the integrated economy by solving r (k 2. Given initial levels of capital in each country k0i , guess values for the (n  1)T variables kti , ^ i , i  1,..., n . i  1,..., n , t  1,..., T  1 , p , t  0,..., T  1 , k
1t

3. For every t , t  0,1,..., T  1  Compute x1t / x2t and p2t using equations (85) and (86).   Compute the cone of diversification, 1t  1 ( p2t / p1t ) ,  2t   2 ( p2t / p1t ) using equations (80) and (81) or equations (82) and (83). For each country, compute the production of each traded good and the factor prices: i i i i i If kti  1t , k1it  kti , i1t  1 , y1it  1 (kti ,1) , k2 t  0 ,  2 t  0 , y2 t  0 , wt  p1t1L ( kt ,1) , rti  p1t1K (kti ,1) .
i p p p i i p p p i i i If 1t  kti   2t , k1it  1p t ( kt   2 t ) /(1t   2 t ) ,  1t  ( kt   2 t ) /(1t   2 t ) , y1t  1 ( k1t ,  1t ) ,
i p p i p p i p i p p i i i i p k2 t   2 t (1t  kt ) /(1t   2 t ) ,  2 t  (1t  kt ) /(1t   2 t ) , y2 t  2 ( k 2 t ,  2 t ) wt  p1t1L (1t ,1) ,

rti  p1t1K (1p t ,1) .
i i i i i i i If kti   2t , k1it  0 , i1t  0 , y1it  0 , k2 t  kt ,  2 t  1 , y2 t  2 ( kt ,1) , wt  p2 t2 L ( kt ,1) ,

rti  p2t2 K (kti ,1) .

37



For each country, compute the demand for each traded good in each country, c1it  x1it ,
i i c2 t  x2 t using the budget constraint (7) :

( x1t / x2t )( wti  rti kti ) c x  p1t ( x1t / x2t )  p2t
i 1t i 1t i i c2 t  x2 t 

(108) (109)

wti  rti kti . p1t ( x1t / x2t )  p2t



For each country, compute the total production of the investment good xti  kti1  (1   )kti , ^ i , and use this to disaggregate c i  x i and c i  x i : where k i  k
T

1t

1t

2t

2t

x1it 
i x2 t 

( x1t / x2t ) xti f ( x1t / x2t ,1) xti . f ( x1t / x2t ,1)

(110) (111)



Compute values for the (n  1)T functions: cti1  (1    rti1 ) , t  0,..., T  2 , i  1,..., n i  ct (112)

^i ,1)   k ^i f (k  1 , i  1,..., n i cT 1

(113) (114) (115)


^i k  ^ k

n i 1

( y1it  c1it  x1it ) , t  0,..., T  1



n

Lj kTj 1 /  j 1 Lj j 1
n

i kT 1

, i  1,..., n .

4. If these functions are not all within some specified distance from 0, adjust the guesses for the ^i using Newton's method and go to step 3. Iterate until (n  1)T variables kti , p1t , k convergence. In the cases where kt converges to 0 or where kt grows without bound, we define ^   n Li k i and k ^ and k ^i in the above algorithm with k ^i ,     DA11/ b  1    . We replace k  i1 T 1 T T and we replace the functions (113) with
^i ,1)  (1     )k ^i f (k T T  . i cT 1 (116)

38

If T is very large, the Jacobian matrix for Newton's method will be ill conditioned because some of the variables kti will be much larger than others. We can solve this problem by working with  i  k i /  t , t  1,..., T . the rescaled variables k
t t

A brute-force way to deal with corner solutions in investment is to guess the pattern of corner solutions and to solve the resulting system of equations. We replace the functions corresponding to first-order conditions, cti1  (1    rti1 ) (117) i  ct with kti1  (1   )kti . (118)

When we have solved this system of equations, we can check that the complementary slackness conditions (25) are satisfied:  cti1  (1    rti1 )  0  cti (119)

whenever we have guessed that xti  0 . If these conditions are satisfied, we can stop. Otherwise, we provide a new guess for the pattern of corner solutions and try again. One limitation to the algorithm is worth noting: The functions involved in the system of equations are not everywhere continuously differentiable. In particular, production plans and factor prices change in a continuous, but not in a continuously differentiable, manner as changes in prices cause a country's capital-labor ratio to pass through the boundary of the cone of diversification. This can cause Newton's method to be less stable than it is when working with continuously differentiable functions. Nonetheless, by keeping the step sizes in the Newton's method small, we have found that we can still compute equilibria.

39

References

A. Atkeson and P. J. Kehoe (2000), "Paths of Development for Early- and Late-Bloomers in a Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin Model," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 256. C. Bajona and T. J. Kehoe (2006), "Demographics in Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin Models: Overlapping Generations versus Infinitely Lived Consumers," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 377. P. K. Bardhan (1965), "Equilibrium Growth in the International Economy," Quarterly Journal of Economics 79: 455­464. R. J. Barro and X. Sala-i-Martin (2003), Economic Growth, second edition, MIT. Press. M. Baxter (1992), "Fiscal Policy, Specialization, and Trade in the Two-Sector Model: The Return of Ricardo?" Journal of Political Economy 100: 713­744. E. W. Bond, K. Trask, and P. Wang (2003), "Factor Accumulation and Trade: Dynamic Comparative Advantage with Endogenous Physical and Human Capital," International Economic Review 44: 1041­1060. R. A. Brecher, Z. Chen, and E. U. Choudhri (2002), "Absolute and Comparative Advantage, Reconsidered: The Pattern of International Trade with Optimal Saving," Review of International Economics 10: 645­656. P. Chatterjee and M. Shukayev (2004), "Convergence in a Stochastic Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin Model," University of Minnesota. Z. Chen (1992), "Long-Run Equilibria in a Dynamic Heckscher-Ohlin Model," Canadian Journal of Economics 25: 923­943. A. Cuñat and M. Maffezzoli (2004), "Neoclassical Growth and Commodity Trade," Review of Economic Dynamics 7: 707­736. A. V. Deardorff and J. A. Hanson (1978), "Accumulation and a Long-Run Heckscher-Ohlin Theorem," Economic Inquiry 16: 288­292. A. Dixit and V. Norman (1980), The Theory of International Trade: A Dual General Equilibrium Approach, Cambridge University Press. J. Doi, K. Nishimura, and K. Shimomura (2002), "Multiple Balanced Growth Paths and Indeterminacy in a Two-Country Model," Kyoto University. R. Findlay (1970), "Factor Proportions and Comparative Advantage in the Long Run," Journal of Political Economy 78: 27­34. M. Mussa (1978), "Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model," Journal of Political Economy 86: 775­791. 40

K. Nishimura and K. Shimomura (2002), "Trade and Indeterminacy in a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model," Journal of Economic Theory 105: 244­260. F. Obiols-Homs (2005), "Trade Effects on the Personal Distribution of Wealth," Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona. H. Oniki and H. Uzawa (1965), "Patterns of Trade and Investment in a Dynamic Model of International Trade," Review of Economic Studies 32: 15­38. Y. Ono and A. Shibata (2005), "Fiscal Spending, Relative-Price Dynamics, and Welfare in a World Economy," Review of International Economics 13: 216­236. S. Rebelo (1991), "Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy 99: 500­521. A. Smith (1984), "Capital Theory and Trade Theory," in P. B. Kenen and R. W. Jones, editors, Handbook of International Economics, volume 1, North-Holland, 289­324. J. E. Stiglitz (1970), "Factor Price Equalization in a Dynamic Economy," Journal of Political Economy 78: 456­488. N. L. Stokey and R. E. Lucas with E. C. Prescott (1989), Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard University Press. J. Ventura (1997), "Growth and Interdependence," Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 57­84.

41

Figure 1 Lerner Diagram and cone of diversification

k

p11 (k , )  1

k1 / 1

k2 /  2

p22 (k , )  1

rk  w  1

Figure 2

Example 1: Capital-labor ratios
12 10 8 ratio 6 4 2 0 0 1 2
period

kt1

k

1 0

 6, k02  2  kt1 kt2
kt2
3

k
1 0

1 0 1 0

 5, k02  3  5, k02  3

k

k

 6, k02  2 
4 5

42

Figure 3

Example 1: Relative income in country 1
0.4

deviation from average

k01  6, k02  2
0.3

0.2

k01  5, k02  3

0.1 0 1 2 period 3 4 5

Figure 4
Example 2: Capital-labor ratios
1.0

0.8

1 ( p2t / p1t )
kt1

0.6 ratio

0.4

1kt  2 kt
0 1 2

 2 ( p2t / p1t )
kt2
3 period 4 5

0.2

0.0

43

Figure 5

Example 2: Relative income in country 1
0.7 0.6 deviation from average 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 1 2 pe riod 3 4 5

Figure 6

Example 3: Capital-labor ratios
6 5 4 ratio 3 2 1 0 0 1

1 ( p2t / p1t )

kt1 (Ventura model) kt1 (C.E.S. model)

k

2 (C.E.S. model) t

 2 ( p2t / p1t )
kt2 (Ventura model)
2 period 3 4

44

Figure 7

Example 3: Capital-labor ratios (detail)
1.5

kt1
1.0 ratio

 2 ( p2t / p1t )
kt2 (C.E.S. model) kt2 (Ventura model)

0.5

0.0 0 1 2 period 3 4

Figure 8

Example 3: Relative income in country 1
0.32 0.30 deviation from average

Ventura model
0.28 0.26 0.24

C.E.S. model
0.22 0.20 0 1 2 period 3 4 5

45

Figure 9

b0
s
 s 0 s

 k 0 k

k
Figure 10

b0

s
 k 0 k

 s 0 s

k
46

Figure 11

b  0 and   0

s

 k 0 k

 s 0 s

k

47

