Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research 10-1-1984 Politics and Public Administration

Review [untitled]
Phil Rawkins
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics Part of the Political Science Commons Recommended Citation
Rawkins, Phil, "Review [untitled]" (1984). Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research. Paper 5. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics/5

This Other is brought to you for free and open access by the Politics and Public Administration at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Reviews of Books

359

tish historicalresearch.Not only has GordonDonaldsonbeen the authorof significantbooks, articles,and reviews(someof whichlatterhaveleft a firmimpression on those authorswhosebooks havebeen dealtwith as only ProfessorDonaldsoncould havedone) but he has also servedthe publicsectorof historicalstudyin the Scottish recordoffice, actedas firsteditorof the Scottish Historical Review afterits revivalin 1947(a revival,it may be said, with whichProfessorDonaldsonhad muchto do), of studentsand scholars,some of and been the mentorto almost two generations in this Festschrift.Giventhe parochial whichScotwhom are represented treatment of tish history as a disciplinehas for long receivedwithin the largercurriculum even it British,including Scottish,universities, maybe saidwithoutverymuchexaggeration that Professor Donaldson's writingsand, more properly,the standards which he has imposed, consciouslyor unconsciously,upon his co-workersin the field have helped significantlyin broadeninginterest and raisingthe quality of of the disciplineto new levelsof achievement. scholarship The rangeof the contributions is so variousas to makea full summary of eachimpossiblewithinthe limitsof a shortreview.Whilethe qualityof all the essaysis very high, certainof them more closely touch upon ProfessorDonaldson'sarea of particularinterest, namely, the field of Scottish ecclesiastical history duringthe sixteenthand seventeenth centuries.Thus the essaysof the two editorsas well as those of JamesKirkand MauriceLee deal with topics in Scottishreligioushistory,while T.M.Y. Mansonin an essay on Shetlandin the sixteenthcenturytouchesupon an historicareawhich, possiblybecauseof his Shetlanddescent,has also attracted the scholarlyattentionof ProfessorDonaldson.ProfessorDenys Hay discussesthe influencesof the ItalianRenaissance on Scotland,while aspectsof social historyare coveredby the contributions of JohnBannerman, EdwardJ. Cowan,JohnDurkan, and Margaret H.B. Sanderson. T.L. Christensen and Athol Murray deal, respectively, with the tribulationsof a sixteenth-century Scotish exile in Denmarkand the financesof the royal householdin the reignof JamesV (1513-1543). Thereare apof variousaspectsof ProfessorDonaldson'slife and scholarlycareerby preciations ThomasLothianand John Imrie. The scholarlyrichnessof the offeringsdoes creditto the editorsand is worthyof its honorific.
Boston University
SIDNEY A. BURRELL

D. Hywel Davies. The Welsh Nationalist Party 1925-1945: A Call to Nationhood. New York: St. Martin's Press. 1983. Pp. ix. 286. $27.50. It was only in the 1960's that, along side its counterpart in Scotland, Welsh Nationalism forced its way to center stage of British political life. Perhaps what is most remarkable about the early years of the Welsh Nationalist Party-a story told by Hywel Davies with sensitivity and considerable insight-is that it survived. Indeed, in

360

Albion

many ways, it was not a political party at all, in the established sense. It failed to contest many parliamentary or local elections. When it did so, its organization was shown to be weak and its electioneering skills virtually non-existent. The rewards at the polls were meagre. Elections were fought principally as a means of recruiting new converts. Founded in 1925 by a small band of intellectuals-an unlikely revolutionary vanguard-the party was, as its opponents claimed, a cultural association of "poets, preachers and teachers." The party-more accurately, the nationalist movement-emerged not in a vacuum, but in the circumstances of the years of disillusion following World War I, a war fought, according to Prime Minister David Lloyd George, on behalf of small nations. For nationalists, Lloyd George himself personified the limits of what the political system offered to Wales. The one-time leader of a self-proclaimed Welsh nationalist faction within the Liberal Party in Wales, went on to success at Westminister, and to become the great war leader and jingoistic champion of Empire. The example of Ireland was very much in the minds of founders of Welsh Nationalism. Yet, unlike the Irish Republicans, Welsh nationalists were troubled and uncertain about the methods to be used in pursuing their objective of Welsh selfgovernment. Party ideologists were intent on rejecting "English" modes of thought and "English" politics. Despite this, the fear of involvement in militant action on the part of a membership brought up in homes and communities steeped in the values of respectablity and humility as expounded by the Non-conformist Protestant churches placed Welsh Nationalism very much in the web of political culture typical of the petit bourgeoisie of England, as well as Wales. What was distinctive about the Welsh-speaking intellegentsia was the common bond of the Welsh language. With the dawn of the 1920's, it became apparent that an era had ended. The class which had provided the leadership to religious dissent and the movement for political reform associated with the Liberal Party, now found itself assigned to a status of social and political irrelevancy. The plight of the language brought on by the associated forces of modernity and anglicization, seemed to sum up the threat to a whole way of life. Thus it was the struggle to save the language rather than self-government for its own sake, which motivated nationalists. The years 1920 to 1945 must be viewed as a period of unremitting political failure for the Welsh Nationalist Party. Yet, if the party is viewed as a focus of a political movement-a current of ideas- the contribution of these years, as Hywel Davies makes clear, was more significant. Led by a handful of visionaries, Welsh Nationalists sought to separate themselves from the dominant trends in Welsh political and social thought. The very success of the party in separating itself from the political mainstream is one telling reason for its political failure. It was a party of "amateurs", quite lacking in political experience, and largely unsuited by temperament and upbringing to the regular routine work required of its activists by a political party. In ideological or cultural terms, the impact of the party's existence was more tell-

Reviewsof Books

361

vision had becomethe leitmotifof the ing. By the end of the 1930's,the nationalist most dynamicelementson the Welsh-language literaryscene. The majorityof the to naleadingwritersand poets of the post-1945era wereto owe their inspiration tionalism. In turn, this vision of an independentWales and a vigorousminority culturewas passed on to the next generation,which would have fewer inhibitions about militantpoliticalaction. The party'sinspirational figurein its earlieryearswas Saunders Lewis;a convert to Roman Catholicism,much influencedby Frenchradicalconservative thought, and particularly the ideasof Barres andMaurras. The "papism"of Lewisanda small group within the leadershipof a predominantly Protestantparty in a profoundly Protestantsocietydid littleto win overpopularsupport.Suchwas Lewis'intellectual predominance that his thinkingwentlargelyunchallenged despiteits lack of fit with mainstream politicalthinking. It maybe claimed,withjustice,thatthe ideologyforgedby Lewiswas out of keeping with the needsof the times. However,the independent trackfollowedby Lewis and his colleaguescontributed enormouslyto the abilityof subsequent generations of nationalist leadersand intellectuals to forgea distinctive world-view, whichwould prove sufficientlystrong to hold togethera resilientnationalistsub-culture in the face of the onslaughtof the age of mediahypeand electionsfoughtlargelyon television. Hywel Davies' book has been some time in the making,but the resultis a most worthwhile additionto a scant literature (in English,at least). The authortells the story of an often obscureand bewildering social group with fairnessand imagination. Onedisappointment is the absenceof a moredetailedtreatment of the thinking of nationalistintellectuals and the writersthey inspired.However,there are other books whichdo this and none whichfocus in suchdetailon the earlyyearsof Welsh nationalism. An understanding of theseyears,and of the fate of the nationalist idea in Walesat a time when the English-speaking worldwas understandably hostileto nationalismin all its guises, is importantto a broaderview of the events of later years,whenminoritynationalism was to becomea significant movementof political oppositionthroughoutthe westernworld.
Ryerson Polytechnical Institute, Toronto
PHILLIP RAWKINS


