FINDING THE DIONNES: REDISCOVERING THE C9 FRED DAVIS AND YVONNE LEROUX FONDS AND DEVELOPING A FINDING AID AT THE ARCHIVES OF ONTARIO

by Chanelle Fabbri BAH, York University, Toronto, 2012

A Thesis Project Presented to Ryerson University and the Archives of Ontario In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF ART In the Program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2014 © Chanelle Fabbri 2014!

Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be electronically available to the public. Finding the Dionnes: Rediscovering the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds and Developing a Photographic Finding Aid at the Archives of Ontario. Master of Arts, 2014 Chanelle Fabbri Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University

ii

Abstract
The C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds at the Archives of Ontario is comprised of textual and photographic materials that primarily document the 1930's Canadian phenomenon, the Dionne Quintuplets; Davis was their official photographer and Leroux, was their nurse. This Fonds, although important to Canadian history, had a similar fate to many archivally held collections, in that improper processing made the collection challenging to discover and navigate through. This applied thesis discusses the literature research, and overall development and creation of a finding aid. It also examines the development of a current finding aid completed to the Archives of Ontario's standards, which logically organized the collection and links the material physically and intellectually.

iii

Dedication
I would like to thank all my fellow classmates, Archives of Ontario (AO) and Ryerson teaching staff. To my professors who have helped shape my experience and inspired me, especially program director David Harris, my first reader Dee Psaila, second reader Jean Bruce and Sean Smith at the AO. Their helpful guidance throughout this process made my thesis possible. Also I would like to thank the Dionne Museum, for allowing me to access their collection and sharing their knowledge. Thank you to all my extremely supportive friends and family. To my ever-supportive editing team, Chloe, Meghann, Catherine and Victoria, without your help I would have been lost. I also want to thank Pariss who has been a positive force from my undergraduate studies to now. You are the one who told me about the FPPCM program initially, and your guidance has helped me though it all. I can't thank you enough for all your help over the years. Lastly, to my parents who taught me how to believe in myself, to never give up and that there is always an exception to the rule. You helped me get to where I am today, you believed in my dream and in me. THANK YOU.

iv

Table of Contents
Declaration .......................................................................................................................... ii Abstract .............................................................................................................................. iii Dedication .......................................................................................................................... iv List of Figures and/or List of Illustrations ......................................................................... vi List of Appendices ............................................................................................................ vii Part I Chapter One: Introduction and Histories ............................................................................ 1
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 1 Histories ....................................................................................................................................... 5 Biography of Dionne Quintuplets' Nurse, Yvonne Leroux .................................................... 5 Biography of Photographer, Fred Davis ................................................................................. 6

Chapter Two: Literature Review ........................................................................................ 8 Chapter Three: Assessing the Collection .......................................................................... 14 Chapter Four: Supplementary Research for Structuring the Finding Aid ........................ 27 Chapter Five: Developing the Overall Project Plan .......................................................... 37 Chapter Six: Conclusion ................................................................................................... 42 Bibliography ..................................................................................................................... 44 Part II Archives of Ontario C 9 Finding Aid ............................................................................... 52

! ! ! !

v

List of Figures and/or List of Illustrations
Figure 1 - Image of File Records Figure 2 - Image of Handwritten Box List Figure 3 ­ Screenshot of Type Notes on Box Content Figure 4 - Image of Cart with Negative Boxes Figure 5 ­ Box List Chart Figure 6 - Image of Negative Box with Paper Tag Figure 7 - Image of Glass Negative with a Chip Figure 8 - Image of Discolored Negative Page 14 Page 16 Page 19 Page 20 Page 21 Page 23 Page 24 Page 25

vi

List of Appendices
1. 1997 Archives of Ontario C 9 Finding Aid 2. Master Box List 3. Archives of Ontario C 9 Catalogue

vii

Part I

Chapter One: Introduction and Histories
Introduction
! On May 28, 1934, five identical baby girls were born in Callander, a small town just

outside of North Bay, Ontario. The miracle of their birth would spark national curiosity and would lead them to become an international phenomenon known as the `Dionne Quintuplets.' Well-known Canadian historian, Pierre Berton, states in his book The Dionne Years: The Thirties Melodrama, that It is not possible to trace the social history of the 30's without reference to the Dionne quintuplets. The reverse is also true. It is certain that, had they been born into an earlier decade, they would have expired swiftly, one-day wonders to be headlined briefly and quickly forgotten. It is equally certain that had the miracle occurred a generation later, the spotlight would have been softer and the melodrama muted.
1

Berton notes that in the height of the great depression, the birth of the Dionne Quintuplets provided a source of economic revival to northern Ontario. Therefore, this combination created a distraction from the deteriorating living conditions of the 1930s and paved the way to the north.2 Contributing largely to the popularity of the Dionne Quintuplets were the images taken by photographer Fred Davis. As their official photographer, Davis's photographs were the only images of the five girls. The images he captured were published worldwide, and for most people were the only link they could have to the Dionnes, who were daily newsmakers in the mid to late 1930s. These images today still invoke the interest and curiosity that the world had with the quints. Davis's photographs of the Dionne Quintuplets are primary sources that act as documents of the time, and therefore hold great historical importance, both nationally and internationally.

1 Pierre Berton, The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1977), p 11-12. 2 Pierre Berton, The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, p 11-12.

The C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds was donated to the Archives in the late 1980s from the Davis family Estate. The collection contains a variety of material ranging from correspondence, financial records and diaries, to photographic prints and negatives. Moreover, the collection spans an assortment of subject matter: the Moose River Mine disaster of 1936, British Royal visits to Canada in 1924, 1939 and 1952 and the Dionne Quintuplets. The collection in its entirety needs to be intellectually re-organized, and will be with the creation of a finding aid. This applied and theoretical thesis project will address the issue of disorganization and underutilization of the collection. It will also address the problem of how the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds can be organized and structured accurately for an archival setting. To address this issue, a finding aid will be created, taking into account the requirements of the archives. This finding aid will be created to better serve the public through accessibility while maintaining the proper preservation of the objects. The project is in line with a current administrative goal of the Archives of Ontario - to address collections that are not organized and accessible to staff and researchers, both intellectually and physically, to the standards of the institution. This project will not only increase accessibility to a collection with great historical importance, but will improve the overall preservation of the objects, and will allow greater collection management control over these important archives. By creating a finding aid for the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, the Archives will have a greater understanding of what items are in the collection and therefore reduce the amount of unnecessary handling of the objects. The largest subject grouping of the collection are objects related to the Dionne Quintuplets. This section contains approximately 1,400 professionally made photographic prints

2

and over 2,000 negatives taken of them by their photographer Fred Davis. This collection has the potential to be used as a primary source for studying in the investigation, and building of a narrative of the lives of the Dionne Quintuplets - one of the most unique Canadian stories. Although the Dionnes make up the better portion of the collection, all of the subject groupings will be addressed. The Nova Scotia Moose River Mine Disaster of 1936 is another subject grouping that is presented in this collection. Davis was one of the only photographers on location and got the much-coveted shot of the survivors emerging from the mine. This subject group contains mostly photographic prints in a variety of sizes and mediums. The comprehensive approach that will be taken in my review of this collection will increase the value and longevity of the artifacts by making them more accessible and better preserved for the future. The following applied thesis project is explained in this order. Chapter One: Introduction and Histories explains the project. It provides background knowledge on the project itself as well as the histories of both Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux. Chapter Two: Literature Review addresses the previously written literature written on or relating to this particular project. This chapter discusses the publications, which offer insight into a variety of topics relating to this project, from Canadian identity to the importance of finding aids. There is also discussion on the lack of literary sources relating to the Dionnes that pay tribute or give any recognition to Fred Davis. Part One is dived into four sections: Chapter Three: Assessing the Collection; Chapter Four: Supplementary Research for Structuring the Finding Aid; Chapter Five: Developing the Overall Project Plan; and lastly Chapter Six: Conclusion, along with the bibliography. Chapter Three: Assessing the Collection, begins with the overall inventory and assessment, which I performed on the collection when I was first introduced to the materials.

3

This chapter details the investigation I went through while dealing with both intellectual and physical materials. It provides a step-by-step explanation and my justification for how I approached and handled several obstacles the collection presented. Chapter Four: Supplementary Research for Structuring the Finding Aid, discusses the supplementary research, and others experiences of working with archival collections and describing them. The section analyzes the key elements that make up a finding aid, how and why they are important, and how they are going to help with the overall organization of the C 9 Fonds. Chapter Five: Developing the Overall Project Plan, discusses the plan I laid out and the execution of a somewhat different version. This chapter explores how I wanted to carry out this practical, applied thesis, as well as the different approaches I took to achieve that overall goal. This chapter presents a transition from the explanation of how I worked with the collection to a discussion about possible future projects for the Fonds. It addresses how this applied thesis can be a stepping-stone for the possible digitization of this collection and how having a comprehensive finding aid may lead to a future relationship with the Dionne Museum. Chapter Six: Conclusion and the bibliography end Part I of the thesis. This is the end of the analysis and description of the project and how the disorganized collection was re-imagined and restructured. The bibliography is a detailed source list of all materials that were investigated for the purpose of this project. Part Two contains the Finding Aid. This section of the thesis is a standalone document that will be utilized by the Archives of Ontario and uploaded to their online database. Although the finding aid is presented in a paper format, all of the information included within will be copied and reformatted for their website, allowing this finding aid to be searchable on the

4

internet. Overall, this project provides the Archives of Ontario with a newly restructured and reorganized collection. The C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds has been updated to fit the archives standards as well as to better serve the public researcher. The new finding aid provides a comprehensive and complete analysis of the collection that is properly structured, and therefore easily uploaded to the archives database and website. This practical applied project has allowed me to fully immerse myself in the world of archives through a fascinating collection which appealed to my interest in social Canadian history and the photographic image. Histories The first nurse to the Dionne Quintuplets, Yvonne Mary Blanche Leroux (1912- 1981) and the Quintuplet's official photographer Fredrick (Fred) Robson Davis (1900? ­ 1963) created the majority of collection during their time working with the Dionnes. Also included are elements from other projects Davis worked on, such as the Moose River Mine Disaster in 1936, and the British royal visits of 1924, 1939 and 1952. Biography of Dionne Quintuplet's Nurse, Yvonne Leroux Yvonne Mary Blanche Leroux (1912- 1981) Yvonne Mary Blanche Leroux was born in Callander, Ontario, near North Bay, where her father worked as a lumberjack and handyman. Leroux grew up with receiving a local education and was one of the first to graduate from the nursing program at St. Joseph's Hospital in North Bay. When Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe put out a call for French speaking nurses on May 29, 1934, Leroux answered and made her way to the Dionne family farm. Leroux continued her nursing position with the Dionne Quintuplets until she retired in December of 1936 in order to begin

5

married life with Fred Davis. After leaving the Dionnes, Leroux went on a lecture tour of the United States and Canada spanning 1936 and 1937. Later, Leroux dedicated herself to raising her children, three sons and one daughter, and only returned to nursing for a short period after Davis's death in 1963.
3

Biography of Photographer, Fred Davis Fredrick Robson Davis (1900? ­ 1963) Davis is believed to be born in Toronto, but raised by family in the United States due to his mother's death during childbirth and his father's subsequent death shortly after. Davis joined the military to fight in World War I and served Canada until he was injured in Amiens. After the war, Davis began his career as a photographer when he joined Toronto World, a subsidiary of the Toronto Star. After his time with the Toronto World, Fred Davis became a staff photographer at the Mail and Empire. He was eventually hired by the Toronto Star as one of the few full-time photographers among a crew of mainly freelance photographers.
6 5 4

Davis was working on a side project as a photographer for a newspaper in Chicago when the Quintuplets were born and was sent by The Star to photograph the babies. He was the first photographer to get to North Bay and, three days after the Quintuplets were born on May 31, he took their first photograph. Davis negotiated exclusive rights to the photographic contract for the Toronto Star at the end of 1934. The Star Newspaper Service acquired the exclusive rights
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Carolyn Gray, Revised, Inventory of the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds C 9, (Archives of Ontario,1997). File Record for C-9 Fond. Archives of Ontario. "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets," The Globe and Mail (1936- Current), May 29, 1963, p 8. Ross Harkness, JE. Atkinson of the Star, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,1963). p 158. Tesher, Ellie. The Dionnes, (Toronto: Doubleday Canada, 1999), p 30. File Record for C-9 Fond, Archives of Ontario. Pierre Berton, The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1977), p 76.
9 8 7

6

in Canada and Newfoundland. Once Davis was hired as the official photographer for the Quintuples, he moved to North Bay and held the position for five and a half years until the rights expired.
10

Davis was the only person who could take photographs of the children, but he did not

have the right to photograph the rest of the Dionne family. As a result, the girls were only publicly shown with their doctor.
11

Davis spent approximately an hour a day, from
12

8:30 to 9:30 am, with the exception of Sundays photographing the Quintuplets.

As well as his work with the Dionnes, Davis is also known for his work on the Moose River Mine Disaster in 1936. Here he took the much-coveted photographs of the three miners and the chamber that caved in on them.
13

Davis, along with four partners, went into commercial photography in 1946. Davis continued his venture into commercial photography and became the co-owner of Canada Pictures with Strathy Smith.
14

In 1957, Davis was chosen to work as the official photographer

for the Diefenbaker campaign. Fred Davis succumbed to the effects of a heart seizure and died at Oakville-Trafalgar Memorial Hospital on May 27, 1963 at the age of 63.
15

10 Ross Harkness, JE. Atkinson of the Star, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,1963), p 249. 11 Pierre Berton, The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, p 15. 12 "The Globe and Mail's Quint Photos Smart but Blanks to Babes," The Globe and Mail (1936-Current), Jan 13, 1937. 13 "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets," May 29, 1963, p 8. 14 "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets," p 8. 15 Ibid, p 8.

7

Chapter 2: Literature Review
Prior to working with the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, it was necessary to contextualize the collection by researching existing material that related to the collection. The material in C 9 relates to national identity specifically related photography, archival arrangement and description, the Dionne Quintuplets, and their official photographer Fred Davis. This analysis of literature, surrounding and connected to the collection, will help to provide a framework and assist in the development of the finding aid for C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds at the Archives of Ontario. To understand the motive behind and the value of this extensive photographic collection, it is necessary to investigate how photographs aid in the creation and development of Canadian national identity. The images that Fred Davis produced of the Dionne Quintuplets were of an extremely popular subject matter in the 1930s. They fascinated Canada and the world, and the Dionne's image would become interconnected with Canadian identity. This collection of material held by the Archives of Ontario helped to fashion an element that was distinctively Canadian and, therefore, holds great social historical importance. Further research into Canadian identity was examined through The House of Difference, a book by Dr. Eva Mackey, a professor of Canadian Studies. Mackey examines why the notion of national identity is important to the foundation of Canada. Mackey states, "It offers a `narrative of nationhood,' and is one of the stories which is closely linked to the images, landscape, scenarios, historical events, national symbols and rituals, [...that] stand for, or represent, the shared experiences, sorrows, [...] triumphs and disasters which give meaning to the nation."
16

16 Eva Mackey, The House of Difference: Cultural Policies and National Identity in Canada, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2002), p 2.

8

In the 1930s, the Dionne Quintuplets were part of the narrative of Nationhood in Canada. They were the object of fascination and attention for so many, and often a symbol of hope during the time of the Great Depression. Their images linked not only Canada, but also the world, through shared experiences of watching the girls grow. In addition, Photographic Memories: Private Pictures, Public Images, and American History by Rob Kroes, discusses how a photograph catches a fleeting moment, which is a representation of an event or experience and how this can become part of our collective imagination.
17

Joan M. Schwartz and James R. Ryan build further on the use of photography in

the creation of national identity in their book, Picturing Place: Photography and the Geographical Imagination. They argue, "photography remains a powerful tool in our engagement with the world around us. Through photographs, we see, we remember, we imagine: we `picture place'."
18

Schwartz and Ryan support this analysis with a discussion about the

subjectivity inherent in the photographic image. They examine the implications of a photograph "as a way seeing and knowing the world,"
19

and how the image is taken as truth, with little
20

thought of the photographer's objective or the strategic angles used.

The belief in the image as

a truth is an interesting point of consideration when viewing the Dionne images, because of how they were strategically staged. This connection via photography is displayed through the Dionne Quintuplet's photographic material at the Archives of Ontario. The photographs of the young quintuplets
17 Rob Kroes, Photographic Memories: Private Pictures, Public Images, and American History, (Hanover, N.H.: Dartmouth College Press, 2007), 36. 18 Joan M. Schwartz and James R. Ryan, "Introduction: Photography and the Geographical Imagination," in Picturing Place: Photography and the Geographical Imagination, Ed. by Joan M. Schwartz and James R. Ryan (London: I.B. Tauris, 2003), p 1. 19 Joan M. Schwartz and James R. Ryan, "Introduction: Photography and the Geographical Imagination," p 3. 20 Schwartz and Ryan, "Introduction," p 3.

9

transcended geographical bounds and formed connections with Canadians across the nation, as Chantal Nadeau mentions in her article "Freakshow: "Million Dollar Babies" and the National Family-rama."
21

Nadeau notes that the Quintuplets were presented in over 100, 000 pictures

and advertising campaigns, which made them nearly impossible to be ignored.22 While Fred Davis's photographs were the official images of the quintuplets, his work also influenced the Canadian national image of the 1930s. The C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, although kept at arguably the most applicable repository for it in the province, the collection is underutilized due to its lack of an accessible and clear finding aid. The definition of a finding aid is something that intellectually organizes the collection, allowing the Archives to have a detailed account of their inventory, and ultimately leads to easier access to the objects by archives staff, researchers and students. Janice Lurie in, "Collaborative Leadership of Art Museum Libraries and Archives" argues that "sleeping collections," underutilized collections often with non-updated finding aids, need to be made available on the internet. This will increase public access to and interest in the items in a collection.
23

With the addition of my finding aid, the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds

will no longer fall under the title of `sleeping collection'; it will be transferable to the Archive's online database and, therefore, available and accessible to more of the public. By being searchable, the aim is to also make the collection more accessible to researches and it will hopefully be viewed more often. Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition provides the theoretical groundwork in order to create an effective finding aid. This book offers
21 Chantal Nadeau, "Freakshow: "Million Dollar Babies" and the National Family-rama," Public 16 (1996). 22 Chantal Nadeau, "Freakshow: "Million Dollar Babies" and the National Family-rama," p. 26. 23 Janice Lea Lurie, "Collaborative Leadership of Art Museum Libraries and Archives." in Art Museum Libraries and Librarianship, edited by Joan M. Benedetti (Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press, INC., 2007), p 5.

10

detailed descriptions with examples of key elements in a finding aid, such as maintaining original order and best use of archival description to give an unbiased illustration of the Fonds.
24

Chapter 2, " Understanding Digitized Finding Aids," in Fredrick Stielow's text, Building Digital Archives, Descriptions, and Displays: A How-To-Do-It Manual for Archivists and Librarians, offers an equally detailed description of creating a finding aid, from beginning to end. Stielow provides an excellent breakdown of how to approach the creation of a standard finding aid, along with a variety of additional sources.
25

A more focused finding aid source can be seen in Museums in a Digital Age by Ross Parry. In this book, Parry narrows his investigation to the technological aspects of museum intellectual organization.
26

This perspective is useful when electronically updating the existing paper finding

aid, as well as when discussing the possibility of digitization. Also addressing the positive aspects of digitization are James Bantin and Leah Agne in their essay, "Digitizing for Value: A User-Based Strategy for University Archives." They address how the archive has a responsibility to the researcher to make their collection accessible and specifically making materials available online.
27

These sources create a basic understanding on how to work with a collection that is in

need of updating. Digitizing and having collections information online is a must in today's archival world and literature like this addresses a very relevant issue. There have been many histories written about the Dionne Quintuplets, with or without the Dionne's assistance, and a commonality that can be seen among them is the lack of photography
24 Alexis E. Ramsey, Wendy B. Sharer, Barbara L'Eplattenier and Lisa S. Mastrangelo, Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition, Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010. 25 Frederick Stielow, Building Digital Archives, Descriptions, and Displays: A How- To- Do- It Manual for Archivists and Librarians, (New York and London: Neal- Schuman Publishers, INC., 2003). 26 Ross Parry, Museums in a Digital Age, (London and New York: Routledge, 2010). 27 James Bantin and Leah Agne, "Digitizing for Value: A User-Based Strategy for University Archives," Journal of Archival Organization 8 (2010): 244-250.

11

credit to Fred Davis. In two of the most popular Dionne histories, The Dionne's, by Ellie Tesher, published in 1999 and Pierre Berton's The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, 1977, there is little discussion of Davis and the authors do not give individual photographic credit to Davis as their primary photographer.
28

Similarly, many of the journal articles, which specifically reference the Dionne Quintuplets and the media frenzy surrounding them, also do not include a mention of their official photographer. Mary Vipond's, "The Million Dollar Babies and The Media: Representations of The Dionne Quintuplets in the 1930s and the 1990s," is an excellent example of how Davis is left out of the Dionne narrative, specifically as she discusses the media representation of the Dionne Quintuplets in the two decades referenced in this article.
29

Even

though Vipond's focus is the media phenomenon, she neglects to mention or give credit to Davis's work in the beginning of the spectacle that would become the Dionne Quintuplets. By making this work digitally searchable and available, the reprocessing of the collection will make efforts to give credit to the photographer who captured the most iconic siblings of the 1930s and arguably the 20th century. To conclude, there is no other collection that is comparable to the Archives of Ontario's C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds. The collection represents an important piece of Canadian history while providing an example of how photographs can link a nation and help create national identity. This section about literature on topics such as Canadian national identity, photography and Fred Davis are extremely varied. With the aid of the literature, the present-day
28 Note: Ellie Tesher, The Dionnes, (Toronto: Doubleday Canada, 1999). and Pierre Berton, The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1977). 29 Mary Vipond, "The Million Dollar Babies and The Media: Representations of The Dionne Quintuplets in The 1930s and The 1990s," 1-12, accessed September 24, 2013. http://www.amec.com.mx/revista/003/05%20The%20Million%20Dollar%20Babies%20And%20The%20Media. pdf

12

finding aid will be updated, and therefore made more accessible to the public. Finally, although little has been written about photographer Fred Davis, he is a significant element of the Dionne history and needs to be further studied. All of these issues combined represent why the collection at the Archive is unique and holds historical importance to complete the visual story of the Dionnes. This work will be done through a practical thesis to highlight the one-of-a-kind Canadian collection.

13

Chapter Three: Assessing the Collection
If any researcher were attempting to find the C 9 Fonds, it is not as straightforward as other collections. Although a majority of the Archives of Ontario collections are searchable though the Archives Descriptive Database (ADD), the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds is sparse in comparison. Upon an initial search of the ADD, I was able to locate minimal information. Further investigation directed me to dedicated terminals in the Archives reading room where information was available through a local server and not available online. This source provided the existing finding aid (see appendix 1), which was written in 1987 and updated in 1997. The existing finding aid is a typed document, meant to be read as a paper-based record and is non-transferable to the online format the Archives of Ontario uses today.

Figure 1- Image of File Records Along with the existing finding aid created for public access, the Archives of Ontario also keeps paper-based files on collections in their central registry, seen in figure 1. These files contain supplementary information that may be sensitive (personal), or material not relevant to

14

any current finding aid but still helpful for a potential researcher. They are not widely available but can be reviewed upon request. To my delight, the paper files proved to be the best reference source as they contained private information invaluable to my role in updating and reorganizing the collection. The lack of detailed information and the inability to access it online were two determining factors of why the Archives of Ontario had this Fonds on a list to update. Prior to viewing any collection material, an idea of what I would find started to present itself. The paper-based file holds all C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds related documents: acquisition of the collection, content of the collection and background information of the donors. While this file did contain various sources of information, it was by no means fully comprehensive or complete. These files held information such as a box list, which provided a general breakdown of the materials in each container. This list would be an excellent resource for researchers wanting to look at this collection. The records also made notes of what negatives corresponded to available prints and provided a timeline of the lives of Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux. The file records house vital information applicable to the collection, yet the information was hidden away and lost to the public. Obtaining these textual records was the beginning of this thesis project and the starting point for updating and reorganizing the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds. These records provided invaluable information, such as the fact that the collection has no original order or the date ranges of the photographs to ensure that there are no copyright infringements. The file records did contain some information about the lives of Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux, although minimal. The details did help me by providing some basic starting information for further research.

15

The most influential and helpful document housed in the paper file record was a handwritten box list of the collection.

Figure 2 - Image of Handwritten Box List This document, seen in figure 2, although simplistic in structure, provided an immense amount of information. The list records the box, the series, the number of items, what medium, and size. The text provides a basic survey of the entire collection in a single glance. Upon further investigation, it appeared that the information in the handwritten box list was not transferred to subsequent documentation included in the paper file record. Because the detailed information had not been transcribed onto newer lists, it was essentially lost and its rediscovery was a major breakthrough. Nevertheless, the handwritten document still did not meet the requirements I laid out for 16

this project. Therefore, this document was used as an inspiration but was not my sole source. Besides being handwritten, the document did not include information such as the barcodes that are associated with every box in the Archives of Ontario's collection. I also wanted to note the visual content and possible damage or deterioration to the collection in my master box list. In his essay, Thomas Masters states, "keeping a careful file of sources with complete information arranged according to a uniform system prevent[s] errors and wasted time and effort."
30

The creation of a box list came out of the necessity to organize all the notes attained

from my survey of the collection. The new box list is a master list that provides detailed information on each of the 75 boxes comprising the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds. The steps I took to survey the collection would not have been possible without these records. They not only provided a framework of understanding of the materials in this particular collection, but the overall understanding of how to approach working with and organizing an archival collection. After obtaining a general understanding of the collection through the textual records, I was prepared to physically interact with the objects of the collection itself. Hugh H. Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland argue, "a comprehensive inventory locates all objects in the collection and reviews of records to make sure all documents are present and in good order."
31

The inventory

method, which I began with, was looking at the material randomly, collecting boxes at random from different storage locations and viewing samples from each box. Originally, the survey of the collection was to be simplistic, just skimming through the

30 Thomas Masters," Reading the Archive of Frenchman English" in Alexis E. Ramsey, Wendy B. Sharer, Barbara L'Eplattenier and Lisa S. Mastrangelo, Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition, (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010), p. 161. 31 Hugh H. Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland, Museum Administration: an Introduction, (Altamira Press: Walnut Creek, CA. 2003), p. 181.

17

different boxes to obtain a general understanding of the collection. After going through several boxes, it became apparent that simply looking through the collection was not utilizing my time properly. My initial approach was to survey the collection, making broad, handwritten notes accompanied by images taken with my phone. I found that the existing finding aid had most of the photographic elements of the collection under the series headings of `photographs'. Upon further examination, I discovered the collection `photographs' were in fact positives and negatives, made on both glass and flexible film. The current finding aid did not distinguish between photographic prints, an album or negatives, which is a factor when addressing proper storage and maintenance due to the needs of the different mediums. After my simple survey, I discovered that the largest portion of the collection was photographic, comprised of over 3,500 artifacts that make up the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds. Due to the fact that this medium was such a large portion of the collection, it is where I chose to focus the majority of my attention during a more detailed inventory. It was at this point in my research that I began to type my overall findings as I was going through the individual boxes.

18

Figure 3 ­ Screenshot of Typed Notes on Box Content These notes were more consistently organized and detailed than my initial handwritten notes. As seen in figure 3, the notes documented identify box number as well as its coordinating barcode. The new typed notes also addressed any deterioration or prominent damage that had occurred to the artifacts. Moreover, the notes addressed visual content, trying to determine medium, total number of artifacts, who was in the images, what were they doing, and a possible date. By addressing the themes, mediums, and/or problems that present themselves, the new note-taking format allowed me to utilize my time more efficiently, while obtaining useful information about the collection. With the beginning of the more detailed inventory for C 9, I immediately recognized groupings. The first major discovery was related to the medium in which the negatives were. The first half of the negatives, boxes 17 to 45, were all 4 x 5 glass negatives and along with one colour positive. In the later half, boxes 46 to 75, were flexible film negatives, mostly 4 x 5, with

19

the exception of box 68, that were 5 x 7 and box 69 that had 8 x 10s.

Figure 4 - Image of Cart with Negative Boxes Without even looking at the image content, it was apparent that the first negative boxes were produced at an earlier date, and the rest later because of the difference in material used. Glass negatives would have been more commonly used in the early 1930s, but by the end of the decade, flexible film would have gained in popularity because of its durability and easy usage. The flexible film in this collection is made of Nitrate and Safety Film and both can be seen throughout the film boxes. After this initial discovery, I focused my inventory review on each individual box. It was through this detailed investigation that thematic groupings and a chronological pattern presented itself. It is important to note that the majority of negatives found in the collection pertain to the Dionne Quintuplets, and therefore I was able to determine a chronological pattern based on the images of the girls growing up.

20

The negatives display various events and milestones of the Quintuplet's lives. They include images of the Quintuplets celebrating their birthdays (ages one through five), Valentine's Day, Easter, Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's. The negatives also document the Dionne girls playing outside, having tea parties and doing arts and crafts. Through these images, I was able to create links noting the Quintuplets were in the same outfits for several images or performing the same tasks. There were also images of the Quintuplets reenacting different nursery rhymes. Some of the nursery rhymes I was able to immediately recognize, such as 'Cinderella', 'Humpty Dumpty' and 'Hickory Dickory Dock', while for others I had to locate an old nursery rhyme book in order to identify them, such as 'Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary'. After reviewing, and making detailed notes on the 58 boxes of photographic negatives and positives, I created a master box list document that organized my various typed notes into one record. In order to create this master document, I first generated a list of all the important elements that I wanted addressed in this document. This list resulted in the figure 5 charts seen below.
Archive Information Fonds ­ C 9 Series Box Number Barcode Number ! Content Material Damages and Deterioration Medium Size Total number of items in the box Number of damaged items in the box The type of damage or deterioration ! Content Subject Connection and Link

Approximate year Links to other boxes and/or items Grouping or (negative and a print themes of the same image) Possible file level descriptions ! Link to outside sources/ materials !

! Figure 5- Box List Chart After the creation of the basic chart above, I began to research different programs in which to 21

implement the chart. After consulting with several people, both working at the Archives of Ontario and my fellow colleagues, I concluded that it was best to work in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. The system is easy to use, works with many different programs, can hold a lot of information and can generate totals. The Archives of Ontario uses Excel spreadsheets for their basic cataloging needs. Therefore, I knew that it would be compatible with whichever software and computers they used to upload information into their database. I found that creating a master document, which combined all of my individual and scattered notes on this collection, helped put the entire C 9 Fonds into perspective. It allowed me to view the work I had done and determine what needed further investigation. The box list also allowed those whom I'd been consulting with to view the collection in one simple document, without having to see the actual items in their boxes. The information that is clearly organized in this master box list was utilized during the creation of the sub-series descriptions. The box list provided an easy to read, and easily accessible document that I could refer to at a moment's notice. It became an invaluable source during my investigation of linking boxes and individual items with certain series and sub-series descriptions. The final box list is located in appendix 2 and will be given to the Archives of Ontario to add to the paper file records. The information from the master box list was then transferred to a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet-cataloguing template, appendix 3, which is commonly used by the Archives. By relocating the key information to the AO catalogue spreadsheet, the C 9 Fonds is then prepared for any final additions and notations before it is uploaded to the Archive's website. During the survey of the collection, I also made note of any damage or deterioration to the items in the collection. I did this by placing a folded piece of white printer paper around the

22

item, with a penciled note stating `damaged,' followed by a brief description of what was observed.

Figure 6 - Image of Negative Box with Paper Tag Although I noted any damage or deterioration to the items, special attention was paid to the negatives due to the sensitive nature of the medium. In addition to gathering initial information, a physical evaluation was conducted. The noting of damage or deterioration was done primarily for the purpose of digitization of the negatives, with any reprocessing that might be done in the future. The Archives of Ontario also considers any items that are good candidates for digitization. Factors not only include potential interest in subject matter by researchers, but the condition of the originals and safety of retrieval. My master box list devotes a section to damage and deterioration, noting what issues are present and their severity. I created a column that describes the priority level for possible digitization. This column can be used in the future by archivists digitizing elements of the collection, and can 23

quickly identify which items, as of the box list creation date, were in greater need of preservation than others. Noting damage and deterioration of items in this collection is particularly helpful for the Archives for assessing how collections are physically stored. By recording the deterioration levels of C 9, the Archives will now have a record and a comparison point to work from during this assessment. Several different types of damage and deterioration to elements of the collection were observed. Paper based photographs showed signs of general wear and tear to the edges and corners; some had rips or tears due to improper handing, but for the most part, minimal damage was observed.

Figure 7- Image of Glass Negative with a Chip The glass negatives (and one positive) most often showed damage in the form of cracks and/or chips, as seen in figure 7. The glass also suffered from different forms of deterioration. The emulsion applied to the glass showed signs of discoloration and fading. Some of the glass negatives suffered from erosion of the emulsion, leaving a gray substance on the glass as

24

identified in figure 8. Most of the damage that has occurred to these glass negatives is categorized under oxidative deterioration. This deterioration has presented in the yellowing, fading and silver mirroring of the images in this collection.32

Figure 8 - Image of Discoloured Negative The flexible film negatives displayed similar forms of deterioration as the glass negatives. There was a variety of discolouration; yellowing, bluish/silvering, as well as a rust colour change to the emulsion. The most common damage observed on the flex film was tears and folding, probably caused by poor handling. Despite these discoveries, the age of the materials and the likelihood that the collection was not stored to Archive standards prior to acquisition by the Archives of Ontario in 1988, the collection is in surprisingly good condition. With many of the paper documents on microfilm, the unnecessary handling of a portion of the collection has been greatly reduced. There are many elements of the collection, particularly the negatives, that could benefit from digitization but it is not an urgent requirement.

32 Bertrand Lavedine, Photography of the Past: Process and Preservation, Translated by John McElhone, (The Getty Conservation Institute: Los Angeles. 2009), p 248-249.

25

Overall, the assessment of the collection provided a general understanding that led to an in-depth investigation into the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds. By beginning with the paper file record, I was able to obtain a general understanding of the content of the collection, as well as survey the different documentation associated with the collection. After my work with the file record, I moved on to physically interacting with the material in the collection. There I discovered the discrepancies between the intellectual knowledge/documents associated with the collection and what the physical collection contained. This lead me to further investigate a variety of Archives of Ontario finding aids, how they are structured and their overall purpose. I wanted to ensure that these inconsistencies, seen in the previous finding aid, were not repeated. This analysis into the creation and structuring of a finding aid is discussed in the following chapter.

26

Chapter Four: Supplementary Research for Structuring the Finding Aid
Understanding the collection through background research was an important element to assessing the collection and ultimately to the creation of my finding aid. During the time I investigated file records, I was also conducting my primary research. This primary research was done not only on the subject matter of the C 9 Fonds but also on organizing collections and creating finding aids. The research consisted of obtaining information and knowledge on the Dionne Quintuplets and the phenomenon that surrounded them. In order to understand the significance and the historical importance of the collection, I needed to investigate the Dionnes. I also researched Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux in order to update the biographical sketch that was in the current finding aid. The current biographical sketch was lacking in-depth information and provided only one reference source, therefore making it very difficult for a researcher to know where the information was obtained. The 1997 finding aid was previously used by the Archives of Ontario and does not provide an inventory of the collection. The inventory could have a more specific breakdown of the materials in the collection. The gathering of all the material content, or inventory, of C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds provided an opportunity to locate any missing boxes or material. "Inventory" is a term coined by the National Archives in the late 1930s, and is often used when discussing finding aids.
33

In Museum Administration: an Introduction, Hugh H.

Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland define a comprehensive inventory in the following way: "locate all objects in the collection and review the records to make sure all documents are present

33 Randall C. Jimerson, "Archives and Manuscripts: Archival Description and Finding Aids," OCLC Systems and Services 18:3 (2002): 127.

27

and in good order."

34

They go on to argue that an inventory of a collection should be performed

routinely. Although they recognize that it may not be possible for annual inventories, they suggest random spot-checks of objects, in order to ensure that no objects are missing and all objects are in their proper location.
35

This project allowed me to perform an inventory analysis on the C 9 Fonds, gathering and evaluating a collection that had not been looked at in some time. Inventorying the collection allowed me to have a basic understanding of the content and material I was working with. It also prompted research into the various forms and functions of finding aids and overall workings of an archive. Furthermore, inventorying presented the disconnection between the physical collection and the intellectual knowledge presented in the current finding aid. In turn this has become a major element of my practical thesis project reviewing the location and then connecting the material to the intellectual descriptions. An element and task that is both tedious and time-consuming. Another problem that arises from the 1997 finding aid is the question of provenance of the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds. The 1997 finding aid explains the provenance of the collection under the subtitle, Immediate Source of Acquisition; then advises the researcher that the "Fonds was acquired from the Yvonne Davis estate on 30 March 1988."
36

In their

article, "Invisible Hands: Recognizing Archivists Work to Make Records Assessable," Sammie L. Morris and Shirley K. Rose explain how general information relating to the provenance of the collection is often stated in the finding aid. More specific, detailed or private information is

34 Hugh H. Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland, Museum Administration: an Introduction, (Altamira Press: Walnut Creek, CA. 2003), p 181. 35 Hugh H. Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland, Museum Administration: an Introduction, p 181- 182. 36 Gray, Carolyn. Inventory of the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds C 9, Revised by Bruce Schinkelwitz. Archives of Ontario,1997.

28

recorded and organized in a "collection file."

37

The Archives of Ontario does hold a "collection

file" which they refer to as a file record. The problem is that the file record holds very little information about the acquisition of C 9. The lack of information or history of the collection has been a hindrance to my research, drawing out even the simplest of tasks. Morris and Rose define provenance as explaining the chain of custody of the material, including who has owned the collection and where has it been.
38

The emphasis on ownership of

a collection is also discussed in Museum Administration; a clear title of an object, or collection, needs to be presented before an Institute can accept the objects. Consequently, having knowledge of the collection's history, and more importantly who the current owner is, is vital to the acquisition process. This is an issue that is addressed immediately to ensure the objects or collection has not been stolen or acquired illegally and, moreover, that the institution properly acquires the collection.
39

The file record for C 9 contained material related to the collection's

history, such as acquisition papers. Being able to view such documents allowed me to gain a greater understanding of the collection's past and to anticipate any potential problems. Provenance of a collection is extremely important because with it the collection has authenticity. Proof of provenance "allow[s] the researcher to evaluate the authenticity and the integrity of the materials as evidence."
40

If a collection does not have authenticity, it has no

value to a researcher or to the institution. The proof of authenticity provides weight in the form of historical significance when choosing the items. Potential researchers want to view
37 Sammie L. Morris and Shirley K. Rose, "Invisible Hands: Recognizing Archivists Work to Make Records Assessable," in Alexis E. Ramsey, Wendy B. Sharer, Barbara L'Eplattenier and Lisa S. Mastrangelo. Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition, (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010), p 54. 38 Sammie L. Morris and Shirley K. Rose, "Invisible Hands: Recognizing Archivists Work to Make Records Assessable," p 54. 39 Hugh H. Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland, Museum Administration: an Introduction, p 179. 40 Sammie L. Morris and Shirley K. Rose, "Invisible Hands," p 54.

29

photographic images of the Dionne Quintuplets, or of the Moose River Mine Disaster, when they come to look at C 9. There can be no doubt to the legitimacy of the material. The Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds was donated to the Archives of Ontario by the Davis estate shortly after Leroux's death. Having proof of the chain of custody, and the knowledge that the collection came directly from the estate, provides the proper foundation for an evaluation of authenticity. The researchers and general public trust the Archives of Ontario to have acquired the authentic material related to the subject matter, and moreover, the Archives has a duty to present the public with genuine artifacts. Original order of the collection is an issue that presented itself early on in my investigation into the C 9 Fonds. Morris and Rose argue that "like provenance, it is a principle that guides all professional archives work, it exists for similar reason: to document the relationship among the records themselves."
41

Furthermore, Morris and Rose explain, "original

order is also important because the arrangement of a collection can sometimes reveal things about the person or organization that created and use the records."
42

The problem, which

presented itself pertaining to the C 9 Fonds, was that the collection did not have an original order. It appears that Davis did in fact number his negatives for his dealings with the Toronto Star and NEA, but there are no numbers physically written on most of the photographic material. Therefore, there is no way to connect the numbers Davis assigned to any physical material in the collection. Upon acquisition, the archives grouped similar medium material together, such as photographic paper prints and flexible film in the same boxes. This was largely due to the different preservation and housing needs of the several different mediums. Carolyn Harris's essay, "Paper Memories, Presented Selves: Original Order and the
41 Sammie L. Morris and Shirley K. Rose, "Invisible Hands," p 54. 42 Ibid, p 54.

30

Arrangement of the Donald G. Simpson Fonds at York University," presents a problem of acquiring a collection where the original order was interpreted and re-conceived by the creator. Harris investigates original order and questions the ideal versus reality of it when an Institute obtains an acquisition. Rethinking convention of the original order leads to flexible concepts "received order" or "last order use."
44 43

The essay goes further into investigation of reimagining

the concept of original order to a more applicable and fluid concept because Harris is presented with a collection where the owner and subsequent donor have altered the order. The order of a collection is constantly being manipulated, reformed, and altered; therefore, the order of a collection is never stagnant and always up to interpretation.
45

Harris's concepts directly relate to the original order issues that have presented themselves in the C 9 Fonds. Although it is a known fact that the Davis estate did not donate the collection in an order that was integral to the collection, and that the Archives subsequently arranged objects based on material, the collection still presents some questions regarding original order. Items in the collection, specifically the photographic negatives, have not been numbered and, therefore, there is no way to know if the order of those items was altered during rehousing or by researcher use. The photographic negatives and positives, the largest element of the collection, pose an issue in their current state as they do not present an order a researcher can easily interpret. Hence, with the new finding aid, comes the identification of approximate years and overall subject matter for each box. Archival description is a major element that needs to be addressed when discussing the 1997 finding aid and updating it. The Archives of Ontario follows the Rules for Archival
43 Carolyn Harris, "Paper Memories, Presented Selves: Original Order and the Arrangement of the Donald G. Simpson Fonds at York University," Archivaria 74 (2012): 196. 44 Carolyn Harris, "Paper Memories, Presented Selves," p 197. 45 Ibid, p 207.

31

Description (RAD) for basic requirements of a collection, but they have adapted certain elements to cater to the needs of describing their collection. Morris and Rose discuss archival description in their essay, they state: description is a general term archivists used to describe the activities involved in creating a narrative account of the contents of a collection. [...] In other words, description documents which provide information about the creator of the documents and the context of their creation provide information from which a story about the collection and its contents could be constructed.
46

Archival description provides the initial point from which a researcher can investigate a collection. The more comprehensive the description, the better equipped a researcher is for their investigation into the collection. In the case of the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, the issue of description arises with the question, is it best to describe the medium or content? C 9 is a collection with a very interesting subject matter and the fact that the majority of the collection is a visual medium makes describing the visual content an easier job. However, the variety of photographic mediums in which the visual content is displayed creates a problem when creating series descriptions. Because of the diversity in photographic mediums that are presented in this collection, and their preservation and housing issues, like mediums are stored together. This in turn leads to the possibility of describing the collection based on how it is stored - by medium. After much debate, I concluded that a mixture of the two forms of description would be appropriate for the C 9 Fonds. The series' descriptions have been divided based on thematic groupings that presented through the visual content. Three series were created to address the non-Dionne related material based on the thematic groupings they represented: C 9-7 Fred Davis

46 Sammie L. Morris and Shirley K. Rose, "Invisible Hands," p 61.

32

records of the Moose River Mine Disaster; C 9-8 Fred Davis photographs of British Royal Visits; and C 9-9 Fred Davis non-Dionne related photographs by medium. By contrast, I chose to divide and group the C 9-6 Dionne Quintuplets Photographs by medium. All photographic material related to the Dionne Quintuplets has been placed into one series, C 9-6, and further divided into sub-series based on medium: C 9-6 -1 Photographic Prints, C 9-6 -2 Album, C 9-6 3 Glass Negatives and Positive and C 9-6 -4 Film Negatives. This decision was made based on the fact that the material is housed together, and therefore grouped thematically by medium. Moreover, a researcher is now informed of content of the material, as well as the photographic medium, making it easier to locate and understand the extent of the collection. The archival description elements of the new finding aid are extremely important in assisting a researcher and for creating a comprehensive and current finding aid. The ability to access information quickly via searches on Yahoo or Google, and subsequently accessing that information in a digital format, is valuable to researchers today according to J. Gordon Danies and Cory I. Nimer, in their article "What Do You Mean It Doesn't Make Sense? Redesigning Finding Aids from a Users Perspective."
47

Having a better description at the series level for this

Fonds will make it more accessible to the public. Along with improved archival descriptions comes the reduction of unnecessary handling of the collection. The researcher will now have a greater understanding of the materials the collection contains and will therefore be able to narrow down the materials or boxes which they request from storage. Moreover, this will reduce the amount of unnecessary retrieval performed by the Archives' staff. Detailing, or providing more information for the series and some series level descriptions, is an important element of my thesis project and ultimately the new finding aid. The
47 J. Gordon Danies and Cory I. Nimer, "What Do You Mean It Doesn't Make Sense? Redesigning Finding Aids from a Users Perspective," Journal of Archival Organization 6:4 (2008): 217.

33

comprehensive investigation I have undertaken of this collection will allow the Archives to fulfill its mandate of providing their collections in an accessible manner. This is one of the reasons why the collection was scheduled for updating and therefore why this project is also of value to the Archives of Ontario. Lastly, copyright is a principal element of conducting a comprehensive analysis of the collection. Although copyright is not an issue with the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, it is a critical issue that archives face on a daily basis. This is essentially the issue Jean Dryden presents in her article "Standards: News, Progress Reports, and Reviews." Dryden investigates the five standards or guidelines when dealing with copyright issues in an archival setting. Dryden argues that most archivists come across copyright, or issues regarding copyright, at some point in their careers, and it is important to have a general understanding of the ground rules.
48

The nature of C 9 being a largely visual collection has the potential to lead to too many

copyright issues. Fortunately, copyright has expired on the photographs of the collection, and therefore was a non-issue, but I still found it imperative to address and research copyright. As previously stated, copyright is a factor when dealing with collections in any form. In addition, I researched different finding aids and the rules and regulations associated with following various guidelines in different institutions. The resources were plentiful and overwhelming, and for someone like myself who has never created a finding aid prior to this exercise, it was easy to get lost in the details. Therefore, I appreciated the following sentiment in Chris Warnick's essay, "Archival finding aids can point researchers to those types of [ ...] materials that are often the hardest to find."
49

A finding aid is simply meant to aid the researcher

48 Jean Dryden, "Standards: News, Progress Reports, and Reviews," Journal of Archival Organization 10 (2008): 153. 49 Chris Warnick, Locating the Archives: Finding Aids and Archival Scholarship in Composition and Rhetoric in

34

in finding a difficult piece of information. The emphasis on making a functional yet simple finding aid is addressed in several texts. This research led me to discussions with Allison Skyrme of the Ryerson Special Collections and Curtis Sassur of the Ryerson Archives, about finding aids, their importance and possible sources I might be interested in. They talked about how they have approached different collections and their methods for keeping a finding aid concise and functional. The updated finding aid I produced uses information I gathered through surveying and utilized in the sub-series descriptions. The existing finding aid neglects this, and therefore leaves a gap a researcher cannot fill. The new finding aid content and new series descriptions tackle large, previously unaddressed sections of the collection. C 9-6 Dionne Quintuplets Photographs has four subseries: C 9-6 -1 Photographic Prints, C 9-6 -2 Album, C 9-6 -3 Glass Negatives and Positive and C 9-6 -4 Flex Film negatives. The sub-series divides the material, making it easier and more accessible for researchers. Whereas C 9-7 Fred Davis Records Related to Moose Rive Mine Disaster and C 9-8 Fred Davis Photographs of British Royal Visits had major thematic sections previously placed under the broad categories of miscellaneous. Finally, C 9-9 Fred Davis NonDionne Related Photographs was a series created to address the unidentifiable material in the collection. The new finding aid provides an in-depth and comprehensive analysis of the collection. By creating new series and sub-series level descriptions, a researcher will be able to find and locate the desired material much more easily and thus reduce the amount of unnecessary handling by both researchers and archive staff.

Alexis E. Ramsey, Wendy B. Sharer, Barbara L'Eplattenier and Lisa S. Mastrangelo, Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition, (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010), p. 99.

35

All outside research, combined with my in-depth survey and investigation into C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, provided a strong foundation that I used to create the updated finding aid. This search tool is a key way in which archives provide access to a collection. It allows researchers to obtain, discover and use details contained in the collection. Most importantly, the main purpose of a finding aid is to provide details regarding the contents of the collection and provide an overall context of the collection's history, illustrating why the material holds historical importance. The foundational archival principles that are discussed throughout this chapter helped develop the 1997 finding aid into a more accommodating document for researchers.
50

50 J. Gordon Danies and Cory I. Nimer, "Re-Imagining Archival Display: Creating User-Friendly Finding Aids," p. 4.

36

Chapter Five: Developing the Overall Project Plan
This section outlines my approach to developing the overall project plan, including the steps I took and the tools I utilized to reorganize and update the C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds. In order to allow researchers to fully appreciate and understand the collection, it was vital to undertake a reprocessing of the entire Fonds. Hugh H. Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland described the assessment of a project in their "Chapter 4: Strategic Planning" of Museum Administration: an Introduction. They discuss how planning is extremely important to the success of the project when approaching any situation in a museum or archive setting. By performing internal analysis and broad assessments, the group or individual gains a much better understanding of their strengths and weaknesses and potential problems for the upcoming project.
51

It was through this assessment that I realized my own

personal strengths and weaknesses, in addition to formulating an appropriate plan for how to approach the collection. During the initial survey of the collection, while handwriting broad observations, I utilized my iPhone, the archives light box, and the research staff at the archives. With the aid of my iPhone, I was able to view the negative image as a positive image, allowing me to gain a better understanding of the visual content included in the collection. The light box was also a very useful tool while viewing the negatives over the course of my survey of the collection. I found that the best quality light box was located in the reading room of the Archives and was available to any researcher. The quality of the light box was dependent on it not having the fluorescent light pulsating, which was a problem I faced with the small light box in the archivist work area in the Archives of Ontario. With this light box I was
51 Hugh H. Genoways and Lynne M. Ireland, Museum Administration: an Introduction, p. 82-83.

37

not able to take pictures of the negatives because the pulsating light would leave lines across the image. Because I had to use the high quality light box located in the public reading room, I encountered times when it was unavailable and therefore impeded my research. The knowledge of Archive staff was an invaluable resource throughout my research. Their ability to navigate the complicated archives database allowed for the finding of several missing components of the collections. In particular, I was unable to find box 3 of the collection. After looking through the database myself, I enlisted the staff and they were able to use their knowledge of the system to find the box in a series that was believed to be empty. It was through using the light box and my iPhone that I saw the images displayed on the negatives and was able to recognize themes throughout the content. After noting that a large portion of the collection was connected to the Dionne quintuplets, I wanted to gain a deeper understanding of their history. In February of 2014, I contacted the Dionne Museum in North Bay to learn about the museum's collection, as well as the Dionnes themselves. This is when I corresponded with the museum's curator, Kimberly Lyon, about the Archives of Ontario collection of material relating to the Dionne Quintuplets. I particularly wanted to obtain more information about the Archive's negatives that depict the quintuplets re-enacting nursery rhymes. These nursery rhyme reenactments pose some interesting questions, most importantly, were these images ever published for the public and, if so, where? Through my correspondence with Ms. Lyon, I was informed that the Dionne Museum holds an entire box of newspaper clippings with the Dionne quintuplets re-enacting nursery rhymes. This collection has not been digitized and therefore prompted my trip to the museum in March 2014. The trip to the museum allowed me to view the newspaper clippings in person as well as

38

photograph them. During my time there, I spoke with with Ms. Lyon about the Quintuplets, the museum, and its patrons. Ms. Lyon provided interesting information such as the fact that the nursery rhyme re-enactments were prompted by decreased interest in the Quintuplets. As the Quintuplets were getting older, the general public was starting to lose interest, so gimmicks were used to rejuvenate their popularity. While utilizing my iPhone and the light boxes at the Archives of Ontario, I discovered that a majority of the images pertain to the Dionne quintuplets. Consequently, they became the focus of my research and were a large portion of visual content for my first thesis presentation in March 2014. It was after the presentation and discussion that I realized the focus of my project and of my research had been driven off-course. My colleagues in the class, along with me, had been swept up in the story and the phenomenon that was the Dionne Quintuplets, and we all lost track of my project and of my goal to organize and reprocess a collection of the Archives of Ontario. It was after this initial presentation that I went back to the Archives of Ontario, looked at my notes and images, and came to the realization that I needed to take a step back and reevaluate the collection as a whole. I needed to see Fred Davis for his role in many historic events, and view his body of work as an important element of Canadian photography, not as a tool to the Dionne Quintuplets. Although I realized the need to refocus my overall plan for how to approach this collection, the trip to the Dionne Museum was immensely beneficial. Creating a dialogue between the two institutions, the museum and the Archives of Ontario, prompted my reaching out to the Dionne Museum. Although this finding aid is for the collection housed at the Archives of Ontario, having both institutions gain a general understanding of the scope of each other's

39

collection will help researchers who may be gathering information. This mutual knowledge pertaining to each institution's collection opens new possibilities for both the institutions and researchers alike. In addition to my loss of focus, I faced another challenge - the existing finding aid, which was revised in 1997, and the incomplete analysis of the collection, no longer met the Archives of Ontario's standards in format and in content. The existing aid falls short when considering universal archive guidelines, such as original order and provenance. Through my research and my discussions with Sean Smith (archivist at the Archives of Ontario) I was prepared with the knowledge required to create a new finding aid for the C 9 Fonds. As stated above, the current finding aid does not fulfill basic archive guidelines and therefore can no longer function as a research tool. The primary issue with the current finding aid was the lack of description and proper series divisions. The current aid addressed only Dionne related materials and placed subsequent groupings into miscellaneous. Through my discussions with Sean Smith, I was informed that the Archives of Ontario no longer practices the placement of a substantial amount of material under the series of miscellaneous. The Archives is currently working towards making the miscellaneous series level description extinct. If other thematic groupings can be found in the miscellaneous material, it is now the practice to create a series or sub-series with this material. This was the case with the current finding aid for C 9. Through my initial inventory of the collection, I found non-Dionne Quintuplets related material that had been placed in a miscellaneous series. There is material related to the Moose River mine disaster of 1936 and three British Royal visits to Canada (1924, 1939 and 1952) in a file previously categorized as miscellaneous. Therefore, I discontinued what was known as C 9-7 Miscellaneous and created the new series C 9-7 Fred Davis Related Records to Moose River

40

Mine Disaster, C 9-8 Fred Davis British Royal Visits Photographs and C 9-9 Fred Davis NonDionne Related Records. Although there is still material that does not relate to any of the three major themes presented in this collection, the amount of material grouped under miscellaneous has decreased substantially. This makes the new finding aid a comprehensive analysis of the collection and therefore a more effective tool for researchers to utilize. The reprocessing of C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds has presented many challenges, however with the aid of helpful and resourceful people, such as the staff of the Archives Ontario and my colleagues at Ryerson University, many challenges were overcome. The development of the overall project plan and the execution of the plan was made much easier by outside research on archival structure and finding aids. This supplementary research helped me create the new finding aid and form my approach to reorganizing the C 9 collection.

41

Chapter Six: Conclusion
The two surviving Dionnes, who turned 80 in 2014, are approaching the end of their lives. When they are no longer alive to provide oral testimony to their experiences during the height of their popularity in the 1930s and 1940s, it will be the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds at the Archives of Ontario that will aid in filling those visual historical gaps. Therefore it is imperative that this collection, a primary resource, is preserved and organized to the best of the Archive's ability. This collection will become increasingly important in the future. The reorganizing and updating of the finding aid for C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds was a top priority for the Archives of Ontario due to its rarity and historical importance. The Dionnes hold historical significance not only to Canada, but also globally, as they were an international sensation. To have this collection at the Archives of Ontario is a great asset. By working with the original finding aid created in 1987 and revised in 1997, I realized how important proper detailed descriptions are for researchers to be able to engage with a collection. As the finding aid stood, it was unable to provide a researcher with the necessary information to adequately and efficiently assess the collection for research purposes. This prompted the restructuring and reorganization of the entire Fonds, which ultimately became my applied project. I surveyed the entire collection and developed a detailed inventory in order to create a comprehensive and fully functioning finding aid, which can now be seen in Part II. Organizing an archival collection is time-consuming and essential to the overall structure of an archive. Throughout this process of creating a finding aid, I came to understand how critical organizing the collection both physically and intellectually is to the overall effectiveness of the finding aid. Researching previous graduates' approaches to structuring finding aids provided a solid foundation to build from. Ultimately, I worked closely with Archive's staff to 42

ensure that the structure of the finding aid I was creating fulfilled all their requirements. I worked with their overall approach to organizing a collection, which allowed me the opportunity to experience the reprocessing of a collection from start to finish to a high professional standard. In terms of further research, the strength in this collection lies in the link between the Archives of Ontario and the Dionne Museum in North Bay, Ontario. Although the Dionne Quintuplets Museum lacks the space and the equipment to sustain a collection the size of C 9, it does have a substantial amount of newspaper clippings and Quintuplet related material despite the lack of a proper viewing area for researchers to work in. By updating the finding aid, the Archives of Ontario will have a better understanding of their collection relating to the Dionnes and in turn will be able to fully communicate and share this collection with the Dionne Museum. A link created between the two institutions will further a researcher's experience and ability to obtain information regarding this chapter of history. This leads to many future possibilities, including the potential of loaning material for exhibits at the Dionne Museum, or the Archives acquiring some of the museum's textual records for long-term preservation and storage. Moreover, the increase in popularity and usage of the collection may lead to a possible digitization project. If a digitization project was to occur, the updated finding aid and the new detailed box list will be extremely useful in determining priority, based on damage, deterioration, and content. The digitization of this collection is a logical extension of my thesis project.

43

Bibliography
Canadian National Identity Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on The Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London; New York: Verso, 1991. Close, Susan. Framing Identity: Social Practices of Photography in Canada (1880-1920). Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring Publishing, 2007. Francis, Daniel. National Dreams: Myth, Memory and Canadian History. Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press, 1997. Hobsbawm, Eric. "Introduction: Inventing Tradition", in The Invention of Tradition, ed. Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger. London: UK, Cambridge University Press, 1983. Kroes, Rob. Photographic Memories: Private Pictures, Public Images, and American History. Hanover, N.H.: Dartmouth College Press, 2007. Mackey, Eva. The House of Difference. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2002. Pollock, Griselda. Vision and Difference: Femininity, Feminism and the Histories of Art. London: Routledge, 1988. Schwartz, Joan M., and James R. Ryan. "Introduction: Photography and the Geographical Imagination." in Picturing Place: Photography and the Geographical Imagination. Edited by Joan M. Schwartz and James R. Ryan London: I.B. Tauris, 2003. Taras, David, and Beverly Jean Rasporich. A Passion for Identity: Canadian Studies for the 21st Century. 4th ed. Scarborough, Ont.: Nelson Thomson Learning, 2001. Winter, Elke. Us, Them, and Others: Pluralism and National Identity in Diverse Societies. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011. Collections Management and Finding Aids Archives of Ontario. Series C-9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, "PF/C9.1/ Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux fond."

44

Archives of Ontario. Series C-9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds, "PF/C9.2/ Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux fond." Bantin, James and Leah Agne. "Digitizing for Value: A User-Based Strategy for University Archives." Journal of Archival Organization 8 (2010): 244-250. Danies J. Gordon and Cory I. Nimer. "Re-Imagining Archival Display: Creating User-Friendly Finding Aids." Journal of Archival Organization 9 (2001): 4- 31. --------- " What Do You Mean It Doesn't Make Sense? Redesigning Finding Aids from a Users Perspective. " Journal of Archival Organization 6:4 (2008): 216- 232. Dryden, Jean. "Standards: News, Progress Reports, and Reviews." Journal of Archival Organization 10 (2008): 150-154. Fox, Micheal and Peter L. Wilkerson. Introduction to Archival Organization and Description. Los Angeles: Getty Information Institute, 1998. Genoways, Hugh H. and Lynne M. Ireland. Museum Administration: an Introduction. Altamira Press: Walnut Creek, CA. 2003. Harris, Carolyn. "Paper Memories, Presented Selves: Original Order and the Arrangement of the Donald G. Simpson Fonds at York University." Archivaria 74 (2012): 195-217. Hollier, Anita. "Computerized Finding Aids at the British Petroleum Archive." Journal Of The Society Of Archivists. 13: 2 (1992): 124- 131. Academic Search Premier, EBSCOhost. Accessed November 7, 2013. Jimerson, Randall C. "Archives and Manuscripts: Archival Description and Finding Aids." OCLC Systems and Services 18:3 (2002): 125-129. Lurie, Janice Lea. "Collaborative Leadership of Art Museum Libraries and Archives." in Art Museum Libraries and Librarianship, edited by Joan M. Benedetti, 3-7. Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press, INC., 2007.

Masters, Thomas. "Reading the Archive of Frenchman English" in Alexis E. Ramsey, Wendy B. 45

Sharer, Barbara L'Eplattenier and Lisa S. Mastrangelo. Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010. 157-168. Morris, Sammie L. and Shirley K. Rose. "Invisible Hands: Recognizing Archivists Work to Make Records Assessable." in Alexis E. Ramsey, Wendy B. Sharer, Barbara L'Eplattenier and Lisa S. Mastrangelo. Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010. 51- 78. Macneil, Heather. "Trusting Description: Authenticity, Accountability, and Archival description Standards." Journal of Archival Organization 7 (2009): 89-107. Parry, Ross. Museums in a Digital Age. London and New York: Routledge, 2010. Pearce, Susan M. Interpreting Objects and Collections. London and New York: Routledge, 1994. Romano, Richard. Digital Photography Pocket Primer. San Diego, CA: Windsor Professional Information, LLC., 2000. Stielow, Frederick. Building Digital Archives, Descriptions, and Displays: A How- To- Do- It Manual for Archivists and Librarians. New York and London: Neal- Schuman Publishers, INC., 2003. Warnick, Chris. Locating the Archives: Finding Aids and Archival Scholarship in Composition and Rhetoric in Alexis E. Ramsey, Wendy B. Sharer, Barbara L'Eplattenier and Lisa S. Mastrangelo. Working in the Archives: Practical Research Methods for Rhetoric and Composition. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2010. 91-101. Dionne Quintuplets, Moose River and the British Royal Visits Arnup, Katherine. "Raising the Dionne Quintuplets: Lessons for Modern Mothers." Journal of Canadian Studies. 29:4 (1994): 65-85. Accessed Oct 23, 2013. Barker, Lillian. The Truth About the Dionne Quints. London: Hutchinson, 1951. Berton, Pierre. The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1977.

46

Blatz, William E. Collected Studies on the Dionne Quintuplets. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1937. ----------. Five Sisters: A Study of Child Psychology. New York: William Morrow and Company, 1938. Brough, James. We Were Five: The Dionne Quintuplets' Story From Birth Through Girlhood to Womanhood. New York: Schuster, 1965. CBC Digital Archives. "The 1936 Moose River Mine Disaster." Accessed April 1, 2014. http://www.cbc.ca/archives/categories/economy-business/natural-resources/the-1936-mooseriver-mine-disaster/moose-river-mine-disaster.html Dionne Museum. Series 2011.3. 494- 639, "Box 30 Newspapers (NEA)." "Dionne Quintuplets Nurse Severely Burned." Toronto Daily Star (1900-1971), August 8,1934. Page 2. Accessed October 9, 2013. http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.torontopubliclibrary.ca/docview/1434460621?accounti d=14369. "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets." The Globe and Mail (1936- Current), May 29, 1963. Page 8. Accessed October 9, 2013. ProQuest Historical Newspaper: The Globe and Mal (1844- 2009). Foxman, Stuart and John Nihmey. Time of Their Lives: The Dionne Tragedy: A True-life Fairy Tale. Ottawa: Niva Pub, 1986. "Four Cameramen and an Editor form Photographic Film." Toronto Daily Star, February 11, 1947. Page 7. Accessed October 9, 2013. http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.torontopubliclibrary.ca/docview/1418033481?accounti d=14369. Gray, Carolyn. Inventory of the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds C 9. Revised by Bruce Schinkelwitz. Archives of Ontario,1997. Harkness, Ross. JE. Atkinson of the Star. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,1963. Legros, Donalda and Mrs. Labelle. Administering Angels of The Dionne Quintuplets: A True Story of the Birth of the Dionne Quintuplets as Told by Madame Legros and Madame 47

Lebel, Midwives for the Dionne Quintuplets. North Bay, Ont.: Northern Publishing Co, 1935. Library and Archives Canada. "A Real Companion and Friend: The Diary of William Lyon Mackenzie King." Accessed April 1, 2014. http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/king/023011-1070.06-e.html McKay, Ian. "Why Tell This Parable? Some Ethical Reflections on the Dionne Quintuplets" Journal of Canadian Studies/Revue d'Études Canadiennes 29 : 4 (1994): 144 ­ 152. Accessed September 24, 2013. Nadeau, Chantal. "Freakshow: "Million Dollar Babies" and the National Family-rama." Public 16 (1996): 24 ­ 35. Accessed September 24, 2013. http://pi.library.yorku.ca/ojs/index.php/public/article/view/30430 Ontario Department of Health. The Baby Issued by the Department of Health of Ontario. 5th ed. Toronto: The Department, 1937. Slesinger, Stephen. The Dionne Quintuplets Growing Up: Exclusive Pictures. New York: Platt & Munk Company, 1935. Soucy, Jean-Yves and Annette Dionne, Cecile Dionne, and Yvonne Dionne. Family Secrets: The Controversial and Shocking Story of the Dionne Quintuplets. Toronto: Stoddart, 1996. Tesher, Ellie. The Dionne's. Toronto: Doubleday Canada, 1999. The Dionne Quintuplets. Directed by Donald Brittain. 1978. Montreal and Toronto: National Film Board of Canada, and Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 2008. DVD. "The Globe and Mail's Quint Photos Smart but Blanks to Babes." The Globe and Mail (1936Current), Jan 13, 1937. Accessed October 9, 2013. ProQuest Historical Newspaper: The Globe and Mail (1844- 2009). Valverde, Mariana. "Families, Private Property, and The State: The Dionne's and The Toronto Stork Derby." Journal of Canadian Studies/Revue d'Études Canadiennes 29 :4 (1994): 15 - 35. Accessed September 24, 2013. Vipond, Mary. "The Million Dollar Babies and The Media: Representations of The Dionne Quintuplets in The 1930s and The 1990s." 1-12. Accessed September 24, 2013. 48

http://www.amec.com.mx/revista/003/05%20The%20Million%20Dollar%20Babies%20An d%20The%20Media.pdf Welch, David. "The Dionne Quintuplets: More Than an Ontario Showpiece - Five FrancoOntarian Children. Journal of Canadian Studies/Revue d'Études Canadiennes 29: 4 (1994): 36 ­ 64. Accessed September 25, 2013. Wright, Cynthia. "They Were Five: The Dionne Quintuplets Revisited (introduction)." Journal of Canadian Studies/Revue d'Études Canadiennes 29: 4 (1994): 5- 14. Accessed September 25, 2013. Photographic History Brennen, Bonnie., and Hanno Hardt. Picturing the Past: Media, History, and Photography. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1999. George Eastman House., William Johnson, Mark Rice, and Carla Williams. Photography: From 1839 to Today: George Eastman House, Rochester, NY. Köln; New York: Benedikt Taschen, 2000. Kozloff, Max. The Theatre of the Face: Portrait Photography Since 1900. London: New York: Phaidon, 2007. Kunard, Andrea., and Carol Payne. The Cultural Work of Photography in Canada. Montreal, QC: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2011. Nadeau, Luis. Encyclopedia of Printing, Photographic, and Photomechanical Processes: A Comprehensive Reference to Reproduction Technologies Containing Invaluable Information On Over 1500 Processes. Fredericton, N.B.: Atelier Luis Nadeau, 1989. Photographic Preservation Lavedine, Bertrand. Photography of the Past: Process and Preservation. Translated by John McElhone. The Getty Conservation Institute: Los Angeles. 2009. Norris Debbie Hess. "Care, Handing, and Storage of Photographs." Library of Congress. Accessed November 20, 2013. http://www.loc.gov/preservation/care/photo.html. Northeast Document Conservation Center. "Overview NEDCC Preservation Leaflets." Accessed 49

November 20, 2013. http://www.nedcc.org/free-resources/preservation-leaflets/overview. Rempel, Siegfried. The Care of Photographs. New York: Lyons & Burford Publishers, 1987.

50

Part II
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !

Ministry of Government Services

Ministère des Services gouvernementaux

Archives of Ontario
134 Ian Macdonald Blvd, Toronto, ON M7A 2C5 ! Telephone: 416-327-1600 Fax: 416-327-1999 !

Archives publiques de l'Ontario
134, boul. Ian Macdonald Toronto, ON M7A 2C5 Téléphone: 416-327-1600 Télécopieur: 416-327-1999

!

Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux fonds

C9

Prepared by: Chanelle Fabbri September, 2014

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. Fonds Description 2. Biographical Sketches 3. Series Register 4. Series Descriptions 5. Sub Series Descriptions 6. Box Listings

Page 3 Page 5 Page 8 Page 9 Page 21 Page 42

2

1. Fonds Description C 9 Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux fonds Dates of Creation: Physical Description: 27 centimeters of textual records 1538 photographs : black and white paper prints 1405 photographs : black and white flex film negatives 820 photographs : black and white glass negatives 23 photographs : colour flex film negatives 1 photographs : glass colour positives (lantern slide) 1 album (51 photographs : black and white prints) 40 drawings : pencil and crayon on paper 19 postcards Immediate source of Acquisition: The records were donated to the Archives of Ontario by the Yvonne Davis estate on March 30, 1988. Scope and Content: Fonds consists of records created by Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux, both of whom worked with the Dionne quintuplets from 1934 to 1939. Davis was the Quintuplets official photographer from 1934 to 1939 and Leroux was their nurse from 1934 to 1936. The majority of the collection consists of Dionne Quintuplet material. Fonds contains correspondence, financial and legal papers, diaries, medical records of the quintuplets, publicity materials including interview scripts and notes, and publications. Also included are drawings made by the Dionne Quintuplets. The largest portion of the fonds consists of paper printed photographs and negatives, taken by Davis. Photographs in the fonds are typically of young Dionne Quintuplets, their hospital and Quintland. Earlier images are on glass-based negatives and, later, on flex
3

1924-1978

film. The negative images have some corresponding black and white paper prints. Also included are material and images from when Davis photographed the Moose River Mine disaster of 1936 and the British Royal Visits to Canada in 1924, 1939 and 1952. Fonds has been arranged into 9 series and 16 sub-series. Availability of other formats: Microfilm copies of some the textual records in this fonds have been created and are located in the reading room. Related Records: The Archives has a microfilm copy of the Dr. Allen Roy Defoe papers (the Dionne Quintuplets Doctor), the originals of which are held by Heritage North Bay formally known as the North Bay Area Museum and Archives. To view this material, access self-service microfilm reel MS 3650. Material related to Canada Pictures Limited can be found in F 4485 Canada Pictures Limited fonds. Access Restrictions: Consult individual series descriptions for further details. Terms Governing Use: Consult individual series descriptions for information on terms governing use of this material. Finding Aid: Consult individual series descriptions for finding aid information. Accruals: No further accruals are expected. How to: Consult individual series descriptions for further details.

4

2. Biographical Sketches Heading: Davis, Fred (1900? -1963) Leroux, Yvonne (1912-1981) Brief Biography/ History: Yvonne Mary Blanche Leroux (1912- 1981) was the first nurse to the Dionne Quintuplets, ; Fredrick (Fred) Robson Davis (1900? ­ 1963) was the Quintuplets official photographer. History/Sketch: Yvonne Mary Blanche Leroux (1912- 1981) Yvonne Mary Blanche Leroux was born in Callander, Ontario, near North Bay, where her father worked as a lumberjack and handyman. Leroux grew up with receiving a local education and was one of the first to graduate from the nursing program at St. Joseph's Hospital in North Bay. When Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe put out a call for French speaking nurses on May 29, 1934, Leroux answered and made her way to the Dionne family farm. Leroux continued her nursing position with the Dionne Quintuplets until she retired in December of 1936 in order to begin married life with Fred Davis. After leaving the Dionnes, Leroux went on a lecture tour of the United States and Canada spanning 1936 and 1937. Later, Leroux dedicated herself to raising her children, three sons and one daughter, and only returned to nursing for a short period after Davis's death in 1963.
1

Fredrick Robson Davis (1900? ­ 1963) Davis is believed to be born in Toronto, but raised by family in the United States due to his mother's death during childbirth and his father's subsequent death shortly after. Davis joined the military to fight in World War I and served Canada until he was injured in Amiens. After the war, Davis began his career as a photographer when he joined Toronto World, a subsidiary of the Toronto Star. After his time with the Toronto World, Fred Davis became a staff photographer at the Mail and Empire. He was eventually hired by the Toronto Star as one of the
3 2

1 Carolyn Gray, Revised, Inventory of the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux Fonds C 9. (Archives of Ontario,1997). 2 File Record for C-9 Fond. Archives of Ontario. 3 "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets," The Globe and Mail (1936- Current), May 29, 1963, p 8. 5

few full-time photographers among a crew of mainly freelance photographers.

4

Davis was working on a side project as a photographer for a newspaper in Chicago when the Quintuplets were born and was sent by The Star to photograph the babies. He was the first photographer to get to North Bay and, three days after the Quintuplets were born, May 31, he took their first photograph. Davis negotiated exclusive rights to the photographic contract for the Toronto Star at the end of 1934. The Star Newspaper Service acquired the exclusive rights in Canada and Newfoundland. Once Davis was hired as the official photographer for the Quintuples, he moved to North Bay and held the position for five and a half years until the rights expired. Davis was the only person who could take photographs of the children, but he did not have the right to photograph the rest of the Dionne family. As a result, the girls were only publicly shown with their doctor. Davis spent approximately an hour a day, from 8:30 to 9:30 am, with the exception of Sundays, photographing the Quintuplets.
10 9 8 7 6 5

As well as his work with the Dionnes, Davis is also known for his work on the Moose River Mine Disaster in 1936. Here he took the much-coveted photographs of the three miners and the chamber that caved in on them.
11

Davis, along with four partners, went into commercial photography in 1946. Davis continued his venture into commercial photography and became the co-owner of Canada Pictures with Strathy Smith. In 1957, Davis was chosen to work as the official photographer for the Diefenbaker campaign. Fred Davis succumbed to the effects of a heart seizure and died at OakvilleRoss Harkness, JE. Atkinson of the Star, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,1963), p 158. Tesher, Ellie. The Dionnes. (Toronto: Doubleday Canada, 1999), p 30. File Record for C-9 Fond. Archives of Ontario. Pierre Berton, The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1977), p 76. 8 Ross Harkness, JE. Atkinson of the Star, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,1963), p 249. 9 Pierre Berton, The Dionne Years: A Thirties Melodrama, p 15. 10 "The Globe and Mail's Quint Photos Smart but Blanks to Babes." The Globe and Mail (1936-Current), Jan 13, 1937. 11 "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets," May 29, 1963, p 8. 12 "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets," p 8. 6 4 5 6 7
12

Trafalgar Memorial Hospital on May 27, 1963 at the age of 63.

13

13 "First to Photograph Dionne Quintuplets," p 8. 7

3. Series Register Series: C 9-1 C 9-2 C 9-3 C 9-4 C 9-5 C 9-6 C 9-7 C 9-8 C 9-9 ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Title: Fred Davis files Yvonne Leroux files Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe files Dionne Quintuplets infant care records Dionne Quintuplets publications Dionne Quintuplets photographs Fred Davis records related to Moose River Mine Disaster Fred Davis photographs of the British Royal Visits Fred Davis non-Dionne related photographs

8

4. Series Descriptions C 9- 1 Fred Davis files 1924- 1928

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

5 centimeters of textual records Scope and Content: Series consists of Fred Davis's personal records, photographs, correspondence and legal records. This series includes the following sub-series, which are described on the following pages: C 9 -1 -1 C 9 -1 -2 C 9 -1 -3 C 9 -1 -4 C 9 -1 -5 C 9 -1 -6 Correspondence files Financial records Legal records Interviews, speeches, notes Photographs General records

Access Restrictions: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on access restrictions. Terms Governing Use: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on terms governing use. Finding Aid: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on the availability on finding aids. How to: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on how to order your records.
9

C 9- 2

Yvonne Leroux files 1934- 1978

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

10 centimeters of textual records Scope and Content: Series consists of Yvonne Leroux's correspondence, interview and legal records.This series includes the following sub-series, which are described on the following pages: C 9 -2 - 1 C 9 -2 - 2 C 9 -2 - 3 C 9 -2 - 4 C 9 -2 - 5 C 9 -2 - 6 Diaries Correspondence files Legal papers, interviews and notes Dionne Quintuplet drawings Photographs General records

Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on terms governing use. Finding Aid: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on the availability on finding aids. How to: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on how to order your records.

10

C 9- 3

Dr. Allan Roy Defoe files 1936

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

2 centimeters of textual records Scope and Content: This series consists of a cartoon addressed to Dr. Dafoe, an extract from a 1936 radio broadcast, and partial scripts of the radio interviews. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: A microfilm copy of this material is available on self service microfilm reel MS 3650. Also included on this reel is the inventory to the Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe Papers F 1359. The original documents are held by Heritage North Bay, located in North Bay, Ontario. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and reel number MS 3650. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.
11

C 9- 4

Dionne Quintuplets infant care records 1936 ­1937

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

2 centimeters of textual records Scope and Content: Series consists of general records and documents relating to the care of the Dionne Quintuplets. Included are daily activity and feeding schedules, charts of tooth growth, and directions for the keeping of activity records. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3650. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B236608. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

12

C 9 -5

Dionne Quintuplets publications 1935 ­1937

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

2 centimeters of textual records Scope and Content: Series consists of books, journal articles, reprints and brochures relating to the Dionne Quintuplets. The publications within this series made direct reference to the Dionne Quintuplets period, and span the years from 1935 to 1937. The following publication are in this series; The Physical Welfare of the Dionne Quintuplets (1937), Further History of the Care and Feeding of the Dionne Quintuplets (1936), The Dionne Quintuplets Growing Up (1935), Hygeia - The Health Magazine (1936), Here We Are...Three Years Old...The Dionne `Quints' (1937), The Country Doctor Talks to Women (1937), and Palmolive Soap advertisement (1937). Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright has been transferred to the Archives of Ontario by the donor. Series also contains material owned by various other copyright owners. To find out more about the copyright status of the particular material you wish to use, consult a Reference Archivist. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3650.
13

How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B236608. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

14

C 9 -6

Dionne Quintuplets photographs 1934- 1978

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

1407 photographs : black and white paper prints 1190 photographs : black and white flex film negatives 746 photographs : black and white glass negatives 9 photographs : 8 colour flex film negatives 1 photographs : glass colour positives (lantern slide) 1 album (51 photographs : black and white prints) 19 postcards Scope and Content: Series consists of photographic material of the Dionne Quintuplets taken by photographer Fred Davis, and is divided into four sub-series based on photographic format. Access Restrictions: Please see individual sub-series for more information on this martial. Terms Governing Use: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on terms governing use. Finding Aid: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on the availability on finding aids. How to: See individual sub-series descriptions for more information on how to order your records.

15

C 9 -7

Fred Davis records related to Moose River Mine Disaster 1936

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

1 centimeters of textual records 13 photographs : black and white paper prints 6 photographs : black and white glass negatives Scope and Content: Series consists of material related to the Moose River Mine Disaster of 1936. The Moose River Mine Disaster happened in on 12 April, 1936 in Nova Scotia, Canada. The gold mine collapsed on three men leaving them trapped 43 metres underground. On April 23rd, the two surviving men, along with the deceased were rescued from the mine. This event was covered nationally by green reporters from both radio and newspapers. Fred Davis was one of many reporters on the scene of this disaster, but it was Davis who got the much-coveted shot of the two surviving men exiting the Goldmine. Series contains several images of the two surviving men exiting the Goldmine and the collapsed mine and includes six glass plate negatives with their corresponding black and white paper prints. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form.

16

Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B410732, B427174, and B379820. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

17

C 9 -8

Fred Davis photographs of the British Royal visits 1924-1952 (predominant, 1924)

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

81 photographs : black and white flex film negatives 44 photographs : black and white paper prints Scope and Content: Series consists of photographs taken by Fred Davis of British Royal visits to Canada in 1924, 1939, and 1952. Included are black and white prints and film photo negatives of British Royalty visiting Canada. Most the collection pertains to the Princes of Wales Royal visit of the 1924. The series also consists of image from King George VI and Queen Elizabeth's cross-Canada tour in 1939 and Princess Elizabeth and The Duke of Edinburgh visit in 1952. Other images included Queen Mary, and King George V. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B410732, B427174, B379849, and B379850. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.
18

C 9 -9

Fred Davis non-Dionne related photographs 1934- 1978

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

134 photographs : black and white flex film negatives 69 photographs : black and white glass negatives 50 photographs : black and white paper prints 14 photographs : colour flex film negatives Scope and Content: Series consists of photographs taken by Fred Davis, which are not related to his work with the Dionne Quintuplets, the Moose River Mine Disaster or the British Royal visits to Canada in 1924, 1939 and 1952. This series consists of film photo negatives that do not appear to have any relation to Davis' main projects. These images depict a variety of subject matter from an unidentified group of young women with children on a beach, to people dressed in traditional aboriginal clothing, to an air ambulance rescuing a person. There are also images of an all-male hunting party in the woods, as well as an unidentified ship, with portraits of unidentified crew members. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available.

19

How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode numbers B410732, B379820, B379821, B379822, B379847, B379849, B379850, and B379851. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

20

5. Sub Series Descriptions C 9 - 1 -1 Dates of Creation: Physical Description: 1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of incoming and outgoing correspondence and memorabilia arranged chronologically, with undated material filed at the end of the sub-series. This material largely deals with Davis's role, first as an employee of the Toronto Star and then of the Newspaper Enterprise Association (NEA), as an official photographer for the Dionne Quintuplets. Included are descriptions of Davis' activities and instructions from the NEA concerning the compositions of the photographs. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online list is available for the material in this sub-series. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3649. Fred Davis correspondence 1934-1940

21

How to: To view this material order using reference code and barcode number B236606. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

22

C 9 - 1 -2 Dates of Creation:

Fred Davis financial records 1937 and 1941

Physical Description: 1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of a ledger kept by Davis for 1937 and a general financial statement for 1941, listing income and expenses. The ledger contains the financial record associated with Davis' contract with Newspaper Enterprise Association (NEA) to sell souvenir prints and postcards of the Quintuplets. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3649. How to: To view this material order using reference code and barcode number B236606. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

23

C 9 - 1 -3 Dates of Creation:

Fred Davis legal papers 1924, 1935-1949

Physical Description: 1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of the copyright registration for Davis' 1924 photograph "The Prince of Wales Mounting Altar Fire," agreements with literary agents and with the Dionne Guardianship, subpoenas, and affidavits. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3649. How to: To view this material order using reference code and barcode number B236606. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

24

C 9 - 1 -4 Dates of Creation:

Fred Davis interviews, speeches, notes 1935

Physical Description: 1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of a draft transcript of a speech given on the Moose River Mine Disaster and of radio interviews in which Davis discusses the development of the Quintuplets and his role as their official photographer. Also included is a rough draft of a feature article on the story of the Quintuplets written by Frank Chamberlain, a publicity consultant. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing is available for the material in this series. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3649. How to: To view this material order using reference code and barcode number B236606. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

25

C 9 - 1 -5 Dates of Creation:

Fred Davis photographs 193? - 1978

Physical Description: 3 photographs Scope and Content: This series consists of three autographed 8x10 inch photographs given to Fred Davis. The photographs are of Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe, Dorothy Patterson, and Jean Hersholt. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. How to: Order using reference code and barcode number B410732. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

26

C 9 - 1 -6 Dates of Creation:

Fred Davis general records 1934-1958

Physical Description: 1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of miscellaneous items, including dinner programmes, Christmas cards, customs forms, invitations to Royal events, clippings from NEA Service, and a list of photographs of the individual Dionne Quintuplets. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3649. How to: Order using reference code and barcode number B236606. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

27

C 9 - 2 -1 Dates of Creation:

Yvonne Leroux diaries 1934-1937

Physical Description: 5 centimeters of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of eight volumes of sporadically diaries kept by Yvonne Leroux that detail the development of the Dionne infants from their birth though to age 3. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reels MS 3649 and MS 3650. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B236607. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

28

C 9- 2-2 Dates of Creation:

Yvonne Leroux correspondence 1936- 1978

Physical Description: 1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of correspondence received by Yvonne Leroux regarding her role as nurse of the Dionne Quintuplets. Series includes correspondence of a general nature from the public, and commercial correspondence with the NEA Service regarding her contract. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3649. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B236608. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

29

C 9 - 2 -3 Dates of Creation:

Yvonne Leroux legal papers, interviews and notes 1936- 1937

Physical Description: 1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of a partial draft and notes for a proposed book by Yvonne Leroux on the Dionne Quintuplets and rough notes and partial scripts for radio interviews conducted during her 1936-1937 lecture tour of Canada and the U.S. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3650. Accruals: No further accruals are expected. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B236608. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.
30

C 9- 2-4 Dates of Creation:

Dionne Quintuplet drawings 1937

Physical Description: 40 drawings : pencil and crayon on paper Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of drawings done by the Dionne Quintuplets in pencil and crayon. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3650. Accruals: No further accruals are expected. How to: Please consult the microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3650 in the selfservices reading room.

31

C 9- 2-5

Yvonne Leroux photographs 1936-1937

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

20 photographs : black and white paper prints Scope and Content: This series consists of publicity photographs acquired by Yvonne Leroux during her 1936-1937 lecture tour of Canada and the United States. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B410732. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

32

C 9 - 2 -6

Yvonne Leroux general records 193? - 1978

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

1 centimeter of textual records Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of general records items collected by Yvonne Leroux, including a dinner menu autographed by Walter Winchell, a Christmas card from Dr. Dafoe, a card to the Quintuplets, a duplicate of the Physician's notice of birth for the Quintuplets, and an unsigned copy of the contract with the ColgatePalmolive-Peet Company. Access Restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Availability of Other Formats: This material is also available on self-service microfilm reel MS 3650. How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B236608. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

33

C 9 -6 -1

Photographic prints 1934- 1978

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

1407 photographs : black and whit paper prints Scope and Content: Sub-series consists of photographic prints that are chronologically arranged of the Dionne Quintuplets. Sub-series contains mostly 8 x 10 and 11 x14 black and white, photographic prints. Many of the images seen in these prints are relate to the negatives, both glass and film, found in sub-series C 9-6-3 and C 9-6-4. The photographs depict the Dionne Quintuplets from their birth in 1934 until 1939, when they were five years of age and contain a variety of subject matters and locations. The images are of the Quintuplets, as a group or singular shots. Often the image shows important milestones or events within the Quintuplets lives such as their birthdays and holiday events such as Easter, Thanksgiving and Christmas. Access restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, Submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available.

34

How to: Consult the online list to identify the records that you require. Order using reference code and barcode number. To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number of the box or boxes that you wish to view. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

35

C 9 -6 -2

Album 1934- 1935

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

1 album (51 photographs : black and white prints) Scope and Content: This sub-series contains a leather bound album, depicting the first year of the Dionne Quintuplets lives. The album contains 51 black and white photographic prints over a 35-page album. The prints contained in this album display images of the Dionne Quintuplets from birth, to approximately just over one year of age. The images are of the babies together, as well as singular portraits. Along with the Dionne babies, the images include Dr. Dafoe, as well as the quintuplets nurse, Yvonne Leroux. The images include the baby quintuplets being phased, feed, and changed; as well as depicting important milestones in their lives, including their first birthday. Access restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, Submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available.

36

How to: To view this material, order using reference code and barcode number B410731. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

37

C 9-6-3

Glass negatives and positive created by Fred Davis 1934-1939

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

746 photographs : black and white glass negative 1 photographs : colour glass positive (lantern slide) Scope and Content: Sub-series consists of photographic records of chronologically arranged negatives and positives of the Dionne Quintuplets, taken by photographer Fred Davis. The majority of this sub-series consists of black and white glass negatives with the exception of one lantern slide, which is a positive image. The images contain a variety of subject matter relating to the Dionne Quintuplets and include images of the quintuplets as a group and singular portraits. Often these images include Dr. Dafoe, the Quintuplet's head nurse from 1934 to 1936, Yvonne Leroux, the quintuplet's parents and sibling. The images also include unidentified medical professionals, doctors and nurses. The images depict the Dionne Quintuplets throughout their early life, and document milestones. The images include the quintuplets being fed, changed, and receiving medical attention. The images also exhibit the quintuplets celebrating holidays, such as Valentine's Day, Easter, Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's. There are also images of the girls celebrating their birthdays, having tea parties, and playing with each other both inside and outside. Access restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form.

38

Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. Accruals: No further accruals are expected. How to: To view this material, consult the online list and order using reference code and barcode number. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

39

C 9-6-4

Flex film negatives created by Fred Davis 1934-1939

Dates of Creation: Physical Description:

1191 photographs : black and white flex film negatives 8 photographs : colour flex film negatives Scope and Content: This sub-series consists of chronologically arranged negatives and positives of the Dionne Quintuplets, taken by photographer Fred Davis. The majority of the subseries includes black and white film negatives. While most of the negatives cover a period from 1934 to 1939, there are some which appear to be taken at a later time. Sub-series displays a variety of subject matter relating to the Dionne Quintuplets. The images are of the Dionne quintuplets as a group, or singular portraits. Often these images include Dr. Dafoe, including head nurse from 1934 to 1936, Yvonne Leroux, the quintuplet's parents and unidentified medical professionals. The coverage of the subject matter is comprehensive, depicting the Dionne Quintuplets throughout their early life, and documenting milestones. The images display the quintuplets being feed, changed, and receiving any medical attention. The images also exhibit the quintuplets celebrating holidays, such as Valentine's Day, Easter, Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's. There also images of the girls celebrating their birthdays, having tea parties, and playing with each other both inside and outdoors. Access restrictions: No restrictions on Access. Terms Governing Use: Copyright is held by the Archives of Ontario. There are no restrictions on reproduction for research and private study. If you wish to use other than for research and privet study any of this material, submit a
40

Request for Permission to Publish, Exhibit or Broadcast Form. Finding Aid: No online listing of the material in this series is available. How to: To view this material, consult the online list and order using reference code and barcode number. Please note that this material is stored off-site. A minimum of 1-2 business days is required to retrieve the material from storage. Please contact a Reference Archivist for more information.

41

6. Listings and Items Please consult the attached box list for a file list of records in the Fred Davis and Yvonne Leroux. C 9-6-1 Photographic prints !
REF. CODE C9-6-1 DESCRIPTION YEAR QUANTITY BOX # BARCODE

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets first birthday. Other images include the quintuplets celebrating Christmas and Easter.]

19351939

173 photographs : black and white paper prints

4 B378821

C9-6-1

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets celebrating Christmas and Easter.]

19351939

173 photographs: black & white paper prints

5

B410724

C9-6-1

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets 2nd birthday. Other images include the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurses.]

1936

160 photographs : black and white paper prints

6

B410725

C9-6-1

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets having a

1936

174 photographs : black and

7

B410726

42

tea party. Other images include the quintuplets celebrating Thanksgiving and Christmas.]

white paper prints

C9-6-1

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets 3rd birthday. Other images include the quintuplets celebrating Valentines day, Christmas and Halloween.]

1936/ 1937

169 photographs : black and white paper prints

8

B410727

C9-6-1

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets 4th birthday and acting out nursery rhymes. Other images include the quintuplets celebrating Halloween, Christmas, and Easter.]

1937/ 1938

175 photographs : black and white paper prints

9

B410728

C9-6-1

[Box consists of images of quintuples 5th birthday, having a tea party and with Dr. Defoe.]

19351939

153 photographs : black and white paper prints

10

B410729

C9-6-1

[Box consists of images of carts with information about the quintuplets. The box also consists of postcards with the quintuplets on them.]

19351939

79 photographs : black and white paper prints

11

B410730

43

C 9-6-3 Glass negatives and positives created by Fred Davis
REF. CODE C 9 -6 -3 DESCRIPTION YEAR QUANTITY BOX # BARCODE

[Box consists of images of the new born Dionne quintuplets in the hospital with Dr. Defoe and unidentified doctors and nurses]

1934

30 photographs: black & white glass negatives

17

B379795

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of newborn quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurses.]

Spring/ Summer 1934

32 photographs : black and white glass negatives

18

B379796

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of newborn quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurses.]

Spring/ Summer 1934

31 photographs : black and white glass negatives

19

B379797

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the Dionne family and their home. Other images include the room where the quintuplets were born.]

Spring/ Summer 1934

31 photographs : black and white glass negatives

20

B379798

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the town of Callander and the Dionne family farm.]

Summer 1934

29 photographs : black and white glass negatives

21

B379799

44

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets and unidentified nurses.]

Summer 1934

27 photographs : black and white glass negatives

22

B379800

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the new hospital and staff.]

Summer 1934

30 photographs : black and white glass negatives

23

B379801

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the hospital, aerial images of the Dionne land and the opening of Quintland.]

Summer 1934

30 photographs : black and white glass negatives

24

B379802

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Quintland. Other images include the quintuplets.]

Summer 1934

29 photographs : black and white glass negatives

25

B379803

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurses.]

Summer 1934

31 photographs : black and white glass negatives

26

B379804

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Christmas with the quintuplets, the babies with their parents, Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurses.]

Winter 1934/1935

31 photographs : black and white glass negatives

27

B379805

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of

Winter

28

28

B379806 45

images of the quintuplets with their dolls and unidentified nurses showing their clothes. Other images include the quintuplets at Christmas.]

1934/ 1935

photographs : black and white glass negatives

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the hospital, Dr. Defoe and unidentified doctors. Other images include an unidentified woman making bread.]

Summer/ Fall 1934

28 photographs : black and white glass negatives

29

B379807

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurses.]

Winter 1934/ 1935

31 photographs : black and white glass negatives

30

B379808

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the hospital, the quintuplets and an unidentified nurse making bottles.]

Winter 1934/ 1935

32 photographs : black and white glass negatives

31

B379809

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurses. Other images are of Dr. Defoe.]

Winter 1934/ 1935

30 photographs : black and white glass negatives

32

B379810

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of

Winter/

30

33

B379811 46

images of the quintuplets. Other images include Dr. Defoe.]

Spring 1935

photographs : black and white glass negatives

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Dr. Defoe and the quintuplets with unidentified doctors and nurses.]

Winter/ Spring 1935

30 photographs : black and white glass negatives

34

B379812

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets in carriages and with Easter lilies.]

Spring 1935

30 photographs : black and white glass negatives

35

B379813

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets first birthday. Other images include the quintuplets having a bath and Dr. Defoe showing products with the quintuplets on them.]

May 1935

20 photographs : black and white glass negatives

36

B379814

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets holding a "be a good neighbour" sign. Other images include the quintuplets in swimsuits and unidentified doctors.]

Summer/ Fall 1935

25 photographs : black and white glass negatives

37

B379815

47

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Dr. Defoe and unidentified images.]

19341940

29 photographs : black and white glass negatives

38

B379816

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Dr. Defoe.]

19341940

30 photographs : black and white glass negatives

39

B379817

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Dr. Defoe, the hospital and unidentified hospital staff.]

19341940

26 photographs : black and white glass negatives

40

B379818

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of files and records.]

19341940

20 photographs : black and white glass negatives

41

B379819

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Dr. Defoe.]

1936

30 photographs : 29 black and white glass negatives and 1 lantern slide (colour positive)

42

B379820

C 9 -6 -3

[Box consists of images of Dionne quintuplets.]

Fall 1934

22 photographs : black and white glass negatives

45

B379823

48

C 9-6-4 Flex film negatives created by Fred Davis
REF. CODE C 9 -6 -4 DESCRIPTION YEAR QUANTITY BOX # BARCODE

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe.]

1935

38 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

46

B379824

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of Dr. Defoe and his family, along with an unidentified young boy and girl.]

1934- 1963

60 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

47

B379825

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and their dolls. Other images include Dr. Defoe with his family and an unidentified young boy and girl.]

1934-1963

60 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

48

B379826

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets running after a turkey.]

1936/ 1937

55 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

49

B379827

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets playing.]

1936/ 1937

44 photographs : black and white flex film

50

B379828

49

negatives

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets playing with their dolls, skiing and sitting on top of a piano. Other images include the quintuplets praying.]

1937/ 1938

61 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

51

B379829

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out nursery rhyme Sing a Song of Six Pence.]

1938

51 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

52

B379830

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out nursery rhymes Sing a Song of Six Pence, and Ride a Cock Horse to Banbury Cross.]

1938

51 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

53

B379831

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out nursery rhymes Sing a Song of Six Pence, Little Bo Peep, Little Miss Muffet, Little Jack Horner, and Mary, Mary, Quite

1938

55 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

54

B379832

50

Contrary.]

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out nursery rhymes Cinderella and Hickory Dickory Dock. Other images include the quintuplets 4th birthday and growth carts.]

1938

40 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

55

B379833

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out the nursery rhymes Humpty Dumpty and Hey Diddle Diddle. Other images include the quintuplets 4th birthday and Easter.]

1938/ May 1938

55 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

56

B379834

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of image of the Dionne quintuplets 4th birthday. Other images include the quintuplets playing and doing arts and crafts.]

1938

50 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

57

B379835

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets with

1938

55 photographs : black and

58

B379836

51

Dr. Defoe and playing. Other images include unidentified doctors.]

white flex film negatives

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out the nursery rhyme Cinderella. Other images include the quintuplets having a tea party.]

1938

55 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

59

B379837

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out the nursery rhyme Cinderella.]

1938

55 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

60

B379838

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets acting out the nursery rhymes Cinderella and Hickory Dickory Dock. Other images include the quintuplets backing and playing and skiing outside.]

1938

55 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

61

B379839

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets in their cribs and

Winter 1938/ 1939

43 photographs : black and white flex film

62

B379840

52

playing outside. Other images include Christmas and the quintuplets playing hockey.]

negatives

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets reading and doing arts and crafts.]

1938/ 1939

42 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

63

B379841

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of quintuplets playing with their dolls, playing instruments. Other images include the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and a unidentified nurse.]

1938/ 1939

33 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

64

B379842

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of quintuplets playing with their dolls, playing instruments. Other images include the quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and an unidentified nurse.]

1939/ May 1939

54 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

65

B379843

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the quintuplets getting on a train for their trip to see the Queen of England.

1939

57 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

66

B379844

53

Other images include the quintuples having a tea party with Dr. Defoe, them cleaning and playing in the snow and unidentified doctors.]

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the Dionne quintuplets in their early to mid 20s, visitors to Quintland, and Dr. Defoe doing interviews on CBS and CFRB radio. Other images include and unidentified women doing laundry.]

1934- 1963

54 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

67

B379845

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the Dionne quintuplets in their early to mid 20s. Other images include young quintuplets eating a turkey dinner as well as unidentified nurse.]

1934- 1940

44 photographs : 38 black and white flex film negatives and 6 colour flex film negatives

68

B379846

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the Dionne Quintuplets, when they are going to meet the Queen of England. Other images

1934- 1940

7 photographs : 6 black and white flex film negatives and 1 colour flex film

69

B410733

54

include the Quintuplets with Dr. Defoe.]

negative

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the town of Callander.

1934- 1963

58 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

70

B379847

C 9 -6 -4

[Box consists of images of the Dionne quintuplets with Dr. Defoe and unidentified nurse.]

1934- 1935

10 photographs : black and white flex film negatives

75

B379852

55

Appendices

L;
-4.

ARCRS OF ONTARIO

December 1997

INVENTORY OF THE FRJD DAVIS and YVONNE LEROUX PONDS C9

Prepared by: Carolyn Gray May 1987 Revised by: Bce Scfijnkelwjtz December 1997

c
Fonds Description Series Descriptions C 9-1 C C C C C C C 9-2 C C C C C C C 9-3 C 9-4 C 9-5 C 9-6 C 9-7 9-2-1 9-2-2 9-2-3 9-2-4 9-2-5 9-2-6 9-1-1 9-1-2 9-1-3 9-1-4 9-1-5 9-1-6

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Fred Davis Papers Correspondence Financial Papers Legal Papers Interviews, Speeches, Notes Photographs Miscellaneous Yvonne Leroux Papers Diaries Correspondence Interviews and Notes Drawings Photographs Miscellaneous Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe Papers Infant Care Records Publications Dionne Quintuplets Photographs Miscellaneous Photographs

Tracings

Dates of Creation Physical Description

1924-1978

15 in. of textual records 1525 photographs 40 drawings
Ca.

Biographical Sketches Yvonne Mary Blanche Leroux (1912-198 1) was the first nurse of the Dionne quintuplets. Fredrick Robson (Fred) Davis (1896?-1963) was the first and official photographer of the Dionne quintuplets. They were married in 1938. Yvonne Leroux was born in Callander, Ontario and was educated at local schools. She was one of the first graduates of the nursing programme at St. Joseph's Hospital, North Bay. On 29 May 1934, Leroux answered a call from Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe, a local physician, for a French-speaking nurse to attend the Dionne quintuplets at a farm located halfway between Callander and Corbeil, Ontario. Leroux remained a nurse of the quintuplets until December 1936. She retired from nursing after her marriage to Fred Davis in order to raise a family, but returned briefly to the profession following Davis' death. Through her position as nurse to the Dionne quintuplets, Yvonne Leroux gained international celebrity and was singled out as a model to other nurses for her part in caring for the quintuplets. As was the case with Dr. Dafoe, broadcasters eagerly sought her as a radio guest, and companies looked to her to promote and advertise their products. After leaving her position as nurse of the Dionnes, Leroux embarked upon a lengthy lecture and publicity tour of the United States and Canada sponsored by the Newspaper Enterprise Association (NRA), the syndicate holding exclusive photographic rights to the quintuplets. It is believed that Fred Davis grew up in the United States. He served for Canada in the First World War, and was wounded at Amiens. In 1919, he began his career as a photographer with the Toronto World, later working with the Mail and Empire and from 1923 with the Toronto Star. He was the staff photographer at the Star for many years as a member of its "flying squad' of reporters and freelance photographers.' It was as a member of this squad that Davis travelled to Callander, Ontario on 30 May 1934 to obtain the first pictures of the newborn Dionne quintuplets. Fred Davis remained in Callander to cover the Dionne story, and was involved in negotiating an exclusive contract for the Star, which sold exclusive international rights to NBA but retained Canadian distribution rights. This agreement and later contracts between NBA and the Official Guardians covering the period 1935 to 1939 stipulated that Davis or another photographer satisfactory to Dafoe would take the photographs of the quintuplets. In practice, this meant that Davis, who had become friends with Dafoe and at `Ross Harkness, IE. Atkinson ofthe Star (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1963), pp. 158-9.

whose insistence often accompanied the doctor on his various travels, was official photographer. For his services, Davis was paid by NEA. In addition to his work as official photographer, Davis held a license from the Guardians to sell postcards and prints of the Quints in small souvenir lots. For a time he operated the Quintuplet Studio located at Simpson's in downtown Toronto. Davis was not restricted in his contract with NEA from taking freelance assignments, and in 1935, for example, he photographed the Moose River mine disaster, selling those pictures to the Associated Press. In 1939, NEA allowed its contract to lapse, and Davis went to work for King Features Syndicate which had entered into a new contract with the Guardians. He later left King Features and in 1946 formed Canada Pictures Limited in partnership with Strathy Smith of Toronto. They operated this company until 1962, with Davis continuing to take freelance assignments such as covering the Diefenbaker election campaigns of the 1950s.
Immediate Source of Acquisition Fonds was acquired from the Yvonne Davis Estate on 30 March 1988.

Scope and Content This fonds primarily consists of materials created and received by Yvonne Leroux Davis and Fred Davis relating to their involvement with the Dionne quintuplets. The textual records consist of correspondence, diaries, financial and legal papers, medical records of the quintuplets, publicity materials including interview scripts and notes, and publications. Also included are drawings made by the Dionne quintuplets. The largest portion of the fonds consists of photographs of the quintuplets. Availability of other formats Microfilm copies of the textual records in this fonds have been made. Restrictions on Access No restrictions on access. Copyright I Publication Information Copyright transferred to Archives of Ontario by donor. No restrictions on reproduction or publication of material for which the donor is authorised to transfer copyright to the Archives. Other material may require permission of third party copyright holders. Copyright on photographs has expired. Consult the responsible archivist for further information regarding reproduction and publication of photographs. Related Records The Archives has a microfilm copy of the Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe Papers (F 1359), the originals of which are held by the North Bay Area Museum and Archives. Consult the appropriate inventory for access to these materials. Notes Fonds formerly known as the Davis-Leroux Collection.

Former Codes Accession 21165. How to view records Consult series descriptions to narrow request to applicable materials. Textual records and drawings are available on self service microfilm in the main Reading Room. Photographs are requested through the Special Collections Reading Room.

(

SNOI1dflI3SRE S31111S

FRED DAVIS PAPERS. 1924-1958 3 in. of textual records 3 photographs

Series C 9-i

This series includes the foIlowin sub-series, which are described on the following pages: C C C C C C 9-1-1 9-1-2 9-1-3 9-1-4 9-1-5 9-1-6 Correspondence Financial Papers Legal Papers Interviews. Speeches, Notes Photographs Miscellaneous

Availability of other formats The textual records in this series have been microfilmed, and the original documents withdrawn from circulation. Please use microfilm reels MS 3649--MS 3650.

Correspondence.

Sub-series C 9-1-1

1934-1940.

1 in. of textual records

This sub-series consists of incoming and outgoing correspondence and memoranda arranged chronologically, with undated material filed at the end of the sub-series. This material largely deals with Davis' role, first as an employee of the Toronto Star and then of NEA, as official photographer of the Dionne quintuplets. Included are descriptions of Davis' activities and instructions from NEA concerning the composition of photographs. Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3649.

Financial Papers.

Sub-series C 9-1-2

1937, 1941.

1 in. of textual records

This sub-series consists of a ledger kept by Davis for 1937 and a general financial statement for 1941, listing income and expenses. The ledger contains the financial record associated with Davis' contract with NBA to sell souvenir prints and postcards of the quintuplets.
Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3649.

Legal Papers. 1924, 1935-1949 1 in. of textual records

Sub-series C 9-1-3

This sub-series consists of the copyright registration for Davis' 1924 photograph "The Prince of Wales Mounting Altar Fire," agreements with literary agents and with the Dionne Guardianship, subpoenas, and affidavits. Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3649.

Interviews, Speeches Notes. [1935?] I in. of textual records

Sub-series C 9-1-4

This sub-series consists of a draft transcript of a speech given on the Moose River mine disaster and of radio inten'iews in which Davis discusses the development of the quintuplets and his role as their official photographer. It also includes a rough draft of a feature article on the story of the quintuplets written by Frank Chamberlain, a publicity consultant.

Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3649.

Photographs. 1 933 photographs

Sub-series C 9-1-5

This is a prelumncu:1 cle.scripnoti. ilils SL'PIL'S has no! hL'L'n /`1Y)LL'.L'cl and a thorough analysis of I/k' matL'rla/ has not /)L'L'n do/k'. PIL'a.'bL' consult I'hotographw Archivist fbr information about obtaining ULCL'.SS to this mawr/al.
This series consists of three autographed 8x10 in. photographs given to Fred Davis. The photographs are of Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe. Dorothy Patterson. and Jean Hersholt.

Miscellaneous. 1934-1958

Sub-series C 9-1-6

1 in. of textual records

This sub-series consists of miscellaneous items, including dinner programmes, Christmas cards, customs forms, invitations to Royal events, clippings from NEA Service, and a list of photographs of the individual Dionne quintuplets.
Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3649.

YVONNE LEROUX PAPERS. 1934-1978 8 in. of textual records Ca. 20 photographs

Series C 9-2

This series includes five sub-series, which are described on the following pages: C C C C C C 9-2-1 9-2-2 9-2-3 9-2-4
9-2-5

9-2-6

Diaries Correspondence Interviews and Notes Drawings Photographs Miscellaneous

Availability of other formats The series has been microfilmed, and the original documents withdrawn from circulation. Please use microfilm reels MS 3649-MS 3650.

Diaries.

Sub-series C 9-2-1 5 in. of textual records

1934-1937

This sub-series consists of eight volumes of sporadically kept diaries of Yvonne Leroux which detail the development of the Dionne infants from their birth.
Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3649 and MS 3650.

·

·i

Correspondence. 1936-1978 1 in. of textual records

Sub-series C 9-2-2

This sub-series consists of correspondence received by Yvonne Leroux regarding her role as nurse of the Dionne quintuplets. Series includes correspondence ola general nature from the public, and commercial correspondence with the NEA Service regarding her contract.
Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3649.

Interviews and Notes.

Sub-series C 9-2-3

1936-1937

2 in. of textual records

This sub-series consists of a partial draft and notes for a proposed book by Yvonne Leroux on the Dionne quintuplets and rough notes and partial scripts for radio interviews conducted during her 1936-1937 lecture tour of Canada and the U.S. Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3650.

Drawings. 1937
Ca.

Sub-series C 9-2-4 40 drawings

This sub-series consists of drawings done by the Dionne quintuplets in pencil and crayon. Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3650.

Photographs. 1936-1937 ca. 20 photographs

Sub-series C 9-2-5

ihi.s .VCPIL'S litis 1101 hL'L'li This i.s a prL'hminarv dL'xcriplioli. analysis of the InalL'ricll has not heeui cloiw. P/edisL' Lvnsu/l information about obtaining clcc.c'.s:s lo tills mdltL'ridI/.

f)lVCes.VL'cI dud

ci thorough

Phoiogra;iuc

Archivist for

This series consists of publicity photographs acquired by Yvonne Leroux during her 1936-1937 lecture tour of Canada and the LISA.

()

Miscellaneous.

Sub-series C 9-2-6

193-

1 in. of textual records

This sub-series consists of miscellaneous items collected by Yvonne Leroux, including a dinner menu autographed by Walter Winchell, a Christmas card from Dr. Dafoe, a card to the Quintuplets, a duplicate of the Physician's Notice of Birth for the quintuplets, and an unsigned copy of the contract with the Colgate-Palmolive-Peet Company.
Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3650.

DR. ALLAN ROY DAFOE PAPERS.

Series C 9-3

1936

I in. of textual records

This series consists of a cartoon addressed to Dr. Daioe, an extract from a 1936 radio broadcast, and partial scripts of radio interviews.

Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3650. Related Records Consult the inventory to the Dr. Allan Roy Dafoc Papers. F 1359.

INFANT CARE RECORDS. 1936-1937 1 in. of textual records

Series C 9-4

This series consists of miscellaneous documents relating to the care of the Dionne quintuplets. It consists mainly of daily activity and feeding schedules, charts of tooth growth, and directions for keeping of activity records.

Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material in MS 3650. Related Records The Dr. Allan Roy Dafoe Papers, F 1359, includes medical records of the quintuplets. Access to these records, however, is restricted. Consult the inventory for further information.

PUBLICATIONS. 1935-1937 2 in. of textual records

Series C 9-5

This series consists of books, journal article reprints, and brochures relating to the Dionne quintuplets. Availability of other formats Please consult microfilm copy of this material on reel MS 3650. Unit List Reference Code C C C C C C C 9-5-0-1 9-5-0-2 9-5-0-3 9-5-0-4 9-5-0-5 9-5-0-6 9-5-0-7 Title Dates

1937 The Physical Welfare of the Dionne Quintuplets Feeding of the Dionne Quintuplets 1936 Further History of the Care and 1935 The Dionne Quintuplets Growing Up 1936 Hygeia The Health Magazine 1937 Here We Are...Three Years Old. ..The Dionne `Quins' 1937 The Country Doctor Talks to Women 1937 Palmolive Soap advertisement
-

DIONNE QUINTUPLETS PHOTOGRAPHS.

Series C 9-6

1934-

Ca.

1400 photographs

This is a preliminary description. This series has not been processed and a thorough analysis of the material has not been done. Please consult Photographic Archivist for further information andfor access to this material. This series consists of photographs of the Dionne quintuplets taken by Fred Davis, and includes photographic prints, a photograph album, postcards, glass negatives and positives, and film negatives and positives.

MISCELLANEOUS PHOTOGRAPHS. [1924-19521 101 photographs

Series C 9-7

This is a preliminaiy description. This series has not been processed and a thorough analysis of the material has not been done. Please consult Photographic Archivist for information about obtaining access to this material. This series consists of miscellaneous photographs taken by Fred Davis which are not related to his work with the Dionne quintuplets. The series consists photographic prints, glass negatives and slides, and film negatives.

TRACINGS

Provenance entries:

Davis, Fred, [18961 1963 Leroux, Yvonne, 1912 1981
-

Author entries: Subject headings:

Dafoe, Allan Roy, 1883-1943

Dionne quintuplets Nursing Ontario
-

A B 1 Appendix(2(*(Master(Box(List 2 3
C59=15and5C59=7 B236606 1 FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

C

D

E

F

G

DESRIPTION

RECORD5MEDIA

4
C59=2=1 B236607 2

5
C59=25and5C59=45and5C59= B236608 5 3 Series5B=2,535 and56.5Series5 C5and5D

6
C59=6=1 B378821 B=14995(4)

7
C59=6=1 B410724 B=15005(5)

8
C59=6=1 B410725 B=15015(6)

9

OFFSITESTD Box5consists5of5letters,5telegrams,5 Correspondence,5 contacts5and5Newspaper5articles.5 Financial5records Some5of5the5information5discuses5the5 Moose5Rive5Mine5Disaster.5 OFFSITEST Box5consists5of5Yvonne5Leroux's5 Diaries Diaries5documenting5her5time5with5the5 Dionne5Quintuplets.5 OFFSITEST Box5consists5of5Interviews,5contacts,5 Correspondence,5 and5Christmas5cards.5It5also5contains5 Medical5records publications,5about5the5Quintuplets,5 with5some5written5by5Dr.5Defoe5and5 medical5magazines.55 OFFSITECOOL Box5consists5of5images5of5the55 Photographs,5Prints quintuplets5first5birthday.5Other5 images5include5the5quintuplets5 celebrating5Christmas5and5Easter.5 OFFSITECOOL Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Photographs,5Prints quintuplets5celebrating5Christmas5and5 Easter.5 OFFSITECOOL Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Photographs,5Prints quintuplets52nd5birthday.5Other5 images5include5the5quintuplets5with5 Dr.5Defoe5and5unidentified5nurses.5

1 2
SIZE

H

I

J

K

L

M

3
55cm5 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW

TOTAL5 NUMBERS 1934=51978

DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION

DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Letters.5Telegrams.5Contracts.5 Newspaper5articles.5Some5of5the5 information5discuses5the5Moose5 Rive5Mine5Disaster.5 Yvonne5Leroux's5Diaries5about5The5 Dionne5Quintuplets

4
85or555cm

5
55cm General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW

General5handling5wear5 and5tear5

LOW

1934=51937

1934=1978

6
8x10 173 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1934/1935

Interviews.5Contacts.5Christmas5 cards.5Publication,5about5the5 Quintuplets,5with5some5written5by5 Dr.5Defoe5and5medical5magazines.55 Dionne5babies.5Dr.5Defoe5and5 nurse.5Christmas.5Easter.5First5 birthday LOW 1935=51939 Dionne5babies.5Dr.5Defoe5and5 nurse.5Christmas.5Easter.5Playing.5

7
8x10 171

8
8x10 160

General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5

LOW

1936

Dr.5Defoe5and5nurse5with5the5 quints.52nd55birthday.5Playing.5

9

1 2 3
POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

N

O

P

Q

4 5

6
YES,5linked5to5 Boxes517,518 175folders5in5this5 box

7 8
175folders5in5this5 box 175folders5in5this5 box

9

A 3
C59=6=1 B410726 B=15025(7) OFFSITECOOL FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

10
C59=6=1 B410727 B=15035(8) OFFSITECOOL

11
C59=6=1 B410728 B=15045(9) OFFSITECOOL

12
C59=6=1 B410729 B=15055(10) OFFSITECOOL

13
C59=6=1 B410730 B=15065(11) OFFSITECOOL

14
C59=6=2 B410731 12 OFFSITECOOL

15

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Photographs,5Prints quintuplets5having5a5tea5party.5Other5 images5include5the5quintuplets5 celebrating5Thanksgiving5and5 Christmas.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Photographs,5Prints quintuplets53rd5birthday.5Other5 images5include5the5quintuplets5 celebrating5Valentines5day,5Christmas5 and5Halloween.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Photographs,5Prints quintuplets54th5birthday5and5acting5 out5nursery5rhymes.5Other5images5 include5the5quintuplets5celebrating5 Halloween,5Christmas,5and5Easter.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5quintuples5 Photographs,5Prints 5th5birthday,5having5a5tea5party5and5 with5Dr.5Defoe.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5carts5with55 Photographs,5Prints information5about5the5quintuplets.5 The5box5also5consists5of5postcards5 with5the5quintuplets5on5them.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Album,5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 Photographs,5Prints unidentified5nurses5in5a5leather5album.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 174 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1936 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Quints5playing.5Tea5party5with5Dr.5 Defoe.5Thanksgiving.5Christmas.5

3
8x10

10
8x10 169 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1936/1937 Christmas.5Valentines.5The5quints5 playing.53rd5birthday.5Halloween.5

11
8x10 175 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1937/1938 Halloween.5Christmas.5The5quints5 acting5out5nursery5rhymes.5The5 quits5having5a5tea5party.5Easter.5 4th5birthday.5 LOW 1935=1939 5th5birthday.5The5quints5having5a5 tea5party.5Playing.5Dr.5Defoe5and5 nurse.5Miscellaneous. The5quints5growth,5behavior5and5 speech5charts.5195Post5cards.5 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1934=1939

12
8x10 153

13
8x10 79

General5handling5wear5 and5tear5

14
515Prints,5355 A5page5has5fallen5out5 pages and5the5there5is5wear5 to5the5leather5cover.5 HIGH 1934=51935 The5album5shows5the5first5year5of5 the5quintuplets5lives.5

15

N 3
175folders5in5this5 box POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

10
175folders5in5this5 box

11
175folders5in5this5 box

12 13
145folders5in5this5 box 75folders5in5this5 box

14
YES,5linked5with5 other5material.5 Boxes517,518,519.5

15

A 3
C59=6=15 B427172 D=5215(13) FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

16
C59=6=1 B427173 D=5205(14)

17
C59=1=55and5C59=2=55 and5C59=7and5C59=85 and5C59=9 B410732 15

18
C59=75and5C59=8 B427174 D=525(16)

19
C59=6=3 B379795 17

ONSITE5 Box5consists5of5an5framed5image5of5the5 Photographs,5Prints Dionne5quintuplets5that5has5been5 hand5tinted.5The5other5image5in5this5 box5is5a5matted5image5of5Dr.5Defoe.5 ONSITE5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Photographs,5Prints family5farm,5the5quintuplets5birthdays5 and5images5of5them5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes.5 OFFSITECOOL Box5consists5of5images5of5the5British5 Photographs,5Prints Royal5visits5and5the5Moose5River5Mine5 Disaster.5Other5images5include5 unidentified5building5in5Toronto5and5 Ottawa.5The5box5also5contains5sign5 images5of5celebrities.5 ONSITE5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5British5 Photographs,5Prints Royal5Visits.5Other5images5include5the5 Moose5River5Mine5Disaster.5 OFFSITECOLD Box5consists5of5images5of5new5born5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets5and5their5hospital5room.5

20
C59=6=3 B379796 18 OFFSITECOLD

21
C59=56=3 B379797 19 OFFSITECOLD

22

Box5consists5of5images5of5new5born5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurses.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5new5born5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurses.5

Glass5Negatives5

Glass5Negatives5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 2 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1934=1978 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Dionne's,5framed5hand5painted5 image.5And5an5matted5image5of5 Dr.5Defoe. Black5and5white5prints5of...5aerial5 images5of5the5Dionne5farm,5the5 quints5birthdays,5and5them5acting5 out5nursery5rhymes.5 Moose5River.5British5Royal5visits,5 1924,51939,5and51952.5Images5of5 Toronto5and5Ottawa5(c.51890s).5 Celebrities5photographs,5some5 signed.5

3

16
11x14 124 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1934=1978

17
8x10 151 General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 LOW 1934=1978

18
7

19
4x5 30

General5handling5wear5 and5tear5 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5the5emulsion5 is5coming5off5a5couple5 of5negatives.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5

LOW

19245and51936

Moose5River.5British5Royal5visits5 1924.5 HIGH 34=05=01 New5born5quintuplet.5Hospital5 room.55

20
4x5 32

MEDIUM

21
4x5 31

Spring/Summer5 1934 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 HIGH Spring/Summer5 1934

New5born5quintuplets.55Medical5 focused5images5 New5born5quintuplets.5 Unidentified5nurses.5Dr.5Defoe.55

22

N 3
POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

16
YES,5linked5with5 many5negatives.5 25of5theses5are5matted,5 and5are5different5sizes.5

17
C59=1=5=535prints,5 C59=2=5=5205prints,5 C59=7=57,5C59=8=5445 prints55and5C59= 9=505prints C59=7=565prints5 and5C59=8=515print YES,5linked5to5 prints5

18 19

20 21 22

A 3
C59=56=35 B379798 20 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

23
C59=56=3 B379799 21 OFFSITECOLD

24
C59=56=35 B379800 22 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Glass5Negatives5 family5and5their5home.5Other5images5 include5the5room5where5the5 quintuplets5were5born.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5town5of5 Glass5Negatives5 Callander5and5the5Dionne5family5farm.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5and5unidentified5nurses.5

Glass5Negatives5

25 26
C59=56=35 B379802 24 C59=56=3 B379801 23 OFFSITECOLD OFFSITECOLD Box5consists5of5images5of5the5new5 hospital5and5staff.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5hospital,5 aerial5images5of5the5Dionne5land5and5 the5opening5of5Quintland.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5Quintland.5 Other5images5include5the5quintuplets.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurses.5 B379803 B379804 25 26 OFFSITECOLD OFFSITECOLD B379805 27 OFFSITECOLD

Glass5Negatives5

Glass5Negatives5

27 28
C59=56=35 C59=56=35

Glass5Negatives5

Glass5Negatives5

29
C59=56=35

30

Box5consists5of5images5of5Christmas5 Glass5Negatives5 with5the5quintuplets,5the5babies5with5 their5parents,5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurses.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 31 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 MEDIUM Spring/Summer5 1934 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 The5Dionne5family,5the5other5 Dionne5children.5the5Dionne5 home.5the5room5where5 quintuplets5were5born. The5Dionne5family5farm.5the5town5 of5Callander.55

3
4x5

23
4x5 29

24
4x5 27 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5and5one5 negative5has5a5chip5 missing.55 Little5discoloration5to5 the5images.5 Little5discoloration5to5 the5images.5 LOW LOW Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 MEDIUM

Discoloration5to5the5 images.5

HIGH

Summer51934

Summer51934

The5quintuplets.5Unidentified5 nurses5with5the5quint5babies.5

25 26
4x5 30 4x5 30

Summer51934

The5new5hospital5and5staff. Summer51934 The5new5hospital.5Aerial5images5of5 the5Dionne5farm.5The5opening5of5 Quintland.55 Summer51934 The5opening5of5Quintland5 (continued).5The5quintuplets. Summer51934 The5quintuplets5with5the5 unidentified5nurses5and5Dr.5Defoe.5 Nurses5feeding5and5bathing5the5 babies.5 Winter51934/1935 Christmas.5Mr5and5Mrs5Dionne5 with5the5quints,5Dr.5Defoe5and5 nurses5with5the5babies.5

27 28
4x5 31 4x5 29

MEDIUM5to5HIGH HIGH

29
4x5 31 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 HIGH

30

N 3
POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

23 24

25 26 27 28

29

30

A 3
C59=56=3 B379806 28 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

31
C59=56=3 B379807 29 OFFSITECOLD

32
C59=56=3 B379808 30 OFFSITECOLD

33
C59=56=3 B379809 31 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets5with5their5dolls5and5 unidentified5nurses5showing5their5 clothes.5Other5images5include5the5 quintuplets5at5Christmas.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5hospital,5 Glass5Negatives5 Dr.5Defoe5and5unidentified5doctors.5 Other5images5include5an5unidentified5 woman5making5bread. Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurses.5

34
C59=56=3 B379810 32 OFFSITECOLD

35
C59=56=3 B379811 33 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5hospital,5 Glass5Negatives5 the5quintuplets5and5an5unidentified5 nurse5making5bottles.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurses.5Other5images5are5 of5Dr.5Defoe.55

36
C59=56=3 B379812 34 OFFSITECOLD

37

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets.5Other5images5include5Dr.5 Defoe.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5Dr.5Defoe5 Glass5Negatives5 and5the5quintuplets5with5unidentified5 doctors5and5nurses.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 28 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5

3
4x5

Winter51934/1935 Christmas5(continued).55The5quints5 with5dolls5of5them.5Unidentified5 nurses5showing5their5clothes.5

31
4x5 28 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 HIGH Summer/5Fall51934 The5hospital.5Dr.5Defoe5and5other5 unidentified5doctors5with5the5 quints.5An5unidentified5women5 making5bread.5 Winter51934/1935 Dr.5Defoe5and5unidentified5nurse5 with5the5quints.5 HIGH

32
4x5 31 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5and525 negatives5have5chips5 missing5from5them.55 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5and535 negatives5have5chips5 missing5from5them.55 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 30 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5

33
4x5 32

HIGH

34
4x5 30

Winter51934/1935 The5hospital.5Unidentified5nurse5 making5bottles.5The5quints.5 MEDIUM Winter51934/1935 Dr.5Defoe5(possibly5on5a5boat),5The5 quints5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurses.5

35
4x5 30

MEDIUM

Winter/5Spring51935 The5quints.5Dr.5Defoe.5

36
4x5

HIGH

37

Winter/5Spring51935 Dr.5Defoe.5The5quints5with5 unidentified5doctors5and5nurses.5

N 3
POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

31
YES,5linked5to5 prints.5The5women5 making5bread.5

32

33 34
The5last525 negatives5form5Box5 315connected5to5 this5box.5YES,5 linked5to5prints.5 YES,5linked5to5 prints.5 Connected5to5Box5 33.5YES,5linked5to5 prints.5

35 36 37

A 3
C59=56=3 B379813 35 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5in5carriages5and5with5 Easter5lilies.5

G

RECORD5MEDIA

Glass5Negatives5

38
C59=56=3 B379814 36 OFFSITECOLD

39
C59=56=3 B379815 37 OFFSITECOLD

40
C59=56=3 B379816 38 OFFSITECOLD

41
C59=56=3 B379817 39 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets5first5birthday.5Other5 images5include5the5quintuplets5having5 a5bath5and5Dr.5Defoe5showing5 products5with5the5quintuplets5on5 them.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets5holding5a5"be5a5good5 neighbour"5sign.5Other5images5include5 the5quintuplets5in5swimsuits5and5 unidentified5doctors.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5Dr.5Defoe5 Glass5Negatives5 and5unidentified5images.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5Dr.5Defoe.5

Glass5Negatives5

42
C59=56=3 B379818 40 OFFSITECOLD

43 44
C59=56=3 B379819 41 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5Dr.5Defoe,5 Glass5Negatives5 the5hospital5and5unidentified5hospital5 staff.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5files5and5 Glass5Negatives5 records.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 30 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5and5one5 negative5has5a5chip5 missing.55 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5and5one5 negative5has5a5chip5 missing.55 HIGH May=35 MEDIUM Spring51935 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Quints5in5carriages.5The5quints5 with5Easter5lilies.5

3
4x5

38
4x5 20

The5quintuplets5first5birthday.5 Nurse5bathing5the5babies.5Dr.5 Defoe5showing5quintuplet5 products.55

39
4x5 25 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 MEDIUM5to5HIGH Summer/5Fall51935 The5quints5in5swimsuits.5"Be5a5 good5neighbor5sign."5The5quints5 with5unidentified5doctors.5The5 quints5in5fall5outfits. MEDIUM5to5HIGH 1934=51940 Dr.5Defoe5(displays5several5 seasons).5Believed5to5be5the5Defoe5 family.55 Dr.5Defoe5(continued)(5displays5 several5seasons).5Believed5to5the5 be5the5Defoe5family.5 Dr.5Defoe5(continued)(5displays5 several5seasons).5Hospital5staff5 and5the5hospital5building. Images5of5files5and5records.5 30 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 20 Little5discoloration5to5 the5images.5 MEDIUM 1934=51940 26 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 1934=51940 LOW 1934=51940

40
4x5 29

41
4x5

Discoloration5to5the5 images.5

42
4x5

43 44
4x5

N 3
The5carriages5in5the5 image5are5the5same5 ones5that5are5housed5at5 the5Dionne5Museum.5 POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

38

39

40 41 42 43 44
This5box5links5with5 the5last5box,5box5 38

A 3
C59=6=35and5C59=75and5 C9=9 B379820 42 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

45
C59=9 B379821 43 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5Dr.5Defoe,5an5 Glass5Negatives5 unidentified5hunting5party,5and5an5air5 ambulance5pick5up.5Other5images5 include5the5Moose5River5Mine5 Disaster.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5Loblaw's5 store5front5and5unidentified5people.5

Glass5Negatives5

46
C59=9 B379822 44 OFFSITECOLD

47
C59=6=3 B379823 45 OFFSITECOLD

48 49
C59=56=4 B379825 C59=56=4 B379824 46 47 OFFSITECOLD OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5unidentified5 Glass5Negatives5 group5of5men5fishing5and5celebrating5 Christmas.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5Dionne5 Glass5Negatives5 quintuplets.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5Dr.5Defoe5 and5his5family,5along5with5an5 unidentified5young5boy5and5girl.5

Film5Negatives5

Film5Negatives5

50
C59=56=545 B379826 48 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5their5 dolls.5Other5images5include5Dr.5Defoe5 with5his5family5and5an5unidentified5 young5boy5and5girl.5

51

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 30 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5and5one5 negative5has5a5chip5 missing.55 MEDIUM5to5HIGH C.51936 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Lantern5slide=5colour5+1(positive5 image).55Moose5River.5Dr.5Defoe.5A5 hunting5party.5An5air5ambulance5 pick5up.5

3
4x5

45
4x5 30

46
4x5 20

Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration Little5discoloration5to5 the5images.5 HIGH

MEDIUM

1934=51963

1934=51963

47
4x5 22

Unidentified5people5dressed5in5 costume.5A5Loblaw5store5 front.(NOTE:5no5Dionne's) A5group5of5men5fishing.55Christmas5 (NOTE:5no5Dionne's) MEDIUM Fall51934 Baby5quints.5

48 49
4x5 60 4x5 38

LOW LOW

1935

Quints5with5Dr.5Defoe. 1934=51963 Defoe5and5his5family,5many5of5the5 images5are5of5a5young5boy5(5 around5the5age5of54)5and5girl5 (around5the5age5of53). 1934=51963,5some5 Defoe5and5his5family,5many5of5the5 possibly5from51935 images5are5of5a5young5boy5(5 around5the5age5of54)5and5girl5 (around5the5age5of53)5(continued)5 Unknown5baby.55The5quints5with5 Dr.5Defoe.5The5quints5with5their5 dolls.5

50
4x5 60 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW

51

N 3
The5first5negative5 in5the5box5is5a5 hand5painted5 lantern5slide5 (double5glass,5 positive5image)5 POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

45 46 47 48 49
YES,5linked5to5 prints.5(5Box54,5file5 6,57,517)

50

51

A 3 52 53
C59=56=45 B379829 51 OFFSITECOLD C59=56=45 B379828 50 OFFSITECOLD C59=56=45 B379827 49 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5running5after5a5turkey.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5playing.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5playing5with5their5dolls,5 skiing5and5sitting5on5top5of5a5piano.5 Other5images5include5the5quintuplets5 praying.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5acting5out5nursery5rhyme5 Sing5a5Song5of5Six5Pence.5

G

RECORD5MEDIA

Film5Negatives5

Film5Negatives5

Film5Negatives5

54
C59=56=45 B379830 52 OFFSITECOLD

Film5Negatives5

55
C59=56=45 B379831 53 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5acting5out5nursery5rhymes5 Sing5a5Song5of5Six5Pence,5and5Ride5a5 Cock5Horse5to5Banbury5Cross.5

56

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 55 44 61 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 1936/1937 1937/1938 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 Discoloration5to5the5 images,5and5one5 negative5has5a5tear.5 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 1936/1937 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Quints5with5Dr.5Defoe.5The5quints5 running5after5a5turkey. Quints5playing5outside5in5both5 summer5and5winter. Quints5playing5with5dolls.5The5 quints5skiing.5The5quints5praying.5 Quints5sitting5on5a5piano.5Fall/5 winter.5

3 52 53
4x5 4x5 4x5

54
4x5 51 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1938

The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Sing5A5Song5Of5Six5Pence.5

55
4x5 51 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 1938 The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Sing5A5Song5Of5Six5Pence5 (continued)5and5Ride5A5Cock5Horse5 To5Banbury5Cross.55

56

N 3 52 53
POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

54
YES,5linked5to5 Boxes553,554,555,5 56 The5Dionne5Museum5 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 The5Dionne5Museum5 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 YES,5linked5to5 Boxes552,554,555,5 56

55

56

A 3
C59=56=45 B379832 54 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

57
C59=56=45 B379833 55 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5acting5out5nursery5rhymes5 Sing5a5Song5of5Six5Pence,5Little5Bo5 Peep,5Little5Miss5Muffet,5Little5Jack5 Horner,5and5Mary,5Mary,5Quite5 Contrary.5

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5acting5out5nursery5rhymes5 Cinderella5and55Hickory5Hickory5Dock.5 Other5images5include5the5quintuplets5 4th5birthday5and5growth5carts.5

58
C59=56=45 B379834 56 OFFSITECOLD Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5acting5out5the5nursery5 rhymes5Humpty5Dumpty5and5Hey5 Diddle5Diddle.5Other5images5include5 the5quintuplets54th5birthday5and5 Easter.5 B379835 57 OFFSITECOLD

Film5Negatives5

59
C59=56=45

60
C59=56=45 B379836 58 OFFSITECOLD

61

Box5consists5of5image5of5the5Dionne5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets54th5birthday.5Other5 images5include5the5quintuplets5playing5 and5doing5arts5and5crafts.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 playing.5Other5images5include5 unidentified5doctors.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 55 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1938 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Sing5A5Song5Of5Six5Pence5 (continued),5Little5Bo5Peep,5Little5 Miss5Muffet,5Little5Jack5Horner,5 Mary,5Mary,5Quite5Contrary.5

3
4x5

57
4x5 40 discoloration5to5the5 images.5 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 1938 The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Cinderella,5Hicky5Dickory5 Dock.5The5quints5next5to5growth5 charts.5The5quints54th5birthday.5

58
4x5 55 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1938/5May51938 The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Humpty5Dumpty,5and5Hey5 Diddle5Diddle.5The5quints5with5 there54th5birthday5cake.5The5 quints5with5Easter5lilies5and5 bunnies.5 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1938 The5quintuplets545th5birthday.5The5 quint5playing5and5doing5arts5and5 crafts.5 55 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1938 Group5images5of5the5quints,5with5 Dr.5Defoe.5The5quints5playing,5and5 painting.55Unidentified5doctors.5

59
4x5 50

60
4x5

61

N 3
Yes,5linked5to5 Boxes552,553,555,5 56 The5Dionne5Museum5 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 The5Dionne5Museum5 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 The5Dionne5Museum5 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 YES,5linked5to5 Boxes552,553,554,5 56 YES,5linked5to5 Boxes552,53,554,5 55,557 Yes,5linked5to5Box5 56 POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

57

58

59

60
Yes,5linked5to5Box5 57,559

61

A 3
C59=56=45 B379837 59 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5acting5out5the5nursery5 rhyme5Cinderella.5Other5images5 include5the5quintuplets5having5a5tea5 party.5

G

RECORD5MEDIA

Film5Negatives5

62
C59=56=45 B379838 60 OFFSITECOLD Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 quintuplets5acting5out5the5nursery5 rhyme5Cinderella.5

Film5Negatives5

63
C59=56=45 B379839 61 OFFSITECOLD

64
C59=56=45 B379840 62 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5acting5out5the5nursery5 rhymes5Cinderella5and5Hickory5Hickory5 Dock.5Other5images5include5the5 quintuplets5backing5and5playing5and5 skiing5outside.5

65
C59=56=45 B379841 63 OFFSITECOLD

66

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5in5their5cribs5and5playing5 outside.5Other5images5include5 Christmas5and5the5quintuplets5playing5 hockey.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5reading5and5doing5arts5and5 crafts.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 55 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1938 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Cinderella.5The5 quintuplets5having5a5tea5party.5

3
4x5

62
4x5 55 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 1938 The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Cinderella.5

63
4x5 55 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1938 The5quints5acting5out5nursery5 rhymes=5Cinderella5(continued).5 Hickory5Dickory5Dock.55The5quints5 baking.5The5quints5playing5and5 skiing5outside.5

64
4x5 43 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW Winter51938/51939 The5quints5playing5and5skiing5 outside5(continued).5The5quints5 reading5and5playing5inside.5The5 quints5in5their5pjs5in5their5cribs.5 Christmas.5 1938/1939 The5quintuplets5in5single5portrait5 images.5The5quints5playing,5 reading5and5doing5arts5and5crafts.5

65
4x5 42

66

No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration

LOW

N 3
YES,5linked5to5Box5 The5Dionne5Museum5 58,560,561 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 YES,5linked5to5Box5 The5Dionne5Museum5 59,561 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 YES,5linked5to5Box5 The5Dionne5Museum5 59,560,562 has5newspaper5articles5 were5these5images5of5 the5quintuplets5acted5 out5nursery5rhymes5 were5published.(Box530=5 2011.3.495=639)5 YES,5linked5to5Box5 61 POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

62

63

64

65 66

A 3
C59=56=45 B379842 64 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

67
C59=56=45 B379843 65 OFFSITECOLD

68
C59=56=45 B379844 66 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5quintuplets5 Film5Negatives5 playing5with5their5dolls,5playing5 instruments.5Other5images5include5the5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5a5 unidentified5nurse.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets55th5birthday.5

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5getting5on5a5train5for5their5 trip5to5see5the5Queen5of5England.5 Other5images5include5the5quintuples5 having5a5tea5party5with5Dr.5Defoe,5 them5cleaning5and5playing5in5the5snow5 and5unidentified5doctors.5

69
C59=56=45 B379845 67 OFFSITECOLD

70
C59=56=45 B379846 68 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5in5their5early5to5mid520s,5 visitors5to5Quintland,5and5Dr.5Defoe5 doing5interviews5on5CBS5and5CFRB5 radio.5Other5images5include5and5 unidentified5women5doing5laundry.5

71

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5in5their5early5to5mid520s.5 Other5images5include5young5 quintuplets5eating5an5turkey5dinner5as5 well5as5unidentified5nurse.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 33 The5negatives5are5 curling5and5one5is5 ripped.5 MEDIUM 1938/1939 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Group5images5of5the5quints,5with5 their5dolls5and5playing5 instruments.5The5quints5with5Dr.5 Defoe5and5unidentified5nurse. The5quintuplets55th5Birthday.5 Images5of5the5quints5both5inside5 and5outside.5 The5quintuplets5at5the5train5 station5with5their5nurses5to5go5see5 the5Queen.5The5quintuplets5in5 their5white5dresses5that5they5meet5 the5Queen5in.5the5quints5having5a5 tea5party5with5Dr.5Defoe.5A5quint5 cleaning.5The5quints5outside5in5the5 snow5and55playing5hockey.5 Unidentified5doctors.5 5Quintland5visitors.5Dr.5Defoe5on5 CBS5and5CFRB5radio.5Believed5to5 be5the545serving5quints5in5their5mid5 20s,5with5old5nurses.5Unidentified5 nurse5and5doctors.5Unidentified5 women5doing5laundry.55

3
4x5

67
4x5 54

68
4x5 57 The5negatives5are5 yellowing.5 MEDIUM

No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration

LOW

1939/5May51939

1939

69
4x5 54 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1934=51963

70
5x7 44 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1934=51940

71

The5quintuplets5at5several5 different5ages.5Quints5in5their5mid5 20s.5Young5quint5eating5turkey5 dinner.5Unidentified5nurses.55

N 3
POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

67 68

69

70
65negatives5are5 coloured.5

71

A 3
C59=56=45 B410733 69 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

72
C59=56=45and5C59=9 B379847 70 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Film5Negatives5 Quintuplets,5when5they5are5going5to5 meet5the5Queen5of5England.5Other5 images5include5the5Quintuplets5with5 Dr.5Defoe.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5town5of5 Film5Negatives5 Callander.5Other5images5include5an5 unidentified5road5and5landscape5and5 ship.5

73
C59=8 B379848 71 OFFSITECOLD

74
C59=85and5C59=9 B379849 72 OFFSITECOLD

Box5consists5of5images5from5the5British5 Film5Negatives5 Royal5visits.5

Box5consists5of5images5of5the5British5 Film5Negatives5 Royal5Visit5and5of5an5unidentified5ship.5

75
C59=85and5C9=9 B379850 73 OFFSITECOLD Box5consists5of5images5of5the5British5 Royal5visits5and5unidentified5fishing5 and5hunting5groups.5Other5images5 include5an5unidentified5man5and5 young5girls5and5an5unidentified5 women.5

Film5Negatives5

76

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 7 The5negatives5are5 yellowing,5and5one5 has5a5rip5on5the5 corner.5 discoloration5to5the5 images5and5one5 negative5has5a5rip5on5 the5corner.5 MEDIUM 1934=51963 MEDIUM5to5HIGH 1934=51940 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 Group5images5of5the5quintuplets.5 The5quints5going5to5meet5the5 queen.5Quints5with5Dr.5Defoe5.5 Quints5with5unidentified5nurse.5 The5town5surrounding5Quintland,5 Callander.5A5unidentified5ship.5An5 unidentified5road5and5landscape.5 (NOTE:5no5Dionne's)

3
8x10

72
4x5 58

73 74
4x5 26 4x55and5 one53x4 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 51 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 LOW5to5MEDIUM5 1924,519395and5 1952 LOW 1924,519395and5 1952 The5Royal5visits5of51924,519395and5 1952.5 The5Royal5visits5of51924,519395and5 19525(continued).5A5unidentified5 ship.5

75
4x5 55 Discoloration5to5the5 images.5 MEDIUM 1924=51963 British5royal5visit.5Unidentified5 older5man5with5little5girl.5 Unidentified5women.5Racetrack.5A5 fishing5group.5A5hunting5party.5 Unidentified5little5girl.5

76

N 3
15negative5is5 colour.5 POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

72
C59=4=5145black5 and5white5 negatives5and515 colour5negative5 and5C59=95=435 black5and5white5 negatives5 YES,5linked5to5Box5 72.5(looks5to5be5the5 same5image) YES,5linked5to5Box5 71.5(looks5to5be5the5 same5image)

73 74

75
YES,5linked5to5the5 prints5in5Box515

76

C59=8=5255black5 and5white5 negatives5and5C59= 9=515black5and5 white5negative C59=85=55black5and5 white5negatives5 and5C59=95=5505 black5and5white5 negatives

A 3
C59=9 B379851 74 OFFSITECOLD FONDS/5REFERENCE5 CODE BARCODE5 CONTAINER SERIES HOME5 LOCATION

B

C

D

E

F
DESRIPTION

G

RECORD5MEDIA

77
C59=56=45 B379852 75 OFFSITECOLD

78

Box5consists5of5images5of5an5 Film5Negatives5 unidentified5hunting5party,5dog5and5 cats5and5baby5bear5cub.55Other5images5 include5a5football5game5and5an5 unidentified5group5of5women5at5the5 beach.5 Box5consists5of5images5of5the5Dionne5 Film5Negatives5 quintuplets5with5Dr.5Defoe5and5 unidentified5nurse.5

H
SIZE

I
TOTAL5 NUMBERS 54 No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration LOW 1924=51963 DAMAGE/5 DETERIORATION DIGITAZATION55555555555555 APPROXIMATE5YEAR (level5of5priority)

J

K

L

M
THEMES/5GROUPINGS5 A5hunting5party.5Images5of5cats5 and5dog.5Baby5bear5cubs.5 Unidentified5people5on5a5beach.5 Football.555

3
4x55and5 four53x4

77
4x5 10

78

No5visible5damage5or5 deterioration

LOW

1934=51935

The5Dionne5quintuples5with5Dr.5 Defoe5and5unidentified55nurse.5

N 3
145negatives5are5 coloured.545 negatives5are53x4.5 POSSIBLE5FILE5LEVEL5 LINKS5TO5OTHER5 DESCRIPTION BOXES NOTES LINKS5TO5OUTSIDE5 SOURCES5

O

P

Q

77 78

A 1 2 3
C29 C"9$1"and"C"9$7 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

Appendix(3(*(AO(C(9(Catalogue

SCOPE SCOPE2

4
C29 C"9$2$1

5
C29 C"9$2"and"C"9$4"and"C"9$5

6
C29 C"9$6$1

7
C29 C"9$6$1

Box2consists2of2letters,2telegrams,2 contacts2and2Newspaper2articles.2Some2 of2the2information2discuses2the2Moose2 Rive2Mine2Disaster.2 Box2consists2of2Yvonne2Leroux's2Diaries2 documenting2her2time2with2the2Dionne2 Quintuplets.2 Box2consists2of2Interviews,2contacts,2and2 Christmas2cards.2It2also2contains2 publications,2about2the2Quintuplets,2with2 some2written2by2Dr.2Defoe2and2medical2 magazines.22 Box2consists2of2images2of2the22quintuplets2 first2birthday.2Other2images2include2the2 quintuplets2celebrating2Christmas2and2 Easter.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 celebrating2Christmas2and2Easter.2 C"9$6$1 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 2nd2birthday.2Other2images2include2the2 quintuplets2with2Dr.2Defoe2and2 unidentified2nurses.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 having2a2tea2party.2Other2images2include2 the2quintuplets2celebrating2Thanksgiving2 and2Christmas.2

8
C29

9
C29 C"9$6$1

10

H 1 2 3
1924]21978 52cm2of2textual2 records2 SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box21

Textual2records Graphic2materials

4
1934]21937 82diaries2 Textual2records Graphic2materials Box22

5
1934]1978 52cm2of2textual2 records2 Textual2records Graphic2materials Box23

6
1934/1935 1732photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints2 Box24

7
1935]21939 1712photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints 1936 1602photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints Box25

8
Box26

9
1936 1742photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints Box27

10

R 1 2 3
B236606 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

NOTES

4
B236607

C29]1=242cm2of2textual2records2 and2C29]7=212cm2of2textual2 records

5
B236608

6
B378821

C29]2=212cm2of2textual2records2 and2C29]4=212cm2of2textual2 records2and2C29]5=232cm2of2 textual2records

7
B410724

8
B410725

9
B410726

10

A 3
C29 C"9$6$1 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

11
C29 C"9$6$1

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 3rd2birthday.2Other2images2include2the2 quintuplets2celebrating2Valentines2day,2 Christmas2and2Halloween.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 4th2birthday2and2acting2out2nursery2 rhymes.2Other2images2include2the2 quintuplets2celebrating2Halloween,2 Christmas,2and2Easter.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2quintuples25th2 birthday,2having2a2tea2party2and2with2Dr.2 Defoe.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2carts2with22 information2about2the2quintuplets.2The2 box2also2consists2of2postcards2with2the2 quintuplets2on2them.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 quintuplets2with2Dr.2Defoe2and2 unidentified2nurses2in2a2leather2album.2 Box2consists2of2an2framed2image2of2the2 Dionne2quintuplets2that2has2been2hand2 tinted.2The2other2image2in2this2box2is2a2 matted2image2of2Dr.2Defoe.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 family2farm,2the2quintuplets2birthdays2 and2images2of2them2acting2out2nursery2 rhymes.2

12
C29 C"9$6$1

13
C29 C"9$6$1

14
C29 C"9$6$2

15
C29 C"9$6$1"

16
C29 C"9$6$1

17

H 3
1936/1937 SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box28

1692photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints

11
1937/1938 1752photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints Box29

12
1935]1939 1532photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints 792photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints Box210

13
1934]1939 Box211

14
1934]21935 512Prints,2352pages Textual2records Graphic2materials Box212

15
1934]1978 22photographs2:212 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2print2 and212framed2colour2 print 1242photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints 1934]1978 Box213

16

Box214

17

R 3
B410727 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

11
B410728

12
B410729

13
B410730

14
B410731

15
B427172

16
B427173

17

A 3
C29 C"9$1$5"and"C"9$2$5"and"C"9$ 7and"C"9$8"and"C"9$9 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

18
C29 C"9$7"and"C"9$8

19
C29 C"9$6$3

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2British2 Royal2visits2and2the2Moose2River2Mine2 Disaster.2Other2images2include2 unidentified2building2in2Toronto2and2 Ottawa.2The2box2also2contains2sign2 images2of2celebrities.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2British2 Royal2Visits.2Other2images2include2the2 Moose2River2Mine2Disaster.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2new2born2 quintuplets2and2their2hospital2room.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2new2born2 quintuplets2with2Dr.2Defoe2and2 unidentified2nurses.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2new2born2 quintuplets2with2Dr.2Defoe2and2 unidentified2nurses.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 family2and2their2home.2Other2images2 include2the2room2where2the2quintuplets2 were2born.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2town2of2 Callander2and2the2Dionne2family2farm.2

20
C29 C"9$6$3

21
C29 C"9$"6$3

22
C29 C"9$"6$3"

23
C29 C"9$"6$3

24
C29 C"9$"6$3" Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 and2unidentified2nurses.2

25

H 3
1934]1978 SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box215

1512photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2prints

18
19242and21936 72photographs2:2black2 Textual2records Graphic2materials and2white2prints Textual2records Graphic2materials Box216

19
May]34 302photographs2:2 black2and2white2glass2 negatives Spring/Summer21934 322photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives Spring/Summer21934 312photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives Spring/Summer21934 312photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives Summer21934 Box217

20

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box218

21

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box219

22

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box220

23

24
Summer21934

25

292photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22glass2 negatives 272photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22glass2 negatives

Box221

Box222

R 3
B410732 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

C29]1]5=232prints,2C29]2]5=2202 prints,2C29]7=27,2C29]8=2442 prints22and2C29]9=502prints

18
B427174

C29]7=262prints2and2C29]8=212 print

19
B379795

20
B379796

21
B379797

22
B379798

23
B379799

24
B379800

25

A 3
C29 C"9$"6$3 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2new2 hospital2and2staff.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2hospital,2 aerial2images2of2the2Dionne2land2and2the2 opening2of2Quintland.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2Quintland.2 Other2images2include2the2quintuplets.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 with2Dr.2Defoe2and2unidentified2nurses.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2Christmas2with2 the2quintuplets,2the2babies2with2their2 parents,2Dr.2Defoe2and2unidentified2 nurses.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 with2their2dolls2and2unidentified2nurses2 showing2their2clothes.2Other2images2 include2the2quintuplets2at2Christmas.2

26
C29 C"9$"6$3"

27
C29 C"9$"6$3"

28
C29 C"9$"6$3"

29
C29 C"9$"6$3"

30
C29 C"9$"6$3

31
C29 C"9$"6$3

32
C29 C"9$"6$3

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2hospital,2 Dr.2Defoe2and2unidentified2doctors.2 Other2images2include2an2unidentified2 woman2making2bread. Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 with2Dr.2Defoe2and2unidentified2nurses.2

33

H 3
Summer21934 302photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 302photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 292photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 312photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 312photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box223

Textual2records Graphic2materials

26
Summer21934

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box224

27
Summer21934

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box225

28
Summer21934

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box226

29
Winter21934/1935

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box227

30
Winter21934/1935

282photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22glass2 negatives

Box2228

31
Summer/2Fall21934 282photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22glass2 negatives Winter21934/1935 312photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22glass2 negatives Box229

32

Box230

33

R 3
B379801 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

26
B379802

27
B379803

28
B379804

29
B379805

30
B379806

31
B379807

32
B379808

33

A 3
C29 C"9$"6$3 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

34
C29 C"9$"6$3

35
C29 C"9$"6$3

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2hospital,2 the2quintuplets2and2an2unidentified2 nurse2making2bottles.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 with2Dr.2Defoe2and2unidentified2nurses.2 Other2images2are2of2Dr.2Defoe.22 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets.2 Other2images2include2Dr.2Defoe.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2Dr.2Defoe2and2 the2quintuplets2with2unidentified2doctors2 and2nurses.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 in2carriages2and2with2Easter2lilies.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 first2birthday.2Other2images2include2the2 quintuplets2having2a2bath2and2Dr.2Defoe2 showing2products2with2the2quintuplets2 on2them.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 holding2a2"be2a2good2neighbour"2sign.2 Other2images2include2the2quintuplets2in2 swimsuits2and2unidentified2doctors.2

36
C29 C"9$"6$3

37
C29 C"9$"6$3

38
C29 C"9$"6$3

39
C29 C"9$"6$3

40
C29 C"9$"6$3

Box2consists2of2images2of2Dr.2Defoe2and2 unidentified2images.2

41

H 3
Winter21934/1935 SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box231

34
Winter21934/1935

35
Winter/2Spring21935 302photographs2:2 black2and2white2glass2 negatives 302photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 302photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 202photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives

322photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2glass2 negatives 302photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22glass2 negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box232

Box233

36
Winter/2Spring21935

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box234

37
Spring21935

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box235

38
35]05]01

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box236

39
Summer/2Fall21935 252photographs2:2 black2and2white222 glassnegatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box237

40
1934]21940 292photographs2:2 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22glass2 negatives Box238

41

R 3
B379809 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

34
B379810

35
B379811

36
B379812

37
B379813

38
B379814

39
B379815

40
B379816

41

A 3
C29 C"9$"6$3 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

Box2consists2of2images2of2Dr.2Defoe.2

42
C29 C"9$"6$3 Box2consists2of2images2of2Dr.2Defoe,2the2 hospital2and2unidentified2hospital2staff.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2files2and2 records.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2Dr.2Defoe,2an2 unidentified2hunting2party,2and2an2air2 ambulance2pick2up.2Other2images2include2 the2Moose2River2Mine2Disaster.2

43
C29 C"9$"6$3

44
C29 C"9$6$3"and"C"9$7"and"C9$9

45
C29 C"9$9 Box2consists2of2images2of2loblaws2store2 front2and2unidentified2people.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2unidentified2 group2of2men2fishing2and2celebrating2 Christmas.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2Dionne2 quintuplets.2 C"9$9 C"9$6$3 C"9$"6$4 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 with2Dr.2Defoe.2

46
C29

47
C29

48
C29

49

H 3
1934]21940 302photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 262photographs2:2 black2and2white2glass2 negatives 202photographs2:2 black2and2white2glass2 negatives 292photographs2:2282 black2and2white22glass2 negatives2and212 lantern2slide2(colour2 positive) 302photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 202photographs2:2 black2and2white22glass2 negatives 222photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives 382photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives 1934]21963 Fall21934 1935 SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box239

Textual2records Graphic2materials

42
1934]21940

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box240

43
1934]21940

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box241

44
1936

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box242

45
1934]21963

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box243

46

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box244

47

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box245

48

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box246

49

R 3
B379817 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

42
B379818

43
B379819

44
B379820

45
B379821

C9]6]3=242black2and2white2 negatives,2C29]7=262black2and2 white2negatives,2C29]9=192:2182 balck2and2white2negatives212 lantern2slide2(colour2positive)

46
B379822

47
B379823

48
B379824

49

A 3
C29 C"9$"6$4 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

50
C29 C"9$"6$"4"

51
C29 C"9$"6$4"

Box2consists2of2images2of2Dr.2Defoe2and2 his2family,2along2with2an2unidentified2 young2boy2and2girl.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 with2Dr.2Defoe2and2their2dolls.2Other2 images2include2Dr.2Defoe2with2his2family2 and2an2unidentified2young2boy2and2girl.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 running2after2a2turkey.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 playing.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 playing2with2their2dolls,2skiing2and2sitting2 on2top2of2a2piano.2Other2images2include2 the2quintuplets2praying.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2nursery2rhyme2Sing2a2Song2of2 Six2Pence.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2nursery2rhymes2Sing2a2Song2of2 Six2Pence,2and2Ride2a2Cock2Horse2to2 Banbury2Cross.2

52
C29 C"9$"6$4"

53
C29 C"9$"6$4"

54
C29 C"9$"6$4"

55
C29 C"9$"6$4"

56

H 3
1934]21963 602photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives 602photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box247

Textual2records Graphic2materials

50
1934]1963

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box248

51
1936/1937 552photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives 442photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives 612photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box249

52
1936/1937

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box250

53
1937/1938

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box251

54
1938 512photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives 512photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives 1938 Textual2records Graphic2materials Box252

55

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box253

56

R 3
B379825 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

50
B379826

51
B379827

52
B379828

53
B379829

54
B379830

55
B379831

56

A 3
C29 C"9$"6$4" REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

57
C29 C"9$"6$4"

58
C29 C"9$"6$4"

59
C29 C"9$"6$4"

60
C29 C"9$"6$4"

61
C29 C"9$"6$4"

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2nursery2rhymes2Sing2a2Song2of2 Six2Pence,2Little2Bo2Peep,2Little2Miss2 Muffet,2Little2Jack2Horner,2and2Mary,2 Mary,2Quite2Contrary.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2nursery2rhymes2Cinderella2and22 Hickory2Dickory2Dock.2Other2images2 include2the2quintuplets24th2birthday2and2 growth2carts.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2the2nursery2rhymes2Humpty2 Dumpty2and2Hey2Diddle2Diddle.2Other2 images2include2the2quintuplets24th2 birthday2and2Easter.2 Box2consists2of2image2of2the2Dionne2 quintuplets24th2birthday.2Other2images2 include2the2quintuplets2playing2and2doing2 arts2and2crafts.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 with2Dr.2Defoe2and2playing.2Other2images2 include2unidentified2doctors.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2the2nursery2rhyme2Cinderella.2 Other2images2include2the2quintuplets2 having2a2tea2party.2

62

H 3
1938 552photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box254

Textual2records Graphic2materials

57
1938 402photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film22negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box255

58
1938/2May21938 552photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box256

59
1938 502photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives 552photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives 1938 552photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box257

60
1938

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box258

61

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box259

62

R 3
B379832 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

57
B379833

58
B379834

59
B379835

60
B379836

61
B379837

62

A 3
C29 C"9$"6$4" REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2the2nursery2rhyme2Cinderella.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 acting2out2the2nursery2rhymes2Cinderella2 and2Hickory2Dickory2Dock.2Other2images2 include2the2quintuplets2backing2and2 playing2and2skiing2outside.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 in2their2cribs2and2playing2outside.2Other2 images2include2Christmas2and2the2 quintuplets2playing2hockey.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 reading2and2doing2arts2and2crafts.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2quintuplets2 playing2with2their2dolls,2playing2 instruments.2Other2images2include2the2 quintuplets2with2Dr.2Defoe2and2a2 unidentified2nurse.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 quintuplets25th2birthday.2

63
C29 C"9$"6$4"

64
C29 C"9$"6$4"

65
C29 C"9$"6$4"

66
C29 C"9$"6$4"

67
C29 C"9$"6$4"

68

H 3
1938 552photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 filmnegatives 552photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box260

Textual2records Graphic2materials

63
1938

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box261

64
Winter21938/21939 432photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film22negatives 422photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives 332photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box262

65
1938/1939

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box263

66
1938/1939

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box264

67
1939/2May21939 542photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box265

68

R 3
B379838 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

63
B379839

64
B379840

65
B379841

66
B379842

67
B379843

68

A 3
C29 C"9$"6$4" REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

69
C29 C"9$"6$4"

Box2consists2of2images2of2the2quintuplets2 getting2on2a2train2for2their2trip2to2see2the2 Queen2of2England.2Other2images2include2 the2quintuples2having2a2tea2party2with2 Dr.2Defoe,2them2cleaning2and2playing2in2 the2snow2and2unidentified2doctors.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 quintuplets2in2their2early2to2mid220s,2 visitors2to2Quintland,2and2Dr.2Defoe2 doing2interviews2on2CBS2and2CFRB2radio.2 Other2images2include2and2unidentified2 women2doing2laundry.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 quintuplets2in2their2early2to2mid220s.2 Other2images2include2young2quintuplets2 eating2an2turkey2dinner2as2well2as2 unidentified2nurse.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 Quintuplets,2when2they2are2going2to2 meet2the2Queen2of2England.2Other2 images2include2the2Quintuplets2with2Dr.2 Defoe.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2town2of2 Callander.2Other2images2include2an2 unidentified2road2and2landscape2and2 ship.2

70
C29 C"9$"6$4"

71
C29 C"9$"6$4"

72
C29 C"9$"6$4"and"C"9$9

73

H 3
1939 572photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box266

Textual2records Graphic2materials

69
1934]21963 542photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box267

70
1934]21940 442photographs2:2382 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives262colour2 flex2film2negatives 72photographs2:262 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives2and12 colour2flex2film2 negative 582photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives 1934]21963 Textual2records Graphic2materials Box268

71
1934]21940

Box269

72

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box270

73

R 3
B379844 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

69
B379845

70
B379846

71
B410733

72
B379847

73

C29]4=2142black2and2white2 negatives2and212colour2 negative2and2C29]92=432black2 and2white2negatives2

A 3
C29 C"9$8 REF_ADD REF_FILE REF_CREATOR CLASS TITLE

B

C

D

E

F

G

SCOPE SCOPE2

Box2consists2of2images2from2the2British2 Royal2visits.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2British2 Royal2Visit2and2of2an2unidentified2ship.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2British2 Royal2visits2and2unidentified2fishing2and2 hunting2groups.2Other2images2include2an2 unidentified2man2and2young2girls2and2an2 unidentified2women.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2an2unidentified2 hunting2party,2dog2and2cats2and2baby2 bear2cub.22Other2images2include2a2 football2game2and2an2unidentified2group2 of2women2at2the2beach.2 Box2consists2of2images2of2the2Dionne2 quintuplets2with2Dr.2Defoe2and2 unidentified2nurse.2

74
C29 C"9$8"and"C"9$9

75
C29 C"9$8"and"C9$9

76
C29 C"9$9

77
C29 C"9$"6$4"

78

H 3
1924,219392and21952 512photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film22negatives 1924,219392and21952 262photographs2:2 black2and2white2flex2 film2negatives2 1924]21963 552photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives SCOPE3 SCALE DATECR PHDESC GMD GMD2

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

GMD3 REST CONT BNOTE Box271

Textual2records Graphic2materials

74

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box272

75

Textual2records Graphic2materials

Box273

76
1924]21963 542photographs2:2402 Textual2records Graphic2materials black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives2and2142 colour22flex2film2 negatives 102photographs2:2 black2and2white22flex2 film2negatives Textual2records Graphic2materials Box274

77
1934]21935

Box275

78

R 3
B379848 BARCODE BDISPLAY BNOTE2 BARCODE2 BDISPLAY2 NOTES

S

T

U

V

W

X

Y

Z

AA
NOTES

HIDDEN WEBL OPENDATE NOTES

74
B379849

75
B379850

C29]8=2252black2and2white2 negatives2and2C29]9=212black2 and2white2negative C29]82=52black2and2white2 negatives2and2C29]92=2502black2 and2white2negatives

76
B379851

77
B379852

78


