Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Economics Publications and Research Economics

2-1-2008

Bilateral trade agreements and the feasibility of multilateral free trade
Kamal Saggi
Southern Methodist University

Halis Murat Yildiz
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/economics Part of the Economics Commons Recommended Citation
Saggi, Kamal and Yildiz, Halis Murat, "Bilateral trade agreements and the feasibility of multilateral free trade" (2008). Economics Publications and Research. Paper 29. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/economics/29

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Economics at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Economics Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

MP R A
Munich Personal RePEc Archive

Bilateral trade agreements and the feasibility of multilateral free trade
Saggi, Kamal and Yildiz, Halis Murat Southern Methodist University, Ryerson University

01. February 2008

Online at http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/17561/ MPRA Paper No. 17561, posted 28. September 2009 / 13:02

Bilateral trade agreements and the feasibility of multilateral free trade

Abstract This paper compares stable Nash equilibria of two games of trade liberalization. In the FTA game, each country can form an FTA with either one of its trade partners, or both of them, or none of them. By contrast, in the No FTA game, each country must choose either no agreement or free trade. Under symmetry, free trade is uniquely stable under the No FTA game whereas the FTA game also admits a bilateral FTA as an equilibrium. However, there exist patterns of cost asymmetry for which the freedom to pursue bilateral FTAs is necessary for achieving global free trade.

Keywords: Multilateral Trade Liberalization, Free Trade Agreements, GATT, Intraindustry Trade, Oilgopoly. JEL Classi...cations: F13, F12.

1

1

Introduction

By their very nature, preferential trade agreements (PTAs) require member countries to grant tari¤ reductions to each other that are typically not extended to non-members. Ever since Jacob Viner' s (1950) classic analysis, the static distortions created by such preferential trade liberalization have received signi...cant attention from economists and policy-makers alike. Furthermore, in recent years there has been widespread concern regarding the potential adverse e¤ects of PTAs on the process of multilateral trade liberalization ­the raison d' etre of the World Trade Organization (WTO). This concern appears to be rather well-founded: so widespread are PTAs today that Mongolia is the only country in the world that does not belong to one. As per the WTO' s web-site, over 200 PTAs are o¢ cially in force today and their number is expected to reach 400 by 2010. Furthermore, such arrangements have spread rather rapidly in the last decade or so: since 1996, as many as 150 new PTAs have come into existence. Under the intricate and ever-increasing web of PTAs, the notion of most favored nation (MFN) treatment has begun to appear more of an exception rather than a core rule of the WTO. The two most commonly occurring PTAs are free trade agreements (FTAs) and customs unions, with over 80% them being FTAs (Crawford and Fiorentino, 2005). Accordingly, this paper focuses on FTAs and asks: how does the pursuit of FTAs interact with the process of multilateral trade liberalization? Would global free trade be easier to achieve if countries were to pursue trade liberalization only multilaterally? Or as Jagdish Bhagwati (1991) put it ­are FTAs building or stumbling blocs for multilateral trade liberalization? While the meaning of the phrase ` stumbling bloc' is relatively clear, what does the phrase ` building bloc' precisely mean? Does it mean that the process of bilateral trade liberalization eventually converges to multilateral free trade (as in Furusawa and Konishi (2007) and Goyal and Joshi (2006))? Or does it mean that FTAs lay the foundation for multilateral trade liberalization in the sense that the freedom to pursue FTAs

2

is necessary to attain global free trade? Existing literature has often tended to take the view that FTAs are building blocs so long as their pursuit does not prevent or eventually leads to the obtainment of global free trade. We take this argument one step further and show that there exist circumstances where global free trade is an equilibrium only if countries are free to form bilateral FTAs. When such is the case, we say that FTAs act as strong building blocs. To our knowledge, with the exception of Aghion et. al. (2007), this potential role of FTAs has been overlooked by the voluminous existing literature on the subject. The reason for this is easy to see ­as we explain below, only a model in which both bilateral and multilateral negotiations are endogenous can lead to such an insight. The general idea behind our strong building bloc result can be stated as follows. If bilateral FTAs are prohibited by multilateral rules (or infeasible due to some other reasons) and the choice is only between multilateral free trade or no agreement (i.e. the status quo), any single country can ensure that the status quo prevails by simply opting to not practise free trade itself. However, when the rest of the world is free to form bilateral FTAs, a country that makes such a choice can ...nd itself immiserized relative to the status quo if the other countries choose to undertake preferential trade liberalization amongst themselves.1 Anticipating this outcome, it may then become quite willing to undertake multilateral trade liberalization. Thus, the possibility of preferential trade liberalization amongst others can induce a country to participate in multilateral trade liberalization. While we demonstrate the strong building bloc result in the oligopoly model of intraindustry trade (described in greater detail below), it is clear that the mechanism underlying it is not model speci...c and is likely to arise in most existing models of international trade. Formally, we analyze the coalition proof Nash equilibria (also called stable equilibria) of two games of trade liberalization between three countries.2
See Chang and Winters (2002) for detailed evidence showing that the formation of the Latin American customs union MERCOSUR adversely a¤ected non-member countries by lowering the prices of their exports to MERCOSUR. 2 Our terminology follows Dutta and Mutuswami (1997).
1

3

Under the FTA game, countries can pursue either bilateral, multilateral, or no trade liberalization whereas under the No FTA game, they have only the latter two options. It is worth noting that under the FTA game each country is free to pursue multiple FTAs ­this is important because, on average, each country today belongs to six PTAs (World Bank, 2005). Our underlying framework is one of intraindustry trade under oligopoly where the production cost of the oligopolistic good can di¤er across countries (see Brander and Krugman, 1983). The FTA game proceeds as follows. In the ...rst stage, each country announces the set of countries with whom it wants to form a bilateral FTA (under which member countries abolish tari¤s on each other). An FTA between two countries arises i¤ they both announce each other' s name. Similarly, free trade emerges i¤ all countries call each other' s names. Next, ...rms compete in the product market in a Cournot fashion. In contrast to the FTA game, in the ...rst stage of the No FTA game, each country can choose between only two alternatives: it can either announce in favor of free trade or no agreement (wherein they retain their existing tari¤s on each other). The rest of the No FTA game proceeds just like the FTA game. Since markets are assumed to be segmented, from each country' s perspective, an FTA embodies the following trade-o¤. On the one hand, forming a bilateral FTA lowers a country' s domestic surplus relative to no agreement because of the tari¤ concession it grants to the other member. On the other hand, the reciprocal tari¤ reduction granted by the other member increases its export pro...ts. Utilizing this trade-o¤, we obtain several interesting results. First, we show that under symmetry, free trade is a stable equilibrium of both games. However, while free trade is the unique stable agreement of the No FTA game, a bilateral FTA can also be a stable equilibrium of the FTA game (weak stumbling bloc e¤ ect ). Second, there exists patterns of cost asymmetry for which multilateral free trade is an equilibrium only if countries have the option to form FTAs (strong building bloc e¤ ect ). Third, despite the absence of any political economy considerations in our model, free trade can fail to be an equilibrium even when FTAs are not permissi4

ble if one of the countries is su¢ ciently high cost relative to others. Under such a scenario, FTAs can act as partial building blocs by providing welfare improving bilateral trade liberalization. Fourth, a ` hub' and ` spoke' type arrangement ­ a regime where one country has a bilateral FTA with both its trading partners who in turn do not have an FTA with each other ­fails to be a stable equilibrium under symmetry. In other words, some degree of cost asymmetry is essential for such a regime to emerge as a stable equilibrium. Finally, it is worth noting that FTAs never act as strong stumbling blocs in our model ­ i.e. it is never the case that the FTA game yields no agreement whereas the No FTA games yields free trade. Given the importance of the topic, it is no surprise that there exists a voluminous literature on PTAs. In what follows, we only discuss papers that are closely related to ours and refer the reader to Bhagwati et. al. (1999) for a collection of many of the important contributions in the area. Our paper shares some key elements with Furusawa and Konishi (2007), Goyal and Joshi (2006), Aghion et. al. (2007), and Krishna (1998). Both Furusawa and Konishi (2007) and Goyal and Joshi (2006) apply the network formation game of Jackson and Wolinsky (1996) to examine whether or not a given trade con...guration is pairwise stable.3 Under symmetry, they ...nd that the continued formation of bilateral FTAs leads to global free trade. However, while they examine whether or not bilateralism results in global free trade, they do not consider the consequences of adopting a strictly multilateral approach to global trade negotiations, a comparison that is central to our paper. As a result, they do not address the issue of when and why countries choose to pursue bilateral trade liberalization when multilateral trade liberalization is an option, an issue that lies at the heart of the complex relationship between the two types of liberalization. Using a three-country version of the Brander-Krugman model (also utilized
Relative to our approach, the concept of pairwise stability implies two First, the deviating coalition can contain at most two countries. Second, can consist of severing just one existing link or forming one additional link. eliminate these constraints, we follow Dutta and Mutuswami (1997) and use of coalition proof Nash equilibrium to isolate stable equilibria.
3

constraints. a deviation In order to the concept

5

by us), Krishna (1998) has shown that the formation of an FTA between two countries reduces their incentives to liberalize trade with respect to the third country. However, in a model with endogenous tari¤s, Ornelas (2005a) shows that an FTA induces member countries to lower their tari¤s on the non-member country (which in turn reduces its incentive to participate in multilateral trade liberalization). Unlike us, Krishna (1998) and Ornelas (2005a) do not develop an equilibrium theory of FTAs and instead consider the e¤ects of an exogenously given FTA.4 Our conceptual approach is related to that of Aghion et. al. (2007) who examine a leading country' s choice between sequential and multilateral bargaining of free trade agreements. Like us, Aghion et. al. (2007) also identify building and stumbling bloc e¤ects of FTAs. However, there are important di¤erences between their approach and ours. First, in our model, all countries are free to negotiate FTAs and not just a single leading country.5 Also, countries are free to form a pair of bilateral FTAs in our model and are not required to choose between joining a single grand coalition or staying out. Second, our analysis complements theirs in two important respects (i) we assume that governments care aggregate social welfare whereas their examples illustrating the e¤ects of FTAs assume governments care only about producer surplus and (ii) unlike them but like Grossman and Helpman (1995), we do not allow transfers between di¤erent coalitions.6 Point (ii) is important because when transfers are possible and
4 Ornelas (2005b) provides an analysis of political economy considerations that arise in the context of FTAs. 5 Aghion et. al. (2007) do consider extensions where the leadership role is assigned to other countries if the ...rst leader' s o¤er is not accepted by the followers but they focus on deriving necessary conditions for a free trade equilibrium. 6 Grossman and Helpman (1995) point out that transfers are rarely used in trade agreements and when used they are limited in scope. However, Aghion et. al. (2007) note that the exchange of concessions on non-trade-related issues among FTA members can be viewed as transfers. Both arguments capture certain aspects of reality. Since one of our goals is to provide a non-cooperative theory of FTA formation in a game with non-transferable utility, we proceed with the assumption of no transfers. In this context, it is noteworthy that Raimondos-Møller and Woodland (2006) have shown that if non-discriminatory tari¤ reforms by a subset of countries are accompanied by appropriate income transfers between them, reforming members can make themselves strictly better

6

there is grand coalition superadditivity, in the absence of externalities free trade necessarily emerges in equilibrium regardless of whether the leading country chooses a sequential or multilateral approach.7 In our model, even when free trade is Pareto optimal (as it is under symmetry), a bilateral FTA can emerge in equilibrium. Our model is also related to that of Riezman (1999) who asks whether the option to pursue FTAs facilitates or hinders the achievement of free trade. However, while we analytically derive the coalition proof Nash equilibria of two non-cooperative games, Riezman (1999) uses the cooperative solution concept of the core and illustrates his results via numerical examples. Second, our model allows us to focus on asymmetries between countries in a way that cannot be done in the inter-industry trade framework utilized by Riezman (1999). As has already been noted, cost asymmetry between countries plays a crucial role in determining conditions under FTAs act as partial and strong building blocs. In this context, it is worth noting that both Krugman (1991) and Grossman and Helpman (1995) pointed out that asymmetries across countries could play an important role in determining the relationship between bilateral and multilateral trade liberalization. The e¤ects of free trade agreements have also been analyzed in models of repeated interaction between countries that require multilateral cooperation to be self-enforcing ­ see Bagwell and Staiger (1997), Bond and Syropoulos (1996), Conconi and Perroni (2003), Freund (2000), and Saggi (2006). We add value to this literature by treating both bilateral and multilateral liberalization as endogenous. Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998) provide a completely di¤erent perspective on international trade agreements by showing that, in the presence of domestic protectionist pressures, such agreements
o¤ without having an adverse e¤ect on non-members. 7 Grand coalition superadditivity holds if the joint payo¤ of the three countries is larger under free trade than under no FTAs whatsoever or a bilateral FTA between any two countries. When this condition fails, Aghion et. al. (2007) show that the nature of externalities created by FTAs assumes a crucial role: when such externalities are negative, FTAs necessarily facilitate the achievement of global free trade whereas when they are positive, they hamper it. In our model, a bilateral FTA necessarily generates a negative externality for the non-member.

7

can improve the domestic allocation of resources by helping a government credibly commit to free trade.8

2

Model

There are three countries (a; b; c) and two goods: x and y . Preferences over the two goods are quasilinear: U (x; y ) = u(x) + y . Good x is produced by a single pro...t-maximizing ...rm in each country at a constant marginal cost in terms of the numeraire good y .9 Firms compete in quantities and make independent decisions regarding how much to sell in each market (i.e. markets are segmented as in Brander and Krugman, 1983).

2.1

Production and trade

Due to market segmentation, it is su¢ cient to focus on only one country' s market. Let t denote a country' s tari¤ on a trading partner with whom it does not have an FTA. In other words, under no agreement (i.e. the status quo) each country imposes the tari¤ t on both its trading partners whereas if it has an FTA with both of them it practises free trade. As Grossman and Helpman (1995) note, GATT Article XXIV forbids FTA members from raising their tari¤s on non-members. Accordingly, like Duttagupta and Panagariya (2006) we assume that FTA members retain their status quo tari¤ t on the non-member. We now describe production and trade under no agreement. Firm j ' s e¤ective marginal cost of exporting equals
j

+ t where

j

0 equals its

marginal cost of production for good x. By assumption, countries impose no taxes on local ...rms and the numeraire good that may be traded internationally in order to balance trade.
In a recent paper, Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (2007) build a model of trade agreements that integrates the terms of trade motive for FTAs emphasized by Bagwell and Staiger (1997) with the commitment argument analyzed in Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998). 9 The monopoly assumption is not necessary. We just need ...rms to have market power in order to justify the existence of tari¤s in a welfare-maximizing framework.
8

8

Let xji denote country j ' s exports to country i; xii the sales of ...rm i in X country i; and xi = xii + xji denote total sales of good x in country i.
j

Country j ' s pro...t function for exports to country i, denoted by written as:
ji

ji ,

can be

= [pi (xi )

j

t]xji

(1)

First order conditions (FOCs) for pro...t maximization for exporters are pi + p0 i xji =
j

+t

(2)

The above FOCs together with an analogous condition for the local ...rm (i.e. pi + p0 i xii =
i)

determine the equilibrium output levels of all ...rms.

Summing the FOCs for all ...rms in country i gives X 3pi + p0 z where z = a; b; c: i xi = 2t +
z

(3)

Following Bergstrom and Varian (1985), if the left hand side is decreasing in
00 xi (i.e. 4p0 i + pi xi < 0) then total industry output sold in country i depends

only on the sum of the (tari¤ included) marginal costs of production of all ...rms. Assume this property holds so that we have: dxi <0 dt (4)

In addition, the following comparative statics are also assumed to hold:10 dxji dxii <0< dt dt to county i (xji ) while it increases the sales of its local ...rm (xii ). Welfare of country i is de...ned as the sum of its domestic surplus and total export pro...ts: Wi Si + X
j 6=i

(5)

In other words, an increase in the tari¤ rate (t) lowers country j ' s exports

ij

(6)

10 As is well known, if second order conditions for pro...t maximization hold these comparative statics obtain when the Cournot Nash equilibrium is stable and output levels of ...rms are strategic substitutes. Since these results are well known, it is convenient to directly assume that the comparative statics in (5) hold.

9

where domestic surplus Si is de...ned as Si where u(xi ) u(xi ) pi xi +
ii

+t

X
j

xji

(7)

pi xi is consumer surplus in country i; ii = (pi i )xii equals X ...rm i' s pro...ts in its own market; t xji equals country i' s tari¤ revenue;
j

and

ij

= (pi

i

welfare is de...ned the sum of the welfare of individual countries: W W = Wi + Wj + Wk

t)xij its pro...ts in foreign market j; where j 6= i. World

(8)

Since the formation of FTAs results in the elimination of some of the tari¤s, in what follows in functions S (:) and W (:) we list the tari¤s faced by foreign countries in ascending alphabetical order. Also, in the export pro...t function
ij (:),

the ...rst argument is the tari¤ faced by country i while the

second argument is the tari¤ faced by its rival exporter (i.e. country k ). As is well known from the work of Brander and Spencer (1984), under fairly general conditions each country has a unilateral incentive to impose rent extracting tari¤s on its trading partners (unless it commits not to do so via an FTA). Accordingly, we assume that the following holds: Assumption 1: Si (t; t) > maxfSi (0; t); Si (t; 0)g > Si (0; 0) i.e. domestic surplus of each country is highest under no agreement and lowest when it practises free trade. Since countries are asymmetric, a comparison of Si (0; t) and Si (t; 0) is ambiguous in general. Let T be the set of all feasible trade policy regimes: T = fhf gi; hfabgi; hfacgi; hfbcgi; hfab; acgi; hfab; bcgi; hfac; bcgi, or hfF gig where hf gi denotes the status quo and and hfF gi denotes global free trade. i' s welfare and ww(r) denote world welfare under regime r. Note that small 10 Let r and v be any two elements of T . Further, let wi (r) denote country

letters denote functions of trade regimes whereas capital letters denote functions of tari¤s that prevail during those regimes. For example, country i' s welfare under the FTA hfij gi can be written either as wi (ij ) or as Wi (0; t). Similar notation applies to domestic surplus and export pro...t functions. De...ne wi (r regimes r and v : wi (r v) wi (r) wi (v ) (9) v ) as the di¤erence between country i' s welfare under

As is well known, under Cournot competition, the higher a country' s cost of producing good x, the smaller its volume of exports and the larger its volume of imports (of this good). Given this and Grossman and Helpman' s (1995) argument that an FTA is more likely to obtain when trade between potential partners is relatively balanced, we make the following assumption: Assumption 2: @ wi (r @ i v) 0 @ wi (r v ) @ m

where m is an FTA partner of country i under regime r (but not regime v ). hfij gi from country i' s perspective. The intuition underlying To get further insight behind assumption 2, consider regimes hf gi and
@ wi (ij @ i )

0

is as follows. Because of their larger volume of imports, higher cost countries have relatively more to gain from using tari¤s. Similarly, due to the smaller volume of their exports, higher cost countries have less to lose from other countries'tari¤s. As a result, a country' s willingness to enter into a bilateral FTA with another depends negatively on its own cost. A similar intuition underlies
@ wi (ij @ j )

0. The higher the production

cost of its trading partner, the larger the increase in export pro...ts enjoyed by a country due to the trade liberalization undertaken by its partner and the smaller the loss in local pro...ts su¤ered by the domestic ...rm due to its own trade liberalization.

11

3

Endogenous Free Trade Agreements

Consider the following two stage game of bilateral trade liberalization (called the FTA game). In the ...rst stage, each country announces whether or not it wants to form an FTA with each of its trading partners (country i' s announcement is denoted by
i ).

Next, given tari¤s, ...rms compete in

product markets. As is clear from the structure of the FTA game, an FTA member can sign an independent FTA with the non-member without needing consent of the other member. A country' s strategy set consists of four possible announcements. Country i' s strategy set
F i F i

is: = ff ; g; fj; g; f ; k g; fj; k gg (10)

its trade partners. In order to conserve notation, each trade policy regime is denoted as follows: (i ) No agreement hf gi is maintained when no two announcements match or when everyone announces f ; g; (ii ) an FTA
i

where f ; g is an announcement in favor of no agreement with either of

nounce each other' s name j and i and (2) k

between countries i and j denoted by hfij gi is formed i¤ they both anand i
j;

(iii ) two independent bilateral
i

FTAs hfij; ik gi in which i is the common member are formed i¤ (1) j
j i

and i

k;

countries announce each others' names: i.e.
c

and (iv ) free trade hfF gi obtains i¤ all
a

= fa; bg.

= fb; cg,

b

= fa; cg, and

It is worth noting here that the regime under which there exist two

spoke' trading arrangement where the common member (i.e. country i) is

independent bilateral FTAs (i.e. hfij; ik gi) can be viewed as a ` hub and the hub while each of the other two countries (i.e. countries j and k ) is a spoke. Also note that two di¤erent strategy vectors may yield the same agreement(s) when countries' announcements do not match. For example, consider the following announcements:
a

= fb; g;

b

= fa; cg; 12

c

= f ; bg

(11)

which country b is the common member. But the same outcome obtains when the strategy vector is given by:
a

The above strategy vector gives rise to two independent FTAs hfab; bcgi of

= fb; cg;

b

= fa; cg;

c

= f ; bg

(12)

Here, even though country a announces country c, country c wants to form an FTA only with country b.11 In order to eliminate redundant announcements, assume that each FTA announcement costs " (where " > 0 is arbitrarily small). Our method of analysis is to compare the FTA game with the following game of multilateral trade liberalization (called the No FTA game). In the ...rst stage of the No FTA game, each country announces either in favor of or against free trade. If all countries announce in favor, free trade emerges. If not, the status quo prevails. Next, ...rms compete in the product market. Clearly, the No FTA game restricts the strategy set of country i to
i

=

trade liberalization to determine how the freedom to pursue bilateral FTAs a¤ects the likelihood of obtaining global free trade. As might be expected, both games admit multiple Nash equilibria. To deal with this multiplicity and to capture the process of FTA formation in a more realistic fashion, we focus attention on Nash equilibria that are immune to self-enforcing coalitional deviations (i.e. are coalition proof or stable ).12 It is useful to note that in the No FTA game, a unilateral deviation from free trade by any country reverts everyone back to no agreement whereas in the FTA game the same deviation results in the deviating country becoming either (i) a non-member country under an FTA between the other two countries or (ii) a spoke under a pair of bilateral FTAs. Since the welfare of a country under these trade policy regimes can be lower/higher
Note that under our approach, the formation of a bilateral FTA requires consent from both sides. This is in contrast to the open membership rule analyzed by Yi (1996) where existing members cannot prevent others from joining. 12 See Bernheim et. al. (1987) for the formal de...nition of a coalition proof Nash equilibrium.
11

ff ; g; fj; k gg, j 6= k 6= i. We compare the equilibria of these two games of

13

than its welfare under no agreement, it is not immediately obvious under which game the unilateral incentive to deviate from free trade is stronger. Thus, even though the set of possible deviations from free trade under the No FTA game is a strict subset of those under the FTA game, it does not follow that free trade is more likely to be a stable equilibrium of the No FTA game. The analysis proceeds as follows. First, we show that trade liberalization of any kind is desirable under symmetry so that free trade yields higher world welfare than any other policy regime (Lemma 1). We then derive Nash equilibria of the two games (Proposition 1 and 2). Next, we show that when countries are symmetric, free trade is the unique stable equilibrium of the No FTA game (Proposition 3) whereas the FTA game also admits a bilateral FTA as a stable equilibrium (Proposition 4). Next, we show that free trade fails to be a stable equilibrium of the FTA game if one of the countries is su¢ ciently high cost relative to the other two (Proposition 5). Continuing with the same underlying asymmetry, we then provide conditions under which free trade is a stable equilibrium of the FTA game (Proposition 7) but not that of the No FTA game (Corollaries 1 and 2). Propositions 8 and 9 describe conditions under which di¤erent patterns of FTAs emerge as stable equilibria. Finally, for the case of linear demand, we graphically illustrate stable equilibria of the two games; isolate the building and stumbling bloc e¤ects of FTAs; and examine how the FTA option a¤ects the welfare of individual countries and the world as a whole (Proposition 10).

4

Equilibrium FTAs under symmetry
= for all i. It proves convenient to begin with

Through-out this section, we assume that the cost of producing good x is equal across countries:
i

the e¤ects of FTAs on global welfare.

14

4.1

Trade liberalization and welfare

We show in the appendix that a reduction in any country' s tari¤(s) (whether on a preferential or a non-discriminatory basis) increases aggregate world welfare. This implies the following: Lemma 1: Under symmetry, free trade yields higher world welfare than any other trade policy regime: ww(F ) > ww(ij; ik ) > ww(ij ) > ww( ). The intuition behind this result is simple: when all countries have the same cost of production, the allocation of output across countries is immaterial and any trade restrictions (whether preferential or multilateral) simply lower aggregate world output and therefore welfare. Since any tari¤ creates a deadweight loss, rent extraction by an importing country is more than o¤set by the loss in pro...ts of exporters.

4.2

Nash equilibria

Before deriving (subgame perfect) Nash equilibria of the two games, we clarify an expositional point: while changes in the underlying trade regime result from announcement deviations by countries, it proves more convenient to refer directly to regime changes rather than changes in announcements. For ment deviation of country i from fj; g to f ; g alters the underlying trade example, when the bilateral FTA hfij gi is in place, the unilateral announce-

regime from hfij gi to no agreement hf gi and we refer to this announcement deviation of country i as simply a deviation from hfij gi to hf gi. It is clear that no agreement hf gi is a Nash equilibrium of the No FTA

game since no country has a unilateral incentive to announce another country' s name if the latter does not announce its name in return. Furthermore, symmetry implies that under no agreement hf gi, welfare of all countries is equal. Clearly, the same is true under free trade hfF gi. Since world

each country is better o¤ under hfF gi than under hf gi. As a result, under symmetry no country has a unilateral incentive to deviate from free trade since any other announcement on its part leads to no agreement where it

welfare is higher under hfF gi than under hf gi (Lemma 1), it follows that

15

(and everyone else) is worse o¤: wi ( ) < wi (F ) for all i (13)

hfF gi are both Nash equilibria of the No FTA game. libria of the FTA game: Condition 1: wk (ij; ik ) < wk (ij )

Proposition 1: Under symmetry, no agreement hf gi and free trade The following two conditions prove useful in describing the Nash equi-

(14)

i.e. if condition 1 holds, each country prefers to be a non-member under a bilateral FTA to being a spoke under a pair of bilateral FTAs. Condition 1 can be understood as follows. The tari¤ reduction that country k receives from country i under hfij; ik gi removes the disadvantage it faces relative to country j while exporting to country i' s market under

market, country k has to grant preferential access to country i in its hitherto and hfij; ik gi is ambiguous in general. Condition 2:

hfij gi. However, to achieve equal footing with country j in country i' s

fully protected market. Thus, country k ' s preference among regimes hfij gi

wi (F ) < wi (ij )

(15)

i.e. if condition 2 holds, each country is better o¤ as a member of a bilateral FTA relative to free trade ­ i.e. two countries ...nd it bene...cial to exclude the third. FTA game. Is a bilateral FTA hfij gi a Nash equilibrium too? Comparing country k ' s welfare under hfij gi and hf gi, we note that export pro...ts of country k are higher under hf gi relative to hfij gi (i.e. and
kj (t; t) ki (t; t)

It is clear that no agreement hf gi is always a Nash equilibrium of the

>

ki (t; 0)

>

kj (t; 0))

whereas its domestic surplus under the two regimes

is the same (i.e. sk (ij ) = sk ( ) = Sk (t; t)). Therefore, we have the following result: 16

Lemma 2: A bilateral FTA between countries i and j makes country k worse o¤ relative to no agreement: wk (ij ) < wk ( ) (16)

inequality implies that the sum of countries i and j ' s welfare must surely be higher under hfij gi: wi (ij ) + wj (ij ) > wi ( ) + wj ( ) Since countries i and j are symmetric, we must have wi (ij ) = wj (ij ) > wi ( ) = wj ( ) (18) (17)

Since world welfare is higher under hfij gi relative to hf gi, the above

Hence, a member country of a bilateral FTA has no incentive to deviate to no agreement and a bilateral FTA hfij gi is indeed a Nash equilibrium of the FTA game. Is a hub and spoke arrangement such as hfij; ik gi a Nash equilibrium? wi (ij; ik ) > wi (F ) (19)

Before addressing this question we note that

The logic behind this inequality is as follows. Starting at free trade, if country k revokes its FTA with country j , export pro...ts of country i increase in both markets because its rival exporters face tari¤s whereas it itself does not:
ij (0; t)

>

ij (0; 0)

and

ik (0; t)

>

ik (0; 0).

Furthermore, the domes-

tic surplus of country i does not change relative to free trade since its own tari¤ equals zero under both regimes: si (ij; ik ) = si (F ) = Si (0; 0). As a result, country i' s welfare under hfij; ik gi is higher than that under hfF gi. Furthermore, we assert that wj (ij; ik ) < wj (ij ): the move from hfij gi

country i' s market. Next, note from Lemma 1 that ww(ij; ik ) > ww(ij ). As hfij; ik gi relative to hfij gi. Given the fact that the hub country' s welfare 17

to hfij; ik gi makes country j worse o¤ since it loses its preferential status in

a result, either country i or country k or both of them are better o¤ under

following assumption:

under hfij; ik gi exceeds even that under free trade (see 19), we make the Assumption 3: The hub country of a pair of independent FTAs enjoys higher welfare than a member country of a single FTA: wi (ij; ik ) > wi (ij ) = wi (ik ) (20)

Three possible unilateral deviations from hfij; ik gi need to be considered: UP1: Country i' s deviation from hfij; ik gi to hf gi. UP2: Country i' s deviation from hfij; ik gi to hfij gi (or hfik gi). UP3: Country k ' s deviation from hfij; ik gi to hfij gi.

We are now ready to investigate whether hfij; ik gi is a Nash equilibrium.

Deviation UP1 can be ruled out because wi (ij; ik ) > wi ( ) whereas deviation UP2 can be ruled out on the basis of Assumption 3. Finally, note that deviation UP3 cannot occur if condition 1 fails: wk (ij; ik ) > wk (ij ). As a result, a pair of bilateral FTAs hfij; ik gi is a Nash equilibrium if condition 1 fails. Is free trade also a Nash equilibrium of the FTA game? To be able to answer this question in the a¢ rmative, we need to rule out the following two deviations: UF1: Country k ' s deviation from hfF gi to hfij gi. UF2: Country k ' s deviation from hfF gi to hfij; ik gi (or hfij; jk gi). Inequalities (13) and (16) imply that deviation UF1 cannot occur: wk (F ) > wk ( ) > wk (ij ) (21)

Furthermore, deviation UF2 can be ruled out due to the following result: spoke country (i.e. j and k ) is worse o¤ relative to free trade. 18 Lemma 3: Under the pair of independent bilateral FTAs hfij; ik gi, each

The logic behind this result is as follows. Since world welfare is lower under hfij; ik gi relative to free trade hfF gi whereas the welfare of the hub country is higher (see inequality 19), the sum of the welfare of the two spoke countries (i.e. j and k ) must be lower than that under free trade. Since both are symmetric, it follows that both must be worse o¤ under hfij; ik gi relative to free trade hfF gi: wj (ij; ik ) = wk (ij; ik ) < wj (F ) = wk (F ) (22)

The following proposition summarizes the Nash equilibria of the FTA game: trade hfF gi are all Nash equilibria of the FTA game. In addition, if condiPropositions 1 and 2 show that both games admit multiple Nash equiProposition 2: No agreement hf gi, a bilateral FTA hfij gi, and free

tion 1 fails then a pair of bilateral FTAs hfij; ik gi is also a Nash equilibrium. libria. To resolve this multiplicity (as well as to capture the process of FTA formation in a richer fashion), we now focus attention on Nash equilibria that are immune to self-enforcing coalitional deviations (i.e. are coalition proof or stable ).

4.3

Stable Nash equilibria

We begin with the No FTA game. Recall from Proposition 1 that the No these is stable? It is easy to see that all three countries have a joint incentive to deviate from hf gi to hfF gi ­ each is better o¤ under free trade than hf gi fails to be stable if the initial deviation from hf gi to hfF gi is selfdeviate from hfF gi. This indeed is the case because any such deviation under no agreement. Based on the de...nition of a stable Nash equilibrium, enforcing ­i.e. no country or a pair of countries has an incentive to further FTA game admits two Nash equilibria: hf gi and hfF gi. Which, if any, of

(unilateral or coalitional) reverts the world back to status quo under which everyone is worse o¤. As a result, we have the following: Proposition 3: Free trade is the unique stable equilibrium of the No FTA game. 19

This result implies that when countries are symmetric, FTAs cannot possibly act as building blocs. We now turn to the FTA game and examine which Nash equilibria are stable. fare under the FTA hfij gi relative to no agreement hf gi. It is immediate from hf gi to a bilateral FTA hfij gi. Furthermore, since hfij gi is a Nash deviations from it. As a result, the initial joint deviation of countries i and j from hf gi to a bilateral FTA hfij gi is self-enforcing and no agreement hf gi is not stable. Now consider a hub and spoke arrangement such as hfij; ik gi as a canWe begin with no agreement hf gi. Consider a member country' s wel-

from (18) that countries i and j always have an incentive to jointly deviate equilibrium of the FTA game (Proposition 2), there can be no unilateral

didate for a stable Nash equilibrium. We know from inequality (22) that countries j and k always bene...t from a joint deviation from hfij; ik gi to since hfF gi is a Nash equilibrium. As a result, a pair of bilateral FTAs hfij; ik gi is also not stable. global free trade hfF gi. Once again, this joint deviation is self-enforcing

bilateral FTA hfij gi. Consider free trade ...rst. For free trade to be stable, we need to rule out three types of coalitional deviations by a pair of countries: JF1: Deviation of i and j from hfF gi to hf gi. JF2: Deviation of j and k from hfF gi to hfij; ik gi. JF3: Deviation of i and j from hfF gi to hfij gi.

Two candidates for stable equilibria remain: free trade hfF gi and a

Since wi (F ) > wi ( )(inequality 13) the joint deviation JF1 cannot occur. Similarly, since wj (ij; ik ) < wj (F ) (inequality 22), we can rule out deviation JF2. Can deviation JF3 be ruled out? Clearly, if country i is worse o¤ under a bilateral FTA relative to free trade (i.e. condition 2 fails) then deviation JF3 cannot occur. Under such a scenario, free trade hfF gi is immune to all coalitional (as well as unilateral) deviations and is in fact the unique stable equilibrium of the FTA game. 20

But what if countries i and j have an incentive to jointly deviate from determine whether this deviation is self-enforcing or not, we need to consider two further deviations from hfij gi: FD1: Deviation of country i from hfij gi to hf gi. FD2: Deviation of country i from hfij gi to hfij; ik gi. It is immediate from Lemma 1 and inequality (18) (i.e. wi (ij ) > wi ( )) that deviation FD1 cannot occur. What about deviation FD2? From assumption 3 (see inequality 20) we know that, taking country k ' s announcement as given, country i has an incentive to further deviate from hfij gi to As a result, the initial joint deviation of countries i and j from free trade free trade hfF gi is stable even when condition 2 holds. the pair of bilateral FTAs hfij; ik gi ­ i.e. deviation FD2 will indeed occur. free trade hfF gi to a bilateral FTA hfij gi (i.e. condition 2 holds)? To

to the bilateral FTA hfij gi (i.e. deviation JF3) is not self-enforcing. Thus, Can hfij gi also be stable when condition 2 holds? It turns out that the

answer to this question depends on whether condition 1 holds or not. First

consider the case where condition 1 fails ­i.e. countries i and k have a joint 2 that hfij; ik gi is a Nash equilibrium when condition 1 fails. Therefore, to hfij; ik gi is self-enforcing. As a result, if condition 2 holds and condition 1 fails, bilateral FTA hfij gi is not stable. when condition 1 fails the initial deviation of countries i and k from hfij gi incentive to deviate from hfij gi to hfij; ik gi. We know from Proposition

Now consider the case where condition 1 holds. First, since condition 2

holds, there exists no incentive for all countries to multilaterally deviate from hfij gi to free trade hfF gi. Second, since condition 1 holds, countries i and k have no joint incentive to deviate from hfij gi to hfij; ik gi. Finally, since

condition 2 holds, inequality (22) implies that country i has no incentive to As a result, a bilateral FTA hfij gi is stable if both condition 1 and condition 2 hold. We summarize as follows: jointly deviate with countries j and k from hfij gi to hfij; jk gi (or hfik; jk gi).

21

FTA game and it is uniquely stable if either condition 1 or condition 2 fail. A bilateral FTA hfij gi is a stable Nash if both condition 1 and condition 2 are not stable Nash equilibria.

Proposition 4: Free Trade hfF gi is a stable Nash equilibrium of the

hold. Finally, no agreement hf gi and a pair of bilateral FTAs hfij; ik gi The above proposition clari...es that under symmetry FTAs end up acting as weak stumbling blocs : while free trade is uniquely stable under the No FTA game, there exist conditions under which a bilateral FTA is also stable under the FTA game. Yet, this is not a particularly strong indictment of FTAs ­while free trade loses its uniqueness, it still continues to be a stable equilibrium. Given these results, it is natural to ask whether a di¤erent role for FTAs might emerge when countries are not necessarily symmetric (say with respect to their costs of production of good x). For example, is it possible that in the absence of symmetry, two countries are willing to enter into a bilateral FTA but unwilling to engage in multilateral free trade? Even more interestingly, can the option to form bilateral FTAs facilitate the obtainment of multilateral free trade? We now turn to these questions.

5

FTAs among asymmetric countries

From hereon, we drop the assumption that the production cost of good x is equal across countries. It proves instructive to focus on the case where two countries have symmetric and low costs relative to the third. Accordingly, throughout the analysis under asymmetry, let
a

=

b

= 0 and

c

=

> 0.

Note also that Lemma 1 requires a slight modi...cation: trade liberalization necessarily improves world welfare under asymmetry as long as it is not biased against low cost producers. In other words we know the following:13 ww(F ) > ww(ab; ac) > ww(ab) > maxfww( ); ww(ac)g
13

(23)

Note that ww(ab; ac) = ww(ab; bc) and ww(ac) = ww(bc).

22

Intuitively, a bilateral FTA between a low cost and a high cost country has two con icting e¤ects on world welfare. On the one hand, it increases world welfare by raising the aggregate output of good x. On the other hand, it diverts production away from a low cost source to a high cost one and this adverse allocation e¤ect harms world welfare. The proof of Lemma 1 can be modi...ed to show that as long as the asymmetry between countries is not too high, an FTA between a high and low cost country also increases world welfare (since the allocation distortion is mild in such circumstances). We begin with the No FTA game and ...rst show that under cost asymmetry global free trade may fail to obtain even when countries are not free to form bilateral FTAs.

5.1

Feasibility of free trade

Consider the perspective of the two low cost countries (denoted by i = a; b). From proposition 1 we know that under symmetry, the welfare of country hf gi: a low cost under free trade hfF gi is higher than that under no agreement lim
!0

wi (F

) > 0 for i = a; b

(24)

Assumption 2 implies:

@ wi (F @

)

> 0 for i = a; b

(25)

i.e. the higher the cost of country k , the larger the gains of multilateral trade liberalization for the low cost countries. Inequalities (24) and (25) together imply that the two low cost countries have no incentive (joint or unilateral) to deviate from free trade to no agreement: wi (F ) > wi ( ) for i = a; b Next, consider the high cost country' s (i.e. c' s) perspective. De...ne free trade equal zero in each foreign market: lim
!
P

(26)
P

to

be the prohibitive cost level at which the export pro...ts of country c under

ca (F )

= lim
!

P

cb (F )

=0

(27)

23

Since domestic surplus of each country is higher under no agreement hf gi than under free trade hfF gi the following is immediate: lim
!
P

wc (

F ) > 0 since sc ( ) > sc (F )

(28)

Inequalities (24), (28), and assumption 2 imply that there exists a critical threshold cost level ( ) such that: wc ( ) wc (F ) i¤ (29)

Intuitively, opening up its market is unattractive to the high cost country when it stands to gain very little (or nothing) from foreign trade liberalization. Thus, the following obtains under asymmetry: Proposition 5: Free trade is the unique stable equilibrium of the No FTA game i¤ < .14 Or else, no agreement obtains. Thus, global free trade fails to be a stable equilibrium even when countries lack the option to form bilateral FTAs as long as one of them is su¢ ciently high cost relative to the others (i.e. > ). Recall from Proposition 3 that under symmetry free trade is uniquely stable under the No FTA game and when such is the case, FTAs can only act as stumbling blocs. Is this also true when countries are asymmetric? We now show that this is not so.

5.2

FTAs as strong building blocs

In this sub-section we show that the option to form bilateral FTAs can serve as strong building blocs ­ there exists circumstances where free trade is stable under the FTA game whereas it is not so under the No FTA game. Intuitively, this result obtains since the high cost country prefers no agreement to free trade which in turn it prefers to a bilateral FTA between the other two countries: wc ( ) > wc (F ) > wc (ab). The key point is that under a purely multilateral approach, the high cost country can ensure the preservation of the status quo by voting against free trade whereas it cannot do
When = , both no agreement and free trade are stable. An analogous statement applies to the remainder of the propositions under asymmetry.
14

24

so when bilateral FTAs are permitted. As a result, in the FTA game it can end up calling in favor of free trade to avoid ending up as a non-member with the other two countries in a FTA. Before showing this, we state the following result (proved in the appendix): Proposition 6: There exist no unilateral or self-enforcing joint deviations involving the two low cost countries from free trade. Given this result, it is clear that the viability of free trade depends critically upon the preferences of the high cost country. Following the de...nition of (in 29) let
r

de...ne the critical threshold cost level below which the

high cost country prefers free trade to regime r: wc (F ) wc (r) i¤
r

(30)

where r = fhf gi; hfabgi; hfacgi; hfbcgi; hfab; acgi; or hfab; bcgig. Arguments analogous to those that underlie the existence of ensure that these critical cost thresholds also exist for the other trade policy regimes.15 We know from (16) that the high cost country always prefers no agreement to being a non-member: wc ( ) > wc (ab). This is because its export pro...ts are always higher under no agreement hf gi relative to the bilateral FTA hfabgi while its domestic surplus under the two regimes is the same. As a result, we must have
ab

wc (

F) >

wc (ab

F ) which implies that

the critical cost threshold ( one ( ) where wc (ab <
ab

) at which

wc (

F ) = 0 is smaller than the

F ) = 0: . >
ab;ac 16 .

Lemma 4:

Similarly, by de...nition, the high cost country has an incentive to uniproceeding further, it is convenient to write down a condition analogous to condition 1:
15 Note that the threshold ac (similarly bc ) exists only when wc (ac) < wc (F ) under symmetry. Otherwise, it is immediate from A2 that wc (ac) > wc (F ) for all . 16 The same critical cost obtains for the unilateral deviation to hfab; bcgi. In fact, since the two low cost countries are symmetric, their roles can be reversed without loss of generality.

laterally deviate from free trade hfF gi to hfab; acgi i¤

Before

25

Condition 1A: wc (ab; ac) < wc (ab) Note that condition 1A is equivalent to
ab

<

ab;ac

and if it holds then

country c prefers being a non-member to being a spoke. We can now state: Proposition 7: Suppose condition 1A holds. If is stable.
ab

the hub and poke arrangement hfab; acgi cannot be an equilibrium since

then free trade

is a stable equilibrium of the FTA game; otherwise the bilateral FTA hfabgi Proposition 5 and 7 together imply the following: Corollary 1: If condition 1A holds, FTAs act as strong building blocs whenever < <
ab

.

The above result hinges on the insight that when free trade is not feasible due to the reluctance of the high cost country, the fact that the low cost countries can form a bilateral FTA can make it a willing participant in global free trade since it is worse o¤ as a non-member country than it is under free trade. It is worth noting here that Baldwin (1995) argued that the expansion of a regional trade bloc can induce outsiders to join since their export pro...ts su¤er if they stay outside. In our model, a similar logic operates but there are several important di¤erences. First, our logic does not rely on the presence of economies of scale. Second, the formation of FTAs is fully endogenous in our approach. Third, and more importantly, our model highlights the fact that under a purely multilateral approach, a country that is reluctant to liberalize can e¤ectively prevent liberalization between its trading partners and the removal of such ` veto power'can sometimes be necessary to achieve global free trade. When >
ab

free trade is not feasible under either game. However, the

second statement of Proposition 7 implies that there is still a sense in which the freedom to pursue bilateral FTAs proves bene...cial. More speci...cally, the option to form FTAs can lead to welfare-improving trade liberalization that is ruled out by the No FTA game: when >
ab

, the FTA game yields

hfabgi whereas the No FTA game yields hf gi. Under such circumstances, 26

we say that FTAs act as partial building blocs ­ the option to pursue bilateral FTAs delivers partial trade liberalization whereas the multilateral approach delivers none. The policy implication here is that insisting only on multilateral trade liberalization can sometimes run the risk of ending up with no trade liberalization. to hfabgi and the equilibrium outcome depends on how it ranks hfab; acgi and hf gi: Proposition 8: Suppose condition 1A fails. If
ab;ac

What happens when condition 1A fails? If so, country c prefers hfab; acgi

then free

trade is a stable equilibrium of the FTA game; otherwise, the hub and spoke arrangement hfab; acgi is stable. As is clear, Propositions 7 and 8 are quite similar: the ...rst argues that

either free trade or a bilateral FTA between the two low cost countries is stable whereas the second states that either free trade or a hub and spoke arrangement with a low cost country as a hub is stable. Propositions 5 and 8 imply the following: Corollary 2: If condition 1A fails, FTAs act as strong building blocs when < <
ab;ac

and they act as partial building blocs when
ab;ac

ab;ac

< .

However, we should note that when condition 1A fails, FTAs are not always a force for the good. In particular, when < < FTAs act as weak stumbling blocs because the hub and spoke arrangement hfab; acgi is stable under the FTA game while free trade is stable under the No FTA game. On other hand, even when condition 1A fails, so long as the high cost country prefers hfab; acgi to hf gi, there is another sense in which FTAs No FTA game yields hf gi. metry using linear demand. act as partial building blocs ­the FTA game delivers hfab; acgi whereas the

We next provide a graphical illustration of our main results under asym-

27

6

A linear demand illustration
x2 i 2

Suppose u(xi ) = xi need < =
1 3

+ y so that pi (xi ) = 1

xi . To ensure that the

high cost ...rm has positive sales in all markets under all trade regimes, we t: this boundary de...nes the feasible parameter space in all ...gures. We now illustrate stable agreements under the two games of trade liberalization. As is clear from Figure 1, free trade is stable under the No FTA game i¤ =
1+t 11 .

-- Insert Figure 1 here ­ The region over which free trade is stable under the No FTA game is determined by the high cost country' s unilateral incentive to deviate from free trade to no agreement. By contrast, under the FTA game, this region is determined by the high cost country' s incentive to deviate from free trade to the bilateral FTA hfabgi under which it becomes the excluded country. Figure 2 illustrates the stable agreements under the FTA game. As is clear from Figure 2, free trade is stable under the FTA game i¤ are stable.
ab

=

3 4t 17 .

Multiple stable equilibria arise over the darker region: both hfabgi and hfF gi

-- Insert Figure 2 here ­ To understand why multiple stable equilibria arise in the darker region, consider possible deviations from free trade in this region. The only deviation from free trade that can potentially occur here is the joint deviation of countries a and c to hfacgi and we can show that: wa (ac) wa (F ) i¤
ac

=

11t 2 10

(31)

However, this deviation is not self-enforcing since taking country b' s announcement as given, country a has an incentive to further deviate from

28

hfacgi to hfab; acgi: wa (ab; ac) wa (ac) = t(6 + 15t 32 2 ) > 0 for all (32)

above, this deviation is not self-enforcing when

incentive to jointly deviate from hfabgi to hfF gi. However, as indicated
ac

Now consider possible deviations from hfabgi. First, all countries have an

since countries a

and c have an incentive to further deviate from hfF gi to hfacgi. Second, enforcing and it determines the left hand-side border of the darker region: wc (ab; ac) wc (ab) 0 i¤
ab ab;ac

the joint deviation of countries a and c from hfabgi to hfab; acgi is self= 6 19t 34

(33)

Figure 1 and Figure 2 together imply that free trade is stable when production technologies are relatively similar across countries. Furthermore, as Figure 2 shows that when country c is su¢ ciently high cost FTAs act as partial building blocs: multilateral free trade is infeasible and no agreement emerges under the FTA game. When there exist multiple stable equilibria, there are two distinct scenarios to be considered. In scenario I, we assume that over the darker region in Figure 2, free trade is stable whereas in scenario II the bilateral FTA hfabgi is stable. We consider each in turn. -- Insert Figure 3 here ­ Under scenario I, Figure 3 shows that free trade is stable over a much larger region under the FTA game. Since the high cost country prefers under the No FTA game relative to the FTA game. As a result, FTAs act as strong building blocs when < <
ab

hf gi obtains under the No FTA game whereas the bilateral FTA hfabgi

hf gi to hfabgi, its incentive to unilaterally deviate from free trade is greater . It is worth emphasizing that this

result obtains when the cost disadvantage of country c is of an intermediate magnitude. If country c is too high cost, it loses too little in export markets from the preferential trade liberalization that occurs between countries a and b and for domestic surplus considerations it prefers to retain its own 29

tari¤s. Similarly, when its cost is quite low it prefers to form FTAs with both its trading partners. stable agreement over the darker region of Figure 2. A comparison of the two trade liberalization games under scenario II is presented in Figure 4. -- Insert Figure 4 here ­ Under scenario II, we highlight three di¤erent regions in Figure 4. In region A, hfF gi is a stable agreement of the No FTA game whereas hfabgi obtains under the FTA game. As a result, in region A, FTAs act as stumbling blocs for multilateral trade liberalization. However, even under scenario II, FTAs continue to act as building blocs: in region B of Figure 4, they act as strong building blocs whereas in region C they act as partial building blocs (since the bilateral FTA hfabgi obtains under the FTA game whereas no agreement hf gi obtains under the No FTA game). How does the option to as a whole? Proposition 9: Under linear demand, the following obtains: (i) when FTAs act as building blocs (strong or partial), the option to form bilateral FTAs bene...ts low cost countries (as well as the world as a whole) whereas it hurts the high cost country and (ii) when FTAs act as stumbling blocs, all countries lose from being able to form bilateral FTAs. Why does the high cost country lose when FTAs act as building blocs? To see why, ...rst note that, for all t > 0, the high cost country always prefers no agreement to the bilateral FTA hfabgi. Thus when FTAs act as partial building blocs, they necessarily make the high cost country worse o¤. Recall that FTAs act as strong building blocs only when wc ( ) > wc (F ) > wc (ab). So here too the high cost country loses from the option to form FTAs. Finally, note that when FTAs act as stumbling blocs (as in scenario II), all countries are willing to jointly deviate from hfabgi to hfF gi. However, hfacgi, the bilateral FTA hfabgi obtains as a stable equilibrium. 30 due to the incentives of countries a and c to further deviate from hfF gi to pursue FTAs a¤ect the welfare of individual countries and that of the world Now consider scenario II where hfabgi rather than hfF gi obtains as the

7

Concluding remarks

This paper contributes to the long-standing debate regarding the relationship between preferential and multilateral trade liberalization by analyzing two trade policy games: one where countries can choose between both types of trade liberalization and another where they can only pursue the multilateral route. An important aspect of the paper is that it explicitly models the process of FTA formation and allows each country to form more than a single FTA. Furthermore, to capture FTA formation in a realistic fashion, we focus on Nash equilibria that are immune to self-enforcing coalitional deviations. At a general level, our analysis sharpens the stumbling versus building bloc debate regarding FTAs by highlighting conditions under which each of the two e¤ects is likely to obtain. More speci...cally, when countries are relatively symmetric, the option to pursue FTAs hinders the obtainment of global free trade in the sense that free trade is no longer uniquely stable when FTAs are permitted. On the other hand, free trade is harder to sustain under asymmetry and FTAs can actually be desirable from a world welfare perspective. In fact, we show that there indeed exist circumstances where global free trade obtains as an equilibrium only if countries are free to form bilateral FTAs. We also ...nd that FTAs can deliver welfare improving trade liberalization when multilateral free trade is infeasible ­ i.e. it may indeed be better to have some trade liberalization (even though it occurs on a preferential basis) as opposed to none. Another interesting result of the paper is that a hub and spoke type trading regime is not a stable equilibrium under symmetry. Finally, it is worth noting that FTAs never act as strong stumbling blocs in our model ­ i.e. it is never the case that the FTA game yields no agreement whereas the No FTA games yields free trade. To allow for greater richness in the modeling of FTA formation, we have kept the underlying model of intraindustry trade as simple as possible. It is important to determine whether our approach to FTA formation can be fruitfully applied to general equilibrium models of inter and intraindustry

31

trade (such as the Ricardian model of comparative advantage and the monopolistic competition model of trade in di¤erentiated goods). We leave this for future research.

8

Appendix

Trade liberalization increases welfare Di¤erentiating world welfare with respect to t gives: dSi X d zi dW W = + dt dt dt Using u0 = pi and xi = xii + dSi = 1 dt Also note that Xd
z 6=i zi

(34)

X
z 6=i

z 6=i

xzi , we have dxji dxki dxii +t + dt dt dt

dpi [xi dt

xii ] + [pi

]

(35)

dt

=

dpi dt

1 [xi

xii ] + [pi

t]

dxji dxki + dt dt

(36)

where we have made use of the ...rst order conditions for pro...t maximization for each ...rm. From equations (34) through (36) we have: dW W = [pi dt Using xi = xii + X
z 6=i

]

dxii + [pi dt

]

X dxzi
z 6=i

dt

(37)

xzi , the following is immediate: dxi dxi < 0 since <0 dt dt

dW W = [pi dt

]

(38)

i.e. lowering tari¤ improves world welfare. Analogous arguments establish that (i) the lowering of its tari¤ on an MFN basis must also improve world welfare and that (ii) it is socially optimal to set an FTA' s external tari¤ to zero.

32

When countries are asymmetric, trade liberalization increases welfare so long as it increases the aggregate output of good x. Only when liberalization i is biased in favor of a high cost country can it be the case that dx dt > 0. Proof of Proposition 6 First consider country a' s unilateral deviation from hfF gi to hfbcgi. The following is immediate from (21): lim [wa (bc)
!0

wa (F )] < 0

(39)

From assumption 2 we know @ [wa (bc) @ wa (F )] <0 (40)

Inequalities (39) and (40) together imply that wa (bc) < wa (F ) for all (41)

Since a = b = 0, starting at free trade, neither country a nor b has an incentive to unilaterally break any of its FTAs. Recall from (26) that low cost countries have no incentives to unilaterally or jointly deviate from hfF gi to hf gi. We now rule out deviations of country a from hfF gi to hfab; bcgi. It is immediate from (22) that lim [wa (ab; bc)
!0

wa (F )] < 0

(42)

From assumption 2 we have @ [wa (ab; bc) @ wa (F )] <0 (43)

Inequalities (42) and (43) together imply that wa (ab; bc) < wa (F ) for all (44)

As a result, a low cost country has no incentive to unilaterally deviate from hfF gi to hfab; bcgi. This also implies that countries a and c have no incentive to jointly deviate from free trade hfF gi to hfab; bcgi. 33

Next, consider country a' s deviation from free trade hfF gi to hfac; bcgi. We know from (23) that ww(F ) > ww(ac; bc). Also, wc (F ) < wc (ac; bc). This implies that countries a and b must both be worse o¤ under hfac; bcgi relative to hfF gi wa (ac; bc) = wb (ac; bc) < wa (F ) (45) Therefore, there exist no unilateral or joint deviations from hfF gi to hfac; bcgi. Thus, all feasible coalitional deviations have been ruled out except for the following: (JD1): joint deviation of countries a and b from hfF gi to hfabgi. (JD2): joint deviation of countries a and c from hfF gi to hfacgi. From assumption 3 we know that, even if these two deviations were to occur, taking countries b and c' s announcements as ...xed, country a has an incentive to further deviate from from hfabgi in JD1 (or hfacgi in JD2) to hfab; acgi. Therefore, neither JD1 nor JD2 is self-enforcing. Proof of Proposition 7 Proposition 6 states that countries a and b will not deviate from free trade either unilaterally or jointly. To prove that free trade is stable if ab we only need to rule out unilateral deviations on the part of country ab c. First note that if then country c will not break both FTAs and become a non-member. Second, it has no incentive to break one of its FTAs and become a spoke under a hub and spoke arrangement (Lemma 3). Now we show that hfabgi is stable when > ab . Since wa (ab) = wb (ab) > wa ( ) = wb ( ) (46)

countries a and b have no unilateral or coalitional incentive to deviate from hfabgi to hf gi. We now consider self-enforcing coalitional deviations from hfabgi. Since condition 1 holds for all , country c has no incentive to jointly deviate with country a (or b) from hfabgi to hfab; acgi (or hfab; bcgi). Next, note that the joint deviation of all countries from hfabgi to hfac; bcgi is not selfenforcing because countries a and b have a joint incentive to further deviate 34

from hfac; bcgi to hfF gi. Furthermore, when > ab country c has no incentive to jointly deviate with country a and b from hfabgi to hfF gi. Finally, suppose that countries a and c have an incentive to jointly deviate from hfabgi to hfacgi. It is immediate from assumption 3 that country a wants to further deviate from hfacgi to hfab; acgi. As a result, the initial deviation from hfabgi to hfacgi is not self-enforcing and hfabgi is stable. Proof of Proposition 8 The ...rst statement of Proposition 8 is immediate from Proposition 6 and the de...nition of ab;ac . Consider the second part. If ab;ac < country c has no incentive to deviate jointly with country b from hfab; acgi to hfF gi. Also, if condition 1A fails then country c has no incentive to deviate (either unilaterally or jointly with a) from hfab; acgi to hfabgi. Moreover, a simple extension of assumption 3 to asymmetry implies that country a has no incentive to deviate from hfab; acgi to hfabgi or hfacgi: wa (ab) wa (ab; ac) wa (ac) wa (ab; ac) < 0 for all (47)

Inequalities (47) and wa (ab) > wa ( ) imply that country a has no incentive to deviate from hfab; acgi to hf gi. Now consider the joint deviation of countries b and c from hfab; acgi to hf gi. Note that even if this deviation occurs, taking a' s announcement as given, b has an incentive to deviate further from hf gi to hfabgi. As a result, the initial deviation is not selfenforcing. The only remaining possible deviation is the joint deviation of countries b and c from hfab; acgi to hfac; bcgi. However, this deviation is not self enforcing since country b has an incentive to further deviate from hfac; bcgi to hfF gi. As a result, if ab;ac < the pair of bilateral FTAs hfab; acgi is stable.

References
[1] Aghion, Philippe, Pol Antràs, and Elhanan Helpman, 2007. "Negotiating Free Trade." Journal of International Economics 73, 1-30. [2] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert. W. Staiger, 1997. "Multilateral Tari¤ Cooperation During the Formation of Free Trade Areas." International Economic Review 38, 291-319. 35

[3] Baldwin, Richard, 1995. "A Domino Theory of Regionalism" , in Expanding European Regionalism: The EU' s New Members, Baldwin, R, P. Haaparanta and J. Kiander (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 1995. [4] Bergstrom, Theodore and Hal R. Varian, 1985. "When are Nash Equilibria Independent of the Distribution of Agents'Characteristics." Review of Economic Studies LII, 715-718. [5] Bernheim, Douglas B., Bezalel Peleg and Michael Whinston, 1987. "Coalition-proof Nash Equilibria I. Concepts." Journal of Economic Theory 42, 1-12. [6] Bhagwati, Jagdish. The World Trading System at Risk, 1991, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. [7] Bhagwati, Jagdish, Arvind Panagariya, and Pravin Krishna, eds., Trading Blocs, 1990, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. [8] Bond, Eric W., and Constantinos Syropoulos, 1996. "The Size of Trading Blocs: Market Power and World Welfare E¤ects."Journal of International Economics 40, 411-437. [9] Brander, J. A., Krugman, P.R., 1983. A ` Reciprocal Dumping'Model of International Trade. Journal of International Economics 15, 313-323. [10] Brander, James A., and Barbara J. Spencer. "Tari¤ Protection and Imperfect competition." In ed. H. Kierzkowski Monopolistic Competition and International Trade, 1984, Oxford University Press, Oxford. [11] Conconi, Paola and Carlo Perroni, 2003. "Self-Enforcing International Agreements and Domestic Policy Credibility," mimeo. [12] Crawford, Jo-Ann and Roberto V. Fiorentino, 2005. "The Changing Landscape of Regional Trade Agreements,"WTO Discussion Paper No. 8.

36

[13] Chang, Won and Winters, L. Alan, 2002. "How Regional Blocs A¤ect Excluded Countries: The Price E¤ects of MERCOSUR." American Economic Review 92, 889-904. [14] Dutta, Bhaskar and Suresh Mutuswami, 1997. "Stable Networks."Journal of Economic Theory 76, 322-344. [15] Duttagupta, Rupa and Arvind Panagariya, 2006. "Free Trade Areas and Rules of Origin: Economics and Politics," mimeo. [16] Freund, Caroline, 2000. "Multilateralism and the Endogenous Formation of Preferential Trade Agreements." Journal of International Economics 52, 359-376. [17] Furusawa, Taiji and Hideo Konishi, 2007. "Free Trade Networks." Journal of International Economics 72, 310-335. [18] Goyal, Sanjeev and Sumit Joshi, 2006. "Bilateralism and Free Trade." International Economic Review 47, 749-778. [19] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, 1995. "The Politics of FreeTrade Agreements." American Economic Review 85, 667-690. [20] Jackson, Matthew and Asher Wolinsky, 1996. "A Strategic Model of Social and Economic Networks." Journal of Economic Theory 71(1), 44-74. [21] Krishna, Pravin, 1998. "Regionalism and Multilateralism: A Political Economy Approach." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 227251. [22] Krugman, Paul R. "The Move Toward Free Trade Zones." in Policy Implications of Trade and Currency Zones: A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, 7-41, 1991. [23] Levy, Philip I., 1997. "A Political-Economic Analysis of Free Trade Agreements." American Economic Review 87, 506-519.

37

[24] Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodiguez-Clare, 1998. "The Value of Trade Agreements in the Presence of Political Pressures." Journal of Political Economy 106, 574-601. [25] Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodiguez-Clare, 2007. "A Political Economy Theory of Trade Agreements," American Economic Review 97, 1374-1406. [26] McLaren, John, 1997. "Size, Sunk Costs, and Judge Bowker' s Objection to Free Trade." American Economic Review 87, 400-420. [27] Ornelas, Emanuel, 2005a. "Trade Creating Free Trade Areas and the Undermining of Multilateralism."European Economic Review 49, 17171735. [28] Ornelas, Emanuel, 2005b. "Rent Destruction and the Political Viability of Free Trade Agreements."Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 14751506. [29] Pascalis Raimondos-Møller and Alan D. Woodland, 2006. "Nonpreferential Trading Clubs." Journal of International Economics 68, 79-91 [30] Riezman, Raymond, 1999. "Can Bilateral Trade Agreements Help Induce Free Trade?" Canadian Journal of Economics 32, 751-766. [31] Saggi, Kamal, 2006. "Preferential Trade Agreements and Multilateral Tari¤ Cooperation." International Economic Review 47, 29-57. [32] Viner, Jacob, 1950. The Custom Union Issue. New York: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. [33] World Bank, 2005. Global Economic Prospects: Trade, Regionalism, and Development, The World Bank, Washington, D.C. [34] World Trade Organization, 2003. World Trade Report. [35] Yi, Sang-Seung, 1996. "Endogenous Formation of Customs Unions under Imperfect Competition: Open Regionalism is Good." Journal of International Economics 41, 153-177. 38




{}



{F }

t Figure 1: Stable agreements under the No FTA game



{ab}



 ab  ab- ab,ac
{F } ; {ab}

 ac
{F } {F }

t Figure 2: Stable agreements under the FTA game

39





 ab
{F } under FTA game only


{F } under both games

t Figure 3: FTAs as Strong Building Blocs



C
C



B



 ab- ab,ac

A

 ac

t
Figure 4: Building and Stumbling Blocs

40

