OPTIONS  FOR  HOMES  IN  METRO  VANCOUVER:  THE  CREATION  OF  COST-EFFECTIVE  HOME   OWNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES            by            Graham  Plant      BA,  Simon  Fraser  University,  2010               A  Major  Research  Paper      presented  to  Ryerson  University               in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of               Master  of  Planning      In      Urban  Development               Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014               ©Graham  Plant  2014   

Author's  Declaration      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  major  research  paper.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the   major  research  paper,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.  I   authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  major  research  paper  to  other  institutions  or   individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.  I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to   reproduce  this  major  research  paper  by  photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at   the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  understand  that  my  major  research  paper  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.  

  

  

ii  

   OPTIONS  FOR  HOMES  IN  METRO  VANCOUVER:  THE  CREATION  OF  COST-EFFECTIVE  HOME        OWNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES         ©  Graham  Plant,  2014      Master  of  Planning      In      Urban  Development      Ryerson  University            ABSTRACT            Housing  affordability  is  a  frequently  discussed  issue  in  many  Canadian  cities;  none  more  than   Vancouver   and   the   surrounding   region.   Data   on   housing   stress   in   Metro   Vancouver   indicates   the   problem   is   real,   and   that   home   ownership   is   out   of   reach   for   most   low   and   moderate   income  earners  in  the  region.  A  preliminary  feasibility  analysis  indicates  that  a  model  created  by   Options   for   Homes,   a   non-profit   housing   provider   founded   in   Toronto,   would   produce   units   for   significantly  less  than  comparable  private  developments.  While  expanding  Options  for  Homes   would  not  be  a  panacea  for  affordability  in  the  region,  and  there  are  a  number  of  associated   challenges   with   applying   the   model   in   Metro   Vancouver,   there   is   merit   to   the   further   exploration   of   a   model   that   provides   below-market   home   ownership   opportunities   to   households  currently  priced  out  of  the  housing  market.             iii  

Acknowledgements      I  would  like  to  thank  my  supervisor,  David  Amborski,  as  well  as  my  second  reader,  Sean  Gadon,   for  their  help  and  guidance  with  this  major  research  paper.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  Michel   Labbe  and  Paul  Tamale  from  Options  for  Homes  for  their  assistance;  this  paper  was  not   commissioned  for  or  approved  by  Options  for  Homes,  but  they  were  supportive  and  responsive   whenever  I  had  questions  or  requests.    Finally  I  would  like  to  thank  my  wife  Sarah  and  dog  Joey   for  keeping  me  sane  throughout  the  process.    

  

  

iv  

Contents     
Introduction        Section  1  ­  Affordable  Home  Ownership               What  is  "Affordable  Housing"   ?               Defining  the  Problem  in  Metro  Vancouver            Public  Sector  Interventions  and  Home  Ownership            International                        National                        Provincial                        Municipal                     Below-market  Home  Ownership                  Inclusionary  Zoning  ­  Vancouver  and  Elsewhere         Attainable  Home  Ownership  Program  ­  Calgary,  Alberta      Habitat  for  Humanity                  Lessons  from  Case  Studies                     Section  2  ­  Options  for  Homes                     Overview                           How  the  Options  Model  Works                  How  Options  Creates  Affordable  Home  Ownership  Opportunities   1. Lower  Production  Costs               nd 2. The  2   Mortgage                 3. Lower  Monthly  Fees                     Additional  Cost  Saving  Mechanisms               Site  Selection                           Home  Ownership  Alternatives                  Critiques  and  Limitations  of  Options  for  Homes            Unit  Affordability  vs.  Household  Affordability            Section  3  ­  High-Rise  Options  in  Metro  Vancouver              Downtown  Vancouver                     Central  Burnaby                        Central  Surrey                          Central  Coquitlam                        High-Rise  Analysis                        Section  4  ­  Options  Carrying  Costs  and  Affordability            Carrying  Costs  ­  Central  Burnaby                  Carrying  Costs  ­  Vancouver,  Surrey,  and  Coquitlam            Affordability                           Analysis  ­  Carrying  Costs  and  Affordability            v      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2   2   3   7   8   8   9   9   10   10   11   12   12   14   14   15   16   16   17   18   19   19   20   21   22   23   25   26   27   28   29   30   30   33   33   35  

Section  5  ­  Mid-Rise  Options  in  Metro  Vancouver                     Surrey  and  Coquitlam  Mid-Rise  ­  Project  Cost                  Surrey  and  Coquitlam  Mid-Rise  ­  Carrying  Costs  and  Affordability            Section  6  ­  Findings  and  Recommendations                        Findings                              Creating  Affordable  Housing  Units  through  New  Housing               Compromising  Location  for  Affordability                  Recommendations                           1. Deferral  of  municipal  fees  and  charges               2. Leasing  of  surplus  lands                     nd 3. Incorporating  2   mortgages  into  private  developments        4. Determine  the  effectiveness  of  Options  for  Homes  affiliates      5. Outline  the  benefits  of  below-market  home  ownership  investment      Conclusion                                 Appendix  ­  Pro  Forma  Assumptions                        Reference  List                                

36   37   38   39   40   40   41   41   41   42   42   43   43   45   46   47   

  

  

vi  

List  of  Tables     
Table  1  ­  Options  High-Rise  in  Downtown  Vancouver      Table  2  ­  Options  High-Rise  in  Central  Burnaby      Table  3  ­  Options  High-Rise  in  Central  Surrey      Table  4  ­  Options  High-Rise  in  Central  Coquitlam      Table  5  ­  Central  Burnaby  Listings,  High-Rises  Built  2010  to  2014      Table  6  ­  Central  Burnaby  Unit  Prices      Table  7  ­  Central  Burnaby  Mortgage  Payments      Table  8  ­  Central  Burnaby  Carrying  Costs      Table  9  ­  Downtown  Vancouver  Carrying  Costs      Table  10  ­  Central  Surrey  Carrying  Costs      Table  11  ­  Central  Coquitlam  Carrying  Costs      Table  12  ­  Carrying  Cost  Summary  Table      Table  13  ­  Minimum  Income  Unit  Requirements      Table  14  ­  Options  Mid-Rise  in  Surrey  and  Coquitlam      Table  15  ­  Mid-Rise  Carrying  Cost  Summary  Table      Table  16  ­  Mid-Rise  Minimum  Income  Unit  Requirements        

vii  

List  of  Figures     
Figure  1  ­  Tenure,  Metro  Vancouver  Households      Figure  2  ­  Housing  Stress,  Metro  Vancouver  Households      Figure  3  ­  Housing  Stress  by  Tenure,  Metro  Vancouver  Households      Figure  4  ­  Median  Income  and  Shelter  Costs  by  Tenure,  Metro  Vancouver  Households      Figure  5  ­  Median  Income  for  Housing  Stress  Presence,  Metro  Vancouver  Households      Figure  6  ­  Housing  Stress,  Tenure,  and  Mortgage  Presence,  Metro  Vancouver  Households      Figure  7  ­  Housing  Stress  by  Tenure  and  Age  Group,  Metro  Vancouver  Household  

viii  

Introduction      Housing  affordability  matters.  The  more  a  household  spends  on  costs  associated  with  

housing,  the  less  they  have  left  over  to  pay  for  other  necessities  such  as  food,  clothing,   transportation,  and  leisure  activities.  Vancouver  and  the  surrounding  region,  henceforth   referred  to  as  Metro  Vancouver,  has  an  affordability  problem.  Ostensibly  on  a  weekly  basis  a   domestic  or  international  report  is  released  that  ranks  it  among  the  least  affordable  cities  in  the   world,  with  the  growth  housing  prices  rapidly  outpacing  the  growth  of  incomes.    The  supply  of   land  in  Metro  Vancouver  is  restricted  by  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  west,  the  Coastal  Mountain   Range  to  the  north,  and  the  United  States  border  to  the  south;  with  such  prominent  natural   and  man-made  boundaries,  it  is  inevitable  that  the  supply  of  housing  struggles  to  keep  up  with   the  demand.    Policy  makers  must  be  creative  and  innovative  to  ensure  the  population  of  the   region  has  access  to  housing,  a  vital  public  good,  at  a  price  that  they  can  afford.      Municipalities  across  Metro  Vancouver  are  grappling  with  the  issue  of  affordability.    

Given  the  fiscal  constraints  of  provincial  and  federal  governments,  and  the  limited  revenue   tools  available  to  municipalities,  models  that  create  affordable  housing  using  little  or  no  public   subsidy  deserve  further  exploration.  This  paper  will  examine  the  feasibility  of  a  model  created   by  Option  for  Homes,  an  Ontario-based  non-profit  organization,  and  its  ability  to  create  home   ownership  opportunities  for  households  currently  unable  to  access  the  housing  market.  A   separate  organization,  Options  for  Homes  of  Greater  Vancouver,  currently  has  one  30  unit   building  approved  in  Metro  Vancouver.    This  feasibility  analysis  is  meant  to  explore  further   possibilities  for  the  Options  model,  and  what  the  impact  on  affordability  would  be.    

1  

Section  1  -  Affordable  Home  Ownership  
   What  is  "Affordable  Housing?"   Housing  affordability  is  a  complex  and  nuanced  issue.  It  applies  to  those  that  are   housed,  and  not  outright  homelessness,  though  the  implications  of  the  former  have  significant   ramifications  for  the  latter  (Hawtrey,  2009).  Housing  affordability  is  focused  on  the  segment  of   the  population  that  have  jobs  and  incomes,  but  experience,  either  temporarily  or  permanently,   financial  pressure  from  the  cost  of  their  housing.  This  pressure  will  be  referred  to  throughout   the  paper  as  "housing  stress".   Households  suffer  from  economic  stress  when  too  much  of  their  income  is  spent  on   housing,  reducing  their  ability  to  meet  other  basic  needs  such  as  food,  clothing,  and   transportation.  The  accepted  benchmark  that  determines  the  presence  of  housing  stress  is   when  households  must  spend  30  percent  of  their  total  before-tax  income  on  shelter-related   expenses.  This  is  the  benchmark  used  by  Statistics  Canada  in  their  National  Household  Survey,   and  the  one  that  will  be  used  throughout  the  remainder  of  the  paper.  The  international  "rule  of   thumb"  ratio  was  25  percent  until  the  early  1980s,  but  has  consistently  been  30  percent  since   then  (Hawtrey,  2009).  For  renters,  the  total  costs  of  housing  are  generally  rent  and  utilities.  For   owners,  shelter-related  expenses  include  mortgage  payments,  property  taxes,  condominium   fees,  as  well  as  maintenance  and  repairs,  utilities  and  other  municipal  fees  or  service  charges.     There  are  a  range  of  problems  associated  with  using  housing  affordability  indices,   especially  one  as  simple  as  the  ratio  of  housing  costs  to  gross  income.  It  does  not  take  into   account  household  size.  A  single  individual  can  afford  to  spend  more  on  housing  than  a  family  

2  

of  five,  who  has  to  spend  more  on  food,  clothing,  and  other  necessities.  An  additional  problem   is  that  there  is  no  consideration  of  the  transportation  costs  associated  with  where  a  household   lives.  The  same  household  can  afford  to  spend  a  greater  proportion  on  housing  if  they  are   saving  money  on  transportation.  Furthermore,  the  ratio  benchmark  is  a  static  measurement   that  does  not  address  the  sustainability  of  housing  stress.  A  fulsome  critique  of  the  index  used   by  Statistics  Canada  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper,  but  Jewkes  and  Delgadillo  (2010)  provide   a  thorough  analysis  of  the  problems  with  conventional  housing  indices  used  by  practitioners.        Defining  the  Problem  in  Metro  Vancouver   As  of  the  2011  National  Household  Survey,  there  were  891,310  households  in  Metro   Vancouver.  Two-thirds  of  those  households  were  owners,  and  one-third  were  renters  (Figure   1).  As  seen  in  Figure  2,  nearly  one-third  of  households  experience  some  form  of  housing  stress  
F I G U RE  1:  TENURE   F IGUR E  2:   HOUSING   STRE SS   

Renters  

Owners  

No  Housing  Stress  

Housing  Stress  

  

Source:  Statistics  Canada,  2013  

3  

by  spending  30  percent  or  more  of  their  before-tax  income  on  shelter  costs.  46  percent  of   renters  experience  housing  stress,  compared  with  only  28  percent  of  owners  (Figure  3).         
F I GU R E    3 :   HO US IN G   S TRE S S    BY   TENURE  
  580,075    

Renters    

Owners  
  419,220    

  306,105    

O V E R AL L   
Source:  Statistics  Canada,  2013  

HO US ING   S TRE S S   

  136,025    

  159,700    

NO    H O US I NG   S T R E S S   

  168,245    

  

   This  gap  is  further  illustrated  by  Figure  4,  a  comparison  of  the  median  income  and   median  shelter  costs  of  renters  and  owners.  Owners  earn  nearly  double  what  renters  earn,  but   their  shelter  costs  are  only  a  few  hundred  dollars  a  month  more.           
  

   4  

FIGUR E   4 :  M E DIAN    IN COME   A N D  S HEL TE R   COS TS   BY   T E N U R E   
$78,445   $1,246  

$41,325  

Owners   Renters  

ME DI AN   INC O ME   
Source:  Statistics  Canada,  2013  

MED IAN  S H ELTER   COS T S   

$968  

  

   Both  elements  of  the  housing  affordability  ratio  are  important  when  considering   households  experiencing  housing  stress.    From  an  urban  planning  context,  the  cost  of  housing  is   the  most  frequently  analyzed  variable.  However  the  effect  of  the  second  variable,  income,   cannot  be  overstated:  high  house  prices  are  only  a  problem  for  those  who  can't  afford  them.   The  median  income  in  Metro  Vancouver  in  2010  was  $63,497;  the  median  income  of  those   experiencing  housing  stress  was  $27,213  (Figure  5).  Raising  incomes  will  help  to  alleviate   housing  stress  as  much  as  lowering  the  cost  of  housing.       
  

   5  

  
F I GU R E   5 :  M E DIAN    IN CO ME,   HOUSING   STR ESS  PRESENCE     
$86,356   $63,397  

O V E R AL L   

HOUS ING   S TRE S S   

$27,213  

NO    H O US I NG   S T R E S S   

  

  
F I G U R E   6 :   HO US IN G   S TRE S S ,   TENUR E   AND  MORTGAGE   P R E SE NC E   
  295,725    

  134,625    

  136,025    

T O T AL   

O WNE R S    WI T H    MO R TGA GE  

RENTE RS   

O WNE R S    WI T H O UT    MORTGA GE S   

  25,075    

  

Source:  Statistics  Canada,  2013  

6  

Of  the  nearly  300,000  households  in  Metro  Vancouver  experiencing  housing  stress,  an   approximately  equal  number  are  owners  with  mortgages  and  renters.  However  a  clear   distinction  emerges  between  owners  with  mortgages  and  owners  without  mortgages.  As   evidenced  in  Figure  6,  owners  without  mortgages  are  by  far  the  smallest  subgroup  to   experience  housing  stress.       If  the  widely  accepted  benchmark  of  spending  30  percent  of  household  income  on   housing  is  used,  it  can  be  stated  inarguably  that  Metro  Vancouver  has  a  problem  with  housing   affordability.  One-third  of  households  face  housing  stress,  and  the  problem  is  not  isolated  to   owners  or  renters.  Income  is  a  key  part  of  the  equation,  but  housing  stress  is  not  only  felt  by   low-income  earners:  20  percent  of  Metro  Vancouver  households  earning  between  $60,000  and   $79,999  experience  housing  stress  (Statistics  Canada,  2013).  Raising  incomes  and  lowering  the   cost  of  housing  are  the  keys  to  increasing  the  affordability  of  housing.  The  cost  of  housing  can   be  lowered  by  reducing  the  cost  of  producing  housing,  but  also  by  lowering  the  carrying  costs  of   housing,  and  one  of  the  easiest  ways  to  lower  the  carrying  costs  of  housing  is  to  own  your   home  outright  after  paying  off  a  mortgage.  If  you  want  an  affordable  home  in  Metro   Vancouver,  make  a  lot  of  money,  own  a  mortgage-free  home,  or  ideally,  do  both.      Public  Sector  Interventions  and  Home  Ownership   Whether  home  ownership  is  preferable  to  renting  from  a  public  policy  perspective  is   beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper,  but  pro-home  ownership  interventions  have  been  in  place  in   North  America  for  decades,  and  their  perseverance  indicates  either  the  reality  or  the   perception  that  ownership  remains  a  priority  for  households.  Prioritizing  home  ownership   7  

inevitably  leads  to  attempts  to  make  housing  more  affordable  or  more  accessible  to  a  greater   proportion  of  the  population.  As  outlined  below,  there  are  many  different  layers  of  subsidies  in   the  housing  market,  but  this  section  does  not  address  direct  public  subsidies  for  housing,   instead  focusing  on  the  over  95  percent  of  households  that  participate  in  the  conventional   housing  market  (Statistics  Canada,  2011).   Through  government  interventions,  home  ownership  is  encouraged  both  indirectly  and   directly.  The  expansion  of  highways  and  roadways,  as  well  as  zoning  by-laws  that  restrict  height   and  density,  encourage  the  development  of  single-family  homes,  which  indirectly  encourages   the  development  of  owned  dwellings.  85  percent  of  single-family  homes  are  owner  occupied,   whereas  more  than  85  percent  of  dwellings  in  homes  with  more  than  three  units  are  rented   (Glaeser,  2011).  Subsidizing  sprawled,  single-family  home  development  indirectly  encourages   home  ownership  and  discourages  the  development  of  rental  stock.  More  directly,  home   ownership  is  subsidized  in  varying  ways  in  different  parts  of  the  world  and  in  Canada.     International     The  most  significant  direct  subsidy  to  home  ownership  outside  of  Canada  is  the  home   mortgage  interest  deduction  in  the  United  States,  which  deducted  roughly  $70  billion  dollars  in   taxes  in  2013  (Weicher  &  Katz,  2013).     National   In  Canada,  mortgage  interest  is  not  tax  deductible,  but  other  federal  and  provincial   policies  exist  to  subsidize  home  ownership.  A  study  found  that  housing  spending  by  the   Canadian  federal  government  in  2009  totaled  $17.1  billion,  with  93  percent  of  the  expenditures   benefiting  home  owners  (Clayton,  2010).  Policies  include  the  First-time  Homebuyer's  Tax   8  

Credit,  Senior  Homeowner's  Property  Tax  Grant,  the  non-taxation  of  capital  gains  on  principal   residences,  and  more.     Provincial     In  British  Columbia  similar  policies  exist,  including  the  B.C.  Property  Tax  Deferment   Program,  Home  Owner  Grant,  and  First-time  Home  Buyer  Property  Transfer  Tax  exemption,   again  primarily  targeting  home  ownership  and  not  rental  housing.       Municipal     Policy  initiatives  at  the  municipal  level  can  also  serve  to  increase  the  affordability  of   home  ownership.  In  Vancouver,  zoning  for  secondary  suites  and  laneway  housing  has  increased   the  supply  of  housing  in  single-family  home  neighbourhoods,  and  reduced  parking   requirements  have  reduced  the  cost  of  producing  primarily  ownership  housing  (Duffus,  2012).     Just  as  governments  can  make  home  ownership  more  affordable,  regulation  can  make  it   less  affordable  or  accessible.  In  2011,  the  Canadian  government  shortened  the  longest   amortization  period  available  for  mortgages  with  a  down  payment  of  less  than  20  percent  from   30  to  25  years.  No  longer  being  able  to  stretch  a  mortgage  loan  over  30  years  means  the   monthly  carrying  cost  of  a  home  rises  and  becomes  less  accessible  for  some.  At  the  provincial   level,  land-use  policies  that  restrict  developable  land  limit  supply  and  drive  up  the  cost  of   housing,  and  at  the  municipal  level  zoning  by-law  restrictions  have  the  same  effect.   These  are  only  some  of  the  many  ways  that  government  policy  and  legislation  can   influence  the  affordability  of  housing  in  a  region,  and  the  overall  impact  of  government   interventions  on  the  housing  market  is  well  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper.  The  next  section  

9  

will  narrow  the  scope  to  consider  programs  and  initiatives  that  target  income-earning   households  who  struggle  to  either  afford  or  access  the  conventional  housing  market.      Below-Market  Home  ownership   Below-market  home  ownership  provides  access  to  those  households  who  struggle  to   afford  or  access  the  conventional  housing  market.  Below-market  housing  can  be  achieved   through  both  supply  and  demand  strategies.  The  housing  product  can  be  made  less   expensively,  which  provides  access  to  individuals  who  were  previously  priced  out  of  the  market   because  the  product  was  too  expensive.  Or,  financing  can  be  made  more  accessible,  which   provides  greater  access  to  individuals  who  were  priced  out  of  the  market  because  of  one  or   more  of  the  following  barriers:  saving  for  a  down  payment,  the  inability  to  qualify  for  a   mortgage,  or  the  inability  to  pay  the  carrying  costs  of  a  mortgage.  A  number  of  programs  exist   locally  and  internationally  that  attempt  to  create  home  ownership  opportunities  for  households   who  are  unable  to  access  an  appropriate  level  of  housing  through  the  conventional  housing   market.  The  list  below  is  not  exhaustive,  but  provides  a  snapshot  of  the  types  of  programs   available  and  the  techniques  used  to  provide  housing  at  below  market  rates.   Inclusionary  Zoning  -  Vancouver  and  elsewhere   Inclusionary  zoning  is  an  instrument  used  by  municipalities  that  requires  affordable   housing  be  provided  as  a  part  of  a  market  development.  In  Vancouver,  the  City  requires  20   percent  of  units  in  major  residential  projects  be  designated  as  social  housing,  and  in  Burnaby   the  policy  requires  that  20  percent  of  units  be  "non-market  housing".  In  Langford,  British   Columbia,  Council  adopted  a  "1  in  15"  policy  that  states  as  a  condition  for  the  rezoning  of  new   10  

subdivisions,  one  of  every  15  homes  must  be  sold  at  a  price  well  below  market  value  (Metro   Vancouver,  2012).  The  Langford  model  also  charges  $1,000  for  every  residential  unit  created  in   multiples  less  than  15  and  puts  the  funds  in  an  Affordable  Housing  Reserve  Fund,  which  ensures   projects  of  every  scale  are  contributing.   Weaknesses:  Inclusionary  zoning  is  a  purely  municipal  tool  that  requires  developers  to   build  below-market  units,  and  does  not  engage  in  any  innovative  supply  or  demand-side   practices.  Additionally,  most  inclusionary  zoning  policies  require  only  large-scale  residential   developments  to  produce  units,  and  thus  place  the  burden  on  developers  who  build  such   projects.   Attainable  Home  Ownership  Program  -  Calgary,  Alberta   The  Attainable  Homes  Calgary  Corporation  (AHCC),  owned  fully  by  the  City  of  Calgary,   offers  moderate  income  families  the  opportunity  for  entry-level  home  ownership  (Metro   Vancouver,  2012).  By  leveraging  their  relationship  with  lawyers,  insurers,  banks  and  builders,   the  AHCC  produces  units  in  bulk  at  reduced  prices.  The  buyer  must  produce  a  minimum  deposit   of  $2,000,  but  the  remainder  of  the  5  percent  down-payment  is  gifted,  and  not  required  to  be   paid  back.  When  sold,  a  portion  of  the  homes  appreciated  value  goes  back  to  the  AHCC  in  a   shared  appreciation  mortgage,  a  type  of  mortgage  explained  in  detail  further  on  in  the  paper.   The  program  received  $945,946  in  start-up  funds  from  the  Government  of  Alberta,  but  is   designed  to  be  self-sustaining  beyond  the  initial  start-up  capital.   Weaknesses:  Nearly  $1  million  in  public  funding  was  required  as  start-up  capital,  and  the   units  created  thus  far  have  been  "attainable"  to  the  first  buyer  only.      11  

Habitat  for  Humanity  ("Habitat")   The  mission  of  Habitat  is  to  make  affordable  housing  accessible  to  low-income  families   who  could  not  otherwise  afford  a  home  (Habitat,  2014).  They  do  this  by  building  modest  homes   using  volunteer  labour  and  donated  materials,  and  selling  the  homes  to  partner  families  with  a   required  commitment  of  500  volunteer  hours.  The  families  are  then  given  a  no-interest,  no   down-payment  mortgage  with  monthly  payments  set  at  25  percent  of  gross  income.  Habitat   families  must  demonstrate  need,  be  willing  to  make  a  significant  time  commitment  to  the   organization,  and  also  be  able  to  repay  the  mortgage.  Habitat  is  funded  primarily  by  donations   and  fundraising,  and  is  given  additional  support  from  the  public  sector,  however  is  primarily  a   privately  run,  privately  funded  organization.     Weaknesses:  The  Habitat  model  is  not  self-sustaining,  as  it  relies  almost  entirely  on   fundraising,  donations,  and  public  support  to  produce  units  for  households.  Furthermore,   Habitat  produces  a  low  volume  of  units,  as  the  units  are  costly  to  produce,  there  is  a  lengthy   qualification  process,  and  a  substantial  commitment  is  required  by  eligible  households.        Lessons  from  Case  Studies   Most  below-market  home  ownership  programs  are  run  with  significant  support  from   the  public  or  private  sector,  and  the  ongoing  success  of  a  below-market  home  ownership   program  in  Metro  Vancouver  may  depend  on  its  ability  to  be  self-sustaining.  Given  the  fiscal   capacity  of  governments  across  Canada  and  the  limited  appetite  for  additional  public  housing   organizations,  Metro  Vancouver  is  limited  in  its  ability  to  significantly  improve  the  status  quo   through  public  funding  or  public  programs.  Moreover,  they  should  not  expect  the  private  sector   12  

to  carry  the  entire  burden.  A  mix  of  solutions,  run  both  publicly  and  privately,  that  target  low   and  moderate  income  earners  is  required.    The  next  organizational  model,  which  will  be   explored  in  depth,  targets  a  different  demographic  then  Habitat  for  Humanity,  focusing  on   moderate  rather  than  low  income  earners.    Options  for  Homes  is  a  self-sustaining  model  of   below-market  home  ownership  with  a  track  record  of  success,  an  established  business  model,   and  much  like  Habitat  for  Humanity,  is  willing  to  share  their  experience  and  expertise.       

                                      
13  

Section  2  -  Options  for  Homes  
   Overview   Options  for  Homes  Non-Profit  Corporation,  hereafter  "Options",  was  started  in  Toronto,   Ontario,  in  1993.  The  founder,  urban  planner  Mike  Labbe,  remains  the  President  and  CEO  of  the   organization.  Options  is  an  organization  dedicated  to  creating  cost-effective  home  ownership   opportunities  to  households  who  are  typically  unable  to  access  the  traditional  housing  market.   Affiliates  that  use  the  Options  model,  or  variations  on  it,  now  exist  regionally  across  Ontario,   domestically  in  Quebec  and  British  Columbia,  and  abroad  in  Cameroon,  Kenya,  Peru,  Columbia,   and  Bangladesh.    Together  with  their  affiliates,  Options  has  built  over  3,700  units  in  20  years   (Options  for  Homes,  2012).  The  Options  model  has  expanded  beyond  housing  and  created   Options  for  Cars,  a  non-profit  car  sharing  co-operative,  and  Options  for  Green  Energy,  a   developer  of  community-financed  green  energy.  All  three  are  part  of  the  Options  Group  of   Companies,  based  on  the  Options  model  but  incorporated  individually.  The  Options  model  also   includes  Home  Ownership  Alternatives,  a  separate  non-profit  financial  corporation  which  exists   to  finance  specific  Options  functions.   None  of  the  individual  components  of  the  Options  model  are  unique  to  Options.  The   model  combines  innovations  in  affordable  housing  finance,  co-operative  housing,  and   conventional  cost-saving  mechanisms  to  provide  high-quality  condominium  units  at  a  lower   cost  than  private  developers.  Options  is  designed  to  function  without  government  subsidies,   and  many  of  their  buildings  have  provided  low-cost  home  ownership  to  households  without   government  assistance.  However  because  different  levels  of  government  recognize  the  

14  

importance  of  affordable  home  ownership  opportunities,  certain  advantages  have  been  given   to  Options  over  the  years,  such  as  the  deferral  of  development  permit  fees,  building  permit  fees   and  development  charges.  This  does  not  invalidate  the  ability  of  the  model  to  function  without   subsidies,  but  does  increase  the  affordability  of  the  units.  Furthermore,  because  government   subsidies  are  not  required,  Options  units  can  be  occupied  by  anyone  who  is  able  to  qualify  for  a   mortgage.   Options  is  an  award  winning  model,  having  received  recognition  from  the  Canadian   Mortgage  and  Housing  Corporation,  an  assortment  of  non-profits,  and  numerous   municipalities.        How  the  Options  Model  Works   Options,  operating  as  a  development  consultant,  seeks  out  potential  development  sites,   and  following  a  feasibility  analysis,  determines  a  site  to  be  appropriate  for  an  Options-style   development.  Options  prefers  to  develop  on  sites  that  are  not  regarded  as  premium  by  private   developers,  but  are  nonetheless  close  to  transit  and  amenities.  Individuals  from  a  previous   Options  development  volunteer  to  form  and  incorporate  a  new  co-operative  housing   development  corporation  (the  Co-op),  which  becomes  the  developer.  The  Co-op  officially  hires   Options  as  the  development  consultant  for  the  project  at  a  nominal  fee,  and  while  the  Co-op   must  enter  into  any  associated  legal  agreement  directly,  and  is  liable  as  such,  the  approvals,   contracts,  and  construction  financing  are  all  negotiated  and  arranged  by  Options,  acting  as  the   development  consultant.  

15  

Future  owners  of  the  units  become  members  of  the  Co-op  by  paying  a  $100  fee,  usually   paid  at  an  informal  information  session  and  for  which  they  receive  an  information  package   about  Options  and  the  proposed  development.  Before  construction  begins,  a  75-percent  pre- sale  target  must  be  reached,  and  construction  and  registration  operate  just  like  a  conventional   private  development.  Options  acts  as  the  project  coordinator  until  construction  is  complete,   and  following  completion,  the  project  is  registered  as  a  condominium,  a  condominium   corporation  is  established,  and  a  board  of  directors  is  elected.  Following  registration,  and  the   completion  of  all  the  contractual  obligations  of  the  Co-op,  it  dissolves  and  has  no  further  role  in   the  project.  Mortgage  registrations  occur  by  the  individual  purchasers,  and  the  registration  of  a   2nd  mortgage,  a  key  feature  of  the  Options  model  and  mandatory  on  all  units,  is  assigned  to   Home  Ownership  Alternatives.      How  Options  Creates  Affordable  Home  Ownership  Opportunities   There  are  three  primary  differences  between  the  development  of  a  conventional  for- profit  condominium  building  and  an  Options  development  that  increase  the  affordability  of   units.     1. Lower  Production  Costs   The  building  itself  is  produced  at  a  lower  cost.  Options  combines  several  modest  cost- saving  measures  to  produce  significant  savings  on  the  total  cost  of  production.  Compared  with   a  roughly  equivalent  unit  in  a  for-profit  development,  Options  can  produce  a  unit  for  around  15   to  17  percent  less  than  a  private  developer  (Canadian  Urban  Institute,  2005).  They  do  this  by   using  modest  finishes  in  the  units  and  common  areas,  avoiding  expensive  and  luxurious  building   16  

amenities  that  are  expensive  to  build  and  maintain,  and  focusing  on  affordable  units  without   building  penthouses  or  luxury  suites.  In  Toronto,  Options  uses  Delterra,  the  construction  arm  of   Tridel,  to  build  its  Toronto  projects.  There  have  never  been  issues  of  quality  or  durability,   indicating  that  modest  should  not  be  confused  with  cheap  or  low-quality.     Additionally,  marketing  costs,  which  account  for  approximately  4-6  percent  of  the  cost   of  a  unit  in  a  private  development,  are  limited  to  $2,500  per  unit  in  an  Options  development   (Labbe,  2014).  Information  sessions  are  typically  run  by  volunteers  and  staff  in  small  venues  and   word-of-mouth  is  used  to  attract  new  purchasers.  Options  does  not  build  model  suites  or   undertake  media  campaigns  the  way  private  developers  typically  do.  Only  recently,  as  the   organization  has  grown  and  has  more  resources  at  its  disposal,  has  it  begun  to  advertise  in   places  like  the  Toronto  subway  system  or  through  internet  marketing.     2. The  2nd  Mortgage   The  most  complex  feature  of  an  Options  development  from  a  buyer's  perspective  is  the   2nd  mortgage.  The  2nd  mortgage  is  essentially  the  difference  between  how  much  the  unit  cost   to  build  and  its  appraised  market  value;  the  difference  between  the  basic  cost  price  and  the   basic  purchase  price.     The  basic  cost  price  of  a  unit  is  the  estimated  cost  of  construction,  established  by  the   Co-op,  pro-rated  for  each  unit,  and  adjusted  for  certain  premiums  such  as  higher  floors  or   corner  units.    The  basic  purchase  price  of  a  unit  is  determined  by  an  independent  appraisal  of   the  unit,  and  represents  the  expected  market  value  of  the  unit.  The  2nd  mortgage  is,  as   mentioned,  the  basic  purchase  price  less  the  basic  cost  price.    An  owner  of  an  Options  units  

17  

always  starts  with  two  mortgages:  a  first  mortgage  with  a  conventional  mortgage  broker  and  a   2nd  mortgage  assigned  to  Home  Ownership  Alternatives.   The  second  mortgage  is  typically  around  15  percent  above  the  basic  cost  price.  It  may  be   discharged  at  any  point,  and  research  indicates  that  20-30  percent  of  second  mortgages  on  any   given  project  are  typically  discharged  as  soon  as  the  unit  closes  (Canadian  Urban  Institute,   2005).  However  for  2nd  mortgages  not  immediately  discharged,  no  payments  on  either  the   principal  or  interest  of  the  second  mortgage  are  due  until  either  the  first  purchaser  sells  the   unit,  or  they  rent  the  unit  out  for  a  period  of  longer  than  two  years.  At  that  point,  both  principal   and  interest  are  due  in  full.     When  the  2nd  mortgage  becomes  due,  interest  is  defined  as  the  lesser  of  two  options.   The  first  option  is  eight  percent  interest,  compounded  annually.  The  second  option  is  a  shared   appreciation  mortgage,  similar  to  the  Attainable  Home  Ownership  Program  in  Calgary,  whereby   the  owner  repays  in  interest  a  share  of  the  increase  in  property  value.  For  example,  if  the  2nd   mortgage  on  a  unit  is  $20,000,  and  upon  sale  the  unit  appreciated  by  20  percent,  fully  repaying   the  2nd  mortgage  would  cost  $20,000  in  principal  and  $4,000  (20,000  x  20%)  in  interest,  for  a   total  of  $24,000.     The  2nd  mortgage  is  only  a  requirement  of  the  initial  purchaser  of  the  unit.    Following   the  sale  by  its  first  owner,  an  Options  unit  behaves  no  differently  than  any  other  market   condominium.   3. Lower  Monthly  Fees   Options  developments  save  money  on  construction  costs  by  including  fewer  common   amenities  than  private  developments,  and  this  also  contributes  to  ongoing  cost  savings  for   18  

owners.  With  fewer  common  amenities,  ongoing  maintenance  costs  and  utilities  are   approximately  10-20  percent  less  than  in  private  developments  (Canadian  Urban  Institute,   2005).       Additional  Cost  Saving  Mechanisms   There  are  a  number  of  other  cost-saving  mechanisms  that  Options  uses  that  contribute   to  the  overall  cost  savings  on  individual  units  (Options  for  Homes,  "How  to  Build...",  2014).   These  include:   · Finance  ­  Through  support  from  government,  the  Options  network,  and  Home  Ownership   Alternatives,  purchasers  are  able  to  get  lower  interest  rates  and  developments  can  defer   fees  and  have  access  to  pre-development  financial  support.   · Government  Support  ­  The  deferral  of  municipal  fees  and  expenses,  access  to  surplus  lands,   and  planning  policy  support  all  contribute  to  increased  affordability.  These  are  not   considered  direct  subsidies  to  the  organization.   · Ongoing  Operating  Costs  ­  Beyond  lower  maintenance  fees,  owner  education,  access  to  car   sharing  programs,  and  access  to  a  national  network  for  insurance  and  other  carrying  costs   all  improve  the  ongoing  affordability  of  Options  units.      Site  Selection      One  of  the  keys  to  residential  development  of  any  kind  is  securing  the  right  land  for  a  

development.  Ideally,  Options  developments  are  built  on  peripheral  lands  away  from  more   expensive  real  estate  markets.  In  the  early  stages,  Options  was  extremely  successful  at  securing   less-desired  lands  that  were  in  close  proximity  to  downtown  Toronto,  and  their  model  thrived   19  

because  of  it.  The  units  were  desirable,  and  have  since  appreciated  substantially  in  value.  These   include  units  close  to  Toronto's  Distillery  District,  High  Park,  and  developments  built  within   minutes  of  major  subway  lines.  As  ideal  Options  land  becomes  more  limited  in  supply,   developments  are  being  built  further  from  downtown.  The  lack  of  available  land  that  suits   Options  developments  is  likely  to  be  a  challenge  moving  forward,  not  only  in  Toronto  but  also  in   other  expensive  real  estate  markets  such  as  Metro  Vancouver.             Home  Ownership  Alternatives  (HOA)   HOA  is  a  separate  non-profit  corporation  which  holds  all  the  2nd  mortgages  of  individual   purchasers  in  Options  developments  (Home  Ownership  Alternatives,  2014).  While  the  function   of  HOA  is  to  hold  the  2nd  mortgages,  the  goal  of  HOA  is  to  accumulate  capital,  and  use  the   proceeds  of  the  2nd  mortgages  to  invest  in  future  affordable  housing  developments.  Over  time,   HOA  has  generated  sizable  amounts  of  mortgages  receivable,  as  well  as  a  sizable  cash  position.   As  2nd  mortgages  are  repaid,  and  the  conversion  from  mortgages  receivable  to  cash  occurs,   HOA  can  provide  financial  assistance  to  new  affordable  housing  projects.  The  assistance  is   typically  given  during  the  pre-development  stage  of  projects  to  assist  with  cash-flow   requirements  prior  to  construction  financing  or  condominium  registration.  This  operates  no   differently  than  the  deferral  of  development  and  building  permit  fees  by  municipalities:  it  isn't   required  to  make  the  model  work,  but  does  increase  the  affordability  of  units.     HOA  is  a  crucial  link  to  the  overall  mission  of  Options,  to  not  only  create  but  also  sustain   affordable  home  ownership  opportunities  for  low  to  middle  income  households.  As  units  are   sold,  or  owners  voluntarily  pay  back  their  2nd  mortgages,  HOA's  ability  to  further  assist  projects   20  

is  enhanced,  and  the  effect  is  twofold.  First,  it  perpetuates  a  virtuous  cycle:  HOA  supports   additional  projects,  those  projects  generate  more  mortgage  receivables  or  cash,  and  HOA  uses   those  proceeds  to  support  additional  projects.  Second,  as  mortgages  receivable  are  converted   into  cash,  HOA  has  a  greater  ability  to  target  individuals  and  households  who  would  not   normally  qualify  for  an  Options  unit  by  providing  additional  down  payment  assistance,  both  to   qualify  for  a  mortgage  and  to  lower  the  monthly  carrying  costs  of  the  mortgage.      Critiques  and  Limitations  of  Options  for  Homes   The  literature  on  Options  is  limited,  despite  the  organizations  size  and  longevity  as  a   housing  developer  in  Canada's  biggest  city.  The  most  detailed  study  was  conducted  nearly  a   decade  ago,  when  in  2005  the  Toronto  Community  Housing  Corporation  retained  the  Canadian   Urban  Institute  to  undertake  a  study  of  the  Options  model.  The  study  validated  the  Options   model,  and  concluded  that  Options  developments  provided  below  market  home  ownership   opportunities  for  the  households  that  purchase  units.       Additional  critiques  and  limitations  will  be  addressed  throughout  the  remainder  of  the   report,  especially  as  they  relate  to  the  potential  for  Options  developments  in  Metro  Vancouver,   but  the  primary  critique  of  Options  is  that  the  benefits  of  affordability  accrue  almost  exclusively   to  the  first  purchaser  (Canadian  Urban  Institute,  2005;  Metro  Vancouver,  2012).  Once  the  unit   is  sold  to  the  first  purchaser,  it  behaves  just  like  a  market  condominium.  As  an  Options  unit   tends  to  be  a  modest  unit  in  a  building  with  modest  amenities,  it  will  be  slightly  more   affordable  than  comparable  units,  and  condominium  fees  will  still  be  lower  than  comparable   buildings,  but  those  are  the  only  ways  in  which  an  Options  unit  remains  a  below  market  unit.   21  

Only  the  first  purchaser  has  access  to  a  second  mortgage,  and  there  are  no  restrictions  on  the   re-sale  price  of  the  unit.        Unit  Affordability  vs.  Household  Affordability   The   opportunity   a   first   purchaser   is   given   in   an   Options   development   to   profit   from   the   sale   of   the   unit   illustrates   an   important   distinction   in   affordable   home   ownership   policy.   "Unit"   affordability  ensures  that  a  unit  remains  below-market  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  is   common  in  government  subsidized  affordable  housing  programs.  When  sold,  the  re-sale  price   must   remain   below   market.   This   ensures   that   housing   is   below   market   for   whoever   occupies   the  unit,  but  only  for  as  long  as  they  occupy  the  unit.   A  different  approach,  and  the  one  used  by  Options,  is  to  provide  "household"  affordability.     If  re-sale  restrictions  are  placed  on  a  unit,  housing  is  no  longer  affordable  once  the  unit  is  sold   or   vacated,   as   a   household   is   unable   to   capitalize   on   the   appreciated   value   of   their   unit.   Unless   they   have   access   to   another   below-market   home   ownership   opportunity,   or   have   increased   their   income   relative   to   the   cost   of   housing,   they   are   once   again   priced   out   of   the   housing   market.   An   Options   unit   provides   a   household   with   the   opportunity   to   access   the   housing   market   for   life.   Either   they   remain   in   the   Options   unit,   or   sell   the   Options   unit   at   a   market   rate   and  use  the  increase  in  equity  to  access  the  conventional  housing  market.                 22  

Section  3  ­  High-Rise  Options  in  Metro  Vancouver  
   As  outlined  in  the  previous  section,  there  are  numerous  cost-saving  mechanisms  that   Options  uses  to  produce  below  market  home  ownership  opportunities.  This  section  will  focus   on  three  primary  cost  saving  measures  ­  a  reduction  in  construction  costs,  a  reduction  in   marketing  costs,  and  the  near-elimination  of  developer  profit  ­  and  the  savings  they  would   create  in  the  upfront  cost  of  a  unit  when  compared  with  a  private  development  of  the  same   size.   The  scenarios  include  a  10  percent  savings  for  Options  in  hard  costs  through  modest   finishes.  Typically,  Options  can  save  as  much  as  15  to  17  percent  of  hard  costs  (Canadian  Urban   Institute,  2005),  but  in  Toronto  this  is  assisted  by  a  strong  relationship  with  a  builder,  and  no   such  relationship  exists  in  Metro  Vancouver.  By  establishing  strong  relationships  with   interested  municipalities  and  selling  them  on  the  benefits  of  the  model,  Options  may  be  able  to   defer  municipal  fees,  get  a  reduction  in  development  charges,  or  have  access  to  surplus   municipal  lands;  this  would  reduce  loan  interest  charges,  soft  costs,  and  land  costs.  But  no  such   relationships  have  been  fully  established  in  Metro  Vancouver.  Additionally,  Options  typically   saves  costs  on  land  due  to  the  avoidance  of  premium  sites,  but  in  Metro  Vancouver  they  would   be  competing  directly  with  private  developers  for  limited  developable  land,  and  so  no  land  cost   savings  are  factored  into  the  scenarios.  A  slight  savings  in  soft  costs  is  factored  in  to  the   scenarios,  as  they  are  calculated  as  a  proportion  of  the  hard  costs  which,  as  mentioned,  are   discounted  by  10  percent.  It  is  assumed  these  soft  cost  savings  would  be  possible  through  

23  

modest  building  designs  and  a  discount  on  legal,  insurance,  and  administrative  costs  obtained   by  accessing  existing  Options  resources.   The  figures  presented  are  estimates  only,  and  no  quantity  surveyor  or  commissioned   real  estate  reports  were  used  to  develop  the  development  Pro  Formas.  Pro  Formas  do  not   include  either  the  costs  or  revenues  associated  with  parking  or  lockers,  and  exclude  any  unit   extras  which  Options  offers  at  the  discretion  of  purchasers.  Findings  are  presented  to   demonstrate  the  magnitude  of  the  savings  possible  from  these  measures,  and  where  in  Metro   Vancouver  Options  could  create  the  most  comparable  savings.  Furthermore,  these  are   presented  as  hypothetical  developments.  They  are  not  based  on  specific  sites,  do  not  address   the  availability  of  assembled  land,  and  are  loosely  based  on  height  and  density  expectations  in   each  municipality.  Further  details  regarding  the  assumptions  and  sources  can  be  found  in  the   Appendix.                           24  

Downtown  Vancouver   A  45-storey  Options  tower  in  Downtown  Vancouver  would  save  $182  per  square  foot  compared   to  a  private  development,  but  would  still  cost  nearly  $700  per  square  foot  to  build.    

Options  For  Homes  Feasibility
Hypothetical  Project  Statistics   Floors Units Average  Net  Unit  Size Gross  to  Net  Efficiency Total  Saleable  Area Gross  Residential  Area  (GRA) Expenditures   Blended  Construction  Cost  (per  s f) Savings  through  design  and  modest  finishes Total  Construction  Cost Soft  Cost  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Soft  Costs Marketing  Savings  (per  unit) Total  Marketing  Savings Land  Cost  (per  buildable  s f) Total  Land  Cost Developer  Profit  (%  of  project  cost) Total  Developer  Profit Project  Contingency  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Project  Contingency Total  Project  Cost  (TPC)   Total  Project  Cost  per  s aleable  s quare  foot Options  Savings  ($  per  sf) Options  Savings  (%)

Table  1  -  Downtown  Vancouver Options Private  Condo 45 45 540 540 689 689 82% 82%                     372,060                         372,060                    453,732                         453,732 $258.50 10% $105,560,682 55% $58,058,375 -$22,500 -$12,150,000 $220 $99,820,976 2% $5,025,801 2.82% $2,976,811 $259,292,644 $697 $258.50 N/A $117,289,646 55% $64,509,305 N/A N/A $220 $99,820,976 15% $42,242,989 2.82% $3,307,568 $327,170,485 $879 $182 21%   
25  

Central  Burnaby   A  25-storey  Options  tower  in  Central  Burnaby  would  cost  $522  per  square  foot,  a  23  percent   savings  over  a  private  development,  or  a  difference  of  $155  per  square  foot.  

Options  For  Homes  Feasibility
Hypothetical  Project  Statistics   Floors Units Average  Net  Unit  Size Gross  to  Net  Efficiency Total  Saleable  Area Gross  Residential  Area  (GRA) Expenditures   Blended  Construction  Cost  (per  s f) Savings  through  design  and  modest  finishes Total  Construction  Cost Soft  Cost  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Soft  Costs Marketing  Savings  (per  unit) Total  Marketing  Savings Land  Cost  (per  buildable  s f) Total  Land  Cost Developer  Profit  (%  of  project  cost) Total  Developer  Profit Project  Contingency  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Project  Contingency Total  Project  Cost  (TPC)   Total  Project  Cost  per  s aleable  s quare  foot Options  Savings  ($  per  sf) Options  Savings  (%)

Table  2  -  Central  Burnaby Options Private  Condo 25 25 300 300 689 689 82% 82%                     206,700                         206,700                    252,073                        252,073 $235.00 10% $53,313,476 55% $29,322,412 -$22,500 -$6,750,000 $113 $28,484,268 2% $2,087,403 2.82% $1,503,440 $107,960,999 $522 $235.00 N/A $59,237,195 55% $32,580,457 N/A N/A $113 $28,484,268 15% $18,045,288 2.82% $1,670,489 $140,017,698 $677 $155 23%   
26  

Central  Surrey   A  tower  in  Central  Surrey  represents  the  greatest  proportional  savings  of  the  four  hypothetical   scenarios,  a  26%  savings  compared  to  a  private  development.    

Options  For  Homes  Feasibility
Hypothetical  Project  Statistics   Floors Units Average  Net  Unit  Size Gross  to  Net  Efficiency Total  Saleable  Area Gross  Residential  Area  (GRA) Expenditures   Blended  Construction  Cost  (per  s f) Savings  through  design  and  modest  finishes Total  Construction  Cost Soft  Cost  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Soft  Costs Marketing  Savings  (per  unit) Total  Marketing  Savings Land  Cost  (per  buildable  s f) Total  Land  Cost Developer  Profit  (%  of  project  cost) Total  Developer  Profit Project  Contingency  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Project  Contingency Total  Project  Cost  (TPC)   Total  Project  Cost  per  s aleable  s quare  foot Options  Savings  ($  per  sf) Options  Savings  (%)

Table  3  -  Central  Surrey Options Private  Condo 20 20 240 240 689 689 82% 82%                     165,360                         165,360                    201,659                        201,659 $203.70 10% $36,970,060 55% $20,333,533 -$22,500 -$5,400,000 $26 $5,243,122 2% $1,142,934 2.82% $1,042,556 $59,332,204 $359 $203.70 N/A $41,077,844 55% $22,592,814 N/A N/A $26 $5,243,122 15% $10,337,067 2.82% $1,158,395 $80,409,242 $486 $127 26%   
27  

Central  Coquitlam     A   smaller,   15-storey   Options   tower   in   Central   Coquitlam   would   cost   $404   per   square   foot   to   build,  representing  a  25%  savings  when  compared  to  a  private  development.  

Options  For  Homes  Feasibility
Hypothetical  Project  Statistics   Floors Units Average  Net  Unit  Size Gross  to  Net  Efficiency Total  Saleable  Area Gross  Residential  Area  (GRA) Expenditures   Blended  Construction  Cost  (per  s f) Savings  through  design  and  modest  finishes Total  Construction  Cost Soft  Cost  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Soft  Costs Marketing  Savings  (per  unit) Total  Marketing  Savings Land  Cost  (per  buildable  s f) Total  Land  Cost Developer  Profit  (%  of  project  cost) Total  Developer  Profit Project  Contingency  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Project  Contingency Total  Project  Cost  (TPC)   Total  Project  Cost  per  s aleable  s quare  foot Options  Savings  ($  per  sf) Options  Savings  (%)

Table  4  -  Central  Coquitlam Options Private  Condo 15 15 180 180 689 689 82% 82%               124,020                     124,020              151,244                    151,244 $203.70 10% $27,727,545 55% $15,250,150 -$22,500 -$4,050,000 $63 $9,452,744 2% $967,609 2.82% $781,917 $50,129,964 $404 $203.70 N/A $30,808,383 55% $16,944,611 N/A N/A $63 $9,452,744 15% $8,580,861 2.82% $868,796 $66,655,394 $537 $133 25%   
28  

High-Rise  Analysis   In  each  of  the  hypothetical  projects,  stacking  the  three  cost-saving  measures  ­  lower   construction  costs,  lower  marketing  costs,  and  less  profit  ­  created  substantial  savings  when   compared  to  private  developments.  The  locations  with  the  least  expensive  land,  Surrey  and   Coquitlam,  experienced  the  greatest  proportional  savings.  Where  land  is  the  most  expensive,   Downtown  Vancouver  and  Central  Burnaby,  land  costs  take  up  a  greater  proportion  of  the  total   project  cost.  Because  the  costs  of  land  were  determined  to  be  the  same  in  both  Options  and   private  developments,  in  these  scenarios  the  components  of  the  projects  that  Options  realizes   savings  on  takes  up  a  smaller  proportion  of  the  total  cost.  Efficiencies  and  average  unit  sizes   remained  static  regardless  of  project  size,  and  therefore  increased  densities  did  not  create   additional  savings.     This  very  preliminary  analysis  suggests  that  less  expensive  land  leads  to  greater   proportional  savings  compared  to  private  developments,  a  strategy  that  Options  actively   employs.  The  next  stage  of  analysis  will  be  to  consider  the  carrying  costs  required  to  purchase   units  in  each  hypothetical  development.  This  will  introduce  the  additional  cost  saving  measure   of  lower  condominium  fees  into  an  Options  development,  as  well  as  the  benefits  of  the  2nd   mortgage.               29  

Section  4  ­  Options  Carrying  Costs  and  Affordability  
   Compared  with  private  developments,  Options  would  be  able  to  realize  substantial   production  cost  savings.  Lower  production  costs  lead  to  lower  unit  prices,  which  lead  to  lower   carrying  costs  through  lower  mortgage  payments.  Furthermore,  because  of  the  modest   common  amenities  the  buildings  are  less  expensive  to  operate  and  maintain,  and  as  a  result   Options  condo  fees  are  typically  10-20  percent  lower  than  comparable  private  developments   (Canadian  Urban  Institute,  2005).       Options  purchasers  only  need  to  finance  the  basic  cost  price  of  a  unit,  as  the  remainder,   known  as  the  basic  purchase  price,  is  financed  by  a  2nd  mortgage  covered  by  Home  Ownership   Alternatives.  The  basic  cost  price  of  an  Options  unit  is  the  cost  of  production,  taking  into   consideration  certain  premiums  or  discounts  based  on  the  specific  unit.  However  the  following   analysis  assumes  no  premium  or  discount  on  units,  and  no  appliances  or  extras  that  are  options   for  purchasers:  the  basic  cost  price  is  the  cost  per  square  foot  to  produce  the  unit.     Carrying  Costs  -  Central  Burnaby   High-rise  Options  units  in  Burnaby  in  the  hypothetical  projects  from  the  previous  section   could  be  constructed  for  a  total  of  $522  per  square  foot,  23  percent  less  than  $677  per  square   foot  for  private  developments.  This  is  comparable  to  the  market  for  high-rise  condominiums  in   Central  Burnaby,  based  on  the  list  prices  of  newly  built  condominiums  on  MLS.  

30  

Table  5 Central  Burnaby  -  High-Rise  Built  2010  to  2014 Sq  Ft Price Price/sf                                    1,150 $928,000 $807                                          842 $609,000 $723                                          899 $560,900 $624                                          842 $662,000 $786                                          459 $269,900 $588                                          605 $429,900 $711 Average $706   
Source:  MLS.ca,  2014  

Table  6  below  outlines  the  basic  financial  components  of  an  Options  unit  in  Central   Burnaby.     

Table  6 Central  Burnaby  -  Options  Units  @  $522  per  sq  ft Unit Sq  Ft Basic  Cost  Price Basic  Purchase  Price Studio 489 $255,408 $293,720 1-bed 589 $307,639 $353,785 1-bed  and  Den 689 $359,870 $413,850 2-bed 789 $412,101 $473,916

2nd  Mortgage $38,311 $46,146 $53,980 $61,815   

The  basic  cost  price  of  a  unit  ranges  from  $255,408  to  $412,101.  The  basic  purchase   price  is  calculated  at  15  percent  above  the  basic  cost  price,  an  estimate  typical  of  most  Options   developments  (Canadian  Urban  Institute,  2005).  The  2nd  mortgage  is  the  difference  between   the  basic  purchase  price  and  the  basic  cost  price.    Table  7  calculates  the  mortgage  payments   required  for  each  of  the  units.  

31  

Table  7 Central  Burnaby  -  Options  Units  @  $522  per  sq  ft Unit Down  Payment Mortgage Mortgage  Payments Studio $20,432.68 $234,976 $1,240 1-bed $17,689.26 $289,950 $1,530 1-bed  and  Den $20,692.52 $339,177 $1,790 2-bed $23,695.79 $388,405 $2,050   

The  down  payment  is  calculated  as  5  percent  of  the  purchase  price,  and  the  purchase   price  less  the  2nd  mortgage  and  down  payment  equals  the  amount  that  must  be  financed  by  the   purchaser.  The  mortgages  are  calculated  using  a  4  percent  interest  rate  and  are  amortized  over   25  years.  The  term  is  typical,  and  the  interest  rate  is  slightly  higher  than  the  national  average  to   reflect  potential  future  increases  in  rates  that  would  increase  the  carrying  costs  of  units   (CanEquity,  2014).   Table  8  uses  only  the  monthly  mortgage  payments  and  strata  fees  to  calculate  the   monthly  carrying  costs  of  an  Options  unit,  and  excludes  utilities,  maintenance,  and  any  other   fees  or  costs  that  may  be  associated  with  home  ownership.    
Table  8 Central  Burnaby  -  Carrying  Costs Unit Sq  Ft Strata  Fees  (per  s f) Studio 489 $0.29 1-bed 589 $0.29 1-bed  and  Den 689 $0.29 2-bed 789 $0.29

Monthly  Fees Mortgage  Payments $142 $1,240 $171 $1,530 $200 $1,790 $229 $2,050

Total $1,382 $1,701 $1,990 $2,279   

As  mentioned,  condo  fees  are  typically  10-20  percent  lower  in  Options  developments.   Strata  fees  in  Burnaby  average  $0.34  per  square  foot  for  condo  high  rises  (Real  Estate  Weekly,   2013).    The  $0.29  used  is  15  percent  lower  than  the  average  rate,  a  reasonable  estimate  for  an   Options  development.     32  

Carrying  Costs  -  Vancouver,  Surrey,  Coquitlam   The  total  carrying  costs  for  the  other  three  hypothetical  developments,  developed  using   the  same  formulas  as  the  Burnaby  project,  are  listed  in  Tables  9,  10,  and  11.  
Table  9 Downtown  Vancouver  -  Carrying  Costs Unit Sq  Ft Strata  Fees  (per  s f) Studio 489 $0.40 1-bed 589 $0.40 1-bed  and  Den 689 $0.40 2-bed 789 $0.40 Table  10 Central  Surrey  -  Carrying  Costs Unit Sq  Ft Strata  Fees  (per  s f) Studio 489 $0.30 1-bed 589 $0.30 1-bed  and  Den 689 $0.30 2-bed 789 $0.30 Table  11 Central  Coquitlam  -  Carrying  Costs Unit Sq  Ft Strata  Fees  (per  s f) Studio 489 $0.28 1-bed 589 $0.28 1-bed  and  Den 689 $0.28 2-bed 789 $0.28

Monthly  Fees Mortgage  Payments $196 $1,655 $236 $2,042 $276 $2,389 $316 $2,735

Total $1,851 $2,278 $2,664 $3,051   

Monthly  Fees Mortgage  Payments $147 $852 $177 $1,051 $207 $1,230 $237 $1,408

Total $999 $1,228 $1,437 $1,645   

Monthly  Fees Mortgage  Payments $137 $960 $165 $1,184 $193 $1,385 $221 $1,587

Total $1,097 $1,349 $1,578 $1,808   

Affordability   The  carrying  costs  for  each  unit  in  each  hypothetical  project  are  summarized  in  in  Table   12.  

33  

Table  12

Total  Carrying  Costs Unit Studio 1-bed 1-bed  and  Den 2-bed

Vancouver $1,851 $2,278 $2,664 $3,051

Burnaby $1,382 $1,701 $1,990 $2,279

Surrey $999 $1,228 $1,437 $1,645

Coquitlam $1,097 $1,349 $1,578 $1,808   

As  discussed  earlier,  to  avoid  housing  stress  shelter  costs  must  not  equal  30  percent  or   more  of  a  households  before  tax  income.  For  a  unit  to  be  attainable  while  avoiding  housing   stress,  households  must  earn  a  minimum  of  the  incomes  listed  in  Table  13.  
Table  13 Minimum  Income  (Annual  Unit  Carrying  Costs  =  30%  of  Before-Tax  Income) Unit Vancouver Burnaby Surrey Studio $74,020 $55,284 $39,949 1-bed $91,107 $68,051 $49,123 1-bed  and  Den $106,575 $79,605 $57,463 2-bed $122,044 $91,158 $65,803 Median  Household  Income,  Metro  Vancouver Highlighted  incomes  are  below  median  household  income

Coquitlam $43,871 $53,973 $63,137 $72,300 $63,347

  

The  income  statistics  used  are  for  all  of  Metro  Vancouver,  and  not  for  each  individual   municipality.  Metro  Vancouver  considers  low  to  moderate  income  households  have  incomes   between  50  and  80  percent  of  the  median  household  income;  in  Metro  Vancouver  that  is   between  $31,674  and  $50,678  (Metro  Vancouver,  2014).  The  highlighted  cells  in  Table  13   represent  units  that  could  be  afforded  by  median  income  earners.  Median  income  earners  are   excluded  from  any  of  the  2-bedroom  units,  and  low  to  moderate  income  households  could  only   afford  either  a  studio  or  1-bedroom  apartment  in  Surrey,  or  a  studio  apartment  in  Coquitlam.        34  

Analysis  ­  Carrying  Costs  and  Affordability   The  construction  of  Options-style  developments  in  Metro  Vancouver  would  create  cost   effective  home  ownership  opportunities,  especially  when  compared  with  private   developments.  However  units  in  the  hypothetical  projects  would  still  be  out  of  range  for  low  to   moderate  income  households  in  Metro  Vancouver,  and  only  the  smaller  units  would  be  at  a   price  point  attainable  for  median  income  earners.  The  next  section  will  explore  further  cost   saving  measures  in  an  attempt  to  create  units  that  are  attainable  for  a  wider  range  of  income   earners.             

                    
35  

Section  5  ­  Mid-Rise  Options  in  Metro  Vancouver    
      A  further  reduction  in  land  costs  and  construction  costs  would  assist  in  the  creation  of   cost  effective  home  ownership  opportunities.  To  achieve  lower  construction  costs  and  lower   land  costs,  developments  would  have  to  move  away  from  Vancouver  and  Burnaby,  away  from   desirable  locations,  and  shift  from  concrete  tower  construction  to  wood-frame  construction.   This  would  result  in  lower  density  developments  further  from  transit  and  amenities,  but  would   potentially  attract  low  to  moderate  income  earners.  Of  the  four  municipalities  chosen,  land  is   most  affordable  in  Surrey  and  Coquitlam,  and  focus  will  narrow  to  those  two  locations  using   lower  land  costs  and  assuming  a  less  central  location  in  each.  Further  cost  savings  are  achieved   by  the  shift  to  wood-frame  buildings,  permitted  for  up  to  6-storey  developments  in  British   Columbia  (BC  Government,  2009).  Efficiencies  are  lowered  to  account  for  the  change  from  high- rise  to  mid-rise,  and  unit  sizes  are  increased  by  an  average  of  50  square  feet  per  unit.  This   represents  a  shift  from  the  Options  model  that  has  had  success  in  Southern  Ontario,  which   relied  on  a  strong  relationship  with  a  builder  and  the  economies  of  scale  associated  with  large   concrete  condominium  buildings  to  produce  cost  effective  units.                    36  

Surrey  and  Coquitlam  Mid-Rise  ­  Project  Cost      At  a  total  project  cost  of  $218  per  square  foot  in  Surrey,  and  $274  in  Coquitlam,  the  

savings  over  the  previous  Options  projects  are  substantial:  a  39  percent  drop  in  Surrey,  and  a  32   percent  drop  in  Coquitlam.  

Options  For  Homes  Feasibility
Hypothetical  Project  Statistics   Floors Units Average  Net  Unit  Size Gross  to  Net  Efficiency Total  Saleable  Area Gross  Residential  Area  (GRA) Expenditures   Blended  Construction  Cost  (per  s f) Savings  through  design  and  modest  finishes Total  Construction  Cost Soft  Cost  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Soft  Costs Marketing  Savings  (per  unit) Total  Marketing  Savings Land  Cost  (per  buildable  s f) Total  Land  Cost Developer  Profit  (%  of  project  cost) Total  Developer  Profit Project  Contingency  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Project  Contingency Total  Project  Cost  (TPC)   Total  Project  Cost  per  s aleable  s quare  foot

Table  14 Surrey Options

Coquitlam Options

6 6 72 72 739 739 80% 80%                       53,208                       53,208                      66,510                      66,510 $126.10 10% $7,548,220 55% $4,151,521 -$22,500 -$1,620,000 $16 $1,064,160 2% $222,878 2.82% $212,860 $126.10 10% $7,548,220 55% $4,151,521 -$22,500 -$1,620,000 $60 $3,990,600 2% $281,407 2.82% $212,860

$11,579,639 $14,564,607 $218 $274   
37  

Surrey  and  Coquitlam  Mid-Rise  ­  Carrying  Costs  and  Affordability      Those  savings  translate  into  significantly  lower  carrying  costs,  and  have  a  demonstrable  

impact  on  the  affordability  of  units.  
Table  15 Total  Carrying  Costs Unit Studio 1-bed 1-bed  and  Den 2-bed

Surrey $649 $797 $932 $1,067

Coquitlam $787 $967 $1,131 $1,295   

Table  16 Minimum  Income  (Annual  Unit  Carrying  Costs  =  30%  of  Before-Tax  Income) Unit Surrey   Coquitlam Studio $25,953 $31,477 1-bed $31,869 $38,680 1-bed  and  Den $37,280 $45,247 2-bed $42,691 $51,814 Median  Income,  Metro  Vancouver $63,347 Highlighted  incomes  are  below  median  household  income   

   Every  unit  is  attainable  for  median  income  earners  in  Metro  Vancouver,  and  every  unit   but  the  2-bedroom  unit  in  Coquitlam  becomes  attainable  for  low  to  moderate  income  earners.   These  changes  achieved  the  desired  effect  of  creating  units  that  would  attract  a  wider  range  of   incomes,  but  the  challenge  in  the  less  desirable  locations  may  be  in  sustaining  demand  for   modest  units  not  typical  in  lower  density  neighbourhoods.         38  

Section  6  ­  Findings  and  Recommendations  
      The  affordable  housing  issue  in  Metro  Vancouver  is  well  established,  and  affirmed  by   the  data  on  housing  stress.  46  percent  of  renters  are  experiencing  housing  stress,  and  for  those   who  would  rather  own  than  rent  the  challenge  is  twofold:  they  struggle  to  pay  rent,  and  the   high  cost  of  housing  prohibits  them  from  saving  for  a  down  payment.  This  can  be  helped  or   hindered  by  both  fluctuating  interest  rates  and  the  somewhat  fluid  qualifications  required  for  a   mortgage.  The  struggle  for  tenants  is  exacerbated  as  the  population  ages.    
F I GU R E   7 :   HO US IN G   S TRE S S    BY   TENUR E   AND  AGE  GROUP     80%   60%   40%   20%   0%   Under   25  to   30  to   35  to   40  to   45  to   50  to   55  to   60  to   65  to   70  to   75   25   29   34   39   44   49   54   59   64   69   74   years   years   years   years   years   years   years   years   years   years   years   years   and   over   %  of  Owners  
Source:  Statistics  Canada,  2013  

%  of  Renters  

  

39  

As  revealed  by  Figure  7,  as  the  population  ages,  owners  become  less  and  less  likely  to   experience  housing  stress.  For  many,  this  is  possible  because  they  have  paid  off  their  mortgages   by  the  time  they  reach  retirement  age.  However  for  renters,  after  the  age  of  25,  age  has  a   minimal  impact  on  the  presence  of  housing  stress.  This  emphasizes  the  importance  of  ensuring   that  home  ownership  opportunities  are  attainable  for  a  wide  range  of  incomes,  to  help  avoid   housing  stress  that  is  sustained  throughout  one's  lifetime.  One  approach  to  achieving  cost   effective  home  ownership  opportunities  is  through  a  model  like  Options,  which  emphasizes   home  ownership,  and  ensures  affordability  at  the  household  level.  Households  can  build  equity   through  Options,  and  ideally  eventually  pay  off  their  mortgage  to  avoid  housing  stress  later  in   life.       The  findings  from  Section  3  reveal  that  Options-style  developments  would  achieve   significant  savings  compared  to  private  market  developments,  especially  in  municipalities  with   more  affordable  land  costs.  Section  4  demonstrates  that  despite  these  comparable  savings,   Options  units  would  still  be  unattainable  for  many  Metro  Vancouver  residents.  This  illustrates  a   significant  challenge  to  creating  affordable  units  in  Metro  Vancouver:  the  prohibitively  high  cost   of  land  and  construction.  Through  cheaper  land  and  wood-frame  construction,  Section  5   demonstrated  that  affordable  units  were  possible  in  Options-style  developments.     Findings   Creating  Affordable  Housing  Units  through  New  Housing      Land  costs  and  construction  costs  have  never  been  higher  than  they  are  currently  in  

Metro  Vancouver.  Even  while  realizing  substantial  cost  savings  over  private  new-builds,  the   40  

carrying  cost  of  all  but  three  high-rise  units  in  Section  3  were  higher  than  the  median  shelter   cost  of  owned  dwellings  in  Metro  Vancouver  (Statistics  Canada,  2013).  This  illustrates  the   challenge  of  creating  affordability  through  new  housing:  even  when  cost  saving  measures  are   employed,  new  housing  units  are  still  less  affordable  than  most  of  the  older  housing  stock.   Compromising  Location  for  Affordability      In  Section  4  it  was  demonstrated  that  cheaper  land  and  construction  appears  to  be  the  

only  way  to  create  units  that  are  attainable  for  low  to  moderate  income  earners.  However  the   unit  sizes  averaged  only  739  square  feet,  and  securing  demand  for  small  units  in  less  than  ideal   locations  could  present  an  additional  challenge  for  Options.  Predictably,  avoiding  premium  sites   and  more  expensive  municipality's  resulted  in  more  affordable  units,  but  the  demand  for   smaller  units  is  less  proven  in  those  markets,  and  the  extra  cost  of  transportation  associated   with  units  built  on  cheaper  sites  may  not  be  worth  the  trade-off  for  low  to  moderate  income   earners.        Recommendations     1. For  Metro  Vancouver  Municipalities  ­  Deferral  of  municipal  fees  and  charges   Affordable  housing  initiatives  should  target  every  point  on  the  housing  continuum,  from   homelessness  to  market  housing,  including  below-market  home  ownership.  Options  for  Homes   is  a  model  that  has  a  track  record  of  success  in  Canada,  and  the  creation  of  cost  effective  home   ownership  opportunities  in  the  short-term  could  alleviate  the  housing  stress  felt  by  many  

41  

households  in  the  long-term.  To  facilitate  the  creation  of  below  market  units  in  the  region,  and   to  further  make  those  units  affordable,  Metro  Vancouver  municipalities  should  provide   organizations  willing  to  produce  those  units  with  incentives  provided  they  can  demonstrate   those  incentives  will  be  passed  through  to  the  consumer.  Waiving  or  deferring  building  permit   fees,  development  permit  fees,  development  charges,  and  other  municipal  fees  and  charges   would  both  foster  investment  in  Options-style  developments,  and  provide  units  that  were  even   more  affordable  than  the  examples  provided  in  Sections  4  and  5.       2. For  Municipal,  Regional,  and  Provincial  Governments  ­  Leasing  of  surplus  lands   As  was  demonstrated  earlier,  high  land  costs  are  extremely  prohibitive  for  the  creation   of  below  market  units,  and  a  key  driver  of  unaffordability  in  the  region.  Instead  of  conveying   land  for  the  development  of  affordable  units,  governments  should  explore  the  possibility  of   leasing  surplus  lands  to  non-profit  organizations  for  the  creation  of  affordable  units.  The  public   sector  would  retain  ownership  of  the  land,  but  still  attract  investment  to  underused,  vacant  or   surplus  government  property  that  would  be  used  to  alleviate  the  issue  of  regional  affordability.   3.    For  Non-Profit  Housing  Providers  ­  Incorporating  2nd  Mortgages  into  private  developments   Given  the  lack  of  affordable  land  in  Metro  Vancouver,  and  the  prohibitively  high  cost  of  

acquiring  desirable  sites,  one  consideration  should  be  to  incorporate  some  elements  of  the   Options  model  into  existing  developments,  especially  the  2nd  mortgage.  This  would  create   affordable  units  in  a  market  building,  and  developers  could  consider  their  inclusion  as  a   community  amenity  contribution.  Habitat  for  Humanity  was  recently  able  to  incorporate  8-units   into  a  condominium  development  in  downtown  Toronto  (Hanes,  2013),  and  Vancouver  already   42  

uses  density  bonusing  to  fund  affordable  housing  initiatives.  This  approach  would  take   advantage  of  the  economies  of  scale  in  larger,  private  developments  while  providing  low  to   moderate  income  earners  with  access  to  the  housing  market.   4. For  Further  Research  ­  Determine  the  effectiveness  of  Options  for  Homes  affiliates   Options  for  Homes  has  now  expanded  internationally  and  domestically  and  affiliates  are   breaking  away  from  the  standard  Options  model.  Options  for  Homes  Greater  Vancouver  is   building  a  30-unit  building  in  Ladner,  a  distant  suburb  of  Vancouver,  and  Neighbourhood   Concepts,  located  in  Toronto,  is  building  mid-rise  buildings  instead  of  high-rises.  The  Canadian   Urban  Institute  study  from  2005  validated  the  original  Options  model,  but  further  research  on   the  effectiveness  of  Options  affiliates  would  help  future  affiliates  in  determining  where   affordability  can  be  created  and  how  to  overcome  barriers  in  different  jurisdictions  with   different  real  estate  markets.   5. For  Further  Research  ­  Outline  the  benefits  of  below-market  home  ownership  investment   Public  sector  officials  and  politicians  have  tough  decisions  to  make  regarding  the   disbursement  of  public  funds  for  housing,  and  homelessness  and  social  housing  are  always  a   priority;  targeting  moderate  income  earners  with  below  market  home  ownership  opportunities   is  a  harder  sell.  However  there  are  short,  medium,  and  long-term  benefits  to  providing  these   opportunities  to  households  previously  priced  out  of  the  housing  market,  and  the  return  on  a   small  investment  ­  leasing  surplus  lands  or  waiving  charges  and  fees  ­  can  be  substantial.  This   paper  was  meant  to  address  whether  or  not  affordable  units  could  be  produced,  and  not   necessarily  the  benefit  of  producing  those  units.  Outlining  the  benefits  for  households  who   43  

have  access  to  below  market  units,  and  how  those  benefits  impact  regional  housing  markets   would  assist  policy  makers  in  determining  when  and  where  the  creation  of  below  market  home   ownership  opportunities  is  a  worthy  investment.     

44  

Conclusion      Options  for  Homes  could  help  alleviate  affordability  in  Metro  Vancouver  as  part  of  a  

wider  strategy  to  improve  housing  affordability  for  all  households,  from  homelessness  to  home   owners.  Having  a  wider  impact  on  affordability  through  new  housing  is  an  obvious  challenge,   but  the  findings  demonstrate  Options-style  development  is  still  in  theory  likely  to  produce  units   at  a  more  affordable  price  than  similar  private  developments;  a  worthy  pursuit  to  policy  makers   in  a  region  with  such  salient  unaffordability.  "Below-market"  housing  that  isn't  guaranteed  to   be  sustained  over  the  long  term  is  less  likely  to  generate  appeal  amongst  policy  makers  that   sustained  "affordable"  housing,  but  nonetheless  gives  households  either  initial  access  to  the   housing  market,  or  access  to  larger  units  for  households  who  living  in  smaller,  less  appropriate   units.  Affordability  could  further  be  improved  by  leasing  surplus  lands  at  a  nominal  rate,  and  by   the  waiver  or  deferral  of  municipal  fees  and  charges  associated  with  residential  development.   Efforts  on  behalf  of  affordable  housing  advocates  and  Options  for  Homes  are  also  necessary,  as   the  benefits  of  below-market  home  ownership  need  to  be  clearly  outlined  if  public  subsidies   are  warranted.  The  Options  model  is  possible  without  subsidies,  but  could  be  targeted  to  meet   other  public  policy  objectives  with  financial  support  from  the  public  sector.     The  issue  of  housing  affordability  in  Metro  Vancouver  isn't  going  away,  but  housing  can   be  made  less  expensively  and  ownership  made  more  accessible  by  using  a  model  like  Options   for  Homes.  The  concern  for  the  region  shouldn't  only  be  the  one-third  of  residents  currently   experiencing  housing  stress,  but  the  thousands  more  that  will  experience  the  same  if  the  trend   of  affordability  isn't  reversed.    

45  

Appendix  ­  Pro  Forma  Assumptions  

Options  For  Homes  Feasibility
Hypothetical  Project  Statistics   Floors Units Average  Net  Unit  Size Gross  to  Net  Efficiency Total  Saleable  Area Gross  Residential  Area  (GRA) Blended  Construction  Cost  (per  s f)

Pro  Forma  Assumptions
Standard  tower  height  for  e ach  municipality  using  current  development   applications  for  e ach.   12  units  per  floor,  and  no  retail  component  therefore  units  on  all  floors. Average  unit  size  of  previous  Options  development  "Sherbourne"  (Canadian   Urban  Institute,  2005). Rule  of  Thumb   #  of  units  x   average  net  unit  size Total  saleable  area  /  Efficiency Butterfield  Development  Consultants  (http://www.bdconsultants.com/)  Cost   Index  gives  a  construction  cost  e stimate  based  on  type  of  development  and   location Options  typically  saves  up  to  15%  of  construction  costs  -  this  i s  a  modest   savings  e stimate. Construction  cost  per  sf  *  0.9  (savings)  *  GFA Rule  of  Thumb .55  *  Hard  Costs Savings  i s  based  on  $25,000/unit  marketing  cost  i n  private  development  vs.   $2,500/unit  i n  Options  development  (Labbe,  2014) Per  unit  savings  *  Total  units Average  taken  from  a  range  for  e ach  municipality,  range  from  BC  Business,   2013.   Land  cost  per  buildable  sq  ft  *  GRA Rule  of  Thumb  for  private,  2%  for  Options  (Canadian  Urban  Institute,  2005) Profit  %  *  (Land  +  Marketing  Savings  +  Soft  Costs  +  Hard  Costs   Rule  of  thumb  (Peiser  &  Hamilton,  2012,  p171).     2.82%  *  total  hard  costs   Hard  Costs  +  Soft  Costs  +  Marketing  Savings  +  Profit  +  Contingency TPC  /  Total  Saleable  Area

Savings  through  design  and  modest  finishes Total  Construction  Cost Soft  Cost  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Soft  Costs Marketing  Savings  (per  unit) Total  Marketing  Savings Land  Cost  (per  buildable  s f) Total  Land  Cost Developer  Profit  (%  of  project  cost) Total  Developer  Profit Project  Contingency  (%  of  Hard  Costs) Total  Project  Contingency Total  Project  Cost  (TPC)   Total  Project  Cost  per  s aleable  s quare  foot

  

46  

References  
   Butterfield  Development  Consultants  Ltd.  BDC's  Cost  Index  (2014)  Web,  accessed  5  March   2014.  http://www.bdconsultants.com/tools/costindex      CanEquity.  Mortgage  Rates  Comparison  (2014):  Web,  accessed  22  March  2014.   http://www.canequity.com/tools/mortgage-rates-comparison/      Clayton,  Frank.  "Government  Subsidies  to  Homeowners  vs  Renters  in  Ontario  and  Canada."   Prepared  for  the  Federation  of  Rental  Housing  Providers  of  Ontario.  August  30,  2010.      Duffus,  Gavin.  "Innovative  Affordable  Housing  Strategies  for  Vancouver."  Digital  Commons  @   Ryerson.  (2012):  Web,  accessed  13  March  2014.   <http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1978&context=dissertations>.      Glaeser,  Edward.  "Rethinking  the  Federal  Bias  Towards  Homeownership."  Cityscape:  A  Journal   of  Policy  Development  and  Research.  13.2  (2011):  Web,  accessed  13  March  2014.   <http://www.huduser.org/portal/periodicals/cityscpe/vol13num2/Cityscape_July2011_rethinki ng.pdf>.      Habitat  for  Humanity.  "Build  and  Ownership  Process."  Habitat  for  Humanity  Canada.  (2014):     Web,  accessed  13  March  2014.  <http://www.habitat.ca/en/how-we-help/building-and- ownership-process>.      Hanes,  T.  "Habitat  for  Humanity  families  are  the  winners  at  159  Wellesley".  The  Toronto  Star.   (Mar  7,  2013).  Web,  accessed  15  March  2014.   http://www.thestar.com/life/homes/2013/03/07/habitat_for_humanity_families_are_the_win ners_at_159_wellesley.html      Hawtrey,  Kim.  Affordable  Housing  Finance.  Hampshire,  UK:  Palgrave  MacMillan,  2009.  Print.     

47  

Home  Ownership  Alternatives.  What  We  Do.  2014:  Web,  accessed  12  March  2014.   http://www.hoacorp.ca/about-hoa/our-corporation/what-we-do      Jewkes,  M,  and  L  Delgadillo.  "Weaknesses  of  Housing  Affordability  Indices  Used  by   Practitioners."  Association  for  Financial  Counselling  and  Planning  Education.  (2010):  Web,   accessed  15  March  2014.   <http://www.afcpe.org/assets/pdf/volume_21_issue_1/jewkes_delgadillo.pdf>.      Labbe,  M.  (2014,  02  27).  Email  correspondence  with  G  Plant.      Metro  Vancouver,  2012.  What  Works:  Affordable  Housing  Initiatives  in  Metro  Vancouver   Municipalities.  Web,  accessed  13  March  2014.   <http://www.metrovancouver.org/planning/development/housingdiversity/WhatWorksDocs/C algaryHsg.pdf>.      Metro  Vancouver,  2014.  Metro  Vancouver  Housing  Data  Book.  Part  of  the  Sustainable  Region   Initiative  (2014):  Web,  accessed  March  13  2014.   http://www.metrovancouver.org/planning/development/housingdiversity/HousingDataBookD ocuments/MV_Housing_Data_Book.pdf      Options  for  Homes.  (2012).  Why  Options?  Web,  accessed  13  March  2014.   http://www.optionsforhomes.ca/why_options/      Options  for  Homes.  (2014).  How  to  build  cost-effective  housing.  Print  copy.      Parry,  J.  (2013,  09  3).  "An  Affordable  High".  BC  Business  (2013):  Retrieved  from   http://www.bcbusiness.ca/real-estate/an-affordable-high      Real  Estate  Weekly.  Condo  Maintenance  Fees  by  Size  and  Age  of  Unit  (2013):  Web,  accessed   March  9  2014.     http://www.rew.ca/news/condo-maintenance-fees-size-age-unit      48  

Statistics  Canada,  2011  National  Household  Survey,  Statistics  Canada  Catalogue  no.  99-014- X2011031.      Statistics  Canada.  2013.  Vancouver,  CMA,  British  Columbia  (Code  933)  (table).  National   Household  Survey  (NHS)  Profile.  2011  National  Household  Survey.  Statistics  Canada   Catalogue  no.  99-004-XWE.  Ottawa.  Released  September  11,  2013.      Weicher,  J.,  &  Katz,  B.  "Should  Congress  Limit  Mortgage  Deduction?"  Marketwatch  (March  22,   2014):  Web,  accessed  March  24  2014.   http://www.marketwatch.com/story/should-congress-limit-mortgage-deduction-2014-03-22     

49  


