GROWING AN ARCHITECTURE: AN EXPLORATION OF FORM AND MATERIALITY AS CATALYSTS TO REURBANIZE AND EMPOWER RURAL TANZANIAN COMMUNITIES

by Kara Green Bachelor of Architectural Science, Ryerson University, 2011

A thesis | project presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Architecture in the Program of Architecture

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2013 © Kara Green 2013

ii

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

Kara Green

iii

Growing an Architecture: An Exploration of Form and Materiality as Catalysts to Reurbanize and Empower Rural Tanzanian Communities Kara Green Master of Architecture 2013 Architecture Program, Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

Tanzanian rural migrants moving to cities in search of opportunity have triggered the country's rapid urbanization. Many migrants, particularly women, are not empowered by the rural-to-urban move and suffer from a degraded quality of life. The rural landscape suffers environmental degradation due to deforestation resulting from the need to supply materials to the rapidly growing urban fabric. This thesis asserts that balance must be achieved between urban and rural development. It posits that balance will be attained by empowering rural communities through the provision of an architectural program, which responds to the communities needs, such as a clinic, primary school, and women's empowerment centre. The research explores the relationships between the contemporary discourses on development, on vernacular architecture, on the changing nature of the profession, and most importantly, on the catalytic potential of form and materiality. The above will be put to test in the representative community of North Muleba in rural Tanzania.

iv

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank my family for their continued support throughout my architectural education. I am truly grateful for their motivation, input, and patience. They have continuously guided me towards pursuing my goals. I would also like to thank my supervisor Dr. Ian MacBurnie, and second reader Dr. Russell Richman for their time and mentoring which has allowed me to pursue my interests during my thesis year. I wish to express my gratitude and thanks to John van Nostrand of Architects Alliance and Richard Tibandege of the Canadian High Commission of Tanzania, and Reihaneh Mozaffari, who have all generously offered their guidance during the research process. Finally, thank you and the best of luck to my friends and colleagues who have been my support group from the start of my architectural education.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Author's Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Figures List of Appendices   iii iv v vi-vii viii-xvi xvii 1-9

Introduction

Part One: Why does Architecture Matter?
1. Why say no to Building? 12-17 18-29 1.1.2 Architecture in a Context of Development  Versus the Context of Development



1.1.1 Can Architecture Empower?         

2. Why say yes to Architecture? 30-32 33-37 38-40 41-43 Tanzania? 1.2.2 Tanzania: Rural to Urban: diverse to homogenous 1.2.3 Why the Rural Matters 1.2.4 How does the Rural become an option of  choice?

1.2.1 Why does Architecture matter for rural 



Part Two: Proposition
3 The Vernacular in an Urbanizing World 2.3.1 Vernacular influence on the Contemporary 2.3.2 Vernacular Elements 2.3.3 Limitations of the Vernacular  46-51 52-58 59-61



   

4 The Promise of Bamboo 62-64

2.4.1 History, Application and Relevance

vi

  

2.4.2 Bamboo as a way of Building 2.4.3 Air Lightness and Flexibility: Bamboo and its  structural and aesthetic capabilities in contemporary practice

65-67 68-69



5 The Unearthing of Mud 70-71 73-73  74-75 2.5.2 Mud as a way of Building 2.5.3 Ground, Heaviness, and Solidity: Earth  Works and their structural and aesthetic  capabilities in contemporary practice

2.5.1 History, Application, and Relevance      

Part Three: Test Case: The Muleba North Village
6 Muleba North as a Test Site 78-79 80-85 86-94 95-97 3.6.2 Ujamaa 3.6.3 Muleba limitations and opportunities 3.6.4 How can Architecture empower Muleba?



3.6.1 Test Site    

7 Design Proposal 98-100 101-116  117-123 3.7.2 A Layout of Ideas 3.7.3 A Day in the Life: post-facto

3.7.1 Design Strategies   

Appendix
A Research and Process B Design Iterations C Research Models   124-137 138-155 156-159 160-164

   

Bibliography



vii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1 Source: Figure 2 Soure: Figure 3 Source: Figure 4 Source: Figure 5 Source: Figure 6 Source: Figure 7 Source: Figure 8 Source: Figure 9 Source: Figure 10 Source: Figure 11 Source: Figure 12 Source: Figure 13 Source: Figure 14 Source: Figure 15 Source: Figure 16 Source Local Ghanian Fabrics woven through roof structure in Kpedze Kara Green: Personal photograph Location of Accra Image adjusted from http://basketsofafrica.com/images/map_ghana_lg.gif Informal Market and Office Buliding Juxtaposition in Accraa, Ghana http://www.flickr.com/photos/7549616@N06/ Finished school in Kprdze, Ghana Kara Green: ersonal photograph Classroom interior, Kpedze, Ghana Kara Green: Personal photograph Breeze block details, Kpedze, Ghana Kara Green: Personal photograph School courtyard, Kpedze, Ghana Kara Green: Personal photograph Scool section illustration by Mitch Popa, http://www.ryerson.ca/~imacburn/Portfolio/Ian%20 MacBurnie%20Portfolio_lowrez.pdf One month of construction on Ghana DIagram by Kara Green Render of classroom interior by Francis Kere for a college in Gando http://www.archdaily.com/222057/global-holcim-award-2012-winners-announced/8-249/ Clinic room in Haiti http://nursing322sp10.files.wordpress.com/2010/03/the-emergency-room-ofthe-haitian-hospital-hueh-in-port-au-prince-april-2009.jpg Butaro Hospital in Rwanda by Mass Design Group http://www.massdesigngroup.org/our-work/projects/butaro-hospital.html Vernacular architecture af Aswan at Nubia Architecture for the Poor by Hassan Fathy Courtyard of New Gourne home by Hassan Fathy Architecture for the Poor by Hassan Fathy Hassan Fathy learned from Doxiadis Architects and planners http://www.stoutbooks.com/cgi-bin/stoutbooks.cgi/68087 Book cover Architecture for the Poor by Hassan Fathy http://www.bibliovault.org/BV.book.epl?ISBN=9780226239163

viii

Figure 17 Source: Figure 18 Source: Figure 19 Source: Figure 20 Source: Figure 21 Source: Figure 22 Source: Figure 23 Source: Figure 24 Source: Figure 25 Source: Figure 26 Source: Figure 27 Source: Figure 28 Source: Figure 29 Source: Figure 30 Source: Figure 31 Source: Figure 32 Source:

Habitat Forum Paper Pavilions http://blog.ounodesign.com/2009/08/13/paper-architecture-for-habitat-1976-by-arthur-erickson/ Paper Pavilion interior http://blog.ounodesign.com/2009/08/13/paper-architecture-for-habitat-1976-by-arthur-erickson/ Primary school in Gando by Francis Kere http://www.kere-architecture.com/projects/primary-school-gando/ City growth map and chart Diagram by Kara Green Zoom in maps of Dar es Salaam Diagram by Kara Green Formal roads in Dar es Salaam Diagram by Kara Green (map from google maps) Formal buildings in Dar es Salaam Diagram by Kara Green (map from google maps) Informal paths and markets in Dar es Salaam Diagram by Kara Green (map from google maps) Informal slums and vendors in Dar es Salaam Diagram by Kara Green (map from google maps) Map of vegetation in Dar es Salaam Diagram by Kara Green (map from google maps) Overlay of Formal and Informal Dar es Salaam Diagram by Kara Green (map from google maps) Slums within Dar es Salaam http://backoftheenvelope.britishcouncil/-mI6QVGUgtTQ/S9WP6uRrIRI/ AAAAAAAACE4/6LZfH0awvrw/s1600/DSC05216.JPG Lack of Infrastructure in Dar es Salaam http://www.flickr.com/photos/gtzecoscan/3233303465/ migrants set up informal street vendors http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-BcjjA Rural Tanzanian village http://photos.travelblog.org/Photos/18015/103002/f/771270-Rural-Tanzania-0. jpg Rural women and children fetch drinking water from afar http://www.nature.org/cs/groups/webcontent/@web/@africa/documents/media/carrying-water-tanzania-720x40.jpg

ix

Figure 33 Source: Figure 34 Source: Figure 35a Source: Figure 35b Source: Figure 36 Source: Fugure 37 Source: Figure 38 Source: Figure 39 Source: Figure 40 Source: Figure 41 Source: FIgure 42 Source: Figure 43 Source: Figure 44 Source: Figure 45 Source: Figure 46 Source: Figure 47: Source

Rural Tanzanian women farming as main source of income http://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/gender-equality-and-womens-empowerment/addressing-gender-programming/agriculture Urbanize the rural diagrams Diagram by Kara Green Bamboo Swatch http://i476.photobucket.com/albums/rr125/boogee48/bamboo-2.jpg Earth Swatch http://www.sirewall.com/wp-content/themes/sirewall/images/wallpapers/NkMip-Texture-1280x1024.jpg Map showing Aswan, Eqypt Diagram by Kara Green Domed vernacular of Aswan Architecture for the Poor by Hassan Fathy Marketplace courtyard by Hassan Fathy in New Gourna http://www.tandfonline.com/action/showPopup?citid=citart1&id=F0004&doi=10.1080/13602360903357120 Map of New Caledonia Diagram by Kara Green Jean Marie Tjibaou Centre by Renzo Piano http://www.architectural-review.com/Pictures/web/t/q/e/Nou__05_380.jpg Jean Marie Tjibaou Centre by Renzo Piano http://www0.artflakes.com/artwork/products/800243/poster/oc09-wbi0195. jpg Jean Marie Tjibaou Centre, Renzo Piano http://assets.inhabitat.com/wp-content/blogs.dir/1/files/2010/07/Tjibaou-Cultural-Center-1.jpg Wall section through Renzo Piano's Tjibaou centre Diagram by Kara Green Diagram showing how Tjibaou centre is informed by vernacular and nature Diagram by Kara Green Le Corbusier's plan for the Radiant City, 1924 http://faqonespionage.wordpress.com/2012/09/10/la-ville-radieuse-1924-lecorbusier/ Layout of typical Haya vernacular village Diagram by Kara Green, adapted from Lwamayanga, C Interior layout of Haya mushonge Diagram by Kara Green, adapted from Lwamayanga, C Interior layout of Haya muchonge

x

Figure 48 Source: Figure 49 Source: Figure 50 Source: Figure 51 Source: Figure 52 Source: Figure 53 Source: Figure 54 Source: Figure 55 Source: Figure 56 Source: FIgure 57 Source: Figure 58 Source: Figure 59 Source: Figure 60 Source: Figure 61 Source: Figure 62 Source:

Diagram by Kara Green, adapted from Lwamayanga, C Mud wall in Nigeria http://apollo5.bournemouth.ac.uk/africanlegacy/images/kanowalls.jpg Reed wall in Uganda http://www.ebay.com/itm/1915-Print-Uganda-Africa-Natives-Reed-FenceConstruction-Ethnic-Tribal-Building-/370857453737?pt=LH_DefaultDomain_0&hash=item5658d3a8a9 Natale Ruins, http://baber.servehttp.com/Ingrid/Africa/pages/ruins.htm South Africa Evolution of Mushonge Vernacular Diagram by Kara Green Vernacular mushonge cap structure http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8307/8000434911_a0d299b780.jpg Haya mushonge, Kagera, Tanzania http:// images.travelpod.com/tripwow/photos4/ta-055b-e7982706/2_13378661126-tpfil02aw-19841.jpg Tanzania deforestation http://www4.ncsu.edu/~mtcunnin/World%20Forestry/Tanzania-deforestation. jpg Women carrying wood to markets http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-Qv_LbBvb8mY/T7QYh1g4zAI/AAAAAAAACEE/ rC7Cx_xCjA0/s320/carrywood_meru.jpg Deforestation rate map http://www.opednews.com/populum/uploaded/african-deforestation-rat es-2000-2795-20080611-62.jpg Bamboo map of Tanzania Diagram by Kara Green based of data from http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/x6700e/X6700E01.htm plant structure Diagram by Kara Green adapted from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0950061811004612 Bamboo Uses Diagram by Kara Green Guadua house in Colombia Giant American Bamboo in Vernacular Architecture of Colombia and Ecuador by Parson, J. Brick on bamboo siding in Ecuador Giant American Bamboo in Vernacular Architecture of Colombia and Ecuador by Parson, J.

xi

Figure 63 Source: Figure 64 Source: Figure 65 Source: Figure 66 Source: Figure 67 Source: Figure 68 Source: Figure 69 Source: Figure 70 Source: Figure 71 Source: Figure 72 Source: Figure 73 Source: Figure 74 Source: Figure 75 Source: Figure 76 Source: Figure 77 Source: Figure 78 Source: Figure 79 Source: Figure 80 Source:

Bamboo roof building in India Traditional Buildings of India by Cooper, I Bamboo vernacular joinery Designing and Building with Bamboo by Janssen, J. Bamboo vernacular joinery Designing and Building with Bamboo by Janssen, J. Bamboo vernacular joinery Designing and Building with Bamboo by Janssen, J. Bamboo vernacular joinery Designing and Building with Bamboo by Janssen, J. Bamboo vernacular joinery Designing and Building with Bamboo by Janssen, J. Map of Colombia Diagram by Kara Green Assembly diagram for Zeri pavilion Diagram by Kara Green Joint and foundation details for Zeri pavillion http://bambus.rwth-aachen.de/eng/reports/zeri/Skizzeg.jpg Zeri Pavilion Overhang http://bambus.rwth-aachen.de/eng/reports/zeri/Skizzeg.jpg Zeri Pavilion Jorg Staam http://bambus.rwth-aachen.de/eng/reports/zeri/neuebilder/ansicht-probebau. jpg Map of Thailand Diagram by Kara Green Bamboo wall details from IBUKU in Soe Ker Tie Bambu Bamboo wall details from IBUKU in Soe Ker Tie Bambu Vitruvius earth brick The ten books on Architecture by Vitruvius Vernacular arches at Aswan Architecture for the Poor by Hassan Fathy Mud brick kiln in India Traditional Buildings of India by Cooper, I. Stacking of mud brick Traditional Buildings of India by Cooper, I.

xii

Figure 81 Source: Figure 82 Source: Figure 83 Source: Figure 84 Source: Figure 85 Source: Figure 86 Source: Figure 87 Source: Figure 88 Source: Figure 89 Source: Figure 90 Source: FIgure 91 Source: Figure 92 Source: Figure 93 Source: Figure 94 Source: Figure 95 Source: Figure 96: Source Figure 97 Source:

infill mud brick wall in India Traditional Buildings of India by Cooper, I. Mason in New Gourna utilizing the vernacular techniques http://www.tandfonline.com/action/showPopup?citid=citart1&id=F0001&doi=10.1080/13602360903357120 Masons creating arches learning from the Aswan vernacular Architecture for the Poor by Hassan Fathy Elevation of New Gourna with vernacular influences Diagram by Kara Green Plan of classroom in Gando Diagram by Kara Green adapted from http://urbantent.blogspot.ca/2009/09/ gando-primary-school-francis-kere.html Women creating mud floor in Gando http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_HgJzxI_xGsI/SrLJYyhXp4I/AAAAAAAACj8/FYoJTdQ54cY/s400/francis+Kere+Architecture+10.jpg School in Gando, Burkina Faso, by Francis Kere http://www.architectural-review.com/Journals/8/Files/2010/6/4/kere.jpg Bamboo line drawing Diagram by Kara Green Villa Savoye, Le Corbusier http://www.bluffton.edu/~sullivanm/france/poissy/savoye/bannerindex.jpg Five points of architecture Le Corbusier http://inderc.blogspot.ca/2012/04/seismic-regulations-versus-modern.html First President of Tanzania, Julius Nyerere https://newuh.files.wordpress.com/2012/06/photo-of-kwame-nkrumah.jpg President Nyerere on the cover of TIME magazine http://themasokproject.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/nyerere-on-time-magazine-cover.jpg Tanzania Resource maps Diagram by Kara Green Lake Victoria's degradation has caused food scarcity among Tanzanians Still from Darwin's Nightmare Water hyacinth at Lake Victoria http://www.fredhoogervorst.com/oni.app/local/upload/02407d.jpg Map of Tanzania highlighting Kagera region Diagram by Kara Green Map of Kagera site zoomed in Diagram by Kara Green

xiii

Figure 98 Source: Figure 99 Source: Figure 100 Source: Figure 101 Source: Figure 102 Source: Figure 103 Source: Figure 104 Source: Figure 105 Source: Figure 106 Source: Figure 107 Source: Figure 108 Source: Figure 109 Source: Figure 110 Source: Figure 111 Source: Figure 112 Source: Figure 113 Source: Figure 114 Source: Figure 115 Source:

Map of Lake Victoria with Muleba Diagram by Kara Green Muleba map Diagram by Kara Green Site in Mulbea North Diagram by Kara Green Activity pattern map: school Diagram by Kara Green Activity pattern map: Leisure Diagram by Kara Green Activity pattern map: food/ water Diagram by Kara Green Activity pattern map: livelihood Diagram by Kara Green A day in the Life of a woman North Muleba Diagram by Kara Green Climate of Muleba North: rainfall Diagram by Kara Green Climate of Muleba North: wind Diagram by Kara Green Town and country magnet by Howard http://www.library.cornell.edu/Reps/DOCS/howard1.gif Strategy diagram 1 Diagram by Kara Green Strategy diagram 2 Diagram by Kara Green Strategy diagram 3 Diagram by Kara Green Strategy diagram 4 Diagram by Kara Green Site plan Diagram by Kara Green Overall render Diagram by Kara Green Floor plan Diagram by Kara Green

xiv

FIgure 116 Source: Figure 117 Source: Figure 118 Source: Figure 119 Source: Figure 120 Source: Figure 121 Source: Figure 122 Source: Figure 123 Source: Figure 124 Source: Figure 125 Source: Figure 126 Source: Figure 127 Source: Figure 128 Source: Figure 129 Source: Figure 130 Source: Figure 131 Source: Figure 132 Source: Figure 133 Source:

Circulation Diagram by Kara Green West elevation Diagram by Kara Green East elevation Diagram by Kara Green North elevation Diagram by Kara Green Passive strategy diagram Diagram by Kara Green Passive strategy section Diagram by Kara Green Health strategy diagram Diagram by Kara Green Exploded axonometric Diagram by Kara Green Step one Diagram by Kara Green Step two Diagram by Kara Green Step three Diagram by Kara Green Step four Diagram by Kara Green Step 5 Diagram by Kara Green Step 6 Diagram by Kara Green Column to truss connection details Diagram by Kara Green Roof detail section Diagram by Kara Green Roof detail Diagram by Kara Green Column to beam connection detail Diagram by Kara Green

xv

Figure 134 Source: Figure 135 Source: Figure 136 Source: FIgure 137 Source: Figure 138 Source: Fugure 139 Source: Figure 140 Source: Figure 141 Source: Figure 142 Source Figure 143 Source: Figure 144 Source: Figure 145 Source: Figure 146 Source:

Column to beam connection detail Diagram by Kara Green Growth strategy diagram Diagram by Kara Green based off of http://www.guaduabamboo.com/bamboo-growing-habits.html Typical clump bamboo Diagram by Kara Green Entry render Diagram by Kara Green Courtyard render Diagram by Kara Green Clinic render Diagram by Kara Green Classroom render: variation 1 Diagram by Kara Green Classroom render: variation 2 Diagram by Kara Green School render Diagram by Kara Green Market render Diagram by Kara Green Courtyard render Diagram by Kara Green Clinic at night Diagram by Kara Green Overall render Diagram by Kara Green

xvi

LIST OF APPENDICES
Appendix A Research and Design Process Work Appendix B Project Design Iterations Appendix C Study Models  156-159 138-155 124-137

xvii

INTRODUCTION
In the fall of 2008, I was presented with a tremendous opportunity. At the time I did not realize the extent to which it would fuel my pursuit in the exploration of architecture's ability to empower. Along with a team from Ryerson, I began to participate in a series of workshops that would lead to the design and construction of a kindergarten school in Kpedze Todze, a small community in the Volta region of Ghana, West Africa. The collaborative approach witnessed remarkable events in both the design process and construction phases, which ultimately led to a community that gained, not only a new school, but also new infrastructures, optimism, and above all opportunity. The team led by Professor Ian MacBurnie met weekly in Toronto and later travelled to Ghana. It consisted of students from Ryerson's architecture, film studies, fashion design, and early childhood education programs.  We began the project with little knowledge of the site and context other than viewing a few photos of the existing conditions, which we had previously received. These photos included visuals of a relatively flat vegetated land with a small derelict tin roof structure to shelter the children from rain. Our mission from the beginning was to avoid entering with any preconceived notions of what a kindergarten school should be according to our traditional North American methods and standards, and dive into a large body of research that pertained to local customs, materials, climates, politics, and skill sets. Most importantly, we decided from the outset of the design process to strive for an architecture that was the communities own, It was to be something that would stand the test of time and could be maintained internally from their available resources. It would be a piece of educational infrastructure that provided much more for the children than what they currently had access to. The team, still working from Toronto, analyzed case studies, which exemplified the spirit of our pursuit for Kpedze. Some of these case studies were the work of Francis Kere, an African architect who does not just provide buildings but infrastructure, specifically for education in Africa (Kere Architecture).

1

Materiality was deeply researched, particularly ways in which we could build as environmentally and socially sustainable as possible were of primary concern. The architectural team devised a series of possible plans and concepts before travelling that incorporated the research and sought to address the particular needs of the community. However, As well researched as the team was prior to travelling to Ghana, nothing could have prepared us for what we were to discover about the realities on site and within the community when operating with the context of a developing foreign country. We first arrived in the capital city of Accra to meet with local engineers and further discuss design development. Upon exploring the city it was noticeable that its infrastructure and architecture was typical of many large African cities, consisting of a mix between formal and informal settlements. Much of the fabric is comprised of modernist style buildings, which were first imposed by British Administration. This approach to capital city planning and architecture is still typical of African governments to implement even post colonialism. The informal aspect of Accra exists on the ground in between these western style developments and takes the shape of open markets and slum style residential dwellings as seen in the shown informal market place. It was apparent that formal infrastructure and development could not support the city growth occurring from those who likely flocked to the city for economic opportunity. Make shift stands formed small shops and market vendors. Some merchants, who may not have been able to access specific resources, had a mobile approach to business, which allowed them to sell items on the side of the highway during hours of heavy traffic. The fabric of the city, and the transience of its informal development was representative of the entrepreneurial spirit of Accra, however a certain quality of life could not be provided through its existing formal infrastructures. Once we left Accra and reached the more rural communities, the formal government implemented architecture began to dissolve leaving the same transient informal architecture we had witnessed within the cities voids. Many of the shelters were thatched roof huts, however some of the relatively wealthier villages such as Kpedze, contained a handful concrete block housing. Settlements overall were much more sprawling, resulting in greater distances separating people from needs. Schools, markets, and health care were often
Figure 4 Finished school building in Kpedze Figure 3 Informal market and formal office building in Accra, Ghana Figure 2 Location of Ghana Ghana

N

2

only accessible in the neighbouring communities at best. When the group first arrived in Kpedze at our site we were greeted by a large mango tree. One could see beyond it lay the open field on which we were to build the new kindergarten school. Quick observation revealed the landscape already included efforts to support educational development within the community. An upper years school sat to the far left of the site, likely developed and built from an international humanitarian group effort. The structure was a narrow linear brick and tin roof building, which opened onto a smaller brush filled field. Inside, the classrooms were hot, dark and
Figure 5 Classroom interior

noisy. The existing kindergarten structure that we immediately connected to the photographs we viewed back in Toronto lay to the immediate right of the mango tree at the edge of our construction zone. It was far more dilapidated than we had expected, with little protection from the regions periodic torrential downpours of rain, and large holes covering the floor surface. The aspect of our arrival that will be focused on for purposes of understanding contemporary development work, and perhaps a driving force behind the pursuit of this exploration, was one inauspicious element of the site that foreshadowed the difficulties of development work the team was to experience. Resulting from a great disconnect between western efforts and Southern needs, a half complete ruin of a school structure had laid its foundations near the upper years school. The structure was likely a result of well-intentioned attempts to provide educational facilities to the community, however it had been abandoned as a possible result of a lack of secure funding. It soon became clear that our team was to overcome resistance that had been acquired as a defense mechanism toward failed foreign promise. Before construction was to begin, and if it was to begin, the team had to communicate with the chief and elders of Kpedze Todze to assess the needs of the community and expectations of the project. The team and the elders met in a local residence that included a central courtyard, which is typical of Ghanaian residential dwellings. They were skeptical of our proposals and one could understand these attitudes due to the abandoned artefacts on site. It became more evident that establishing trust and relationships with key com-

Figure 6 Breeze block details

Figure 7 Finished porch of classroom

munity members was essential to achieving the project's goals and facilitating

3

the successful outcome of the construction process. Once the project was discussed at a final meeting between the Ryerson team and the elders of Kpedze, plans were revealed to the local community committee members and permission was granted to move forward with the project. The final agreement made at the meeting was to construct a kindergarten school, including classrooms, offices, latrines, and a courtyard, to be completed in phases based on different rounds of funding. The first phase, to be completed during our teams month long stay in Ghana, included two classrooms, latrines, and the beginnings of a foundation for the remainder of the complex. The collaboration between faculties at Ryerson continued to incorporate the residents of Kpedze as we began construction. Local tradesmen and community members were involved in the entire process in the hopes that they were to be rewarded a true sense of ownership towards their new school. We worked with the tradesmen to learn about the local building strategies and materials, and together came up with new and innovative ways to address the needs and wants of the community. Weeks of work digging foundations, shovelling aggregate, pouring concrete, etc., would not have been accomplished if not for the various Ryerson faculties, community elders and chief, local workers, children who encouraged the team throughout the days, and most importantly, the women that volunteered their free time pouring endless amounts of concrete into the schools formwork. As the school came to be, the other Ryerson faculties were simultaneously working on all aspects of the project. The interior design team constructed new furniture from wood only to avoid rusting and promote longevity. The early childhood education students worked with the existing schoolteachers to help them achieve their own goals as successful instructors. Two fashion student's crafted new uniforms for each child that was to attend the school with the help of a local seamstress. As this entire collaborative processes unfolded, Ryerson film students were there to provide documentation of the experience. As a result of these efforts and determination, the construction process was a celebration experienced by all of those who were involved. As for the architecture of the kindergarten complex itself, simplicity and

4

avoiding over complication was key. Within an approach that was simplified, the physical presence of the project truly came from the details of the project. The two classrooms opened up into the courtyard across from one another yet were spaced far enough apart to reduce noise distraction. The courtyard was a rethinking of the existing rural fabric and the use of courtyard spaces within residential dwellings. This promoted good ventilation, day lighting, and maximizing comfort for the teachers and children within it overall.The articulate exposed roof structure peeled away from the building mass towards the rear of the classrooms, which allowed for warm light and cool breeze to flood the spaces. Colourful fabrics, expressive of the community's vibrant culture, were woven throughout this roof structure to aid in diffusing the sound of rainfall. Woven fabrics were also used as door coverings that could be easily and locally replaced over time. The block walls were parged and painted over with bright colours and the interior walls were furnished with child height blackboards repurposed from the old school structure. The members of the community were all instrumental in achieving these details. Finally, a veranda from each classroom looked out into the courtyard where the finishing touch to phase one was planted. The learning tree would grow with the school, and its phases of construction. Once the team departed from Kpedze changes, both social and physical, began to occur within the community. The enrolment numbers for the kindergarten school increased tremendously and a new infrastructure replaced the worn dirt path leading into the village. During the project's construction process and its life after completion, it began to be understood, that the true architecture of development has intentions reaching far beyond providing the bare minimum necessity as most physically present projects do. These intentions include a desire to empower people by maximizing their potential in educational pursuits, health, and economic activities. Architecture may not be a means to an end or a definite answer to the problems faced within the developing world, however, it can be a vehicle for change and empowerment. The architectural response that the team provided surpassed an attempt at simply being useful, seeing as it is buildings that aim to be merely useful (Tschumi, 1994, p. Intro.). In Architecture and Disjunction, Bernard Tschumi differentiates architecture from building by explicitly stating what architecture cannot be without and what it most definitely is not, he states,

5

"There is no architecture without program, without action, without event...architecture is autonomous, never pure form, and similarly, that architecture is not a matter of style that can be reduced into a language" (Tschumi, 1994, p. Intro). The team's architectural efforts in Ghana were primarily an architecture of event, which starkly contrasted the "buildings" existing on site that were precedent to it. These experiences, in particular the success of the Kpedze project post-construction, have illustrated the extent to which architecture has the ability to empower those with dire needs in lesser developed nations. The experience gained has resulted in a personal need to pursue further exploration on maximizing architecture's potential to empower. It has become evident that there is not so much a shortage of development work in the form of buildings, however there is a clear shortage of architecture. There is indeed a very real need now for "architecture" now in Sub-Saharan Africa, and as architects we have a specific role to be revolutionaries. In the writings of Tschumi there are three possible positions the architect can assume. The first is the conservative who simply translates the existing political and economic priorities of society and gives it form, for the purpose of this thesis we will name this building.The second is to act as critics by using our practice to reveal the contradictory aspects of society.The third role, and the role that I advocate for the architect to pursue when divulging into this realm of practice, is to use our acquired environmental knowledge, which understands cities and the mechanics of architecture, to empower by seeking new social and urban structures, facilitating change by utilizing architecture as the vehicle (Online Etymology Dictionary, 2012).

natural daylighting passive ventilation

Figure 8 Section looking through classroom in Kpedze

6

The team flew from Toronto to Accra, Ghana

A month in the life of the Ryerson students and faculty in Kpedze...

We travelled by bus back and forth from Ho to Kpedze

In Accra, design meetings were held

Pre Construction, the team met with community elders in Kpedze

The existing school was a tin roof shelter

The site was an empty field with old concrete blocks

The team dug the foundation

Figure 9 A month in construction

7

local women helped to pour concrete

pouring the foundation

ready to begin laying block

pouring the flooring

locals and the Ryerson team stopped for lunch...

...while Kpedze school children provided song and dance

laying of the concrete blocks

incorporation of breeze block

Figure 9 A month in construction

8

assembly of roof

locals worked to construct roof

enclosures were hand woven in traditional craft

the building elevation was parged

near completion...

the school children celebrate the community's new addition

final touches to the interior

raising of the flags

Figure 9 A month in construction

9

01

Why does Architecture matter?

10

11

CHAPTER 1 Why say no to Building?
1.1.1 Can Architecture Empower? An architecture of empowerment, is not simply limited to architecture's physical manifestation. Through the lens of Tschumi, and as alluded to in 1.1, we can differentiate architecture from building as architecture never being separate from program, action, or event. It is never pure form (Tschumi, 1994, p. Intro). As a result, I argue the true architecture of development is one that unites this larger scope of what constitutes practice and the idea of program, event, and performance over pure form for forms sake to facilitate empowerment. This thesis exploration advocates for architecture's ability to empower rural communities, specifically women in the global south, particularly within Tanzania. It seeks to determine how a rural architecture may come together materially to facilitate sustainable rural growth within Tanzania, facilitating improved health, education, and employment opportunities for rural dwellers. This ultimately gives an individual the choice to remain in agrarian areas. For this reason, human dignity through choice, education, employment, and above all, health, architecture matters. But how does one differentiate architecture from building? Tschumi in Architecture and Disjunction, writes about Le Corbusier and Robert Venturi's position on the architectural condition of the 20th century and its present disjunction between use, form, and social values, they argue this condition is highly architectural rather than being pejorative (Tschumi, 1994, p. 78). Form for form's sake does not embody empowerment, but rather architecture must utilize form to allow architecture to oppose existing social values, or political structures. The very thing that makes architecture, or rather, architecture that has the ability to be revolutionary, is one that negates itself. It is in contrast to what society expects of it, and it negates itself by allowing intentions of event program and action to take precedence (Tschumi, 1994, p. 45).

01

12

To exemplify this thinking,Tschumi uses the example of Russian revolutionary social condensers. It was thought that having small private living spaces and community kitchens would promote peace and social interaction, and as a result act as the mold for society. He points out that the problem with this approach is in assuming that changing behavior through spatial organization will result in a major socio-economic chance in society.The behavioral changes may be temporary (Tschumi, 1994, p. 45).There was however, still a search for a more revolutionary approach to architecture. But it came from negating the hierarchy of form. Tschumi wrote of the revolutionary architects, "Their attempts to find a socially relevant, if not revolutionary, role for architecture culminated in the years following the May 1968 events with "guerrilla" buildings, whose symbolic and exemplary value lay in their seizure of urban space and not in the design of what was built." (Tschumi, 1994, p. 45) Corbusier also defined architecture as having a purpose and intention beyond its utilitarian means. In Towards a New Architecture he writes, "Architecture is a thing of art, a phenomenon of the emotions, lying outside questions of construction and beyond them. The purpose of construction is to MAKE THINGS HOLD TOGETHER; of architecture TO MOVE US" (Corbusier, 1931, p. 23). In the context of this thesis, to move is to emancipate those whom are living a sub-standard life using architecture as a support or enabler. At the heart of this empowerment is the vision, and a way for architects to materialize this is through the plan. Corbusier has three reminders for the architect, which break the architecture itself into three elements; mass, surface, and plan. The plan he defines as the generator of both mass and surface, and hence he writes, "The plan is the generator without plan, you have lack of order, and willfulness. The plan holds in itself the essence of

13

sensation. The great problems of tomorrow dictated by collective necessities, put the question of "plan" in new form". (Corbusier, 1931, p. 9) Another differentiation between the architecture of development and simply put building is the act of translation over transferal. Transferring architectural ideas does not necessarily result in an architecture. The majority of the existing building stock being constructed within Tanzanian cities and villages, are currently rectilinear in form and utilize "modern" materials such as concrete and steel. This "style" of building is therefore representative of western influenced architecture, and therefore western social ideals and technological advancements are missing from the equation when placed in a Tanzanian context. These types of buildings generally lack and significant adaptation once they have been imported. Francis Kere, Burkina Faso native architect, states that African cities are under pressure to be contemporary and they also feel pressured into copying buildings that do not work in their climate or culture (Kere).Translation however, has the ability to be sensitive to context. To have an architectural vision one must understand the body of work undertaken by architects within the global South prior to intervening.The vernacular of that context must also be known. Once these areas are analyzed, the ideas behind them, rather than being rejected or copied, are translated and adapted to suit the current context. If architecture, opposed to building, is never devoid of program and events, and the architect aims at being revolutionary rather than conforming to existing societal expectations, then it absolutely bears the potential of empowerment. Not to be mistaken, buildings do provide a certain opportunity that would not be otherwise present. A dimly lit classroom, much like the ones previously mentioned from the visit to Kpedze Todze, still provides a space in which children can go to school and receive an education. A clinic may be unsanitary due to poor ventilation and spike disease transmission, but without it there would be no facility at all to receive the appropriate medical care one may need. This is the primary and most important differentiation factor between building and architecture. Architecture aims to maximize opportunity and potential, thus rendering it capable to be a vehicle for empowerment

14

itself. But can architecture empower? Is it capable of emancipating? Can it be revolutionary? Architecture has the ability to optimize and empower, because unlike a building it has quantitative and qualitative properties. Architecture may utilize form to enable appropriate passive performance, enhancing the quality of activities that take place within through appropriate lighting, ventilation, and microclimate. If we look to the juxtaposition of photos, one from a clinic in Haiti, and the other the new Butaro Hospital designed by Boston's MASS Design group in Rwanda, the former I consider building and the later architecture, it is apparent how the physical environment contributes to the well being of patients.The spatial planning allows for minimal congestion and patients have an outdoor view, rather than a view of other sick patients. The space is also designed for an efficient use of resources. A central dividing wall no more than 1.5 meters high runs all services needed for each hospital bed. Natural light floods the spaces and is amplified through the lightly coloured walls. Meanwhile, the example from Haiti is dark, making it difficult to see. One of the most significant differences between the two clinics is ventilation. A longitudinal plan that incorporates passive ventilation helps minimize airborne disease transmission in Butaro, whereas in Haiti the congested rooms create an ideal scenario for the spreading of germs. On a qualitative level, architecture can begin to take on the form of a learning tool itself, giving it more richness and purpose than a "building" does. The Aga-Khan Award for architecture, given by the Aga-Khan Network, a group of agencies which are advocates of environment, culture, rural-development, health, education, architecture, and micro-finance, select projects for nomination every three years, that are exemplary of a true architecture for development (Aga Khan Canada). The criteria a project must embody to be considered for nomination include efforts to not only empower those who are in need socially, physically, and economically, but it also recognizes that cultural and local responses are of utmost importance (Aga Khan). The Aga Khan Award is another indicator that architecture has a radically different intention and outcome than building, particularly in the context of

15

development. Whether teaching about new construction methods or enhancing the health of its occupants, information, experience, and comfort, can be layered and woven within its form. Architecture provides an optimistic environment, an environment that one wishes to be part of by drawing one into it rather than hindering them.

lack of passive ventiliation lack of daylighting indoor waiting room contributes to disease transmission Overcrowding due to inadequate layout

Figure 11 Building vs Architecture- clinic in Haiti

16

proper ventilation reduces disease transmission plenty of daylight enhanced by light finishes

patients have a view

one wall to efficiently combine services Figure 12 Building vs Architecture- MASS Design Butaro Hospital, Rwanda

17

1.1.2 Architecture in a context of development versus the context of development The aforementioned abandoned projects in the village of Kpedze were the first indicators to me during my experience of a long struggle with development in the Global South between foreign intervention and the local community.To fully engage in the discourse of empowerment focused architecture in Tanzania, the definition of development specific to this thesis must be defined through a historical understanding of its evolution. It is essential to outline the process of development and the architecture in this context of development. There is no shortage of interest in the idea of development, however there does exist a lack of criticality in this type of work that stems from the very definition itself.The term has become incredibly complex during the last century, and is filled with various connotations. The origin of development in the English language is rooted back to 1756, meaning an unfolding. In 1885 it related to property and the sense of "bringing out latent possibilities". Eventually it led to the understanding of a "state of economic advancement" (Oxford Dictionaries , 2012). The last century has added layers of meaning upon this term, which is now dependent on its context. Shown is the oxford dictionary definition of development. It is a definition that barely scratches the surface of this deep and convoluted term. Development (Oxford Dictionaries , 2012) ·  ·  ·  ·  ·  The process of developing or being developed: she traces the devel opment of the novel the paintings provide evidence of his artistic  A specified state of growth or advancement: the wings attain their full development several hours after birth A new and advanced product or idea: the latest developments in  information technology An event constituting a new stage in a changing situation: I don't  think there have been any new developments since yesterday The process of converting land to a new purpose by constructing  buildings or making use of its resources: land suitable for develop

development

ment

18

·  ·  ·   ·  

An area of land with new buildings on it: a major housing develop ment in Essex The process of starting to be affected by an ailment or feeling: the  development of brittle bones The process of treating photographic film with chemicals to make ensure even development  Chess the process of bringing one's pieces into play in the opening  phase of a game: I sought to take advantage of Black's defective de velopment   a visible image: agitation is carried out while a film is processed to 

The idea of process and growth is picked up on frequently in the definitions, however the term itself has undergone an evolution. What the oxford definition fails to make note of is that early on in this evolution there occurred a divide between the Global South and the Western World. We will begin to understand the complexities of development for the purpose of this thesis exploration through a timeline that begins as the Second World War commences. The context, in which the idea of development relative to underdevelopment arose, is the exact justification of why the term itself is contradictory to the intentions of this thesis exploration. There occurred a certain moment in time when attention turned to the South as being inferior, a moment when it became us and them, the rich and the poor. Immediately after World War II commenced, president Truman took office in 1949 and announced, "We must embark on a bold new program for making the benefits of our scientific advances and industrial progresses available for the improvement and growth for underdeveloped areas. The old imperialism- exploitation for foreign profit- has no place in our plans. What we envisage is a program of development based on the concepts of democratic fair dealing." -President Truman (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 1) In a time when American's held all of the world's financial power, this statement suddenly set the boundaries of the "developed" rich western countries

19

and the "underdeveloped" poor South, which was then populated by 2 billion people. This was not the first time the term underdevelopment in terms of a nation had been utilized. Benson, who was a member of the secretariat of the international labour organization, first mentioned underdevelopment in 1942. He spoke of it when he wrote about peace with an economic basis (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 3). Truman's speech was however, the first time the term was used in which the public now clearly understood that there were two ends of the development spectrum. Esteva, an activist and professional on the subject of development believes that for one to experience a positive change, they must first come to the realization that they are undignified. He states, `For those who make up the two-thirds of the world's population today, to think of development- of any kind of development- requires first the perception of themselves as underdeveloped, with the whole burden of connotations it carries. Today, for two-thirds of the peoples of the world, underdevelopment is a threat that has already been carried out: a life experience of subordination and of being led astray, of discrimination and subjugation. Given that precondition, the simple fact of associating with development one's own intention, to contradict it, to enslave it." (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 6) Development often falls into the trap of this same pattern hinting towards cultural hegemony, and in turn, a top down controlling approach. These feelings of insubordination and discrimination will always exist in this context. Therefore, it is time to leave the baggage of this term behind, and move forward conceiving of approaches that empower rather than over power. Paralleled and interwoven with the political, social, and economic timeline of the context of development, exists the architectural projects and movements that reside within and reflect the ideas of the times. By looking at culture and beliefs through the lens of architecture, the role of the architect in the development discourse may be understood.

20

Le Corbusier was deeply concerned with and inspired by the vernacular. He began to study vernacular Arab housing. This interest was a result of the economic crisis in the United States prior to the war and a questioning of his belief in technology (Ackley). He looked to the global south to address these new interests. As a result, he proposed the Obus Plan for Algiers, Algeria, which was the integration of infrastructure and architecture through concrete highway forms that concealed dwellings beneath it (Ackley). There was however a major disconnect between the vernacular and the Obus plan. The massive concrete forms were imposing, and the scheme overall was of modernist ideals that did not address locality. Instead, it addressed form, which was disconnected from program. Tschumi writes about this favouring of formal qualities with the exclusion of social considerations as an aspect of modernism (Tschumi, 1994, p. 113). Overall the project idea, which was conceived of 1933 just prior to president Truman's speech, was well intentioned, however is was a reflection of the attitudes surrounding development of the time, of an American hegemony and an acultural and top down approach to the work. From the moment Truman gave his speech in 1949 on, the terms continued to change based on the contemporary thinking of each decade, and determining what the developed world's relationship was with the South, and how it could intervene. Many began initially, after Truman's speech, to seek the reasons for development with internal and external factors they considered to be current causes, being: terms of trade, unequal exchange, dependency, protectionism, imperfections of the market, corruption, lack of democracy or entrepreneurship (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 6). But the undignified population of the lesser-developed nations was a result of colonialism and development itself. The West has been exploiting resources in the South since the eighteenth century, thus leaving the entire notion of development a hypocritical one.The remainder of the century, post World War II, right up until current practices, saw a series of changes in regards to how development was conceived of. It began as economic growth evolving to the incorporation of economic and social, to a focus human development, and finally sustainable development (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 7). Mid century, the obsession with industrialization meant to many that development of third world countries was based on production of goods, and an overall economic growth. Leading American economists of

21

the time, such as Paul Barren, were advocates of this economic growth. A measure used was the inflation of a countries GNP, until it was soon discovered that in reality, industrializing a nation and further depleting its resources does not translate to diminishing poverty. In fact it just widens the poverty gap (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 7). During this era, in 1945, Hassan Fathy, an Egyptian educated architect , as opposed to western, trained in Egypt, was commissioned to design a housing series for a new village named New Gourna, located within Egypt. It was starting to move towards a more local approach, at least more so than the Obus Plan, in the sense that it attempted to use materials from the site and building techniques from Egypt. Fathy's project was praised overseas in the Western world; however, the locals who were to live there rejected it. There were even acts of vandalism towards it in refusal to inhabit the village initially (Pyla, 2009, p. 715). It appeared that Fathy's design was more of an assembly of different aesthetic elements borrowed from wealthier homes in Cairo.The courtyard, for example, was of inappropriate use and was rejected by locals who were of a lesser social and economic status (Pyla, 2009, p. 715). Panayiota Pyla, a professor of architecture at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, writes about Fathy's work: "The formal character of the houses and the public buildings reflected the architect's aesthetic sensibilities that combined the masterful joining of domes and vaults with a sensitive play of shade and light. The poetic simplicity of the buildings had a sensual presence on the desert landscape, while it also revealed the designer's modernist sympathies, with the abstraction of spaces, the simplicity of volumes and the monochromatic character of the buildings, which, incidentally, stood in stark contrast to the colourful mud houses of Nubia." (Pyla, 2009, p. 716) This suggests, not undermining the good intentions of Fathy's work that the idea of a superimposition of ideas is still present during the time of its conception, and any sort of social movement through architecture is not yet surfacing. It is still materializing as a primarily formal approach. Fathy even

22

stated at one point that he was, "...restoring the aesthetic qualities that the locals were incapable of appreciating", and that he wanted to build a village "where the fellahin would follow the way of life I would like them to." (Pyla, 2009, p. 717). The next stage in the process of development trends did however; begin to introduce the social with the economic. In the early `60's the UN began to introduce social progress, secondary to economic growth in development reports, suggesting some balance between the two (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 9). Hassan Fathy continued to evolve his practice, reflecting economic theories of the time. In the mid 50's and into the early 60's he worked in Greece for the office Doxiadis and Associates. Pyla writes of his time there, "Through his collaboration with Doxiadis, Fathy had the chance more systematically to contemplate the interrelationships of local knowledge systems with dominant demands for standardization and mass production." (Pyla, 2009, p. 717) There was still an emphasis on industrialization in hopes that it would bring lesser- developed nations economic growth.It was not until the later half of the `60's that it was realized a focus on production and raising a country's GNP was, despite incorporating some aspects of social development, fruitless (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 10). This strengthens the argument that looking at development from an American cultural and industrial hegemony actually worsens the undesirable conditions of the South. In the 70's, with the recognition that production of material goods did not bring dispersed wealth, the opportunity was presented for further integrating economic and social growth as a unified approach to developmental analysis. The UN set forth some designed components to adhere to when approaching issues of development, including (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 10).    A) To leave no sector of the population outside the scope of devel B) To effect structural change which favours national development  and to activate all sectors of the population to participate in the  opment

23

     

development process; C) To aim at social equity, including the achievement of an equitable distribution of income and wealth in the nation; D) To give high priority to the development of human potentials... the provision of employment opportunities and meeting the needs  of children

This approach was relatively unsuccessful as it was complex and received much resistance. It did however change the course of thought surrounding development for the better. In 1974, the focus finally shifted into a much more humanistic approach. An emphasis was put on the well being of a population rather than the production of things (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 10). 1976 was a pivotal year in the development discourse. In '76 a conference was held by the ILO on employment, income distribution, and social progress that put forth a solution they called `the basic needs approach'. This focused on achieving minimum standards of living for all, rather than economic growth (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 10). Simultaneously, 1976 was one of the most important years in the architectural profession for realizing the shift from the global to the local, and top down approaches to the bottom up approaches. During this year, the largest Habitat conference to date, named Habitat 1, which addressed an urbanizing global condition, and therefore issues of poverty, water access, housing, etc., was held in Vancouver, British Columbia. Canadian prime minister at the time, Pierre Elliot Trudeau, provided the opening remarks for the conference, and in attendance were various leaders of the time including, Mother Theresa, anthropologist Margret Mead, and Buckminster Fuller to name a few (Tuper, 2011). This conference was of particular importance, because it was the onset of the UN-Habitat Agency. The agency today continues to maintain objectives of poverty reduction and sustainable urban development (UN Habitat). During this conference however, Canadian architect Arthur Erickson designed the paper pavilion adjacent to the Art Gallery, which was to hold events during the conference. The paper pavilion is a particularly important piece of the timeline, since it truly addresses the use of local materials and an architecture that responds closely to its region. The pavilion itself was a large roof structure in a parabolic form that responded structurally to the

24

materials used.The material consisted of paper, since it was a resource readily available and not properly recycled within the city of Vancouver. Local school children around from the city came together to construct the paper mache roof pieces that made up the whole (Ouno, 2009). Tschumi states in the introduction to Architecture and Disjunction "Several precedents pointed, however, to the extraordinary power of incidents of small actions amplified a thousand times by the media so as to assume the role of revolutionary myth. In these cases, it was not the form of architecture that counted (whether it was contextual or modernist), but the use (and meaning) that was assigned to it. (Tschumi, 1994, p. Intro)" Rather than importing ideas and techniques from the developing world, Erickson decided to utilize local resources, including materials local to the habitat site (which ultimately deciphered the formal qualities of his architecture). He likely did this in the hopes of a transfer of ideas, and not formal qualities, this was his architecture, and this was his role of the architect. Fathy's previously mentioned project in New Gourna in the 1940's was also looked at under a new light in the 70's. The same project, which received criticism, previously, was now looked at as a seminal work in the realm of regional development focused architecture. He published a book in the 1970's entitled, Architecture for the Poor: An Experiment in Rural Egypt.When modernist ideals of universalism were under scrutiny during a time when regionalism was gaining in popularity, Fathy's writing emphasized his desires to find a local building method in New Gourna (Pyla, 2009, p. 724). His writing becomes a cornerstone for innovative design and planning approaches. This evolution of the way New Gourna was perceived confirms that architecture is not just in its physical manifestation, but also expressed through the writings of the architect. It absorbed the new optimism of the times, for a social and regional architecture. The next major stage in the development process came in the `90's when redevelopment was focused upon, eventually leading to sustainable or green

25

development (Sachs W. , 2010, p. 11).The first time issues of environmental preservation were paired with development was in the 1987 Brundtland Report. It was now widely accepted that a rise in GNP equaled not only wider poverty gaps but severe environmental devastation and resource depletion as well. The report stated; "We have in the past been concerned with the impacts of economic growth upon the environment. We are now forced to concern ourselves with the impacts of ecological stressdegradation of soils, water regimes, atmosphere, and forests,

Fathy learned the technical aspects of mud brick construction with Doxiadis. This influenced him to eventually re-write his ideas on New Gourna

Architecture For the Poor, a book by Fathy which looks to his 1940's plan for New Gourna in a new humanist and scentific way

Figure 15 Cover of book by founder of Doxiadis on thier projects

Figure 16 Hassan Fathy's Architecture for the Poor

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Mud brick domes of Aswan which Fathy brought to New Gourna

Courtyard scheme in New Gourna which Fathy transplanted to project from urban areas

Figure 13 Aswan at Nubia's Vernacular domed  earth roof

Figure 14 New Gourna courtyard and domed scheme applied from Aswan

26

upon our economic prospects." (Sachs J. , 2012, p. 27). Today, ecological sustainability is at the forefront of discussion surrounding development of lesser-developed nations.The United Nations proposed a set of eight "Millennium Development" goals to be reached by 2015 that incorporate sustainability, among other social and economic development goals including (CIDA, 2012): 1) 2) 3) 4) Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger Achieve universal primary education Promote gender equality and empower women Reduce child mortality

innovative use of traditional materials beyond vernacular to achieve maximum comfort levels in design

new use of mud brick provides local opportunity with environmentally sustainable objectives

Figure 19 Francis Kere's primary school in Gando, Burkina Faso

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010 2013

paper roof structure made by school children in Vancouver

Paper structures make up two pavilions during Habitat Forum

Figure 17 Habitat Forum in Vancouver: Erickson's Paper Pavilions

Figure 18 Inside the paper pavilions: graphics on roof done by local children

27

5) 6) 7) 8)

Improve maternal health Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases Ensure environmental sustainability Develop a global partnership for development

In addition to these UN Millennium Development goals, American Economist Jeffery Sachs, a leader in the discourse of development, advocates for an importance of sustainable development goals. He points out that by 2024 the population will reach 8 million, with the 8th billion person being born into Sub-Saharan Africa or Asia. Our earth may no longer be able to sustain life as we enter the anthropocene, an epoch in which all of the earth's processes are controlled by human intervention and extraction of resources (Sachs J. , 2012, p. 53). The land may no longer be fertile for agriculture, and natural habitats will experience massive destruction. For this reason, Sachs believes economic development must be paired with sustainable development, and the fight against poverty must be paired with sustainability (Sachs J. , 2012, p. 53). As a result; architectural interventions have become increasingly more environmentally conscious over the last decade. In the realm of development work, Francis Kere, a Burkina Faso native who studied architecture in Berlin, is actively involved in providing an environmentally and socially sustainable that empowers African communities. His first project, while he was still studying in Berlin, was a primary school that was located within his hometown in Burkina Faso. The school aimed for simplicity through innovation as building technique. Climatic comfort was key, and the structure allowed for passive cooling throughout the space. Compressed earth blocks absorbed heat and allowed further temperature moderation. The community was utilized as a resource in construction, and they were able to take away the knowledge to pass on to other surrounding villages (Kere Architecture). From Le Corbusier's concept for a project in Algeria, through to the work of Francis Kere, it is evident that drastic shifts from the global to the local, or top down to bottom up approaches, have occurred in architectural development within the overall context of development. Today globalization, particularly rural to urban migration, and its effect on, environment, health, women's rights, education, and employment, within the developing world,

28

becomes first and foremost architectural concerns within the development context, however is it important to never forget the origins of development. All projects discussed, despite their varying approaches, thus far have been a part of the same development discourse. The evolution of development is one of varying definitions and, sometimes negative, connotations. To proceed with this thesis, it is the intent to bring awareness to the term and the heavy burden it caries.

29

CHAPTER 2 Why say yes to Architecture?
1.2.1 Why does Architecture matter for rural Tanzania? When Erickson designed his paper pavilion for the Habitat 1 conference in Vancouver in 1976, it was one of the first instances in which architecture began to address issues of mass urbanization in the developing world. As previously mentioned, the conference was held to discuss issues of poverty, as well as inadequate sanitation, lack of access to drinking water, inadequate housing, etc. These issues were becoming increasingly relevant for discussion due to a rapidly urbanizing world. The report that came out of the Vancouver Habitat 1 conference, and the document that commenced UN Habitat itself, The Vancouver Action Plan, took note of some major themes occurring within the conference from May 31 to June 11, 1976 (United Nations, 1986). It recognized that the current living standards for large numbers of people in human settlements within developing countries were highly unacceptable due to social, economic, ecological, and environmental deterioration. The world population growths were identified as doubling within the next 25 years, which also doubles the demand for environmental resources (United

01

Dar es Salaam

Kinshasa

Nairobi

Addis Ababa

Luanda

Abidjan

Dakar

Ibadan

Figure 20 African cities to experience the greatest growth by 2030

Lagos

30

Accra

Nations, 1986). This growth results in uncontrolled urbanization. The conference makes note of the increasing potential for overcrowding, pollution, deterioration, and psychological tensions in metropolitan regions (United Nations, 1986). The overcrowding is augmented by forced migration of people to urban areas to seek employment, and to escape the increasingly poor rural conditions where lack of infrastructure is detrimental to an acceptable quality of life. From the 1970's to present day, population growth and urbanization has become increasingly problematic, particularly within many sub-Saharan African countries. Rural to urban migration is now at a staggering rate in Tanzania, and problems associated with it are at the heart of this thesis. Many go to urban areas in search of something, mainly economic gain, but there are much greater losses along the way, including dignity, and health for many.The move is not an empowered one. It is often not one of choice but born out of necessity to provide for ones family. The migratory Tanzanian may enter an environment with a slightly greater amount of economic opportunity, yet they must endure conditions far worse then where they came from (Tibandebage, 2012). When looking at trends in urbanization and city growth within the next 15 years, we can see the areas with the greatest needs, including clean water, adequate housing, education, and healthcare, are also those projected to grow

Kinshasa

Nairobi Dar es Salaam

N

31

drastically in urban areas. The Economist published an article stating that in 2012 one third of Africa's population is considered urban, and this figure will increase to one half in only 15 years (The Economist, 2010)(Figure 21). Some cities will grow drastically by 2030, with almost the entirety their population being considered urban. The major problem surrounding this rapid urbanization within lesser-developed nations is their ability to support this type of growth. There exists currently a shortage of infrastructure, food, limited water access, and a lack of housing (Tibandebage, 2012). In addition to issues associated with mass urbanization, there exists a severe shortage of professionals. As outlined by Sierra Bainbridge, senior director at MASS Design Group, the Western world has no shortage of architects. Italy in fact, has more than double the amount of professionals practicing architecture than all of sub-Saharan Africa combined (Bainbridge, 2013).The result of this shortage, and the simultaneous occurrence of rapid growth, equates to a lack of critical design strategies for new infrastructure and building. The resulting building stock becomes homogenized in form and materiality, and lacks any passively beneficial relationship to its context. The majority is of substandard quality at best. For this reason, we as architects have a moral duty to intervene within Sub-Saharan Africa. The next questions a Canadian architecture thesis must address pertain to the act of imposition, and resistance. If architects from the Western World are to design within a context from which they are physically removed from does this imply a naive intervention on the existing Tanzanian culture? And how receptive to foreign ideas are Tanzanian communities? In a meeting conducted to gather insight and research for this thesis project with Richard Tibandebage, the minister of the High Commission of Tanzania in Ottawa, it was evident that these are indeed two sensitive and complex topics. One must remain sensitive to cultural preference, however, the truth is architecture must impose. There currently exists a lack of architectural professionals within the context due to economic and educational opportunities. In turn there tends to be a lack of critical thinking when implementing the sub-standard building stock, and therefore a continued degradation. Architecture may seek to be a vehicle to curb migration and aid in providing amenities that are currently vacant within rural areas.

32

1.2.2:  Tanzania: Rural to Urban: diverse to homogenous Studies show that Tanzania's capital city is projected to experience the most rapid increase in urbanization by the year 2025 (The Economist, 2010). Dar es Salaam has a current population of roughly 4 million and is projected to grow in population by an 85% increase. This figure surpasses any other African city (The Economist, 2010). Tanzania is already experiencing social and environmental devastation, which includes, a shortage of drinking water, high HIV infection rates, short life expectancy rates, and environmental degradation. The existing infrastructure of urban areas within Tanzania largely cannot support current populations. There are a large number of people residing in Dar es Salaam, who currently do not have access to formal jobs, and therefore cannot live in adequate housing, creating a number of informal "slum like" developments throughout urban centres. Many travel from rural regions of Tanzania with a shared optimism towards gainful employment in the capital. If this migratory pattern nearly doubles the current population size as projected, extreme overpopulation will create intolerable life within Dar es Salaam. Dar es Salaam's urban fabric currently consists of a mix between formal and informal architecture, much like that of Accra Ghana, as noted during the kindergarten school project in Kpedze Todze. This is a result of informal and formal economic sectors, with the informal sector in Tanzania consisting primarily of any illegal and or untaxed small businesses (Lewinson, 1997, p. 210). As previously mentioned with the case of Accra, and common throughout many Large African cities, modern architecture appeared near the end of colonialism and in the 1950's in Dar es Salaam (ArchiAfrika, 2008).This approach to city planning and its architectural institutions was continued through postcolonialism as a sign of independence and optimism (ArchiAfrika, 2008). Today in Dar es Salaam informal economic activity keeps the interstitial spaces and the ground plain of the capital transient and in constant transformation. The static modern institutions of Dar es Salaam, which include government buildings, schools, and office buildings, stand in stark contrast to the bustling informal city. As a result of these opposing formal and social developments, tensions exist between the employees of offices in the formal economic sector and the street vendors (Lewinson, 1997, p. 207). Those earning a living in the formal sector take action against street vendors and kiosks as they feel

33

they are "polluting the city", however a demand also exists for the goods and services that informal merchants provide, creating an informal and mobile architecture that is in simultaneous erasure and apparition (Lewinson, 1997, p. 210). If we view a map of a typical condition in downtown Dar es Salaam, the planned infrastructure and architecture of the formal sector can be noted in blue. The informal slums and laneways infill the void space created by the blue and if they continue to grow, negative conditions, such as the congestion, overpopulation, and unsanitary dwellings, will become increasingly worse. In addition to the worsening built environment, there is also a cultural loss and homogenization of urbanization. Coming to Dar es Salaam and other major cities such as Mwanza, are rural dwellers from a diverse range of indigenous tribes. These tribes have their own vernacular that diminishes in the slums of the urban as they scrape to get by with the little materials and poor conditions they have (Tibandebage, 2012).

N Figure 21 Zooming into Dar es Salaam

N

N

34

Formal Dar es Salaam street grid

Formal highways leading into the city centre

0

50

2.5

N 500m Figure 22 Formal Roads in Dar es Salaam

dark blue rectilinear forms represent high rise formal modern buildings, primarily office towers

light blue represents low to mid rise modern buildings, commercial, hotels, residence, office, etc.

formal open space such as sports stadiums or markets opperating legally.

0

50

2.5

N 500m Figure 23 Formal buildings and public space Dar es Salaam

35

informal retail and food vendors line busy streets such as "Congo Street"

a network of informal roads and pathways not commisioned or funded by governement

a network of paths amongst slums

informal market places

500m 2.5 0 50 Figure 24 Informal pathways and markets in Dar es Salaam

N

informal structures for retail vendors and housing

500m 2.5 0 50 Figure 25 Infromal slums and vendors in Dar es Salaam

N

36

small plots of agriculture in slums

formally landscaped boulevards

0

50

2.5

N 500m Figure 26 Vegetation Natural and Landscaped in Dar es Salaam

informal (pink) infills formal planned elements (blue)

0

50

2.5

N 500m Figure 27 Overlay map of formal and informal in Dar es Salaam

37

1.2.3 Why the Rural Matters There exists an entrepreneurial spirit and resilience of the Tanzanian population present within this temporal and informal aspect of the city. To harness this spirit and potentially aid in curbing the rapid over population of Dar es Salaam, this thesis proposes to urbanize the rural. Rather than continue the trend of rapid forced migration away from rural areas where economic, educational, and health care opportunities have become sparse, there lies an opportunity to allow the population to choose where they want to live and work. By inverting the model of the Tanzanian city, which is conceived of as a fixed and modern model with an imposed informal aspect, we can implement structure, program and formal opportunity in rural areas. The urban and the rural depend on one another, especially in the context of Tanzania's economy, where intensive urban infrastructures cannot possibly be provided for an entire population at such a rapid rate. The rural makes up an agrarian hinterland that provides food, materials, and other products to cities, proving that one can never be independent of the other. To be truly sustainable, there may be an established relationship between the city and the rural, in which the two provide for one another and offer the country's diverse population unique and equally diverse enriched lifestyle options. The rural matters not only to support cities, but more importantly it matters on a human level. In a common scenario, one may leave their family in rural Tanzania to come to Dar es Salaam. A member of the traveller's family has likely fallen ill and does not have access to a clinic or the funds to receive medical care. Once in Dar es Salaam to make ends meet for their family, the provider may find work among the other migrants in the market place, selling inexpensive goods and food items. They will face many struggles as they belong to the informal market and their makeshift vendors will be at constant risk of demolition. Life in the city is considerably more expensive, and the migrant will reside within the slums of Dar es Salaam where issues of sanitation, sewage, clean drinking water, and security, challenge their well being. In addition to their personal security their absence may leave a lasting effect on their community. If the migrant is male, which most are, the woman of the household is left with all chores, duties, and child rearing.This affects both the
Figure 30 Informal retail vendors set up by rural migrants. Most will be at risk of being razed by government. Figure 28 Informal overcrowded slum of Dar es Salaam

Figure 29 Lack of infrastructure surrounding migrants to support proper sanitation and health

38

well being of the woman, and the potential for the child to have access to an education. If the migrant is an elder, they may be missing from the important upbringing of the children in their family, as most rural Tanzanian families and communities all take part in the upbringing of a child. Among those leaving rural areas to find employment in cities are often women. Women have different opportunities in urban areas, such as commonly being forced into prostitution, which strips them of their dignity (Elizabeth Maganaga Nsese, 2007).This is the opposite of empowerment. In rural areas women are valued as care givers and community leaders, while in urban areas they are subject
Figure 31Typical rural Tanzanian village residence

to being objectified and de-valued. Providing opportunity for rural women is of utmost importance for their rights and dignity, and it also has been linked to ensuring positive development in Sub-Saharan Africa.The United Nation's Women's Organization states that women's empowerment fuels socio-economic growth (United Nations Women).Women are the ones who ensure food reaches the mouths of their communities; they access and carry clean water to others, and care for the ill. The empowerment of women is also closely linked to the previously discussed issues of urbanization. The 2009 World Survey on the Role of Women in Development states, "Unequal access to resources limits women's capacity to ensure agricultural productivity, security of livelihoods and food security and is increasingly linked to poverty, migration, urbanization and increased risk of violence" (United Nations, 2009). During a time when more women are beginning to migrate to urban areas for economic opportunity (Lewinson, 1997), this statement demonstrates that it is imperative to focus on the empowerment of women in rural communities. Providing access to resources including land, education, security, food and water, and employment, all have endless positive outcomes, including, stable economic growth, decease in violence, lower HIV infection rates, less unplanned parenthood, and higher infant mortality rates to name a few (United Nations, 2009).

Figure 32 Women and children gather drinking water from wells and water bodies far away from home

Figure 33 Rural Tanzanian women farming as main source of income

39

Women's empowerment is also closely linked to environmentally sustainable development, which is another key theme within the current development and architectural discourse. The 2009 World Survey on the Role of Women in Development states, "Population growth, climate change, the spread of markets and urbanization have created new opportunities and new challenges in women's access to land, housing, and other productive resources. Attention to the resource challenges women face in agriculture is essential for addressing the food and energy crisis and climate change in both the short and the long term" (United Nations, 2009). Giving women the responsibility of agriculture and business even on a microeconomic scale, will help to manage these necessary resources, and provide for those who are in need, whether its her immediate community, or even urban areas (United Nations, 2009). Women's development and environmental sustainability are two of the most current and pressing issues resulting from urbanization. United Nations many Millennium Development goals, and as previously mentioned, economist Jeffery Sachs advocates for pairing economic development, which we are now aware is largely connected to women's development, with environmentally sustainable development. Sachs acknowledges that empowering women by educating them about birth control and family planning, controls and lowers birth rates, allowing for increased resources per child yet less demand overall, which in turn, decreases environmental stresses (Sachs J. , 2012).

40

1.2.4: How does the Rural become an option of choice? How does the rural become an option of choice in Tanzania, and what exactly is architecture's role? This thesis advocates for the modernization of conditions within rural locations, and to bring new opportunities to non-urban settlements. It proposes that the traditional settlement is looked at in a new light. The implementation of program, which will aid in employment, educational, and most importantly health care opportunities, is sought after. These opportunities can be provided for and housed utilizing buildings, however as previously mentioned, architecture can do so much more to empower. One must give form to provide sanitation, articulate views and light for proper educational environments, plan for security, etc., In Africa, women keep their children close to them until the child is old enough to attend school. This results in a need to provide supervision for children wherever program is introduced for women's business or education. This now becomes an architectural problem. Education surrounding health and hygiene can be implemented through certain architectural moves. Some basic personal health care strategies are not as widely recognized in Tanzania, or taught through the public educational system as they may be in the western world. The articulation of the building may begin to teach about the importance of washing through roof water collection systems, and ventilated clinic waiting room spaces to speak to the dangers of airborne disease. A project that pertains directly to women's health and women's empowerment and exemplifies the idea of education through architecture is the 2010 Aga Khan shortlisted CBF Women's Health Centre by FARE architects. It is an example of architectural form engaging in empowerment. The Centre, located in Burkina Faso, is intended for contrasting the diffusion of Female Genital Mutilation/Excision. To achieve public awareness and an exchange of information in this area, the design incorporates a public outdoor space directly connected to the clinic to be used by all community members (FARE). Besides not having access to this type of program in most rural areas, open discussion and education on women's sexual health is scarce and taboo. FARE

41

architects have created an environment, which is more conducive to this exchange of information and becomes a vehicle through which women may be empowered. In addition to the personal health and wellbeing component of rural areas, there must also be an economic aspect to create an incentive for women to stay within the agrarian community. The trading function of rural settlements may be augmented with the proposal. Rural locations in Tanzania traditionally have been locations in which a specialty product is grown and sold to urban areas in return for other goods. The program and architecture of this new centre will be one that enforces this role of agricultural trade, with the women's economic component. Market spaces may be provided for the buying and selling of agrarian goods, and the architecture may be a by product of the agriculture itself, giving women and other community members the opportunity to engage with new construction techniques and skills which pertain to their grown crops.

Figure 34 Top: current urban structure, Middle: current rural structure, Bottom: Thesis advocated to combine and urbanize the rural

42

This thesis proposes that the rural must become an option of choice not only through implementation of key programmatic elements the rural needs to maintain interest and opportunity, but the architecture can enhance the environment in which these activities take place. The rural must become urbanized with facilities for opportunity. This new settlement is an anchor and may go as far as becoming an educational tool and a response to local social and economic conditions in and of itself.

43

02

Proposition: Urbanization, Form and Materiality

44

45

CHAPTER 3 The Vernacular in an Urbanizing world
2.3.1 Vernacular influence on the Contemporary If this thesis is looking to anchor rural settlements, and in turn create a new type of settlement, what do current rural villages and the ones that came before look like? Why is this important? It is absolutely vital for one intervening within rural Tanzania, through implementing contemporary architectural visions, to understand and dissect a region or a tribe's particular indigenous architecture, particularly within the context of globalization. As Tanzania continues to urbanize, men and women of different native tribal origins flock to cities in search of employment, while simultaneously a rapid loss of culture exists. Housing, schools, clinics, etc., of poor quality and homogeneity continue to grow and replace the vernacular. These poorly constructed primarily concrete and steel buildings that are "western" in aesthetic and to most Tanzanians represent achievement and modernity, are in reality lacking functionality in these contexts and undermine an intensely rich and diverse cultural past. A diverse existing knowledge that pertains to a vast array of culture is situated within different environmental contexts across Tanzania and is at risk of becoming forever lost. The recovery and permanence of this accumulated wealth of knowledge surrounding indigenous methods is at the hands of the architect who wishes to participate within this context today, and the recovery of this knowledge may be absolutely vital to increasing large- scale rural economic concerns that we face within the twenty-first century (Oliver, 2007, p. 17). The study of the vernacular, and in turn its definition according to architectural historian and expert on the subject area Paul Oliver, has been continuously changing since the architects initial interest in it around the onset of modernism. At this time, some modernist architects brought to light that the study of the vernacular was missing from the architectural discourse and indeed deserved a place within it. Since this early consideration architects continuously look to the vernacular when designing in unfamiliar contexts,
Figure 36 Map of Aswan and New Gourna N

02

Mediterranean Sea

Egypt
New Gourna Aswan

46

however, the agenda has changed and its application has become increasingly more complex in some cases (Oliver, 2007, p. 9). It is only recently that the study of culture and its existence within indigenous architecture has become recognized in the vernacular. Originally, the vernacular was looked to primarily as a formal study or as an architectural "style". There was no consideration of its impact on the occupants of a building or how it came to exist as it did formally. Sybil Moholy-Nagy, architectural historian, tried to determine what made the vernacular of importance to the contemporary architect in the 1950's. Her conclusion was focused on the "native genius" of the American vernacular in regards to its response to climate formally. She also acknowledged the skills and body of knowledge that the indigenous must have possessed, yet there was no discussion on what this type of vernacular meant for a culture (Oliver, 2007, p. 11). Demetri Porphyrios also defined the vernacular as something separate from culture. He stated, "The idea of the vernacular has nothing to do with stylistics. It rather points to a universal ethos of constructional techniques."

Figure 37 & 38 Aswan and market place at New Gourna Fathy studied the domes of earth block in Aswan and then applied the technique to New Gourna. They were later removed, as the different context provided different meaning. Domes in New Gourna were only to be used for religious architecture

47

He did not refer to culture as something that informed the vernacular in any way. Up until around the 1970's, when the previously discussed humanistic view came into the discussion of the architecture of development, the vernacular was assessed primarily to provide economy in form and design (Oliver, 2007, p. 11). Hassan Fathy's previously discussed project in New Gourna is not only exemplary to illustrate the shift of the architectural discourse overall towards humanistic interventions, but is also demonstrative of a shift in the study of the vernacular. His project in New Gourna quite obviously referenced the Egyptian Vernacular formal elements, however it failed initially to operate on a social level because he may not have had a full understanding of the formal elements relationships to culture and economy (Pyla, 2009, p. 716). He imported the courtyards in his scheme from wealthier urban vernacular forms that did not translate into useful social spaces within the context of New Gourna. In addition to this, he utilized building techniques from a nearby local vernacular of Nubia, which included domed roofs made from mud brick. This vernacular did not translate properly to the inhabitants of New Gourna (Fathy, 1973), as they related domed structures to places of worship (Pyla, 2009, p. 718). Overall, Fathy had a far too generalized view of Egypt's vernacular that lacked locality and cultural specificity. In the 1970's however, when Fathy published his book on the project, Architecture for the Poor, the project was received in more positive light as he brought a new level of meaning to it through his continued experience with mud brick post New Gourna. Fathy highlighted the passive qualities of his courtyard houses, and also spoke more to the culture of building and utilizing vernacular skills to empower locals to build their own dwellings (Pyla, 2009, p. 717). His writing revealed how his research was revealing as to how those in New Gourna historically solved both issues of social and environmental functionality through form. He believed that environment actually contributed to culture, and this was legible through the vernacular. He stated, "...result of the human-environment interaction constitutes culture and has led to the development of a multitude of cultures by different people in different environments. Vernac-

48

ular architecture is one of the most concrete manifestations of this interaction" (Oliver, 2007, p. 12). In his book Dwellings, Oliver highlights the fact that anthropological enquiry in the past was typically outside of the architectural discourse. To find the cultural aspects of vernacular building one would have been more successful to look at writings out side of architectural discourse for proof of cultural existence (Oliver, 2007, p. 14). But it is their cultural values that one must understand in order to operate successfully when practicing within a foreign culture. Architects such as Renzo Piano and his design for the Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre in New Caledonia exemplify how vernacular traditions are reinterpreted in a contemporary manner, not simply for a means of economy, but also to acknowledge and sustain cultural traditions. Piano speaks about the project and its relationship to tradition, "The strength of the complex and its position in is in the smooth but authentic tradition between the more rooted Kanak culture and the innovative needs of modernity. Let's not forget that we are at the dawn of the twenty-first century; if we can use highly advanced technology, we can also soften it so that it becomes an effective means, one that is contemporary and not opposed to or incompatible with the concept of memory. We must reconcile modernity and technology to nature and tradition" (Piano, 1998). The huts for the Tjibaou Centre stand as a metaphor for the vernacular huts of the Kanak.They do not just simply mimic the aesthetic of the huts but they learn from the way in which it used local materials. Wooden members used for the structure are cured the way local craftsman would have constructed the vernacular (Piano, 1998). The application of this vernacular knowledge is absolutely essential today in a world in which economic disparities, population numbers, and exploitation of resources, are causing the need for massive growth. In this context the architect and his or her relationship with the local is an absolute necessity (Oliver, 2007).

49

Like the work of Piano in New Caledonia, this thesis proposes that the vernacular may be used in conjunction with contemporary ideas and technology in an urbanizing context.Tanzania's pride comes from their diverse indigenous culture is present within the vernacular. The vernacular of specific regions in Tanzania becomes a textbook of passive design, which appropriately handles its diverse environmental conditions. Lastly, the vernacular building methods have been practiced and passed down through generations, an existing skill set is readily available for a modernized vernacular. Combing this with new technologies would provide much more site sensitive and culturally sensitive approaches to rural architecture that far surpass the aforementioned buildings that are currently replacing the built environment.

combined vernacular building material of wood and bamboo with glass and steel

Coral sea
joinery stayed as true to vernacular as possible with modern engineering

New Caledonia
Coral sea
Noumea

South Pacific Ocean
N Figure 39 Map of New Caledonia showing Noumea Figure 40 Wall Section of Renzo Piano's Tjibaou CentreCultural in Noumea New Caledonia JM Tjibaou Centre - Wall Assembly NTS

50

Figure 42 Indigenous Kanak vernacular with Piano's design

Figure 41 Balance between tradition and modernity

Figure 43 Piano's Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre

Tall scooping walls designed for passive ventilation much like the vernacular forms did

Figure 44 Diagram of how Tjibaou centre reinterprets vernacular through passive design and its reference to nature

51

bly NTS

Site Vegetation Diagram NTS

2.3.2 Vernacular elements The vernacular's components worthy of study for this thesis consist of spatial, formal, and most importantly material elements. As mentioned, culture, passive design, and economy of form are all revealed in the local vernacular. For the most part, rural Tanzanian communities have evolved as the country continues to develop with certain customs and traditions no longer in current practice. Some of these rural tribal traditions are still very much alive, while some are under the threat of becoming derailed due to urbanization and economic pressures. The local vernacular has also evolved over time. As previously mentioned, in recent times of western influence Tanzania's varied tribe's local vernacular has been nearly razed and replaced by western influenced rectilinear tin roofed buildings. When discussing the significance of the vernacular we can look to East African traditional architecture and the architecture of the Haya specifically to understanding the rich body of knowledge accumulated over time in regards to how to work with climate and landscape, but also to understand and respect more of the Tanzanian culture. An Important element of East African vernacular architecture was its community layouts and spatial division. Layouts of a community were highly reflective of their culture. They were in tune with spirituality and the human body (Hull, 1976, p. 45). The ground was dedicated to ancestors, and above

"arteries", roads

"lungs", green space

The "feet" of the plan, industry Figure 45 Le Corbusier's design for the Ville Radieuse, 1935

52

the ground plain for the living, as ancestry worship, was and still is, integral to most communities' lifestyles in Eastern Africa. Built form and spatial arrangement was all about relationships, which reflected the nature of all living organisms. Much like Corbusier in his plan for Ville Radieuse envisioned the city to function like the human body with arteries for circulation, lungs for fresh air, a scientific "head", and an industrial "footing". The chiefs dwelling of the Haya would have been the "heart of the village, located next to important functions such as the market where trade occurred (Hull, 1976, p. 45). When looking back to the vernacular and its interior layouts of individual huts and their spatial arrangements among a traditional community, much can be revealed about the rural way of life. Some of these revelations are a cultural imprint and speak to their customs, many of which, are still conducive to harnessing an interest in rural living.The spatial arrangements of the Haya's tribal vernacular, exemplifies this notion. The Haya is a Tanzanian tribe located in the Kagera region of Tanzania, which is locate within North West Tanzania, immediately West of Lake Victoria. The Haya tribe was once arranged so that the chief was the focal point of the community. His mushonge, the Haya term for its vernacular huts, was located centrally within the village surrounded by concentric rings and radial spokes which originated from its centre. Moving away from the chief was the medicine man, as health and superstition was central to the Haya dwellers needs, then came the clan leaders, sub clan leaders, and finally the common rural

clan leaders medicine man "heart", Chiefs mushonge sub clan leaders common people

Figure 46 Typical layout of a Haya village in the Kagera region of Tanzania

53

dwellers of that community (Lwamayanga, 2008). The current spatial organization of a Haya community is much more dispersed. Chiefdom is no longer commonplace within Haya communities (Tibandebage, 2012), possibly resulting in this decentralization, however in contemporary design interventions, health can still play a central role as it once did in the vernacular. Most rural communities today lack clinics or any adequate health care.This programmatic component has the potential to be central once more in rural areas, in turn anchoring them as it provides an incentive to remain rural. The interior spatial arrangements of the Haya mushonge were innovative in their use of space. The vernacular acknowledged family growth and change in its realization. One mushonge dwelling consisted of a circular floor plan riddled with wooden poles on which partitions could be placed. All activities would take place within an ever-changing space (Lwamayanga, 2008). Once the family had children they could separate sleeping quarters, cooking was central, cattle was kept within the home, and space was still left towards the front of the dwelling to socialize. Beyond the door, located on the porch was an area for harvesting and drying agricultural produce (Lwamayanga, 2008). The entire scheme emphasizes the importance of cohesion within families and communities and showcases the dependence on agriculture as income and lifestyle choice.
use

livestock adult sleeping cooking children sleeping
use

common space

Figure 47 Haya interior layout variation one

Figure 48 Haya interior layout variation two

54

The human body was often used as a method of measurement in traditional East African vernacular.This naturally would result in more ergonomic designs (Hull, 1976). Also utilized as a method of measurement, fractals were highly notable in almost all East African communities. Ron Eglash, ethno-mathematician who studies African fractals, notes that the same pattern is always seen on a variety of scales in African architecture and community layouts. Even some royal insignias, such as one particular tribe in Cameroon used similar fractals that were seen in its village planning (Eglash, 2007). Fractals were also highly utilized in the formal and material aspects of the vernacular. Fractals are seen everywhere in nature, and they appear in African architecture because their use coincides with natural phenomena. An example of this is the fractal wall, which provides passive design methods to appropriately deal with climate and site conditions. Walls are generally thought to be linear and not fractal, however, a commonly seen wall throughout Eastern Africa is made of reeds in which its woven pattern became continuously denser near the top. This density responds to higher winds near the top of the fence.This tighter pattern exactly coincides with wind to block dust particles near the top whilst still keeping sunlight and air flowing through at other locations of the wall (Eglash, 2007). Fractals can also be noticed at scales down to person-

Figure 49 Mud wall in Nigeria

Figure 50 Reed wall in Uganda, 1915

Figure 51 Natale ruins, South Africa

55

al crafts such as pottery and basket weave. Geometry and scaling is integral to not just African architecture but African culture and spirituality as it is representative of infinity and after life (Eglash, 2007). In contemporary application it speaks greatly to the idea of the natural cycle and sustainability and the relationship of land organisms, which is highly relevant in the realization of the thesis project's intentions. There are formal elements of East African vernacular that are more typical of various tribal traditions. One of these major vernacular components was the wall. Throughout East Africa's pre colonial past, walls are important for security, controlling sprawl, and psychic security (related to spirituality and ancestors) (Hull, 1976). Exterior walls were also used as a status symbol. Richard Hull in African Cities and Towns Before European Conquest wrote, "Queen Amina of Zaria constructed a high mud wall extending more than a hundred miles. While protecting Hausa markets from external threats emanating in the South, it also became an enduring testimony to the glorious reign of Amina" (Hull, 1976, p. 33). In African cities there was a hierarchy of walls, as the inner walls were used to protect royal compounds and the exterior walls were for the protection of all people under rule. Secondary walls between the two defined kinship ac-

Old Mushonge reeds wood

New Mushonge reeds wood mud and stone

Current buildings

steel

concrete

good thermal properties all local materials sheds rain water time consuming flexible plan

easier to build than old mushonge local materials kept rain away lack of ventilatioin

viewed as modern poor ventiliation hot noisy rain leakage

Figure 52 The evolution of architecture and building in rural communities, from vernacular to an imposed western prototype. Can a new architecure of empowerment rethink aspects of the vernacular?

56

tivities, and defined and protected extended families. Walls were constructed of what was locally available and this was dependent on the context. Queen Amina's wall was made from mud, however, many other regions used stone, reeds, thickets of vegetation, palm wood, and even iron (Hull, 1976). Issues of security remain a pressing issue in rural Tanzania to this day. And vernacular "city" wall still maintains formal and of symbolic importance and can be integrated into contemporary intervention. The vernacular of the Haya specifically, is fabricated from poles of wood, typically palm, and woven reeds or grasses. The materiality and form of the Tanzanian vernacular was a result of what the immediate environment had to provide, combined with the acquired skill set on how to utilize these materials. The haya's vernacular, being close to Lake Victoria, in a rather damp and lush location, therefore was heavily influenced by the use of wood and reeds (Lwamayanga, 2008, p. 15). The dwellings they forged from these materials were referred to as the mushonge. Early versions were round and conical to shed the rainwater in the tropical Kagera region. A bent palm wood pole frame was tied together at the top and fixed to the ground at the base. Then, a thick reed skin helped to insulate the spaces at night, protecting occupants from the drastic temperature drop that occurs overnight in the region. In this version the roof and walls were continuous.

Figure 53 Poles converge at top with hole for smoke to escape, reeds weave walls

Figure 54 Haya mushonge in the Kagera region, Tanzania

57

It wasn't until later, due to the traditional mushonge's labour intensive construction, the roof and walls formed two separate elements. Short poles were placed upright and in-filled with a mixture of clay, reeds, and various forms of mud brick. This style lacked a prominent entry and was relatively quick to build while still maintaining the rain shedding roof system, therefore it became the dwelling type of most locals, saving the process intensive old mushonge for designated chiefs and clan leaders (Lwamayanga, 2008). Today the Mushonge has almost diminished completely (Tibandebage, 2012). The cultural imprint left in the vernacular, which is still relevant to how communities function today in rural communities is of great importance when proposing a contemporary architecture for rural communities, however the main focus of the vernacular in regards to this thesis exploration is the material manifestation of the vernacular. Looking at how materials are derived from the site, and come together as a result of sweat equity is a key factor in architectures ability to support rural empowerment.

58

2.3.3 Limitations of the Vernacular The vernacular, while a highly useful culturally necessary tool in informing design decisions within rural communities, has its set of limitations and requires re-evaluation and adaptation. Firstly, it begins formally to enhance interior conditions utilizing passive design methods, however, there is potential to integrate new material knowledge and contemporary technologies to enhance these environments. For example, the mushonge was exceptional at keeping the haya peoples warm and dry during the rainy seasons and overnight (Lwamayanga, 2008), however this design method lacks adequate day lighting, and ventilation. Both lighting and adequate airflow are detrimental to the health and productivity of those in rural areas, and this is where an architecture for empowering reinterprets the vernacular and goes a step beyond it. Secondly, the vernacular is seen as rather rudimentary through the eyes of local Tanzanians.The current buildings, despite their lack of performance appropriateness and innovation, are a symbol of modernity within Tanzania. Building technique that has a strong resemblance to the vernacular is thought of as primitive, despite its potential to provide a more sustainable and comfortable environment. If the effective methods and approaches are reconsidered and enhanced in contemporary design teaching locals how to adapt their existing skill set, there is a greater likelihood that acceptance will follow. The act of building and designing within African communities, especially within the vernacular, is very much process based. Engaging the community within this can create a sense of ownership of the project as well as determine many of the formal qualities of the architecture. It is important to design with this in mind. The philosophy of Burkina Faso native architect, Francis Kere, highlights this approach as integral to the success of the design and construction. In a lecture given on his library for a school in Gando, Burkina Faso, he shows an image of women travelling to the building site single file each carrying traditional clay pots atop their heads. The pots were embedded within the ceiling of the library to allow light to penetrate deep into the central area of the floor plan (Kere). Using these vernacular materials in a new way allowed community members to be more open to the proposal. In this case engaging the community in the design process creates not only an almost ceremoni-

59

al display of tradition merging with innovation, but provides the ownership required to ensure the project is maintained over time. In addition to ownership, the community also has the skill set to maintain the project over the building life cycle. With this skill set the community also has the ability to grow together overtime As mentioned in the previous section, if there is a definite distinguishing feature of the vernacular that provides promise for a contemporary intervention it is its ability to source materials that are within its immediate environment. While other aspects of the vernacular are important, the material aspect of the vernacular is the focus of this thesis project exploration. In the context of rural Tanzania deforestation is an ever-increasing problem (ossrea, 1997, p. 3). As Tanzania urbanizes there is an increased demand for building materials. The production of concrete and the extraction of palm wood for lumber have negative effects on the environment (ossrea, 1997, p. 17). Materials become increasingly difficult for those in rural areas to access and must be transported to the site. This adds to the embodied energy of the material. Reintroducing the idea present in the vernacular that all materials are found from the earth, in abundance and in close proximity, is highly relevant for contemporary design in this context. However, the Haya vernacular's material choice has its limitations. Ecologies evolve, the rural vernacular has evolved, and palm wood may no longer be a viable and sustainable option for rural Tanzania.
Figure 56 Women carrying wood to markets Figure 55 Deforestation in Tanzania

% lost per year >1.5 1-1.5 0.5-1 0-0.5 >0-1 >1 not significant Figure 57 Map of deforestation rates per year

60

A method to alleviate this environmental strain, through the lens of Landscape architect James Corner, may be to reimaging the capabilities of the landscape and those inhabiting rural villages and reimage a new forward trajectory. The various ecologies, i.e., relationships between different organisms of the Lake and surrounding tropical environments in the Kagera region have changed drastically overtime and will continue to change as further exploitation occurs. Restoring them to their past abundance would prove to be near impossible if not potentially even more environmentally hazardous. Instead architects should aim to participate in the mediation rather than remediation of these landscapes, focusing on how existing species, and possibly new ones, can be improved or introduced based on the realistic limitations of the lands current state. In addition to this, relationships will always be undergoing constant change. Corner states in Not Unlike Life Itself: "The idea of strategy, more generally, invokes the art of engagement, typically in battles, but also in any activity that requires a certain finesse, careful positioning, and intelligent, informed, coordinated actions to ensure success (advantage rather than disadvantage, survival rather than death). However, to think solely in terms of ends is perhaps not accurate, for a good strategy remains dynamic and open and thereby assures its own longevity" (Corner, Not Unlike Life Itslef: Landscape Strategy Now, 2003, p. 33). The following materials to be explored were not necessarily a part of the Tanzanian vernacular themselves, however they are a strategy to modernize the vernacular. They transcend the limitations that building tradition and urbanization pose.

61

CHAPTER 4 The Promise of Bamboo
2.4.1 History, Application and relevance Bamboo has long been utilized in the vernacular. This thesis advocates that it is currently one of the most promising material choices for an architecture of development in a rapidly urbanizing context. It is the fastest growing organic structural material, growing at a rate of up to two inches per day, and is extremely flexible in its design capabilities as well as its various applications, architectural and other. Its lightness and flexibility allow for sunlight and ventilation to penetrate space and is therefore of particular importance in conceiving of an architecture that will empower rural Tanzanian villages, particularly, when the current building stock utilizes materials and design methods that do not allow proper ventilation, and lighting, negative side effects such as airborne illness, smoke accumulation, respiratory problems, learning deficiencies, and overall degradation of life quality occur. Having the freedom to protect oneself from the elements, while still enhancing the natural climatic conditions passively is highly achievable using this renewable and multifaceted material. Looking forward to aid in landscape mediation, the bamboo plant has a lot of potential in the Eastern African context. Traditionally not thought of as a plant that has flourished within Africa, but typically Asian, and South American
even though bamboo has potential to grow in any region in Tanzania, coastal zones, highlands, and lake regions (shown in hatch) carry the most potential

02

bamboo currently grows in two prominent areas, the Eastern Arc Mountains, as well as the lowland areas, comprising of approx. 127,000 ha (2000)

N Figure 58 Map of Tanzania showing potential and current bamboo growth

62

agricultural regions, there are in fact many native species of bamboo as well as newly introduced species that flourish. The Bamboo plant can adapt to many different climatic and soil conditions. Tanzania currently has two major zones which grow a variety of bamboo species, the high rainfall forests of the Eastern Arc Mountains and the Lowland Areas. Other exotic bamboo species have shown excellent growth within Tanzania. Bamboo, being so versatile, has the potential to go beyond these zones and grow in many other regions of the country, especially near lake regions, and coastal zones (Forestry and Beekeeping Department, 1999, p. 5). There are several initiatives to combine issues of women's economic empowerment with the multiple functions of the bamboo plant to achieve sustainable rural futures for Tanzania (IFAD). One of these interventions in Tanzania, the Myeba women's bamboo association run by Pauline Samata, recognizes the potential of introducing the plant on a large scale in rural Tanzania. Many women in rural Lake Victoria Villages are widowed through HIV when their husbands leave to work nearby fishing villages. The women may even travel themselves to shore line urban areas where they resort to prostitution (Elizabeth Maganaga Nsese, 2007). Samata runs a training program, which helps women learn about farming and processing bamboo so that they may make a decent living for themselves while still remaining settled in a rural community.
rhizome

The United Nations Food and Agriculture Association in a report on alternative non-timber products found that bamboo, where present, can help to
culm (hollow)

bring rural Tanzanian communities out of poverty as it is such a multipurpose material and can be utilized as a variety of household items (Forestry and Beekeeping Department, 1999, p. 5). The educational program run by Samata specifically focuses on innovative processing techniques to produce

node (where connections are to be made

high quality bamboo products and teaching proper harvesting, cultivation and management techniques to ensure the use of this resource is done so in a sustainable manner (IFAD). There are many initiatives similar that of Pauline Samata's, as bamboo offers a lot of benefits and new hope as a rural agricul-

cross section strength in dense perimeter fibres

tural and income generator. One of the most important factors about the bamboo crop is that it is rapidly renewable, unlike traditional types of wood, which is particularly relevant as

Figure 59 plant structure

63

Tanzania is currently facing deforestation. In addition to growing one to two inches per day in good conditions, the bamboo plant also has a non-invasive root species that will not degrade the soil quality. Over time it will actually work to re-mediate the soil. Bamboo can grow in a wide variety of climatic conditions, however it thrives in tropical climates such as the Kagera region where the Haya are located (Kigomo, 2007). For daily use the plant can be ingested as a source of nutrients. It can also be used to make agricultural tools, crafts, furniture, paper, and fencing for livestock. When burned, it burns much slower than typical firewood and also gives of less harmful emissions. Burning wood for fuel is a major contributing factor to deforestation in Tanzania (Kigomo, 2007). What makes bamboo of particular interest to this thesis exploration is its potential as an architectural medium or building material. It is flexible and has a simple curing process that, when done properly, has no negative environmental side effects, can be manipulated to achieve varying transparencies, members can be simply joined, formally it can achieve much more than any other current material in use, and most of all is context appropriate as it is on site and renewable (Kigomo, 2007). Initiatives such as the Pauline Samata's Bamboo Association are already trying to teach local women living in rural Tanzania how to work with bamboo to build their own homes. By using bamboo as a material, the intervention can allow for the landscape to become infrastructure and architecture. Gainful employment, higher standards of living, and a closed loop cycle with a sustained future, are supported through the architecture as a result. We can combine the knowledge of bamboo as ancient building material, as well as look to how contemporary architects have re-envisioned the material and its capabilities.
clean slow burning fuel may be made into tools medicinal properties infrastructure fencing food income furniture Figure 60 Bamboo is versatile, not only used for building but may be integrated into every aspect of rural life

64

2.4.2 Bamboo as a way of Building Where bamboo naturally grows rampant, it has been used as a vernacular building material. A particularly strong presence of bamboo vernacular, due to its geographic location, is within Colombia and Ecuador. Bamboo is present within the earliest archaeological site in Colombia. The Giant American Bamboo, or guadua plant, is integral to every aspect of life within most rural communities, sometimes even being referred to as the guadu civilization (Parsons, 1991, p. 137). Indigenous cultures within Colombia would utilize the plant to construct not only their homes, but for lances and knives, conFigure 61 Guadua siding on a house in Colombia

struction of aqueducts, bridges, fences, river rafts, and for utensils. They also played an important part in the locals diet as the bamboo could be ingested and drinking water could be drawn from in between the nodes. Once the nodes were cut, the bamboo could then be used as a vessel for storing other food items (Parsons, 1991, p. 139). Spanish travellers in Colombia noted its versatility and Ecuador saw a similar trend of bamboo adapted to all aspects of life. The uses in Ecuador extended to furniture, instruments, irrigation, and eventually, in more recent times, poles for power lines (Parsons, 1991, p. 139). The Guadua has such a rapid growth rate that a properly maintained plant would produce up to one thousand poles per year. This rapid growth and overall ease of harvesting, transporting, and working with the material made possible the quick construction of settlements centered around the coffee trade (Parsons, 1991, p. 139). Native's rural homes of Colombia, in the past and present, utilize bamboo as siding and in flooring. In Ecuador, bamboo was used in rural locations as the structure, which was built like a balloon frame, as well as the siding. Since the flooring was raised due to flooding, bamboo siding peeled away from the floor allowing air to enter. The bamboo lattice like siding was spaced for dispersed light and ventilation. Any windows in the home became primarily about views since lighting and ventilation were adequately dealt with through its use. The methods gave the dwellings a distinct architectural character as well, as one could see how the bamboo was being used. To build the structures, the homeowners themselves would have the required skills to construct. Machetes were used to harvest the poles and whittle the culms to create perfectly fitted joints (Parsons, 1991, p. 140).

Figure 62 Brick, perceived as more modern, covers bamboo siding in Ecuador

Figure 63 Bamboo roof: Indian vernacular

65

In addition to Colombia and Ecuador, India has a tradition of bamboo building as well. It is utilized for its high tensile strength in buildings that receive heavy wind loads. (Cooper & Dawson, 1998, p. 21). Homes, like the one depicted in South Bengal often utilized bamboo to create the roof structure, which was then hoisted to the column structure before it is parged over with thatch. Bamboo was widely utilized because of the simplicity and variety in its methods of vernacular joinery. The benefit of most vernacular joinery is its ability to be produced with materials and tools that can be found on site in even the most remote locations. Many of the depicted methods can utilize machete to whittle joints, wooden pegs, and a fibrous material such as reeds. The material has such an important role within every aspect of indigenous rural life, especially residential dwellings, and perhaps this is the reason why less suitable and far less sustainable materials are replacing the vernacular. Its versatility, particularly in Colombia, was taken for granted. Once expensive materials such as brick and cement were imported and to be viewed by others as luxurious, the use of bamboo was subsequently rendered primitive (Parsons, 1991, p. 142). Many referred to it as the poor man's wood despite its extraordinary capabilities as a construction material. Once cement and brick became more affordable in modern times bamboo began to be replaced. Eventually when foreign aid agencies such as the World Bank and AID began to intervene in poor rural locations, the interventions they left Colombia and Ecuador with were brick and concrete block housing that provided little comfort to the occupants (Parsons, 1991, p. 142).
Figure 64 Image of palm wood joinery

Figure 65 Image of palm wood joinery

Figure 66 Image of palm wood and reed joinery

Figure 67 Image of palm wood joinery

Figure 68 Image of reed and string joinery

66

However, recently there has been a renewed interest in the material, showcased by a number of contemporary architectural projects. As architects we can see the merit of bamboo in both its application and design potential, and its impact and role to play in urbanizing environments. We have the ability to reinvent the material and break down the associated stigmas it carries resulting from development. The following projects merge this innovation with rudimentary vernacular building methods.

67

2.4.3 Air, Lightness, and Flexibility: Bamboo and its structural and aesthetic capabilities in contemporary practice
Manziales

Many Architects working in the global south where bamboo is available are exploring its potential. One of the leaders in the bamboo construction movement is architect Simon Velez of Colombia. Velez is an advocate of the use of bamboo in Colombia due to its ability to umbrella over large areas with significant overhangs. Much like some tropical regions of Tanzania, ColomN

Colombia

bia experiences scorching daytime heat and heavy rains year round (Kraul, 2011). Velez, a native of Colombia, makes the argument that bamboo will be the future building material for Colombia. He has enhanced its capabilities with innovative custom joinery, a steel bolted joint set in concrete, that can

Figure 69 Mao of Manziales

4 3 2 1
Figure 70 Assembly stages of Zeri pavilion

achieve great spans (Kraul, 2011). One of his projects, the Zeri Pavilion for the 2000 EXPO in Hanover, Germany, is representative of the umbrella like quality he feels bamboo structures offer. The project is a large circular open structure, which varies in height from 8 to 14 meters high. The project was able to construct the 3500 bamboo pole structure without utilizing any cranes (Gernot, 2012, p. 132). The overhang of this particular structure reaches 7 meters in length, allowing protection from rain driven winds.The project's innovation includes concrete and mortar injections within the bamboo culms to achieve the greatest structural integrity possible (Rohrbach & Gillman, 2013). Another innovative project is from Ibuku, an international design build architectural practice completes nearly all of their work, including furnishings using bamboo. One of their projects, Aga Kahn 2010 finalist Green Village in Bali, is a residential sustainable living community, which uses bamboo at a variety of different scales, larger for structural and smaller sections of the plant

Figure 71 Concrete filled culm connection (top) & foundation (bottom)

7m 20m

Figure 72 Open Zeri pavilion overhang

Figure 73 Open Zeri pavilion

68

for window coverings and partitions (IBUKU, 2013). The structure is able to achieve curvilinear and unconventional forms, which actually speak to the local climate in a more sensitive fashion than its precursor buildings. To achieve these curvilinear and organic forms architect Jorg Staam reinterprets the traditional bamboo structure. Rather than utilizing the fairly rigid bamboo poles for his guest house in Ubud he gathers together a very thin bamboo with a diameter of 6 centimeters, strapped together with the fibrous material leather to create flexible structural members which he can manipulate (Gernot, 2012, p. 86). The house in Bali Indonesia has an ovoid roof structure which is cast directly into the ground plain and lends itself well to this structural method. To showcase a different aspect of bamboo's architectural application, architects from Norway TYIN Tegnestue commonly use bamboo not as a structural element, but as a wall and window covering to allow varying amounts of light to enter spaces and control security (TYIN Tegnestue). One can really get a sense of how multi dimensional the material can be from their Soe Ker Tie house in Noh Bo, Thailand. No one façade is the same, despite the singularity in material use, due to manipulating the shoots in different ways. Bamboo is an indigenous vernacular material to the region, however the Soe Ker Tie House reinterprets its use. As depicted, the bamboo is slated women and sliced into sections to achieve varying amounts of light and security within the shelters. These projects showcase innovative new interpretations of bamboo as a vernacular material. They combine the vernacular skills with innovation in structure, joinery, and façade material, to enhance the architectures performative aspects.
Figure 74 Map of No Bo, Thailand No Bo, Tak

Thailand
Gulf of Thailand
N

Figure 75 Exterior of Soe Ker Tie Houses

Figure 76 Interior utilizing bamboo

69

CHAPTER 5 The Unearthing of Mud
2.5.1 History, Application and Relevance Earth works, including a variety of earthen construction from bricks to rammed earth, is one of the earliest and most widely utilized vernacular building materials. It is still one of the most widely available structural and enclosure materials today. Earthen architecture can be implemented to create massive enclosures, structure and even roofing in many scenarios. Unlike bamboo with its near limitless structural, enclosure, and partitioning capabilities, there are processes in forming walls or earth blocks that have been continuously tried and tested over time, resulting in a rather formulaic architectural application. Earth architecture provides solidity and security and its heaviness anchors it to the earth from which it came. This mass translates to control and security of environments within developing environments such as those within Tanzania. It has excellent thermal abilities to control indoor environments in hot arid climates without the use of additional HVAC systems. It may also provide the physical security and separation that is needed to control certain uses and thus aid in empowering. Ronald Rael, architect and professor at Berkeley University and expert in the area of earthen construction, defines earthen architecture in his book Earth Architecture as being made up of any combination of, clay, gravel, silt, sand, and other friable soils (Rael, 2010, p. 12). Theoretical architectural writings on the use of mud brick construction date back to Vitruvius II Book on Architecture. Vitruvius creates a manual or guide in book II that illustrates the methods of creating and working with mud brick masonry (Pollio, 1960). Once again, it is seen as rather formulaic, as the stacking methods Vitruvius describes have not evolved significantly from what one would see done today. Even during modernism, synonymous with glass and steel, western architects were incorporating mud brick into their designs for its efficiency and economy.This is however, much less documented. Le Corbusier even experimented
Figure 77 Vitruvius mud brick diagram

02

70

with mud brick. He designed structures for agriculture, dwelling and civic purposes, and they were intended to be built by the occupants themselves. This was a large departure from the five points, however it was a more vernacular approach to address economy when rebuilding from war (Rael, 2010, p. 12). The use of mud brick is relevant in Tanzania, not only for its capabilities in design, but also for the geological composition of many rural areas. Rural villages in the Kagera region, to the West of Lake Victoria, have access to clay, which is optimal for mud brick construction. The clay was often used within the vernacular of the region to parge over interior walls (Tibandebage, 2012). Like the next set of vernacular examples it has a long tradition within Tanzania's indigenous building culture.

71

2.5.2 Mud as a way of Building Earthen construction is one of the most influential vernacular materials. Even concrete has origins in mud construction since it is so widely utilized and therefore engrained within building and vernacular culture. Concrete is a derivative of French earthen work named pise, a type of rammed earth (Rael, 2010, p. 13). Perhaps one of the most well known studies of mud brick vernacular, are the explorations by previously mentioned Egyptian architect, Hassan Fathy. He was heavily influenced by the vernacular for his village design of New Gourna, Egypt. Despite his previously mentioned failures on a social level Fathy deeply studied the vernacular construction methods and uses of mud brick in the Middle East during and after the construction of New Gourna. In his writings for Architecture for the Poor he describes that his method, and the approach he advocates architects take, is to utilize the existing skills of the locals and enhance them through creative thinking (Fathy, Architecture for the Poor, 2010, p. 20). He looked to the vernacular architecture of the Nubians. Fathy studied the building methods within the small provincial town of Aswan. At first Fathy did not feel that the town had anything to offer, but upon closer inspection he noted the acquired skill of the Nubian earth masons. The earthen architecture of the town consisted of two elements, which were of primary interest to Fathy, the decorative mud claustawork, and the vaulted earth brick roofs. Fathy spoke of his experience, "Among other things, I noticed with great surprise and interest that the refectory of main and secondary vaults to avoid a heavy filling between the curved surface of the vault and the horizontal floor above it. This showed argument that mud brick buildings could go up to two stories and still be going strong enough to survive for a thousand years." (Fathy, Architecture for the Poor, 1973, pp. 7-8) Earthen material is also commonplace in the vernacular throughout India. It
Figure 78 arches at Aswan

72

is usually load-bearing, supporting the dead load of a roof made from timber or bamboo (Cooper & Dawson, 1998, p. 21). In this context it is commonly mixed with cow dung, straw, stone or gravel. It is constructed in portions, foot-by-foot, course-by-course. When one dries, the next is laid. In some tribes, such as the Santal tribe of Orissa, uses decaying vegetal matter to help achieve greater plasticity in mud.The material is then sliced into blocks, which are sundried and then used for construction (Cooper & Dawson, 1998, p. 22). Kiln fired brick in India dates to around 5000 BC. Certain tribes such as the Harappan civilization were built upon the knowledge of kiln firing bricks, whereas others continued to bake the bricks within a wooden mould out in the sun. This was dependent on climate. The drier the region the more likely one was to sun dry brick (Cooper & Dawson, 1998, p. 24). In the words of art historian Ilay Cooper, "Malleable when wet, rigid when dry, the potential of mud as a building material mus have been apparent at an early stage of human development. It remains a primary building material in rural India, its versatility only beginning to be appreciated by formal architects." (Cooper & Dawson, 1998, p. 22) Earthen architecture in the contemporary architecture discourse is just beginning to be explored to maximize its potential. Today many buildings within the various regions still utilize a form of mud brick, however it has a similar stigma to that of bamboo. It is seen as a primitive building material and not
Figure 79 India Earth brick kiln

at all modern (Kere), however, the following contemporary projects give this formulaic material new life and renewed purpose.

sun dry

Figure 80 India earth brick storage

Figure 81 Mud home in India

73

2.5.3 Ground, Heaviness, and solidity: Earth works and their structural and aesthetic capabilities in contemporary practice The next set of architectural projects attempt to break the stigma of mud brick by only being utilized by those in extreme poverty.All projects acknowledge their potential to be sustainable and perform passively, making them quite superior to commonplace "modern" building such as concrete. In the previous chapter, Hassan Fathy's explorations in Nubia were explored. As previously mentioned, he reinterpreted the skills of the Nubian vernacular for a contemporary project in New Gourna. Upon touring the Nubian's mud brick vaulted ceilings he stated, "...I was getting more and more confirmation of my suspicions that the traditional materials and methods of the Egyptian peasant were more than fit for use by modern architects, and that the solution to Egypt's housing problem lay in Egypt's history." (Fathy, Architecture for the Poor, 1973, p. 8) With this perspective Fathy began to explore the potential of the vernacular in his designs for New Gourna. He believed that the architect had the ability to reinterpret the skills in an entirely new and innovative way. He also felt that the need to be "modern", the same need many rural Tanzanian communities feel currently, results in poor buildings (Fathy, Architecture for the Poor, 1973, p. 22). He worked with masons, as depicted in the imagery, to learn the skills required to translate the methods into his own design, to continuously evolve
Figure 83 Mason building arches learned from Aswan techniques Figure 82 Mason in New Gourna learning from vernacular techniques

sabras doors

claustrawork courtyards

domed earthwork

Figure 84 Elevation of Hassan Fathy's design for New Gourna and its vernacular influences reinterpreted for environmental and social performance

74

the vernacular, stating, "Once a particular tradition is established and accepted, the individual artists duty is to keep this tradition going, with his own invention and insight to give it that additional momentum that will save it from coming to a standstill, until it will have reached the end of its cycle and completed its full development." (Fathy, Architecture for the Poor, 1973, p. 25)
releases heat at night keeps interior cool during day

Another contemporary project, which utilizes mud brick and is of relevance to this exploration, is Francis Kere's design for a school in Gando, Burkina Faso. Kere grew up in Burkina Faso and was well versed in the rural vernacular, which was heavily reliant on mud brick. He was very aware of the stigma, and negative connotations that mud brick construction carried (Kere, 2012). Having the opportunity to study architecture abroad in Germany, he was fortunate enough to see the potential and passive benefits of earthen construction, and wished to showcase to the people of Gando how it could improve their lives if executed properly (Kere, 2012). Like Hassan Fathy felt the architect had the ability to reinterpret the skills of the vernacular, so did Kere. His belief resulted in an innovative merger between tradition and modernity. The school was made almost entirely from clay. Along with the locals he experiments with casting the clay and reinforcing it with steel. He even shows locals how they can tamp clay material and polish it to reveal a smooth floor finish. The clay has thermal qualities, keeps dust out of the classrooms, and keeps children safe (Kere, 2012). Even though earthen architecture is rather formulaic, as it is a material of mass and stability, Kere has found ways to stretch the materials capabilities. One defining feature of the library positioned beside the school, is its clay pot roof. Women from the community gather locally made pottery and bring it to the site where it is are broken and cast into more clay to create the ceiling. A larger roof structure is elevated overhead, so that the occupants receive light through the pots, while still having a great deal of temperature and noise control within the space. This use of material and form is truly representative of innovation merging tradition and modernity (Kere, 2012).

Figure 85 Plan of mudbrick classroom

Figure 86 Women work together to smooth out mud floor

Figure 87 Compressed earth bricks forming coloumns and walls

75

03

Test Case: Muleba North Village

76

77

CHAPTER 6 Muleba North as a Test Site
3.6.1 Test Site

03

The following proposal both furthers the research and responds to it.The architectural discourse has a longstanding history of professionals testing their research and ideas through theoretical projects. Le Corbusier quite frequently utilized test sites and projects as a way of furthering his design principles and demonstrating them, on both the larger urban and smaller residential scale. In The City of Tomorrow and its Planning, Corbusier lays out the justification for what he feels is the ideal urban plan in modernizing cities, particularly Paris. His congestion free city of high rise commercial, mid rise residential, and primarily green space, was demonstrated for his fictional design of the Contemporary city. Later, he applied this design as research to a more specific site for the plan Voisin. Corbusier also proposed his five points of architecture, published in Vers un Architecture and sought out a test project to illustrate them. The pilotis, roof garden, horizontal strip window, free plan, and free façade, were all exemplified within design for the Villa Savoye.

pilotis

free plan

free facade

strip windows

roof terrace Figure 90 Five points of architecture by Le Corbusier

Figure 89 The Villa Savoye, a test site for five points of architecture by Le Corbusier

78

This thesis will utilize the research conducted to date and attempt to explore the capabilities of bamboo and mud brick pertaining to an architecture that empowers those in rural Tanzanian communities. This opportunity is to see how the proposed position of this thesis may unfold in a real place, in a real time.

79

3.6.2 Ujamaa Tanzania, a former British colony was formed in in 1964 when Zanzibar and the mainland, then named Tanganyika, united and gained independence from Britain. The country currently has a population of 48,000,000 persons with over 25% being urban as of 2010 (Central Intelligence Agency, 2010). It has been known to be one of the most diverse African cities in population, climate, and geographic conditions. The diversity comes from its many native tribes. There are 120 different ethnic groups in total. Each tribe speaks Swahili, English, and their traditional native language. In addition to language as a means to communicate, each tribe has its own methods of traditional dance, which are used to convey important messages to their own tribes, as well as to others (Carlson & Pratt). Tanzania is a relatively peaceful country and despite the diversity among tribes, there is a strong sense of unity, which Tanzanians prides themselves on. This unity likely comes with the common language of Swahili as well as strong leadership from past president, and the first president of Tanzania, Julius Nyerere. Julius Nyerere led the main land Tanganyika into independence and believed in re-adopting traditional pre-colonial communal traditions and expands upon them. He introduced the socialist idea of the Ujamaa village in which communities would act as family units sharing land and working together towards agricultural production (Anderson, 2005). Overall his system failed as there was not enough incentive for rural communities at the time, but the mentality of the community and unity still resonate with Tanzanians

Figure 91 Former Tanzanian President, Julius Nyerere

Figure 92 Former Tanzanian President, Julius Nyerere

80

to this day. The goals of president Nyerere are increasingly relevant in today's rural Tanzanian context. He wanted to lead Africa away from the projected western capitalism (Anderson, 2005). Nyerere's ideas support local rural empowerment. He wanted to keep people in rural villages providing them with a lifestyle that would provide for a sustainable future for his country. At a time when rural to urban migration has become almost necessary to Tanzanians for survival, it is more important than ever to revisit to concept of Ujamaa and how it may translate into architectural intervention.

Lake Victoria Serengeti

wildlife reserves & parks

Kilamanjaro

Lake Tanganyika Lake Malawi N Figure 93 Tanzania's resources

Tanzanians also have a shared sense of pride in their countries natural resources. The diverse geography gives them the Serengeti, Mount Kilimanjaro, and Lake Victoria. The lake is one of the most devastating examples of resource depletion in Africa as it provides employment and sustenance for many. The changing ecology and industry surrounding the lake, due to western capitalism, is constantly changing social dynamic in the country. Lake Victoria is the world's second largest freshwater lake and the largest lake in Africa (Elizabeth Maganaga Nsese, 2007). It is located in Northern Tanzania, and is at the center of one of the countries largest economies, the fishing industry (Elizabeth Maganaga Nsese, 2007). Mid twentieth century, an invasive species of fish named the Nile Perch was introduced into the Lakes waters. This species has been Tanzania's major export to European countries since the 60's, however its increasing dominance over other species throughout Lake Victoria has negative environmental and social side effects to those who depend on the Lake for survival (Elizabeth Maganaga Nsese, 2007). In addition to the Nile Perch, a new invasive species has emerged potentially as a result of imbalance. The water hyacinth is a rapidly growing weed that lines shores and blocks fish migration while simultaneously removing oxygen from the water (All Africa). Another contributing factor to disturbing the natural ecological balance of the existing species are industrial manufacturing plants, which process the fish. They line the shore and deposit wastes and effluent into the Lake. To increase economic opportunities surrounding this existing fishing industry, environmentally rich marshlands have been replaced by cash generating agriFigure 95 Water hyacinth at Lake Victoria Figure 94 Food scarcity due to degradation of Lake Victoria

81

culture from which its by products may also degrade the quality of the Lake. From a social perspective there is a lack of ownership taken to actively protect the lake. Even daily local activities such as car washing produce chemicals that contaminate the lake showcasing that there exists a lack of regard for sustaining it (Elizabeth Maganaga Nsese, 2007).Within a matter of a few short years the Lake will no longer be able to sustain life within its waters, widening poverty gaps due to loss of industry. This increases health problems due to lack of sanitation, causing a variety of other land species to diminish from the area, and causing widespread hunger (United Nations, 2008). The Canadian international development Agency has identified Tanzania as a country of focus in terms of food security (CIDA, 2012). If the Lake can no longer provide food, this need for adequate nutrition will become more severe.
UGANDA

Bukoba RWANDA Muleba

Lake Victoria
Mwanza

Musoma

KENYA

Biharamulo BURUNDI Kibondo Kasulu

Sengerema Mosh Kahama Arusha Shinyanga Nzega Kiomboi Singida Babati Same

Kigoma

Tabora

Kondoa Korogwe

Tanga Handeni Pangani

Manyoni Mpanda

Dodoma
Kilosa Morogoro Iringa

Zanzibar Bagamoyo

Dar es Salaam

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO Sumbawanga

Ifakara Chunya Vwawa Tunduma Mbeya Tukuyu Kyela Lindi Mtwara MIkindani MALAWI Mbinga Songea Tunduru Masasi Newala Rujewa Makambako Njombe Mahenge Kilwa Kivinje

ZAMBIA

0

100

500

1000km

MOZAMBIQUE

N

Figure 96 Map indicating region of test site, Kagera to Dar es Salaam. Railways are in pink while roadways are in black

82

In addition to food and species scarcity, the Lake also presents an opportunity for quick employment to many. Often times, the circumstances of the employment are not necessarily ones that will empower. Many men from surrounding rural locations travel to the Lake in search of work in the fishing industry. Meanwhile, they have left their wives back in rural communities alone with their families. Many times men turn to prostitution and spread the HIV virus upon returning to their rural homes. In other cases, women who have been widowed, or cannot support herself or her children, will migrate to the shores of Lake Victoria to find work in the sex trade (Elizabeth Maganaga Nsese, 2007).

83

major road Lake Victoria

Lake Victoria

0

50

250

500km

N

Figure 97 Map locating Muleba site

forestation/ banana plantation major road Lake Victoria

Lake Victoria

0

5

25

50km

N

Figure 98 Map lacation Muleba site

84

secondary school primary school convent baptist church anglican church police prison sports stadium hospital forestation/ banana plantation major road secondary roads and paths Muleba city limits 0 2.5 12.5 25km N

Figure 99 Map locating Muleba site (Map of Muleba city limits)

secondary school residential cash crops forestation/ banana plantatioin secondary roads Muleba city limits

0

0.5

2.5

5km

N

Figure 100 Map of site in Muleba North

85

3.6.3 Muleba limitations and opportunities One of these rural villages, which has an immediate migratory relationship with Lake Victoria, Muleba, has been selected as the test site for this thesis project exploration. It is located in the Kagera region off the Eastern Coast of Lake Victoria. The town of Muleba consists of about 10,000 people with smaller rural villages outside of its city limits. This thesis project will be looking to intervene within the context of rural Muleba. Upon meeting with Richard Tibandebage of the Tanzanian High Commission in Ottawa to gather first hand local experience of the Tanzanian context for this intervention it became apparent that this village has many needs, as well as provides many opportunities. To fully grasp these needs and assess where further opportunities may be sought out it is important to understand the average day of the Muleba family. The typical family unit in this location consists of a mother and her children. There is a strong physical link to elders and other extended family members in this community, and in most other Haya communities. Although polygamy was once common practice, it has subsided in popularity due to Western influences. In this particular village most husbands and adolescent males have left the community to fish on a nearby island off the coast of Lake Victoria,

children stay with thier mothers until 5-7 years old. A secondary school is in the area (roughly 2km walk). Young chilfren do not have access to a primary school nearby. If they are to attend, they must walk to near by town (3+ kms)

0

0.5

2.5

5km

N

Figure 101 Activity pattern map in Muleba North: School

86

women sleep at home with their children while men sleep in fishing dormitory communities

food is dried in front of homes

walk to church 3 to 4 kms away

0

0.5

2.5

5km

N

Figure 102 Activity pattern map in Muleba North: Leisure

women must fetch water, carrying it over heads, often bringing children with women raise livestock to eat

gather agriculture from ones own crop for food

$

walk to market (4 kms) to purchase food females cook indoors and eat outdoors for their families and extended families

0

0.5

2.5

5km

N

Figure 103 Activity pattern map in Muleba North: Food/water

87

men have left for extended periods to fish on islands

women plant mantain and harvest crops

$
0 5km

women must bring agriculture to markets 4+ kms away, carrying products over thier heads

0.5

2.5

N

Figure 104 Activity pattern map in Muleba North: Livelihood

where they may stay for days as fishing for some species is done after dusk (Tibandebage, 2012). Upon waking each morning at dawn the mother will provide her children and elders with a small breakfast of plantain picked locally and bread previously purchased at the market (Carlson & Pratt). It is not uncommon for her to witness her neighbors setting out for the nearest clinic on foot with an ill family member on stretcher. Clinics like the one they are travelling to are often as far as 10kms away and service many surrounding villages, which lead to long wait times (Tibandebage, 2012). Families could be there for many hours if not days depending on how severely care is needed. HIV prevalence is highest in the Kagera Muleba region at about 26% infection rate, which is 5% higher then the national average (Mulisa, 2013). Parasitic, intestinal, nutritional, and respiratory disease is a widespread problem overall and a dire need for clinics exists (Carlson & Pratt). Potable water for drinking must be the fetched by hand by the women and brought back to the village. In this case women must walk over 5 kilometers to reach the Lake in which they gather water which is contaminated and return to their communities, carrying the barrels overhead. Once back in the village, her children old enough to attend school have walked to the main town of Muleba almost 3 kilometers away to attend the nearest school (Tibandebage, 2012). Inside the school is overcrowded, dark, hot, and noisy. The building, which is concrete and rectilinear in form with a corrugated metal

88

roof, does not facilitate the appropriate learning environment. Back in the village, the child's mother is simultaneously caring for her youngest as well as sewing seeds, tending to livestock, harvesting crops and preparing agricultural product for market. While those who are able tend to the crops, elders and pregnant women participate in craft.Weaving mats from reeds is a common pastime in the Haya culture and these goods may also be sold in the market. The mother and her fellow female community members must travel 3 kilometers to deliver the goods to market by hand, as there is no formal market or infrastructure in the town (Tibandebage, 2012). No proper storage facilities exist so the crops such as tea, coffee, sugar and bananas must all be taken or they will go to waste. Once the children return home from school bringing any extra water they can with them, the dinner meal is cooked early to take advantage of daylight, as there is no source of electricity in the village. A meal of starchy vegetables including cassava and protein from the community's livestock, such as goat, will be prepared, usually indoors, where smoke accumulates in the poorly ventilated homes (Carlson & Pratt). After the meal, which is customarily eaten outdoors, the night will typically commence with song and dance. Song and dance is highly important to the Haya culture. Songs all have purpose whether it is to convey stories or news, mourn tragedy and death, or celebrate life; music is integrated into every aspect of the Tanzanian's life (Carlson & Pratt). Dance in traditional colourful costume accompanies the music. Members of the community may gather to watch in any open space within the village. On Sunday's the mother and her children will join elders and other families in church. She is catholic, and must travel to the main town to attend service. Others in the community are Lutheran or Anglican and must also travel to reach their church (Tibandebage, 2012). Other major architectural limitations within the Muleba village include latrines. Typically latrines have security issues, particularly for women, as they may be located in an isolated area. In addition to this there is increased spread of disease and contamination of ground waters with the current infrastructure. The materials that most homes are currently constructed from do not provide comfortable environments for the inhabitants. After interviewing

89

in Dar es Salaam...

A day in the life of the Haya woman...

...busy informal markets are bustling

MULEBA

meanwhile, across the lake, exists a quiet community in rural Muleba Muleba

LAKE VICTORIA

The community is situated amongst banana plants

she walks outside to see fellow community women, children, and elders

meanwhile, across the lake,on a small island, hus-

...often leaving for long periods of time or widowing women of Muleba

MULEBA FISHING VILLAGE

2kms

Figure 105 A day In the life of a Haya woman

90

in the morning, the mother witnesses her neighbours taking an ill elder to the nearest clinic a few villages away...if they do not leave now they will not make it

children old enough depart for school

conditions at school are poor...daylighting is poor and the room becomes hot and noisy

latrines are unsanitary and cause issues of security

fetch water from miles away

...back in Muleba, the mother sews seeds

they must deliver harvest by foot to markets in town

her youngest help

Figure 105 A day In the life of a Haya woman

91

livestock running free, must be fed

elders pass the day weaving traditional mats

by the afternoon, indoor environments are too hot for the elders

after long periods of heat, heavy rains start, buildings become noisy and leakage occurs

children return home from school carrying water

the mother cooks indoors,

dinner is eaten outdoors with elders

before they retire at dusk traditional haya song and dance is performed and enjoyed by all

Figure 105 A day In the life of a Haya woman

92

Tibandebage, it is apparent that the rural communities North of Muleba's city limits are in dire need of education, health care, agricultural innovation, and above all a driving force to keep people from seeking a new life elsewhere. The selected site for the proposed thesis intervention, The Muleba North health care clinic, school, and women's empowerment centre, is situated in an open plot of land located directly between two villages just North of the Muleba city limits. The two villages have a combined population of approximately 300 people. The climate is a tropical one and the landscape is situated just above 1200 meters above sea level (Weather). Surrounding the open plot of land and enveloping the existing residential dwellings are dense banana plantations. Various other crops for agriculture exist surrounding the banana plantations including, coffee tea, and cassava plants, however the once fertile soil has started to degrade do to over extraction. Clay like soils also exists in areas of the Muleba region (Tibandebage, 2012). Despite being relatively damp compared to many other regions of Tanzania there are two major rainy seasons. During the months of March April and May it usually rains anywhere from 120 to around 200 millimeters per month. The second rainy season, during the months of October, November, and December, experiences rainfall between 80 and 110 millimeters per month.Temperatures remain relatively similar year round, with an increase of only a few degrees September to November. Average highs are anywhere from 18 to 21 degrees Celsius but may drop by 10 degrees during the nighttime (Weather). The wind patterns in Muleba are primarily East and Southwest. The Eastern winds are predominant from January to August, with the highest weed speeds reaching approximately 4km/hr. in May. Southwesterly winds are common from July through December, with the strongest in July around 3.8kms/hr. and tapering off to the high twos in December (WeatherOnline). It is vital to know the climatic and geographic conditions of the location so that the architecture and landscape may work with wind, rain, and sun patterns utilizing passive technologies to achieve comfortable microclimates and various other benefits such as potential for water collection.

93

climate: rainfall january february march april may june july august september october november december

days of rain (1 drop=5)

rainfall amount (mm) rainy seasons

Figure 106 Climate of Muleba North: rainfall

climate: wind N 2.2 km/hr 3.1km/hr 3.4 km/hr 3.7km/hr 4.0km/hr 3.8 kn/hr 3.9kn/hr 3.8km/hr january february march april may june july august
primary wind direction wind direction (largest=most frequent)

NE

E

SE

S

SW

W

NW

3.1km/hr september 3.1kn/hr october

3.2km/hr november 2.8kn/hr december

N

Figure 107 Climate of Muleba North: wind

94

3.6.4 How can Architecture empower Muleba? Architecture can provide the vehicle that emancipates one, particularly the Haya woman and her children within Muleba. This thesis proposes to implement new program to Muleba based on its needs, which will anchor the community and garner a renewed interest in rural communities. The architecture supports this response. Its form and materiality are conceived with all previously themes of urbanization in mind, including, economy, environment, tradition, health, etc. The program, a health clinic, kindergarten school, and women's economic empowerment centre, are all currently absent from the Muleba region, as well as many surrounding rural regions. Health, education, and employment need to exist if one wishes to stay located in a rural location. The architectural intervention to house this program is comprised of discussed elements of bamboo and earthen materials. Bambo allows freedom through light and air, while earth anchors the complex for security. The intervention will utilize four main strategies derived from the research which include, passive design, healthy architecture, affordability and sweat equity, and perhaps most importantly, growing an architecture. Growth acknowledges the benefits of combining built form with landscape, or the rural with the urban, into an integrated community in which one can simultaneously work and recreate. At the turn of the nineteenth century within the Western context, Ebenezer Howard in his book Garden cities of tomorrow, promotes combing traditional urban life with traditional rural life. He feels that one should not have to choose between the social isolation and employment limitations that the rural environment provides or the dense polluted city that the urban working lifestyle provides. He highlighted this through his iconic diagram of the town country magnet. His plan for garden cities included a green belt and areas within close proximity in which residents in urban areas could experience the environmental aspects of rural life (Howard, 1965). Much like Howard believed in choice during the height of industrial America,

95

this thesis promotes choice for the Tanzanian, specifically women in the rapidly urbanizing African context. With the current influx of population to urban areas as a result of low economic opportunity in rural communities, the living conditions in these city centres continue to degrade. Bringing economy back to rural areas with the aid of agriculture may benefit from Howards early ideas. However, this design strategy furthers the ideas of Le Corbusier and Howard. The landscape and the built environment can work in a closed loop cycle, feeding into one another, dependent on one another, which creates an architecture that is very much a product of the town and country merging. The environment can be manipulated into the built form, creating an infinite and continuous cycle. One has the ability to grow his or her own house and grow their community. By understanding the life cycle of agricultural crops in which the built form will be situated in and grown from (i.e., the growth rate, harvest for resale and amount needed to fuel personal community use), the inhabitants needs, both social and economic may be satisfied by through this vision. In addition to the environmental impacts of sourcing materials from outside of the region, the likely lack of infrastructure at the beginning of the intervention in a rural area will prevent the design from sourcing materials that exceed a certain number of kilometers radius from the site. Almost everything one may require is within a certain walking distance from any location within their community boundary and may change as the boundaries themselves continue to grow and evolve, providing new opportunity.

Figure 108 Ebenezer Howard's Town and Country magnet

96

Opportunity leads to empowerment. These two have long history of being linked with one another. To clarify the relationship between opportunity and empowerment, we can look to a recent Western example of President Barack Obama's early formative years in Chicago. He spent some time in the mid 1980's as the community organizer for the Altgeld Gardens public housing project. He assisted the low income residents, who had a difficult time accessing employment themselves, with job training and other informative programs. He provided the residents with an opportunity. Not only were they accessing better housing, jobs, and education, but they now had the skills to help run their own community (Walsh, 2007). This opportunity empowered them, freeing them to achieve a higher quality of life. It is this provision of opportunity that is the measure of success in all endeavours, which aim to empower. The more opportunity architecture can provide, the more it has the potential to empower.

97

CHAPTER 7 Design

3.7.1 Design Strategies

03

From the research, a number of strategies may be employed and tested. This set of strategies speaks to how bamboo and earthen architecture manifest themselves in order to support an architecture that empowers rural Muleba in the context of urbanization. The following four strategies, passive design, healthy architecture, affordability and sweat equity, and growing an architecture, all incorporate the explored materials to showcase how one can maximize opportunity in rural Tanzania through architectural intervention. The first of the four strategies, passive design, is easily achieved, even in the tropical climate of Muleba, when the two materials are utilized in an appropriate and innovative fashion. Passive methods can be adapted from both the vernacular and contemporary practices. Bamboo can create lightweight structures that are elevated to ensure cooling ventilation throughout the centre. Along with airflow, indirect sunlight may enter the spaces to provide optimal learning environments. Large overhangs and a sloping structure allow rain to shed away from the indoor environments. To keep indoor environments cool during the daytime and counteract the dropping nighttime temperatures, the thick earthen wall mass may act as a thermal wall storing and radiating heat. As previously discussed, health care and the adequate facilities are lacking from many rural communities like Muleba North, and conditions in urban areas are no better. Health is foremost in empowering, above the social and economic aspects. Simply put, without adequate personal health, healthy functioning rural communities cannot exist and the rural will not succeed in providing incentive for one to remain there. This second strategy aims to address issues of health through architectural form. Architecture can provide the community with a learning tool to teach about proper personal care. Ventilated clinic rooms and open-air waiting rooms can begin to teach about
Figure 109 Strategy 1: passive ventilation

98

5km

airborne illness. Providing fresh water through rainwater collection made possible through the roof or ground's design provides sanitation and teaches one the great importance of water sanitation and consumption. The form can be instrumental of healthy practices within the clinic, but the centre itself must be kept secure if it is to function properly. If inoculations and HIV testing are to occur, adequate security must be implemented to keep medical supplies, patients, and staff safe. Spatial planning, layout and material use can work together providing the most secure intervention possible. The third strategy relates to community involvement in the construction
Figure 110 Strategy 2: health and awareness

process. As this relates to affordability and access to materials tools, it absolutely becomes an architectural problem to be solved. Sweat equity, or the act of community combining efforts and labour to increase the value of the project, is essential to the realization of a community-shared centre in Muleba.When local residents have the opportunity to build their own centre from materials available to them, they are given a new skill set. This skill can help to maintain the centre, potentially gain employment, and the knowledge can even be passed along to neighbouring communities.The architecture that assists this type of sweat equity is one that is easily understandable. It is imperative to communicate design and structural ideas in a universal language. This approach has a direct impact on how the project manifests itself. In Francis Kere's work he utilizes easy to understand diagrams that break away from traditional architectural drawings. He also uses creative ways of describing structural properties, such as creating live demonstrations to describe structural properties (Kere). The concept of translating design ideas into a "universal language of design" has been explored through this thesis by utilizing a series of pictograms to represent information. The final product itself is transparent in the sense that it always aims to be useful as a learning tool just by studying its structural and material qualities. The Norwegian architectural practice TYIN Tegnestue has projects that are exemplary of this legibility of locally found materials. Their project for the Cassia Co-op, a cinnamon farmers training Centre in Indonesia, puts the materials in dialogue with the building users, showing them how they are used in both construction and the agricultural industry (TYIN Tegnestue). The con-

5km

5km

Figure 111 Strategy 3: community involvement

Figure 112 Strategy 4: growth

99

struction process itself must be accessible to locals with minimal tools and products brought from off the building site. Once again, the vernacular may merge with innovation to achieve this result. The final, and perhaps one of the most important strategies in the context or urbanization is an architecture that grows. A community should literally be able to grow their own architecture. Growth is intended to occur in plan over time as well as pertain to building material. Given that funding is likely to come in phases there must be a plan to expand upon what has already been constructed. Rather than serving the immediate needs of just the community, it is apparent that the building will likely have the opportunity to serve surrounding communities as well, and therefore one must speculate that growth is likely to occur in numbers. It is also likely that spatial use may change as necessary, or due to unforeseen changes, making plans for adaptability for the unplanned essential. In addition to the growth of the structure and plan, the material itself is also grown. Bamboo that creates the roof structure can come from the site itself. This decreases the negative environmental impacts associated with development and construction. In the words of Simon Velez, the architecture becomes move "vegetarian". It is of the earth (Velez, 2010). The inner earthen component of the centre is also extracted from the earth in a sustainable fashion. These strategies represent the culmination of research pertaining to the needs and concerns of an architecture that is to empower and anchor Muleba within the rapidly urbanizing context of Tanzania. Each individual strategy can be attended to utilizing the embodied knowledge of the vernacular as well as innovation exemplified through contemporary architecture utilizing bamboo and earthen material.

100

3.7.2 A Layout of Ideas The three major programmatic components, the school, women's empowerment centre, and clinic, are encapsulated by secure rammed earth and earth black enclosures. To allow light and air to flood the interior spaces, without the effects of wind driven rain, the two large undulating bamboo structures umbrella the individual rooms and walkways.To maximize security, in addition to the earthen walls, the clinic and library are both located at the entry to the
pedestrian paths to site entrance

bamboo growth

existing dirt road has potential to recieve more traffic

located between two residential clusters without any existing amenities

pedestrian paths to site entrance

Muleba village to South 0 10 50 100m N

Figure 113 Muleba North Site Plan

Figure 114 Overall render

101

centre.This "eyes on the street" notion allows for maximized security due to the receptionist's lookout station and keeps the most public uses to the front of the site. Beyond the entry walls are where patients may wait and community members may take their library books to read. Once inside the secured compound, a large courtyard utilized for children's play, trade of bamboo products and other local resources, as well as water collection takes place. In the left hand bar, three classrooms are separated each by earth blocks for noise control and teachers are able to face outwards for maximizing supervision. At the end of the left bar a composting latrine protrudes so that the prevailing winds may ventilate unwelcome odours away from the centre itself. Nearby the latrines, off the covered walkway, rain water is collected for hand washing by a roof gutter system. Any excess water that floods off the roof during heavy rains is washed into subterranean cisterns towards the back of the site. Before the water enters the concrete cisterns it is filtered through bamboo plantings that surround the openings. The right side of the bar contains a workshop for women to produce crafts and goods as well as cook, and a classroom to hold seminars on new types of agriculture, such as the cultivation and harvesting of bamboo. Women now have the opportunity to work or become educated, as well as supervise their younger children simultaneously. Three clinic rooms, as well as a doctor's office and reception area, exist in the clinic program. A secure disposal pit for medical waste exists only once past the doctor's office. The right bar also contains overnight accommodation for teachers and doctors who may be working abroad or from neighbouring villages. While physically connected to the complex itself, being underneath the bamboo umbrella, access occurs from private courtyards to the exterior to allow for residents to have a separate space away from work. The perimeter of the complex is of rammed earth with punctures created by bamboo sections to provide views to the exterior, while the interior is of compressed earth block due to its slimmer profile than rammed earth. To control entry and security a series of bamboo screens pivot closed in front of certain rooms, but can also be opened fully to blur the boundary between indoor and outdoor when desired. The design was informed by the aforementioned strategies and realized through the two materials. The first of the four strategies, passive design, utilizes the capabilities of bamboo and earth to respond to the climatic issues of

102

28

13

12

8

27

9

10

11

7

14 29 6 25 15

5

16

4 3

24

17 18 30 19 20 26 23 22 21

1

2

24

0 1

5

10m 11. workshop/ kitchen 12. curing area 13. test crops 14. class women's 15. residence 1 16 large residence 2 17. residence 3 18. clinic room 1 19. clinic room 2 20. clinic room 3

N 21. disposal areas 22. office/ reception 23. patient reception 24. waiting room 25. outdoor market/playground/performace 26. clinic emergency exit 27. emergency exit 28. staff latrines/ shower area 29. bamboo crops 30. bamboo visual shield

1. library 2. entry/ outdoor reading area 3. covered porch 4. office 5. class 1 6. class 2 7. class 3 8. latrines 9. cisterns and hand wash water collection 10. solar cooker Figure 115 Floor Plan

103

0 1

5

10m

N

Figure 116 Circulation map indicating blue for teachers and students, red for clinic patients and doctors, and green for women using empowerment centre

104

0 1

5

10m

Figure 117 West elevation

0

1

5

10m

Figure 118 East West Section

0

1

5

10m

Figure 119 North South Section

105

the Kagera region.As previously mentioned, the common place building stock has become increasingly devoid of site specificity and creates uncomfortable internal environments. Through innovation, this thesis design project sought to look to ways in which the Haya vernacular dealt with the tropical climate of the Haya tribe's region, and the capabilities of bamboo and earthen construction. The dramatic temperature change of 10 degrees centigrade from daytime to evening, calls daytime cooling and nighttime heat release through

N Figure 120 Passive Strategy Diagram

106

Figure 121 Passive strategy diagram

thermal massing. The long bars of rammed earth wall soak up the sun during the day, keeping the rooms cool, and releases the heat at night to heat up spaces that may be inhabited after hours, particularly the clinic. To help keep the spaces cool, and provide adequate lighting within, the light bamboo structure lifts away from the building with an overhang large enough to keep occupants dry during the rainy season. The roof structure, a type of space truss designed from bamboo, allows the roof to have a slightly undulating curvature. This curvature allows for passive ventilation throughout the North South running elongated bars, as well as appropriately shedding rainwater much like the regions vernacular musonge did. The second strategy aims at providing opportunity for communities to become physically healthier, through not only the design considerations themselves, but also utilizing architecture as a method to inform individuals of healthy practice. Open-air waiting rooms are utilized to decrease the transmission of airborne disease, and clinic waiting rooms are properly ventilated utilizing the light bamboo roof. The mud brick enclosures add an impenetrable layer of security, beyond which medical waste is disposed of. This theft prevention of needles and other waste may also help to minimize the spread of disease. It is clear to patients visiting the clinic of the importance of ventilation and disease prevention due to the articulated roof structure that covers both interior rooms and exterior waiting areas. The architecture also helps to speak to the health benefits of clean drinking water. Clean water is offered in two ways. The sloped roof utilizes the runoff to collect at the base of the courtyard within subterranean cisterns, and it also collects rainwater to be

107

natural daylighting thermal mass keeps cool during day and releases heat at night rainwater collected from roof for handwashing large amounts of rainfall collected from roof to courtyard and into concrete cisterns for potable water doctors stay beside but separate from clinic with thier own entrance from beyond the centres perimeter wall

patients have thier own private rooms which completely open up due to hinged bamboo screens, or can be secured medical waste disposal is secure, occupying a corner space beyond the dooctor's office doctor's office and recpetion are away from waiting room for crowd control, however have direct views

natural ventilation keeps airbourne disease at bay and environments comfotable

a shaded outdoor waiting room provides plenty of space for patients and thier families to wait in a well ventilated area with a reduced chance of contracting certain illnesses patients to be seen are welcomed through the front entry Figure 122 Health strategy diagram

utilized for immediate hand washing. As mentioned in the research, bamboo was used as piping for infrastructure in Colombia. In the thesis project design it is used as a gutter, which then filters to a bamboo pipe for storage in an elevated basin to be used as hand washing water for the latrines and clinic. The bamboo also filters water before it enters the underground cistern. The third strategy, community involvement, recognizes that to provide opportunity and be truly accessible to a rural community such as Muleba, it must be easy to construct from basic tools on site, as the existing infrastructure may be seen as an obstacle for delivering goods and large equipment to

108

site, not to mention the lack of access to large amounts of electricity. Allowing for all community members to simultaneously lend a hand and become part of the construction process not only creates an opportunity to overcome the barriers caused by lack of machinery, but it also provides a sense of ownership achieved through sweat equity. The architecture itself lends it self to this accessibility of construction and is designed for ease of construction using limited tools yet maximum community participation. The first step in the process is both the extraction of one of the prime building materials and the excavation of the site itself. Clay is removed from where the cisterns will be located, as well as 2 feet down for the rammed earth wall foundations.The

interlocking bamboo shingles, help with noise control

roofing membrane found in local Muleba markets

bamboo lattice work provides support between truss and membrane

6 5 4

bamboo trusses made from 10cm in diameter bamboo and 12 centimeter bundles of 6 cm bamboo.

bamboo tri column structure earth block walls bamboo woven pivot screens landscaped seating area of rammed earth rammed earth walls concrete water collection surface

1 3 2

Figure 123 Exploded Axonometric

109

0.7 meters

2.5 meters

excavated clay soil put aside for walls later 0.7 meters deep for foundation

stakes to plan out excavation 2.5 meters deep for cisterns 0.8 meters 0.8 meters across

Figure 124 Step one: excavation

tamping between formwork form work slips along wall in courses temporary bamboo scaffolding rammed earth flooring 6 cm diameter bamboo reinforcement

foundation poured concrete

Figure 125 Step two: Rammed earth perimeter wall

110

mud bricks drying in sun

6 mm holes to allow for bamboo reinforcement brick form

27cm x 8cm x 15cm

Figure 126 Step three: forming sun dried earth brick

10 cm in diameter bamboo column poles are lowered onto steel rebar holes drilled through culm and filled with concrete to strengthen connection poured concrete foundation 0.7 m deep in final product, rammed earth will cover the concrete foundation

Figure 127 Step four: column foundations

111

trusses formed individually fish mouth pretensioned beam gathered 6cm bamboo poles to create 12cm curved structural members

10cm bambo cross bracing bamboo 300kg/cu.m (SiMetric, 2011) 1 truss = approx. 3 cu.m (divide by two since culms are hollow) = approx. 1000 pounds therefore a team of 5-8 on ground and a couple persons lifting from scaffolding with pulleys from above can fit one truss into place Figure 128 Step five: building trusses

workers on roof tying trusses to one another

temporary bamboo scaffolding makes this possible

trusses are lightweight and hoisted to roof by team

Figure 129 Step six: Lifting the trusses

112

6cm diameter bamboo bundled to create 12 centimeter structural member reed ties 1o cm diameter truss palm wood pegs reed ties 10 cm diameter column poles

Figure 130 Column to truss connection elevation

0 0.05

0.25

0.5m

12 cm diameter bamboo 5 cm culm halves as shingles waterproofing membrane strips of bamboo lattice work support 10 cm diameter truss structure

Figure 131 roof detail section

0 0.05

0.25

0.5m

clay is set aside for the next step in the process, where it will eventually be mixed with a small amount of concrete for added binding before becoming tamped down into the perimeter wall. The formwork that holds the bamboo reinforced rammed earth wall is able to slip along as each section is compacted in order to save lumber utilized for the form itself. The remaining clay is added to a wooden mold and left to dry in the sun to become the building medium for the interior earth blocks.

113

5 cm culm halves as shingles strips of bamboo lattice work support

waterproofing membrane 10 cm diameter truss structure Figure 132 Roof detail 0 0.05 0.25 0.5m

10 cm diameter beam structure palm wood pegs 10 cm diameter column poles reed ties

Figure 133 Column to beam connection elevation

0 0.05

0.25

0.5m

10 cm diameter beam structure palm wood pegs 10 cm diameter column poles reed ties Figure 134 Column to beam connection plan 0 0.05 0.25 0.5m

Once the rammed earth structure is complete, the bamboo roof structure must begin with setting up the foundation for the slender tri pieced columns. A round concrete foundation is poured to expose rebar reinforcement. The hollow bamboo culm is the lowered onto the rebar and filled with more concrete to stabilize it. Once these columns are in place and topped with a beam structure, builders must assemble the bamboo space trusses on the site

114

crop and centre can grow North South

curing station boric acid dunk and vertical air dry

crop and centre can grow North South

0 1

5

10m

N

Figure 135 Growth strategy plan

A typical Guadua bamboo plant yields 2000 stems per hectare per year at an average of 10 cms in diameter. Therefore, with the design's given crop being 800 meters square, approx. 350 poles at 10m in length, ranging from 10-12 cms in diameter will be produced in one year Figure 136 Typical clump bamboo The structure requires approx. 300 poles at 10m in length.

115

to be hoisted onto the columns. Fine 6cm in diameter bamboo is clustered and bent into long curving members, which form the tops of the trusses. The base consists of a fish mouth beam of pre-tensioned bamboo, which helps to achieve the long spans and overhang to protect the interior from heavy rains. All connections may be whittled with a machete and secured using palm wood pegs and a fibrous material of reeds. Once the trusses are completed, temporary bamboo scaffolding can be erected so that a team of workers may help to lift individual trusses up onto the structure. Once in place, the connection is made by tying each truss to one another. The final roofing layers of lattice work, membrane, and bamboo shingles are put in place by workers utilizing nails and palm wood pegs. Finally others, likely the elders of the community, can weave doors and partitions from bamboo and polish the smooth rammed earth floor, which covers the complex. The fourth and final strategy is perhaps the most vital in a context that is undergoing rapid urbanization and experiencing its negative environmental effects. The ability to generate all materials on site to literally grow your own architecture makes rural opportunity accessible and has benefits on a much larger scale, even far beyond the community itself. The Design utilizes approximately 350 bamboo poles ranging from 6 to 12 centimeters in diameter.With the shown plantation area of 800 meters square, the harvest taken when mature after 4 years from planting will be 400 poles of this length and diameter. More can be extracted from the plant for the creation of furniture, food, and crafts almost immediately after the fact. As funding for projects typically becomes available in stages, if an expansion is needed, the design can be extended North and South, and the new plantation growth can be harvested and cycled back into the building.

116

3.7.3 A Day in the Life: post-facto The project fits positively within the wider scale of the development of Rural Tanzania in an urbanizing context. Bamboo as showcased can provide opportunity to minimize deforestation and provide economic incentives overall. When envisioned to be utilized in innovative new ways merging the traditional vernacular with the materials capabilities, its results in drastically improved environments compared to the existing building stock. As vital as an intervention such as this one is needed to mediate in large scale environmental issues within the country, it is really acting on the human and personal scale, seeking to enrich the lives of those who are impacted by it.

Figure 137 Entry

117

With the new Muleba North School, Clinic, and women's empowerment centre, not only do existing residents have an improved quality of life due to new opportunities, but the rural population has grown as a result of this valuable resource. The woman who once had to start her morning by walking to the nearest water source to collect unclean water may now pick up a canister from the Muleba North centre's cisterns on her way to work. The family within the community who set out a dawn with an ill loved one no longer has to walk upwards of 10 kilometers to reach a substandard clinic, where all are susceptible to disease, and may not even be seen by a doctor. The patient can now wait in a shaded outdoor environment that is close to home. The children also do not have to walk to a neighbouring community to attend elementary school. They can stay in Mulbea North where they will be able to learn in a safe, secure, and comfortable environment. Adequate daylighting, proper ventilation, sanitary latrines, and planning for visual access allows for this opportunity.

Figure 138 Courtyard

118

Children who are too young to attend school can now come with their mothers to their new place of work. The women's empowerment centre provides women the venue to learn about new and promising agricultural opportunities within their community, mainly bamboo, and even provides a hands on learning tool on how to work with the material after it is harvested through the materialization of the architecture itself. The workshop can be used for others to create crafts from the material. Prior to the centre, women had to travel far distances to sell their goods in the market. The hope is that the intervention becomes an anchor, drawing people from other communities for trade, as it is located next to an existing road, which may one day become a permanent piece of infrastructure. The centre overall provides opportunity for education, personal economic gain, and above all education. All three of these give women and the rest of the community opportunity and opportunity equates to empowerment.

Figure 139 Clinic

119

Figure 140 Classroom variation 1

Figure 141 Classroom variation 2

120

Figure 142 Women's classroom and playground

Figure 143 Workshop, cisterns, and marketplace

121

Figure 144 Performance space at night

Figure 145 Clinic at night

122

Figure 146 Front view

123

A

Appendix

124

125

Appendix A

Research and Design Process Work

01

Early design sketches for curved bamboo structures which used Haya vernacular building techniques

126

Early design sketches for planning of Muleba North site and its interaction between the two village clusters

Design sketches looking at how screens can be used as partitions in a contemporary manner, adapted from vernacular processes

127

Design process sketch looking to bars of program containing different programatic uses

128

Deisgn sketch for the planning of the final proposed interven

129

Planning the book layout

130

131

Planning the book layout

132

133

Planning the book layout

134

135

Planning the book layout

136

137

Appendix B

Project Design Iterations
First design iteration

01

Site render

138

24

3 2 5

7 8 4

1

6 9 10 11 22 23

12 21 16

17 20 18 13 14 15 19

Floor Plan of School Clinic and Women;'s empowerment centre

Section running through centre

139

classroom bamboo testing patches market

inside of workshop

classroom/ o ce curing pond

3m

Section of women's empowerment centre

teachers accomodation

classroom1

cisterns

bamboo as sound barrier

classroom2

classroom3

library

3m

Section of school

clinic room

pond bamboo for noise barrier

bamboo as visual screen waiting area around pond reception desk

3m

Section of clinic

140

Diagram showing water on site

141

H

D I

Pull apart axonometric of structure

142

Wall type one

Wall type two

Wall type three

143

women approaching centre

market place in centre

school in centre

144

Library in centre

Dance in centre

145

Appendix B

Project Design Iterations
Second design iteration

01
N

N

Site Plan

146

floor plan showing potential for growth

activity 1 classroom

activity 2

classrooms showing partitioning options

147

one room showing bamboo weave influenced by local craft

148

pull apart axonometric showing different layers of structure

149

E']$7,&-+)$,'(/+-)?

D

D'C7&>%)*^'(/+-)?

E

details

150

H

details

151

\

details

152

`

a

details

153

render of school

154

render of clinic

155

Appendix C

Design Research Models

01

156

157

158

159

160

161

BIBLIOGRAPHY

UN Habitat. (n.d.). Vancouver Gears up for Third Session of World Urban Forum. Retrieved November 10, 2012, from UN Habitat: http://www.unhabitat. org/content.asp?cid=3043%catid=5&typeid=6 UN Habitat. Lake Vistoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative. United Nations, UN Habitat. 2008: UN. United Nations Women. (n.d.). Focus Areas | UN Women. Retrieved November 7, 2012, from UN Women | United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women: http://www.unwomen.org/focus---areas/?show=leadership%20&%20Participa United Nations. (2009). 2009 World Survey on the Role of Women in Development; Women's Control over Economic Resources and Access to Financial Resources, including Microfinance. United Nations, United Nations. New York: UN. United Nations. (1076). Habitat Forum 76 | People's forum of the 1976 UN Conference on Human Settlements, held in Vancouver. Habitat Forum 76 | People's forum of the 1976 UN Conference on Human Settlements, held in Vancouver. Vancouver: UN Habitat. United Nations. (2008). Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative. United Nations , UN Habitat. UN. United Nations. (1986). The Vancouver Action Plan. Proc. of United Nations Conference on Human Settlements. Vancouver: UN. Walsh, K. T. (2007, 8 26). On the Streets of Chicage, a Candidate Comes of Age. U.S. News & World Report . Weather, W. (n.d.). Bukoba Weather Tanzania. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from World Weather Online: http://www.worldweatheronline.com/Bukoba-weather/ Kagera/TZ.aspx WeatherOnline. (n.d.). Bukoba weather. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from Weather Online: http://www.weatheronline.co.uk/weather/maps/ c i t y ? F M M = 1 2 & F Y Y = 2 0 1 2 & L M M = 1 & LY Y = 2 0 1 2 & W M O = 6 3 7 2 9 & CONT=afri&REGION=0011&LAND=TZ&ART=WST&R=0&NORE GION=1&LEVEL=162&LANG=en&MOD=tab%29 Worldwide, R. N. (Producer), Velez, S. (Writer), & Worldwide, R. N. (Director). (2010). Simon Velez: Bamboo Architect [Motion Picture]. Netherlands.

162

Ackley, B. (n.d.). Blocking the Casbah: Le Corbusier's Algerian Fantasy . Retrieved November 06, 2012, from Bidoun Projects: http://www.bidoun.org/magazine/06---envy/blocking---the---casbah---la---corbusiers---algerian---fantasy--by---brian---ackley/ Aga Khan Canada. (n.d.). Aga Khan Development Network Canada. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from Aga Khan Development Network Canada: http://www. akdn.org/canada Aga Khan. (n.d.). Eligibility Criteria. Retrieved from Aga Khan Award for Architecture: http://www.akdn.org/architecture/eligibility.asp All Africa. (n.d.). Tanzania: Resurfacing Water Hyacinth Threatens Livelihood in Lake Victoria. Retrieved December 07, 2012, from All Africa: http://allafrica.com/ stories/201212070097.html Anderson, K. (2005, July 27). Julius Nyerere, African Socialist. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from libcom: http://libcom.org/library/julius-nyerere-marxist-humanism ArchiAfrika. (2008, July). Modern Architecture in Tanzania around Independence. Retrieved October 20, 2012, from Archi Afrika: http://www.archiafrika.org/en/ node/145 Architecture for Humanity. (2012). Design Like you Give a Damn 2: Building change from the ground up. New York, N.Y: Abrams. Architecture for Humanity. (2006). Design Like you Give a Damn: architectural responses to humanitarian crises. New York, N.Y.: Metropolis Books. Bainbridge, S. (2013, March). MASS Design Group. Lecture for Ryerson University . Toronto. Canadian International Development Agency. (n.d.).Tanzania. Retrieved December 07, 2012, from Canadian International Development Agency: Focus Countries: http://www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/tanzania Carlson, R. G., & Pratt, M. (n.d.). Tanzania. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from Every Culture: http://www.everyculture.com/Sa-Th/Tanzania.html Central Intelligence Agency. (2010, October 6). CIA The World Fact Book: Tanzania. . Retrieved October 3, 2012 CIDA. (2012). Canadian Internaional Development Agency (CIDA). Retrieved September 6, 2012, from Canadaian International Development Agency: http:// www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/home Chen, M. A. (2005). Progress of the Worl's Women 2005; women, work, & poverty. . New York, N.Y.: United Nations Development Fund for Women. Cowen, M., & Shenton, R. (1996). Doctrines of Development. New York, N.Y.:

163

Routledge. Cooper, I., & Dawson, B. (1998). Traditional Buildings of India. London: Thames and Hudson. Corbusier, L. (1931). Towards a New Architecture. Architectural Press. Corner, J. (2003). Not Unlike Life Itslef: Landscape Strategy Now. Harvard Design Magazine 21 , pp. 32-34. Corner, J. (2006). Terra Fluxus. In C. Waldheim, The Landscape Urbanism Reader (pp. 23-33). Princeton Architectural Press. Eglash, R. (2007, June). Fractals at the Heart of African Design. Sauper, H. (Director). (2007). Darwin's Nightmare [Motion Picture]. Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering Development . Princeton University Press. Full Interview with award-winning architect Francis Kere. (n.d.). Retrieved September 20, 2012, from Africa Press: http://thinkafricapress.com/blog/fullinterview-award-winning-architect-francis-kere FARE. (n.d.). FARE for an architecture of reality. Retrieved March 05, 2013, from FARE studio : http://www.farestudio.it/ Fathy, H. (1973). Architecture for the Poor. In H. Fathy, Architecture for the Poor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Fathy, H. (2010). Architecture for the Poor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Forestry and Beekeeping Department . (1999). Non-Wood Forest Products in Tanzania. Retrieved February 10, 2013, from FAO Corporate Document Repository: http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/x6700e/X6700E01.htm Galbraith, J. (n.d.). Rich World, Poor World. Retrieved November 7, 2012, from The American Prospoect: http://prospect.org/article/rich-world-poor-world Gernot, M. (2012). Building with Bamboo. Basel: Birkhauser. IBUKU. (2013, February 20). IBUKU Architects. Retrieved from IBUKU Architects: ibuku.com IFAD. (n.d.). A Tanzanian Mother Teresa is born: Pauline Samata, the "bamboo saint". Retrieved February 15, 2013, from Rural Poverty Portal: http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/country/voice/tags/tanzania/bamboo International Monetary Fund. (2006). United Republic of Tanzania: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. IMF country Report N0.06. IMF, IMF. IMF Publication Services. Hull, R. (1976). African Cities and Towns Before the European Conquest. Norton. Hays, M. K. (1998). SPace, Knowledge, and Power INterview with Paul Rabinow

164

. In M. K. Hays, Architecture Theory SInce 1968 (p. 428). Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. Howard, S. E. (1965). Garden Cities of Tomorrow. MIT Press. Kere Architecture. (n.d.). Kere Architecture. Retrieved October 20, 2012, from Kere Architecture: http://kerearchitecture.com/person.html Kere, F. (n.d.). Global Holcim Awards 2012 Gold Lecture at Ecole Polytechnique Federale De Lausanne. Kigomo, B. (2007). Guidelines for Growing Bamboo. Kenya Forestry Research Institute. Kraul, C. (2011, December 09). Architect Believes in Bamboo Buildings. The Charleston Gazette . Lwamayanga, C. (2008). Constancy and Change: the living processes and skills in verncular architecture of Kagera region- Tanzania. The Oslo School of Architecture and Design, Architecture . Oslo: Unipub. Lake Victoria. (1998). Retrieved December 05, 2012, from The Living Africa: library.thinkquest.org/16645/the_land/lake_victoria.shtml Lewinson, A. S. (1997). Reading Modernity in Urban Space: Politics, Geography and the Informal Sector of Downtown Dar es Salaam. Cities and Society , pp. 205-222. Mulisa, M. (2013, March 27). HIV Prevalence high in Kagera region. Retrieved March 28, 2012, from Daily News Tanzania: http://www.dailynews.co.tz/ home/?n=21910 Moore, C., Allem, G., & Lyndon, D. (1979). Sea Ranch. In C. Moore, G. Allem, & D. Lyndon, The Place of Houses (pp. 31-53). New York, N.Y.: Henry Holt. Ouno. (2009, October 13). Paper Architecture for Habitat 1976 by Arthur Erickson. Retrieved November 20, 2012, from Ouno Design: http://blog.ounodesign.com/2009/08/13/paper-architecture-for-habitat-1976-by-arthur-erickson/ Oxford Dictionaries . (2012, September 05). Retrieved from Oxford Dictionaries : http://www.oxforddictionaries.com Oliver, P. (2007). Dwellings: The Vernacular House Worldwide. Phaidon Press. Online Etymology Dictionary. (2012, September 5). Retrieved from Online Etymology Dictionary: http://www.etymonline.com/ Operndorf Afrika. (2012, September 12). Retrieved from Francis Kere Architecture : http://www.kere-architecture.com/bf/bf_305.html ossrea. (1997). OSSREA. Retrieved from OSSREA: http://www.ossrea.net/ index.php?option=com_content&view=ar ticle&id=378:opening-session& -

165

catid=40:national-chapters Pyla, P. (2009). "The Many Lives of New Gourna: alternative histories of a model community and their significange. The Journal of Architecture , 14 (6), 715-730. Payne, A., & Philips, N. (2010). Development. Cambridge: Polity. Parsons, J. J. (1991). Giant American Bamboo in the Vernacular Architecture of Colombia and Ecuador. American Geographical Society , 81 (2), 131-151. Piano, R. (1998). Cultural Centre Jean-Marie Tjibaou. Architettura , 44, 414-426. Pollio, V. (1960). The Ten Books on Architecture. (M. H. Morgan, Trans.) New York: Dover Publications. Sachs, W. (2010). The Development Dictionary: A Guide to Knowledge as Power. London: Zed. Sachs, J. (2012). The Future of Development Goals. In The Common Wealth Ministers Handbook. SIMetric. (2011, August 27). Density of Wood. Retrieved 2013, from SIMetric: http://www.simetric.co.uk/si_wood.htm Spataro, S. (2011). Needs: architecture in developing countries. Siracusa: Siracusa: LetteraVentidue. Study, T. U. (2011, October). Symposium Metropolis Non Formal Landscape, Infrastructure and Urbanism in the Global South. Non Formal Metropolis . Rael, R. (2010). Earth Architecture. Princeton: Princeton Architectural Press. Rohrbach, D., & Gillman, S. (2013, 06 20). ZERI Pavillion on the Expo 2000. Retrieved from Bambus: http://bambus.rwth-aachen.de/eng/reports/zeri/englisch/ referat-eng.html Tuper, P. (2011, August). Unearthing Vancouver's forgotten utopian UN conference, Habitat `76. This Magazine . TYIN Tegnestue. (n.d.). TYIN Tegnestue Architects. Retrieved from TYIN: http:// www.tyinarchitects.com/ TYIN Tegnestue. (n.d.).TYIN Tegnesture Architects: Soe Kir Tie House. Retrieved February 20, 2013, from TYIN: http://www.tyinarchitects.com/projects/soe-kertie-house/ Tibandebage, R. (2012, February). Meeting At High Commission of Tanzania Ottawa. (K. Green, Interviewer) Ottawa, ON, Canada. The Economist. (2010, December). The Urbanisation of Africa: Growth Areas. Retrieved October 1, 2012, from The Economist Newspaper: http://www.economist.com/blogs/dailychart/2010/12/urbanisation_africa Tschumi, B. (1994). Architecture and Disjunction. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

166

167


