            Provincial Nominee Settlement Practices: An examination of multilevel governance, best practices, challenges and neo-liberal shifts of provision

by Emma Flynn Bachelor of Arts, Memorial University of Newfoundland and Labrador, 2009

A Major Research Paper Presented to Ryerson University In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts In the Program of Immigration and Settlement Studies

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2013 © Emma Flynn 2013

Author's Declaration for Electronic Submission of a Major Research Paper (MRP)

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public. Emma Flynn

 

II

Provincial Nominee Settlement Practices: an examination of multilevel governance, best practices, challenges and neo-liberal shifts of provisions

Emma Flynn Master of Arts, 2013 Immigration and Settlement Studies Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

Settlement services for newcomers in Canada have been traditionally funded at a federal level with providers at a community level, often referred to as immigrant service providers (ISPs). But settlement provision does not stop at ISPs. A new player has joined the immigrant settlement service sector in Canada: "The Private Sector", which includes employers and universities. This shift in provision is particularly a reality for newcomers who have arrived via the provincially downloaded Provincial Nominee Program (PNP). This research aims to examine the contemporary practices of settlement services of immigrants who have arrived via the PNP, and offers an examination of multilevel governance, best practices, challenges, recommendations and the neoliberal shift in newcomer settlement provision.

Key Words: Provincial Nominee Program (PNP), settlement services, ISPs, neoliberalism, best practices, integration, downloading of settlement services

 

III

Table of Contents Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Background and Context · · · · The Concept of Regionalization Provincial Nominee Program (PNP) Neoliberalization Privatization

Page # 1 6 6 7 14 15 18

Chapter 3: Multilevel governance of Settlement Services · · · · ·

Federal Government Provincial Government Municipal Government Immigrant Service Providers: "The Shadow State" The Private State i. Employers ii. Universities

19 22 25 27 29 31 36

Chapter 4: Discussion · Best Practices · Challenges · Recommendations

39 40 49 52

Chapter 5: Conclusion Appendix Bibliography

55 60 63

 

IV

List of Tables Table 1: Different streams of Provincial Nominee Program (PNP) by province & territory Table 2: Retention of immigrants per province & territory via Provincial Nominee Program (PNP)

Page #

11

14

 

V

Acronyms AB- Alberta BC- British Columbia CIC- Citizenship and Immigration Canada FSWP- Federal Skilled Worker Program ISP- immigrant service provider MB-Manitoba NB- New Brunswick NL- Newfoundland and Labrador NS- Nova Scotia NWT- Northwest Territories NU- Nunavut ON-Ontario PA- Principle Applicant PEI- Prince Edward Island PNP-Provincial Nominee Program PN- Provincial Nominee PR- Permanent Resident QC- Québec SK- Saskatchewan TFWP- Temporary Foreign Worker Program TFW- Temporary Foreign Worker YK- Yukon

 

VI

Chapter 1 Introduction Settlement services for newly arriving immigrants have long been an integral component of the Canadian immigration experience. The first recorded official settlement agency in Canada was the Jewish Immigrant Aid Society that was formed by the Jewish community after the First World War (Canadian Council for Refugees, 1998). While this may be true, historians would argue that Canada's First Nations people provided the first immigrant settlement services upon the arrival of the early French and English settlers upon the discovery of what is now known as Canada (Vineberg, 2012). In the field of immigration and settlement, Canada has generally been globally recognized as an immigrant-welcome country. Contemporarily, immigration continues to be a key tool for growth in Canada's economic development strategy (Canada's Economic Action Plan, 2013). The ministry of Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) controls federal immigration policy, and in recent years has annually welcomed upwards to 250,000 permanent residents into Canada (CIC, 2012d). Canada recognizes that the immigration and settlement process has not ended once the immigrant has entered Canada with legal status, but rather only begun, as government funded settlement services are provided in most Canadian cities, and increasingly being provided in rural and less populous regions that have not traditionally received immigrants in their communities until recent years. These newcomer settlement services vary nationwide in their funding, size, staff, clientele and programs offered, but the central goal for all is to provide support for immigrants and to help ease the difficulties and challenges of settling and integrating into Canadian life.

 

1

As discussed in Richmond & Shields' (2005) critique of the twenty first century settlement sector, a major share of Canadian settlement services are provided by "community-based or third sector agencies, with funding from the three levels of government, as well as community charities and public and private foundations" (p. 514). These settlement service providers are often non-government organizations (NGO) or non-profit organizations (NPO). They are often referred to as immigrant service providers (ISPs). Sadiq (2004) has argued that Wolch's (1990) concept of the neoliberal "shadow state" has emerged in Canada's settlement sector, where large multi-service ISPs are financially dependent upon government purchase-of-service agreements, yet smaller ethno-specific ISPs are financially dependent on multi-service ISPs due to their lack of resources to compete for government funding and contracts. This type of funding discrepancy has lead to spatial mismatch of ISP locations, as well as instability and nontransparency of funding. The Canadian model of immigrant service providers (ISPs) is widely recognized as working successfully in favour of immigrant settlement and integration. Yet the provision of settlement services in Canada continues to evolve and shift alongside ever-changing Canadian immigration attraction and recruitment policies. The federal government has traditionally been the main funder of ISPs. Funding cuts are a growing reality for traditional immigrant receiving cities as the growing dispersal of immigrants countrywide also means the dispersal of funds to a growing number of receiving ISPs. As regions increasingly grasp the importance of ISPs for the attraction and retention of immigrants, provinces, territories and municipalities have stepped up and are playing more principal roles in the funding of ISPs alongside the federal government. Competition is fierce for settlement funding at national and regional

 

2

levels, which helps to explain why ISPs are becoming more dependent upon a diverse and non-traditional selection of funding sources. But settlement provision does not stop at ISPs. A new player has joined the immigrant settlement service sector in Canada: "The Private Sector", which includes employers and universities. As employers and universities are given more responsibility in choosing potential immigrants through particular employer-driven streams, as well as international student streams, a pattern of settlement provision by these non-government actors has been noted in the literature (Rural Development Institute, 2005; Baxter, 2010; Moss et al., 2010; Palacio, 2010; Zahtab-Martin et al., 2010; Kataoke & Magnusson, 2011; Dobrowolsky, 2012; Gates-Gasse, 2012). This trend of third party settlement provision is a relatively new neoliberal phenomenon and is particularly apparent within a certain cohort of foreign workers and immigrants in Canada: provincial and territorial nominees. This research aims to examine the contemporary practices of settlement services of immigrants who have arrived via the provincial nominee program (PNP). The provincial nominee program (PNP) is an immigration stream that was created in the late 1990's with the initiative to disperse immigrants nationwide, to fill regional labour gaps and to boost provincial population growth in non-traditional immigrant receiving provinces and territories (Carter et al., 2010). Before the PNPs were enacted, immigration had generally been a federal responsibility. But now with the PNPs legislated in most provinces and territories, the program downloads immigration selection responsibility upon the provinces and territories, as provincial and territorial governments are granted the responsibility to choose immigrants to meet their particular labour and economic

 

3

development needs. PNP is unique, as many nominees begin their Canadian immigration experience as temporary foreign workers (TFW) or international students. In this research I will examine the body of literature on the settlement experiences of potential and actual nominees in Canada and study the various players who participate in the settlement provision. The research questions I aim to study are: 1. How are PNP settlement responsibilities divided between levels of government, the non-for-profit and the private sector? 2. Are there too many levels of government and outside government sectors involved in settlement services for equitable and accountable provision? 3. In which way is Canada's settlement structure following trends of neoliberalism, particularly the privatization of settlement provision for temporary foreign workers, international students and nominees? This research aims to add to the body of literature on the neoliberalisation of immigration and settlement in Canada. A leading example is Evans, Richmond & Shields' (2005) report on the neoliberal model of settlement provision in Canada, which the authors note is drifting away from their "community oriented focus and towards a business model" (p. 75). Some other important sources in the literature include Baxter (2010), Cragg (2011) Dobrowolsky (2012), which all demonstrate neoliberal trends in both immigrant attraction and settlement. This paper also aims to illustrate the settlement experience of potential and actual provincial and territorial nominees, as the settlement experience of nominees may be distinct to federal programs due to the employer-driven component, as well as the nominees settling in non-traditional immigrant receiving communities. I will bring together the best practices, as well as challenges that present

 

4

themselves in the settlement of temporary foreign workers, international students and nominees. This research is inspired by my experience as a settlement and employment officer at an ISP in New Brunswick. This research is not an evaluation of the effectiveness of the PNP, nor the settlement practices that accompany it. Rather, I hope to open the discussion of the unequal settlement service provision that immigrants face, depending on the program they have entered Canada, their status, as well as the jurisdiction in which they have settled. In my experience working at the only ISP in a non-traditional immigrant receiving community in New Brunswick, I witnessed the important presence of temporary foreign workers, international students and provincial nominees in the community, yet their settlement experiences were varied and unequal due to eligibility and accessibility issues of services available. Through this position I witnessed TFWs who lived and worked outside of the town and had no transportation to the closest ISP, and the employer-provided settlement services were limited to one weekly language class. As the temporary migrant workers did not receive satisfactory settlement provision, this discontent led to many leaving the region once they attained their PR status. This phenomenon sparked my interest, and I sought to discover if this type of settlement discrepancy is a nationwide phenomenon for nominees. In this research I will use the term "immigrant" to include only permanent residents, i.e. not immigrants who have acquired Canadian citizenship. Temporary foreign workers (TFW) and international students will be referred to as potential nominees, although it is not known whether these potential nominees will apply for permanent residency through the PNP.

 

5

Chapter 2 Background and Context The concept of regionalization

The Canadian immigrant landscape is changing at an unprecedented rate at a national, and more notably in recent years, regional scale. Canada admits approximately 250,000 immigrants annually, with a large proportion traditionally choosing to settle in Canada's three largest cities- Montreal, Toronto and Vancouver, also referred to as MTV (Carter et al., 2010). Although MTV has long dominated in receiving Canada's immigrants, Statistics Canada (2010) reveals that settlement patterns are slowly beginning to change. In 2006, for example, Calgary had higher levels of foreign-born population than Montreal. This long standing urban trend has been met with concern as witnessed in Citizenship and Immigration Canada's (CIC) 2001 study entitled "Towards a more balanced geographic distribution of immigrants". The government study discusses what both the federal and provincial jurisdictions can do to promote the dispersal of immigrants away from Canada's first-tier cities, and instead towards second-and thirdtier cities, as well as to rural and remote areas (CIC, 2001). Walton-Roberts (2007) explains that the promotion of regional immigration is influenced by the need to tackle population decline in rural areas of the country, as well as helping to boost "regional economic development" in otherwise non-traditional immigrant receiving communities (p. 14). This task of dispersing immigrants to second and third tier cities, as well as rural and remote areas is not easy, as Hyndman et al. (2006) reveal that the majority of immigrants prefer to live in large cities. The action of creating policy to disperse residents, and in this particular case, dispersing immigrants, nationwide has been referred

 

6

to in the literature as the concept of regionalization (Frideres, 2006; Bruce, 2007; WaltonRoberts, 2007).

Provincial Nominee Program The most prominent, well-known and perhaps successful initiative, as suggested in the literature, that has promoted the concept of regionalization from coast to coast in recent years has been the Provincial Nominee Program (PNP) (Baxter, 2010; Carter et al., 2010; Lewis, 2010). Canada's immigration system has traditionally admitted permanent residents through federal immigration policy via three routes: as economic immigrants, as sponsored family members as part of Canada's family reunification program, or on humanitarian grounds seeking asylum. The provincial nominee program is different in that it enables provinces and territories to use immigration to "address short-term labour shortages that are not currently being met through the federal skilled worker program (FSWP)" (Carter et al., 2010). The PNP shifts immigrant selection power to the provincial level, and gives provincial governments a voice in what the province specifically needs in terms of labour and skill. The provincial program was created to encourage, stimulate and support immigration to places outside of Canada's three main immigrant gateways, Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver, as well as to help fill regional labour deficiencies (Pandey & Townsend, 2010). Baxter (2010) explains that the federal government "retains primary control over setting national immigration policy by defining classes of admissibility and inadmissibility, and by ensuring that Canada meets its international obligations with respect to refugees" (p. 18). Yet the federal-provincial agreements leave the

 

7

responsibility in the provincial governments' hands to form their selection process, and subsequently choose nominees who will "populate the provincial nominee class, with attention to social, economic and demographic objectives defined by the provinces themselves" (Baxter, 2010, p. 18). While a centralized system is advantageous in a number of practical ways, Canada's provinces and territories differ tremendously coast-to-coast in not only labour needs and deficiencies, but also their population growth levels. The PNP allows the provincial and territorial governments to customize immigration policies and programs to suit regionally desired economic, demographic and social needs. The first federal-provincial immigration accord was with Quebec. The federal government's unique accord with Quebec (QC), the Canada-Quebec Accord, was signed in 1991 and provides a provincial immigration scheme that gives Quebec greater power in immigration selection, yet is distinct to the PNP (Baxter, 2010). This particular provincial accord will be not taken into account in this research on the practices of settlement of PNP nominees, as it is different from the PNP programs. The first federalprovincial PNP agreements were signed in 1998 by British Columbia (BC), Manitoba (MB) and Saskatchewan (SK), followed by New Brunswick (NB) (1999), Newfoundland and Labrador (NL) (1999), Alberta (AB) (2002), Nova Scotia (NS) (2002), Prince Edward Island (PEI) (2002) and Ontario (ON) (2007), who have followed suite, each creating their own unique PNP streams (Carter et al., 2010). Additionally, the territories have created their own programs with the Yukon's (YT) program starting in 2001 and the Northwest Territories (NT) in 2009 (Carter et al., 2010). The territory of Nunavut (NU) and QC are the only exceptions that do not have PNP streams of immigration. Before the

 

8

PNP came into play, certain provinces and territories had distinct agreements with the federal government pertaining to immigration, yet the PNP is different in that it gives the provincial and territorial governments a "formal role in the selection of immigrants" (Carter et al., 2010, p. 6). What makes the PNPs unique is that many individuals enter into Canada as temporary foreign workers (TFW). If the employer sponsors the TFW as a provincial nominee through either the skilled or semi-skilled streams, their immigration path may lead to permanency residency. The program may be attractive for employers who want to keep their TFW permanently, as the TFW's status can change from temporary to permanent resident (PR) via the PNP's. This may work as a win-win situation for both employers and TFWs, as provincial nominees are fast-tracked to gain PR status in less time than it would take otherwise through a federal stream. A more direct route to PR status via the PNP is applying directly to the province of interest if principal applicant is eligible through a certain stream. Provincial and territorial government officials determine if the applicant meets the criteria for the stream through which they are applying (Carter et al., 2010). Once deemed regionally fitting, the next steps involves the federal government, as Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) requires a background check on nominees relating to health, criminality and security before being granted permanent status (Carter et al., 2010). As previously mentioned, provinces and territories with nominee agreements are able to create multiple streams within their PNP program, as each province and territory has distinct labour and development needs. Table 1 displays certain streams that the provinces and territories offer. "Other" includes distinct regional streams such as

 

9

Alberta's Self Employed Farmer Stream or Nova Scotia's Community Identified Nominee programs. Table 1- Different PNP streams offered in Canadian provinces and territoriesPNP Streams Skilled Worker SemiSkilled Worker X X International Business Family Graduate Investor/ Student Entrepreneur X X Other (s)

BC X X AB X X SK X X X X X MB X X X X X ON X X X NB X X X PEI X X X NS X X X X NL X X X NWT X X X YT X X Source: Streams identified through provincial and territorial PNP websites, August 2013 PNP streams are in ever evolution as provinces and territories experiment with unique routes that allow migrants of different eligibility the potential to become PRs. 2013 has been a busy year for PNP modification as the International Graduate Stream and Family Stream has been cancelled in several provinces due to the federal government avoiding duplication, as there are similar federal programs for international students and families to become permanent residents. Table 1 is up-to-date as of August 2013. As much the PNP's appear on the surface to work for everyone involved­ employers who need workers, foreign workers who need jobs, and regions that demand population and industry growth­ there has been no shortage of critiques of the provincially downloaded immigration program.

 

10

Baglay (2012) discusses the ideology that immigration policy traditionally has worked towards nation building, where a centralized system may benefit in selecting who is considered favorable for the country as a whole, rather than narrowly focusing on provincial and regional distinctions. As the PNPs grow and Canada seemingly has a twotiered immigration system, Bagley (2012) suggests "careful consideration of the impact of programs on one another and directing their development in a cost-effective and consistent way" (p. 137). In certain provinces there are duplications as the PNPs and federal programs offer similar programs for international graduate students and families seeking to become PRs. These duplications are not cost-effective, although mentioned previously certain streams have been cancelled due to these replications. Accountability and evolution of the nominee programs has not been up to par as noted in the literature (McDonough, 2008; Leo & August, 2009; Baxter, 2010; Carter et al., 2010; Dobrowlsky, 2011; Baglay, 2012). McDonough (2008) provides a case example of Nova Scotia's PNP business stream failure. This stream was created to attract immigrants to the Maritime province for the purpose of "increasing investment, creating high-value jobs and tapping into the qualifications of skilled immigrants to boost the economy" (p. 1). The Business Mentorship Program, at the cost of $130,000 for the foreign investor, was expected to attract wealthy newcomers to NS, yet instead the province did not have the socio-economic conditions to achieve this (McDonough, 2008). This resulted in the program being ineffective and has since "cast doubt" over the viability of the province's immigration and retention rates (McDonough, 2008, p. 1). It is important to note that the lack of accountability of investor or entrepreneur streams is not unique to the PNP. Ley (2006) reveals that entrepreneurial immigrants from Hong Kong,

 

11

Taiwan and Korea who had arrived to Canada via the Canadian Business Immigration Program (BIP), often never implemented their intended business plan or had weak business performance. These cases works as a reminder that the PNP is not to be used solely as a population and economic growth strategy for non-traditional immigration receiving provinces, who may view immigrants arriving to their communities as a solution for many economic and demographic troubles. As CIC (2013a) indicates, it is essential that the nominees have "the skills, education, and work experience needed to make an immediate economic contribution to the province or territory that nominates them". Not only should the region benefit from the newcomer, but also the newcomer should be able to benefit and grow, both socially and economically, from the area if the match works for both parties. Retention of Nominees The nominee programs aim to regionalize immigration from coast to coast, yet the programs do not restrict a successful nominee's ability to move between provinces. Section 6, point 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which addresses mobility rights (1982) states "Every citizen and every person who has the status of a permanent resident of Canada has the right a) to move to and take up residence in any province; and b) to pursue the gaining of a livelihood in any province" (Government of Canada, 1982). Regional immigration attraction policy may entice immigrants to a certain province, territory or community, as does the PNP, but it does not necessarily mean that they will remain there, nor need they. As Hou (2007) explains, "both existing and proposed policies aimed at directing immigrants away from major gateway cities

 

12

have focused on the choice of initial destination" (p.681). Focusing solely on initial destination may be problematic as immigrants are mobile, and provincial and national migration is a reality. The province of Manitoba has been widely looked at as the "leader in program development" (Carter et al., 2010, p. 9) of the PNP. The PNP has contemporarily become Manitoba's primary attraction initiative for new immigrants to the province, and since the program premiered in the prairie province in 1998, it has quadrupled the number of immigrants welcomed to the province annually (Government of Manitoba, 2011), not to mention the high retention rates for these immigrants (CIC, 2011a). Table 2 displays the number of nominee principal applicants (PA) present in the Immigration Database (IMDB1) for the years 2000-2008 by province. Of the number of PA's who arrived between 2000 and 2008, the Table demonstrates the percentage of nominees who were residing in their province of nomination in 2008. Table 2 ­Retention of PA PNP of each province (2000-2008) Province or Number of PA PN % of PA PN's Retained Territory NL 255 22.9 PEI 885 36.6 NS 785 65.4 NB 1065 65.1 ON 45 ---MB 11515 82.6 SK 2065 86.0 AB 1975 95.3 BC 2975 96.4 Source: PNP Evaluation: CIC (2011a, p. 8 & 53)
*(Ontario, NWT & YK were not included due to their small numbers in nominees)

                                                         1 The IMDB is a database managed by Statistics Canada on behalf of a federal-provincial consortium led by CIC (CIC, 2011a)     13

As Table 2 reveals, the western provinces of BC, AB, SK and MB had high levels of retention, while the eastern provinces had less success in retaining those nominees provincially. In just over a decade that the program has been in existence, the program has developed and grown extensively. In the last decade, the PNP has become the second largest route to economic immigration to Canada. In 2011 more than 38,000 provincial nominees, inclusive of spouses and dependents were welcomed to communities throughout Canada (CIC, 2012a). This reveals that the number of PNP's has sextupled since the turn of the century. Although certain provinces are known for their PNP success such as MB, as their PNP accounts for 94% of their arrivals, it is also the main vehicle for immigrants into Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan and New Brunswick (CIC, 2012a). As the PNP continues to be a main driver for certain regions across Canada, examining the retention of nominees is imperative in evaluating the program's success. It is also essential to evaluate the nominee's economic outcomes, the nominee family's integration and settlement, the contentment of the employers who have sponsored nominees, and the reaction of the communities where the nominees have landed.

Neoliberalism Canada has witnessed, and continues to observe and endorse its immigration system shift from a centralized and objective immigrant selection process, customized for nation building, to one that has been transferring a substantial amount of the immigrant selection and recruitment process to third parties, customized to strengthen Canada's economic power (Canada's Economic Action Plan, 2013). This type of systematic

 

14

transformation is not specific to the recruitment and attraction strategy of immigration, but it is also appearing within the settlement sector. As the literature on the contemporary immigration and settlement experience in Canada grows, as does the literature demonstrate that the settlement sector is in the midst of shifting provision to non-state actors (Richmond & Shields, 2005; Baxter, 2010; Lewis, 2010; Palacio, 2010; Cragg, 2011; Dobrowolsky, 2011). As this chapter aims to argue, neoliberalization, specifically the privatization of settlement provision to immigrants in Canada, is on the rise. The term neoliberalism describes a set of "ideological beliefs" that have become more prominent since the 1970's, which primarily focus on "liberating individuals from the fetters of the state and emphasizing the importance of the market" (Cragg, 2011, p. 65). Neoliberal ideology in the twenty-first century continues to have influence on contemporary politics and society, not to mention, having a significant mark on the making of public policy within all levels of the government. As Harvey (2007) explains, "almost all states, from those newly mined after the collapse of the Soviet Union to oldstyle social democracies and welfare states such as New Zealand and Sweden, have embrace some version of neoliberal theory" (p. 3). Canada is no exception in incorporating neoliberal ideology in the nation's public policy, including immigration and settlement policy.

Privatization A pivotal objective of neoliberal theory is the privatization of public services as opposed to public ownership. The privatization appears to be "beneficial in neoliberal eyes because it reduces government spending, and it opens potentially lucrative new

 

15

terrain for private, profit-seeking investment" (Stanford, 2008 cited by Cragg, 2011). In the late twentieth century, the trend of shifting from public monopolies of provision to markets and competition was introduced (Hermann & Flecker, 2012). The privatization of such traditionally public funded services, such as health care, was observed by politicians as a "win-win situation" as the change from public to private was supposed to "lower costs and improve public service quality" (Hermann & Flecker, 2012, p. 1). As Canada's immigration streams become more employer-driven with routes of residency like the PNP, and the anticipated Expression of Interest (EOI) model, which allows employers to pick suitably trained foreign workers from a pool of applicants, one can see that neoliberal ideology of a profit motivated immigration system is present. The thought of privatized immigrant settlement provision within an already devolved immigrant stream, the PNP, is an interesting concept, as it would relieve the federal government of all responsibility and accountability of both the attraction and settlement of immigrants entering Canada through this program. Third party sectors are beginning to play a larger role in the settlement of TFW, who may be sponsored through the nominee program, or directly nominated individuals. Frideres (2006) reveals that "since the 1980's there has been a restructuring of the welfare state in favour of the neoliberal approach that rejects state intervention with regard to immigrant integration" (p. 7). As Canadian immigration policies increasingly rely on the market, this dependence on the private sector has encouraged the "privatization, contracting out and withdrawal of funding by the State" (Frideres, 2006, p. 7). The PNP's are a prime example of Canadian immigration policy's growing reliance on the economy, as "these programs enable provincial governments, in close partnership with private employers and other non-

 

16

governmental actors, to nominate economic immigrants and their dependents for permanent residency" (Baxter, 2011, p. 2). The attraction and recruitment for PNP streams are market-based and employer-driven as nominated migrants depend on regional labour deficiencies. The settlement of nominees is also in the midst of being shifted from public ISPs to the private sector of settlement provision as the proceeding chapter demonstrates.

 

17

Chapter 3 Settlement Services Immigrant service providers (ISPs) are a fundamental component of the Canadian immigration settlement experience. Although the services and support offered varies widely among the numerous ISPs across the nation, the broad mandate is to facilitate immigrant settlement and integration within Canada, which remains a resilient premise. ISPs have traditionally been chiefly federally funded, as immigration and settlement governance has conventionally been centralized. Yet as regionalization of immigration increasingly grows and regional specific programs like the PNP develop, issues of immigration and settlement increasingly need to involve, and perhaps even demand, the involvement of more than one level of government. Partnerships between different levels of governments, whether "in the form of fiscal resources, cooperation agreements, or provisions for power sharing" is referred to as "multilevel governance" (Tolley, 2011, p. 4). Leo & August (2009) have stated that multilevel governance is "the commonsense attempt to ensure that national government policies are formulated and implemented with sufficient flexibility to ensure their appropriateness to the very different conditions in different communities" and have referred to this attempt of multilevel governance as "deep federalism" (p. 491). It is no longer feasible for ISPs to be dependent upon only one source of funding. As settlement service funding cuts at all levels have come to be expected by ISPs, these organizations need to be creative acquiring their funding and must strive to create long lasting relationships with all levels of governance, as well as involve an array of stakeholders in the communities for funding stability.

 

18

The concentration of immigrants fluctuates nationwide, as the settlement of immigrants is not a uniform phenomenon. Tolley (2011) explains that as demographic profiles of newcomers from a wide range of countries differ from coast-to-coast, with uneven levels of immigrants and refugees throughout, a "one size fits all" model for immigrant settlement provision for the country is unsustainable. As the federal government, provinces, regions, municipalities and regional stakeholders all contribute to immigrant settlement with varying roles, contemporary immigrant settlement provision requires a multilevel approach. The next section will explain the different roles that each level of government plays and has the possibility of playing in the settlement sector, as involvement of multilevel governance is unique regionally. The focus is on post-arrival settlement services for newcomers. With academic literature and government sources, I will examine the varying responsibilities, as well as functions these levels of governance provide. Noticeably, it is not only the traditional three levels of government who have made the list of immigrant settlement provision players. ISPs are an obvious chief component of provision and the private sector has been added to the list.

Federal government Federal funding for the Ministry of Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) is relatively small, as Andrew & Abdourhamane Hima, (2011) explain that federal Social Affairs has four different objectives. The objective that relates to immigration and settlement ranks third place, as "part of the objective of creating a diverse society that promotes linguistic duality and social inclusion" (p.53). The actual spending for

 

19

newcomer settlement and integration for 2011-2012 was $966 million, while the forecast spending for 2012-2013 is $987.5 million (CIC, 2013b). Andrew & Abdourhamane Hima (2011) note that immigration is a relatively small federal expenditure, but that both non-governmental and governmental third parties receive the bulk of the expenditures as grants and contributions. The third parties may include provincial and municipal governments, school boards and postsecondary institutions, settlement service organizations and other non-governmental actors, as well as the private sector, which all provide settlement services to immigrants (CIC, 2013b). Presently, the majority of all settlement services are funded and designed federally, with the exception of Manitoba, British Columbia and Quebec, who have their own federal-provincial settlement service agreements, which allows a federal transfer of funds, yet the provincial governments have control of settlement design and development. CIC has recently suspended the downloaded settlement arrangement with Manitoba and British Columbia and by 2014 will continue to have all settlement service funding centralized with the continued exception of Quebec. CIC emphasizes, however, that however funds are divided among to non-for-profit organizations, many of which are community-centered organizations, accountability for the funding and for attaining outcomes continues to be with CIC (CIC, 2013b). As the CIC Funding Guidelines in the National Call for Proposals (2012c) outlines, to receive Settlement Program funding, the project and/or activities must "correspond to one or more of the delivery streams below" (p. 3):

 

20

· · · · · · ·

Information and Orientation Language and Skills Development Labour Market Participation Community Connections Needs Assessments and Referrals Support Services Indirect Services

As well as ultimately resulting in at least one of the five main Settlement Program Outcomes" (p. 3): · · · · · Orientation Language/Skills Labour Market Access Welcoming Communities Policy and Program Development

Although the federal government continues to be the main funder for settlement services, the lower levels of government and non-governmental organizations continue to "run the show", in terms of executing settlement programs and services once receiving funding to serve their clientele.

 

21

Provincial governments As made apparent by the creation PNPs, provincial governments are demanding greater participation in the attraction and retention of Canada's immigrants to their particular province or territory. Looking at provincial settlement provision, Quebec has long played a key role in immigrant settlement since the establishment of its own Department of Immigration in 1968, and continues to distinctly do so with its CanadaQuebec Accord, signed between both levels of government in 1991 (Baxter, 2010; Chiasson & Koji, 2011). In MB and BC, the federal government currently "delegates design and delivery of settlement services with the goal of achieving comparable outcomes, but remains responsible for accountability and determining funding levels" (CIC, 2011b). This devolution was first proposed for all provinces in the 1990's, yet most provinces were disinclined to be responsible for settlement due to the fear that the fiscal transfer would then allow the federal government to gradually "step away from its funding responsibilities" (Welcoming Communities Initiative Bulletin, 2012, p. 2). As federal funding for settlement has tripled in the past decade (CIC, 2012e), this prediction has been proven to be false. But the Welcoming Communities Initiative Bulletin (2012) report suggests that there has been an "emergence of a more pessimistic view by the federal government of the extent to which federal transfers induce greater provincial spending and of that federal government's ability to hold provinces accountable for their spending of federal transfers" (p. 2). As of 2012, the federal government has repatriated its control over settlement spending (Welcoming Communities Initiative Bulletin, 2012), even though the settlement programs created by both provinces are impressive and have seemingly worked as both provinces have high attraction and retention rates of

 

22

immigrants. The repatriation of settlement services to the federal government has "proved fatal to current federal-provincial agreements" (Welcoming Communities Initiative Bulletin, 2012). It will be an adjustment for these provinces to now return the responsibility of settlement program development in a fashion that will not disrupt their current settlement and integration services. Other provinces that have never had settlement services downloaded upon their provincial government must report how funding is spent to their main funder, CIC, but provincial governments also have the flexibility to modify settlement programs to suit their province, as well as adding extra funding. The New Brunswick (NB) provincial government in 2007 created a Population Growth Secretariat, which since has been changed to the Population Growth Division. Within the division, there are different branches, which include Immigration, Settlement and Multiculturalism, Repatriation and Attraction and Retention (Government of New Brunswick, 2013). Other than the PNP, the province of NB has certain regional initiatives for settlement such as the Francophone Immigrant Settlement Support Funding Program, Foreign Qualifications Recognition Funding Program, Welcome Sessions for Newcomers, as well as Immigrant Settlement Support Funding Programs (Government of New Brunswick, 2013). Provinces have the flexibility to add distinct programs if indeed the province calls for it, as New Brunswick demonstrates with their francophone settlement program as it is an officially bilingual province. An important form of settlement provision offered by all provincial and territorial governments is their provincial immigration websites. These websites are not only used to entice immigrants to move to the province or territory, but also can be useful in the

 

23

settlement for newcomers as they serve as a guide, with an assortment of "How to" lists, as well as testimonials from immigrants who have already arrived. PEI's Immigration website "Opportunities PEI" gives potential immigrants information on streams to immigrate to the province, immigration stories from already arrived immigrants, along with links about "Living, Working and Studying" in PEI that are also helpful for those immigrants who have already arrived (Government of PEI, 2013). On Manitoba's immigration webpage, "See yourself in Manitoba", videos are provided on the quality of living in the province, different municipalities throughout the province, ISPs that are available, as well as specialty English courses (Government of Manitoba, 2013). The website is offered in over 6 languages and there is a segment that expands on the province's special bond with nationalities that have been settling within the province for decades and have special ties, including the United Kingdom, Iceland and the Philippines (Government of Manitoba, 2013). As provincial immigration websites provide pre-arrival and post-arrival information for newcomers, the settlement provision given by these websites should not be underestimated as many newcomers who may not have access to ISPs rely on the Internet and these information portals for their pre and post-arrival needs. Provincial governments have to be competitive in their battle to attract immigrants to their province. They also have to compete to be able to retain those attracted, which entails keeping their promises of employment and settlement services. It is in the provinces and territories best interest to contribute as much as possible to the settlement sector and to develop distinct settlement and integration programming if intending on retaining the immigrants that they have managed to attract.

 

24

Municipal governments The municipal role in immigrant settlement makes sense. These cities and towns, after all, are present in the immigrants' search for accommodation, as they enroll children in school and go grocery shopping in Canada for the first time. Tolley (2011) reveals that jurisdictional authority has hampered the involvement of municipalities in immigrant settlement, as municipalities have the status of "creatures of the provinces", coupled with no direct funding. This has denied municipalities a principal role in immigrant settlement, even if the cities and towns are "the primary recipients of immigrants to Canada" (Tolley, 2011, p. 4). As mentioned previously, downloaded responsibilities for settlement services in the 1990's occurred via federal-provincial settlement agreements. But following these agreements, Sadiq (2004) explains that in Ontario, the Harris Progressive Conservative government reduced spending on social and settlement programs and further downloaded responsibility for these services to the Ontario municipalities in the latter 1900's. Tossutti (2012) reveals that more than 95 per cent of foreign-born and visible minority Canadians live in urban centres. Even with concept of regionalization in full force, the phenomenon of urbanization has endured, which has encouraged urban municipalities to assume a more principal position in immigrant settlement within their jurisdiction. The 2005 Canada-Ontario-Toronto Immigration Agreement and the 2006 Canada-Ontario-Toronto Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Immigration and Settlement has given the city of Toronto more immigrant settlement responsibility (Stasiulis et al., 2011). These agreements require upper-level governments to collaborate with the municipal government to "develop and offer policies, programs and

 

25

infrastructure for immigrant integration so that municipalities can better realize the benefits of immigration" (Stasiulis, 2011, p. 74). In 2007, Edmonton, Alberta followed suite to become the second municipality to adopt a formal immigration and settlement policy that has been modeled on Toronto's policy framework and has addressed similar programs (Tossutti, 2012). These policy reforms may have happened due to competitiveness in immigration attraction, but Tossutti (2012) also observes that the social justice considerations were also influential, as "there were concerns about the ability of newcomers to access services and goods without a formal settlement policy, and about possible stereotyping, discrimination and racist behavior on the part of wellestablished groups afraid of change" (p. 617). Although the municipalities mentioned are chiefly first-tier cities, with long histories of immigration and settlement and large cohorts of immigrants joining them each year, it is essential for second and third tier cities and towns to participate in immigrant settlement as well. As Chiasson & Koji (2011) discuss, immigration settlement issues have become big issues in smaller cities like Sherbrook and Rimouski in the province of Quebec, who in recent years have been receiving more immigrants. Sherbrook has created an "Intercultural Relations and Diversity Committee", which is a consultative body of the city council, and Rimouski has developed a Welcoming Guide for Newcomers, and has adopted the Rimouski Declaration of the Citizens Rights (Chiasson & Koji, 2011). These new developments, however small or large they may be, are symbolic of the municipalities' commitment to the settlement and integration of newcomers into their communities.

 

26

A most symbolic change for settlement in Toronto, Canada's biggest immigrant destination is its new status as a "Sanctuary City". The city's new status was voted in by the city council, which allows undocumented workers access to city services (Dhillon, 2013). This new policy, although controversial as it allows illegal migrants living in Toronto to access services, looks to improve access to services for these extremely vulnerable foreign residents. It is a representative move on Toronto's part for taking a greater role in the settlement services of newcomers, no matter their status. The city council has also recommended the Ontario provincial government to examine their policies on these often forgotten about residents (Dhillon, 2013). This case is an excellent example of the difference municipal governments can make at a local level for immigrant settlement services, and indeed should be a good example for higher levels of governance in their settlement policymaking.

Immigrant Service Providers: "The Shadow State" (Wolch, 1990) Although immigrants may receive support and funding from the federal, provincial and municipal governments, the majority of the support and services are provided and run by a third party, ISPs. ISPs are a third party organization or association who rely on funding from all levels of government, as well as additional stakeholders, to provide their services. This type of contract of service has been referred to in the literature as "the Shadow State" by Wolch (1990). Sadiq (2004) further notes that the shadow state is a "subsidiary or auxiliary system of non-governmental organizations that deliver social services to newcomers through purchase-of-service agreements, some of which were formerly provided by state-run public-sector agencies (Wolch, 1990 cited by

 

27

Sadiq, 2004). These organizations and their front line workers aid immigrants on a daily basis, and offer services including (but not limited to) employment, language, housing and education. Although this system has been admired as an "efficient, immigrantfriendly and inclusive model to be emulated elsewhere", Richmond & Shields (2005) have criticized the neo-liberal restructuring as it creates instability, service gaps, as well as "a general diversion of precious human resources from service planning and delivery to irrational administrative burdens"(p. 518; also see Evans, Richmond & Shields, 2005). Sadiq (2004) argues that, "Canada's settlement sector has evolved into a para-state system that is financed by contractual arrangements between the state and nongovernmental settlement agencies" (p. 1). These agreements also facilitate ISP spatial mismatch, which is a discrepancy between where the immigrant lives and where the ISP is located, particularly for ethno-specific ISPs (Sadiq, 2004; Lo et al, 2007). Lo et al (2007) demonstrate spatial mismatch of ISPs in the city of Toronto, as the state has control on funding and location of these services. Sadiq (2004) has suggested "direct funding should be made available to etho-specific agencies", instead of these groups having to be funded through larger ISPs. Federal funding for settlement services nationally has increased in recent years. Yet as immigrants become more dispersed nationwide, the funds in traditional immigration receiving regions i.e. Ontario, that have grown accustomed to certain funding amounts, are now being cut. In 2012, the federal government cut $53 million from Ontario settlement services, $8.5 from British Columbia and $1.5 from Nova Scotia (Pagliaro & Mahoney, 2012). Due to these cuts, ISPs increasingly have to cut back on staffing, which leads to the leftover employees becoming overworked, and inevitably,

 

28

immigrants are underserviced. Canadian ISPs continually aim to deliver the vital supports and services need for newcomers, yet due to funding cuts and spatial mismatches, ISP provision gaps are present.

The Private Sector: Employers & Universities When examining contemporary routes to permanency for immigrants in Canada, it should be no surprise that immigrants are becoming increasingly dependent on the private sector, particularly employers, for settlement services. In recent years the route into Canada has reformed, and consequently temporary migrant workers have become increasingly dependent upon employers for their immigrant status. When examining a program like the PNPs, the dependency that the foreign worker has on the employer in certain streams is almost in its entirety. For example, Skilled Workers, International graduates and Semi-skilled workers who consider PNP streams in Alberta must obtain a permanent, full-time job offer from an Alberta employer before applying (Government of Alberta, 2013). Potential nominees are completely reliant on their employment status for permanent residency. Migrants who have applied for PR status via PNP while in Canada may be working as TFW or on an international student work visa. These foreign workers remain vulnerable to their employers until permanent status is granted. Yet what has been a theme in the literature is that foreign workers under the PNP are not only reliant employers for their immigration status, but also their settlement provision (Rural Development Institute, 2005; Baxter, 2010; Carter et al., 2010; Moss et al., 2010; Palacio, 2010; Cragg, 2011). The PNPs have "increased reliance on employers

 

29

to provide language and settlement services, linked with possibilities for creating a vacuum in service provision where governments have derogated public responsibility and when third-party actors are absent" (Baxter, 2010, p. 3). For both potential and actual nominees of the provincial program, the private sector is becoming increasingly involved in the participation of settlement provision. This shift is happening both organically, as the PNPs encourage immigration to non-traditional immigrant receiving areas where ISPs may not be already located and established, as well as systematically as certain PNP streams are employer-driven. With this lack of formal provision in place in certain regions and circumstances, employers are beginning to provide, and in some cases, like Alberta, are expected (Consult Appendix, p. 60) to provide settlement services for potential and actual nominees. Although this is extra responsibility and use of resources for the employer, the eventual outcome will optimistically be the retention of the nominee. Examining the recent privatization of the settlement sector of provincial nominees through a neoliberal lens, it is relevant and important to question the eventual settlement and integration outcomes of the nominees. The private sector actors in the PNP settlement sector are predominantly employers and universities. The next section will examine examples of the private sector's involvement in settlement provision found in the literature.

Literature Review of "The Private Sector" of Settlement A major settlement service gap that fails to be recognized by the federal government is the period of transition between a migrant worker with the status as a

 

30

temporary foreign worker and when they are nominees for the PNP (Baxter, 2010). During the period of temporary status and being granted permanent resident status, which could be anywhere from eight months to two years, these migrants are not eligible to receive government funded settlement services, notwithstanding the fact they are en route to becoming a permanent Canadian resident. It has been said that provincial governments are more flexible than the federal government in regulating who is receiving these services, as Gates-Gasse (2012) reveals that international students have accessed provincial services. Baxter (2010) notes that principal federally funded programs such as the Immigrant Settlement and Adaptation Program (ISAP) and language-training services are also unavailable to nominees while the nominee's permanent status is not formally obtained. The lack of formally offered settlement provision to both TFW and international students has resulted in provision from third party non-government actors.

Employers In the "Rural Employers' Information Pathway for Hiring Temporary Foreign Workers in Manitoba" (Zahtab et al, 2010) employers are encouraged to participate in the employees settlement process as much as possible for potential PN's by holding diversity and inter-cultural training at the workplace, as well as arranging housing for the foreign worker in the community. The important role of employers in the PNP settlement experience is further witnessed in Palacio's (2010) review of low-skilled provincial nominees working at Maple Leaf in the small city of Brandon, Manitoba. The employer's role of importance and authority was very apparent in all aspects of the PNP settlement experience, both for the immigrant and the community. Maple Leaf recruits workers, who

 

31

along with their families, arrive to Brandon to settle, from specific countries that speak particular languages to "ease the settlement planning and integration" (Palacio, 2010, p. 64). For example, a majority of the TFW in Brandon come from Spanish-speaking countries, which facilitates group sessions of orientation and language classes as the company would only need to provide a Spanish to English translator. This projects Maple Leaf's complete control in not only what type of worker they want, but also in the selection of the country of origin of their nominees. Maple Leaf has gone as far as to create a settlement plan for nominee newcomers which includes many perks and benefits such as "one month's rent, a month-long bus pass, access to the company cafeteria for one week, vouchers to purchase food, etc" (Palacio, 2010, p. 64). Although beneficial for the newcomer employer to have the initial settlement tasks financially taken care of by the employer, some concerns have also been raised about the unsanitary conditions of the accommodation provided (Palacio, 2010). It is not surprising that the nominees have not made headlines about unsanitary living conditions provided by their employer, as it is important to remember that as a TFW, their employment contract is tied to their immigration status. These TFW are in a vulnerable position until their nomination process is complete and they are granted PR status. The employers could also be considered to be in a vulnerable position as they are taking on responsibility of the well being of the TFW not only during work hours, but after as well. Although certain employers may have learned certain practices of settlement from other employers, there is no regulation in place and settlement provision is up to their own discretion. While the employer driven settlement provisions appear to be an advantageous for the employer in the control over the TFW and advantageous for

 

32

the TFW as they actually have access to settlement services, it is not the most strategic or healthy integration process as it puts the foreign workers in a vulnerable position. This provision creates conditions of uneven power relationships and dependency conditions for the newcomer. As Kataoke & Magnusson (2011) reveal in their case study about immigration to third-tier city Kelowna, British Columbia, employers have been playing a front-runner role in nominee settlement. A certain key employer in the city has been providing nominee employees rental housing and a welcome package. The Economic Development Commission of Kelowna has gone so far to hire someone with a background working for CIC to support nominees in filling out immigration paperwork as well as referring them to different programs in community that may be useful in their settlement experience (Kataoke & Magnusson, 2011). Both employers and community stakeholders are taking settlement provision into their own hands in this case. At the debut of Nova Scotia's late arrival of the PNP, the premier of the province declared that the program would be at "no extra cost to the tax payers of the province", which one can see was reflected in the initial design of the streams, as they were created to enforce both the potential nominees and their private employers to be accountable for the attraction and settlement upon arrival to NS (Haddow, 2011). Rather than creating its own attraction and settlement capacities, the province made a contract with a consulting firm, Cornwallis Financial Corporation to execute the economic and business mentorship stream responsibilities (Haddow, 2011). As recognized in the literature (McDonough, 2008; Dobrowlsky, 2011), this immigrant experiment failure reinforced the neoliberal model of the privatization of both attraction and settlement of immigrants through the

 

33

PNP. Challenges that arose from this practice included, "the majority of business matches are not bona fide, the employment relationships which are legitimate are rarely at a middle management level as required and many of the nominees are not staying in Nova Scotia, and those that stay indicate that the program does not meet their needs", while at the same time Cornwallis Corporation "raked in almost $4 million without much show for its efforts" (Gillis, 2005, p. 8 cited by Dobrowlsky, 2012, p. 206). Clearly the program that was hosted by the private company sunk quickly, at the expense of both the province for giving this responsibility and of course the immigrants. The investing nominees to NS lost out greatly on opportunities and wealth due to the provincial governments neoliberal attraction and settlement provision choices. When examining Alberta's lower-skilled nominee streams, the employers are required to fill out an Employer-Driven Settlement and Retention Plan (Consult Appendix, p. 60; Alberta Government AINP, 2013). On the form, employers are expected to have English as a Second Language (ESL) instruction set up, as well as the options of providing accommodation, transportation, school enrollment for children, health care services and financial services (Alberta Government AINP, 2013). These responsibilities and more are now an extra component for employers to consider when hiring foreign workers. Alberta seems organized with its expectations of employers on the settlement front, yet an evaluation and outcomes of employer driven settlement services has yet to surface. It is the responsibility for these employers to recognize that settlement services are essential for the foreign workers they are recruiting. Yet the amount of control given as exemplified in the example provided is excessive and without evaluation.

 

34

This control of settlement may not always occur due to the employers attempt to dictate all aspects of the immigrants' life, but rather that there are no other options as ISPs may not exist in many smaller towns and remote areas where bigger companies with the need for TFW are located. The nominees working schedule, which may include long hours and laborious work, could run into the availability for the nominees to seek assistance elsewhere, making settlement services on the spot more convenient. Baxter (2010) states that perhaps the employers' heavy participation in the nominees settlement could have positive outcomes such as "increasing employer-worker communication, building mutual respect, and strengthening norms of loyalty and reciprocity that promote worker retention" (p. 39), but subsequently notes that the lack of public involvement puts both the employee and employer in vulnerable positions as issues of "exploitation and bad faith" could come into play.

Universities The road to permanency can also transpire by studying at a Canadian university, as certain provinces have specifically designed international student streams within their PNPs. Gates-Gasse (2012) explains that each international graduate stream is unique as certain PNP require Canadian work experience, some are employer-driven and others require in-province education for sponsorship, while others do not. Similar to TFW, international students, along with their spouses and dependents, are not eligible for federally funded settlement services until they are granted permanent residency status, which could take up to ten years after entering the country to study (Gates-Gasse, 2012).

 

35

In Moore's (2008) paper, which narrates the experience from student to migrant of York University students, one key informant noted that the campus community's social network and informal advice led him through the process towards permanency. According to Moore (2008) the process for international students to can be overwhelming, which is a reason that so many international students may not pursue permanency, particularly if there are no immigration support services available. International Student Offices (ISOs) are a focal point for international students to become orientated at the university, as well as to seek academic and employment support. However, as Gates-Gasse (2012) points out, few programs target international students in their last year of study to pursue permanent residency through either the Canadian Experience Class (CEC) or PNP, although there have been instances of mentoring programs which links international students with members of the community for professional networking. The lack of specific international student settlement services may be a principal cause of only 18% of permanent stay rates for international students in Canada (OECD, 2010, cited by Gates-Gasse, 2012). Some positive practice examples of the university becoming involved in the settlement and integration of the students and potential nominees are as follows. At Memorial University in Newfoundland, the provincial government provides grants to deliver the Professional Skills Development Program for International Students as well as a Family Integration Support Program (Gates-Gasse, 2012). The programs' main goal is to retain the international students by educating them on Canadian employment culture and process, making connections in the community, as well as providing their families

 

36

with integration support by introducing them to the community through information and referrals, as well as social events (Gates-Gasse, 2012). L'universite de Moncton in New Brunswick has employed a program entitled "Destination Emploi", which looks to retain francophone international students as eventual provincial residents (Gates-Gasse, 2012). The program is provincially funded and helps international students enter the workforce as well as "providing additional coaching to students during their studies and assisting them with social integration into the community, encouraging New Brunswick businesses to hire international students, and educate students who are about to graduate about how to immigrate to the province" via the PNP (Gates-Gasse, 2012, p. 284). These programs are all located at the university campus, funded provincially and staffed through the university. As addressed by GatesGasse (2012) the recruitment of international students is not a university responsibility, nor is the provision of employment services via provincial or federal funding, as it could create issues of responsibility and conflicts of interest. Yet, universities are recognizing that settlement and employment services are essential in the Canadian international student experience. If Canada is looking to retain their international students, settlement service provision is essential and should be offered to all interested in immigrating via the PNP or CEC. Roach (2011) examines service needs and gaps for international students transitioning to permanent residency in a Toronto based case study. The interviews conducted with international student advisors (ISA) revealed how dynamic their role is. One ISA noted the position not only provides information on how to obtain a work permit, but also deals with "immigration, academic issues, personal issues, transition

 

37

issues, relationship issues, sometimes housing issues, or career" (p. 28). Workshops provided by CIC on pathways and procedures to permanent residency and bridging services to connect students to community organizations were mentioned by ISAs as working practices in the university setting (Roach, 2011). Lack of staff and resources were noted challenges for the international student offices. Dependence on the private sector for settlement provision is growing as demonstrated in the literature in this section. As this trend of third party players in settlement expands and perhaps eventually becomes status quo, research on TFW and international students who received settlement provision by this devolution should be obligatory to regulate the provision and to discover the settlement and retention outcomes.

 

38

Chapter 4 Discussion "The ultimate responsibility for integration rests with the Canadian people for, without their acceptance of the newcomers into community life, there can be no integration." (Dominion Bureau of Statistics, 1959, p. 183)

As the previous chapters have demonstrated, the services that nominees and potential nominees receive, vary widely, as each company, organization, community, province and/or territory have different capabilities, as well as distinct actors involved and different amounts of funding available. As different as all of these services and provisions offered may be, they all should have a common goal, which is working together to strive for economic and social integration of newcomers, which optimistically will lead to retention. To put together best practices and challenges of settlement for potential and actual nominees, I have critically assessed the literature on the provincial nominee immigration and settlement experience in Canada from province to province. It is important for the reader to remember that different types of nominees may require distinct settlement needs, i.e. international graduates and business investors or a nominee that has settled in a remote area. I will distinguish when referring to practices for TFW and international students who will eventually be sponsored as nominees. To be considered a best practice, the mode of positive integration must have been identified in at least two pieces of literature on PNP settlement. Expectantly, ISPs, as well as the levels of government and the private sector, may learn and use practices and

 

39

programs that have been effective and useful for nominees to help them successfully integrate into Canadian community. Best Practices Community Involvement The essential role of community involvement stood out as an overarching successful practice in the social integration and retention of nominees throughout the literature. As Moss et al (2010) state in their discussion on nominee settlement in Brandon, Manitoba, "community preparedness and welcoming initiatives are imperative" (p. 35) when aiming for successful integration of nominees. The community of Brandon has benefited from the proactive approach that has encouraged collaboration between the main employer, Maple Leaf, and other community stakeholders in the creation of a Community Steering Committee (CSC), which bridges the relationship between the community and the company (Moss et al, 2010). Maple Leaf representatives have been appointed to this committee and each delegate represents a settlement priority: housing, education, health care, transportation, childcare and language and support services (Rural Development Institute, 2008). This cooperative approach identifies the needs of the employees, the employer, and as settlement and integration should be considered a twoway street, it includes the settlement community as well as stakeholders in the discussion. Community initiatives and partnerships may be distinct to the Manitoba PNP experience, as Carter et al. (2008) explain that certain communities within the prairie province have agreed to sign contracts to agree to support the settlement of immigrants to their particular jurisdiction. Chambers of Commerce, schools, churches, employers and others have collaborated together to develop distinct attraction and retention strategies,

 

40

which can both secure employment for the newcomer, as well as offer an array of settlement services. As the case example of Steinbach, MB has demonstrated, the development of the community's settlement program entitled Steinbach and District Immigration Settlement Program has greatly helped in coordinating the settlement process for newly arrived nominees in this smaller town by offering essential services such as youth programming, programs for women, collecting furniture for newcomers and language training (Carter et al., 2008). Saint John, New Brunswick is also on track for involvement in nominee settlement. Anderson & Leo (2006) reveals that there is a general consensus throughout this community that "more settlement services, more education for the existing and traditional community, more integration opportunities and greater community-provincial and federal communication" (p. 18) are crucial for their city to keep the PNP alive and well. Local volunteers and community-run organizations have been shown in the literature (Anderson & Leo, 2006; Carter et al., 2008; Theriault & Haan, 2011) to be the heart of the success of these types of community initiatives. When the community becomes more involved in the immigrant settlement experience, a clearer understanding of both newcomer and community needs may be discussed, which in turn will optimistically organically integrate the nominees at a more, personal, local level. Multilevel governance of settlement- never too many cooks in the kitchen? As this research has endeavored to attest, the number of players involved in the settlement of immigrants in Canada, particularly nominees, has grown. Settlement provision continues to be provided by various third party actors until provision is made readily available for temporary foreign workers and international students by government funded ISPs.   41

The three levels of government are crucial in funding ISPs as well as developing program design, yet we cannot underestimate the roles community stakeholders and members play that are equally important in helping to create both social and economic networks for newcomers, as well as facilitating a sense of belonging within the community. The third party sector in the settlement sector of immigrants lacks accountability and vulnerability attached to it, as they are traditionally not looked at as experts in the field. Yet their involvement in provision to potential and actual nominees appears to work in certain cases and their important presence in the settlement process of their employees has been critical to the integration and retention. As outlined in the section on multilevel governance and the privatization of the settlement sector, there are many players involved in settlement provision, which may make the accountability in newcomer integration problematic. The level of involvement and roles led by these actors is dependent on various factors including, most importantly, the jurisdiction of operation. As Leo & August (2011) comment on the uniqueness of governance towards immigration and settlement, "if governance becomes a matter of applying a template, rather than carefully considering each set of circumstances as a unique problem, requiring the separate application of subtle political and administrative arts, we may as well save ourselves the trouble and expense of multilevel governance and simply apply the template from the centre" (p. 507). As each region is distinct in their settlement needs, an open debate is needed within the field in all jurisdictions to see what actors may provide and where their specialties may be most beneficial. Baxter (2010) suggests that in regions where PNPs are usually employer-driven, the federal and provincial governments should collaborate to "ensure strong regulatory standards and to

 

42

take the lead in settlement provision" (p. 47). As the PNP continues to expand nationwide, movement toward equity in funding for different categories of immigrants should continue to be strived for from higher levels of government. Pre-arrival contact It is important for nominees to have accurate information on the receiving community, future employment and Canadian life and culture, pre-arrival. As newcomers tend to arrive with high expectation of lifestyle and employment opportunities in Canada, creating realistic expectations for the newcomer is essential. It is also important to communicate with the community and create a dialogue about potential issues with immigration and settlement and expectations of not only the newcomers, but also the receiving community (Carter et al., 2008). Carter et al. (2008) encourage exploratory visits to receiving community for nominees as well as building on familial and cultural linkages within the community as a starting point. As visiting Canada pre-arrival is not feasible for most potential immigrants, obtaining as much information via the Internet is more realistic. Provincial nominee website information on pre-arrival information is key as 95% of nominees welcomed to Manitoba rated the provincial website as "a useful or a very useful source of pre and post arrival information" (Carter & Amoyaw 2011, p.182). As a significant number of nominees arrive in smaller and more remote areas of Canada, informing the nominee of the realities of immigrating to such areas is critical to building is a trusting relationship between the receiving community and newcomer that optimistically will result in high rates of retention.

 

43

Nova Scotia's Immigrant Settlement and Integration Services (ISIS) has created an online tool that aims to improve labour market integration process for immigrants by providing early preparation while still in their home countries and for those recently arrived to the province (Nova Scotia Start, 2013). The program has been named "Nova Scotia Start" and eligibility includes those who have received a letter of provincial nomination from the Nova Scotia Office of Immigration. This program allows nominees to communicate with settlement and employment counselors, as well as pre-arrival language instructors who can better inform the nominees on their future life in Canada. In a survey done by ISIS in 2013, 97.6% of newcomer responded that pre-arrival preparation is "important or very important". The value of the program is captured by one client, who commented that this program "may play a crucial role in one's integration into the new place and the measure of integration success" (Immigrant Settlement & Integration Services, 2013). This program appears to be a trailblazer in the field of prearrival contact as the nominee can continually communicate with a settlement counselor in Canada until arrival. Hopefully other jurisdictions will catch on to the benefits of informing and educating nominees of what to expect pre-arrival to Canada. Flexibility and Creativity Each town, city and province and/or territory is distinct in infrastructure, social services available and in the welcoming atmosphere of the community. Consequently, social integration initiatives for newcomers must vary by jurisdiction by their unique needs as demonstrated in the literature. The provincial nominee program was, after all, created due to a "one size fits all" immigration program not working for certain parts of the country. This is also true in the case of settlement provision.   44

In the delivery of services, Carter et al. (2008) conclude that offering language classes at a work site after hours may "increase attendance, as efficiencies of travel and time may be utilized" (p. 179). As discussed in chapter 3, certain municipalities and companies who have not traditionally received immigrants, are now becoming host communities due to the PNP, and are increasing taking settlement responsibilities into their own hands. The offering of language classes and settlement services on-site by a settlement worker from a local ISP or otherwise, is becoming more common, as the logistics for the workers to access these services on their own is not always feasible due to obstacles like the lack of local transportation and long work hours. Flexibility is key in being able to offer imperative services for nominees, as having service provision is better than no programs offered at all. In Theriault & Haan's (2011) report on settlement provision in New Brunswick, front line workers in smaller towns revealed a lack in public transportation which made it difficult for newcomers to get around, as purchasing a vehicle upon arrival to Canada is not always financially possible. The report shows one ISP has fundraised locally to purchase a mini-van to offer some transportation for newcomers to the area (Theriault & Haan, 2011). The creativity of ISPs and community members is essential in the welcoming and social integration of newcomers until the settlement provision infrastructure catches up in smaller and remote areas that are receiving nominees. Relevant recruitment This best practice should and could be owed to provincial attraction and recruitment initiatives of the PNP, as the successful settlement outcome is due to the

 

45

correct matching of labour deficiencies within the province to the nominee who has the certain skill set to fill it. Up to 80% of PNP have found employment within their first year, with annual earnings increasing with time in Canada and the "majority have jobs at skill level commensurate with, or higher than, the skill level of their intended occupation" (CIC, 2011a, p. 36). If a nominee is working in his/her field with adequate and reasonable wages, the economic integration is on its way to taking care of itself. It is mentioned that nominees in the Atlantic Provinces have lower employment levels of between 52% and 76%, whereas MB, BC, AB and SK's incidences were as high between 94-98% (CIC, 2011a, p. 37). New Brunswick's employment incidence is as high as 76% (CIC, 2011a), which the Maritime province should be commended for as it is the highest rate of employment for nominees in eastern Canada. These high of employment outcome figures indicate a good match between the province and skilled workers and professionals, which could be key when examining the retention of newcomers in second and third-tier cities. Relevant recruitment is the first important step for the provinces and nominees for the eventual economic integration of the newcomers. Employment Services Employment services are a chief tool in a nominee's economic integration as repeated continuously throughout the literature on nominee settlement in Canada. Although most ISPs have the common approach of offering employment services through an employment counselor, certain ISPs have created distinct employment services for nominees. Foreign credential recognition issues remain prominent challenges for

 

46

nominees. Yet in 2002 Manitoba developed the Framework for a Manitoba Strategy on Qualifications Recognition, which has "established principles to ensure skilled immigrants have access to the information and resources necessary to prepare for qualifications recognition" (Carter & Amoyaw, 2011, p. 183). Correct information on how to get foreign credentials recognized is an important first step for nominees seeking employment in their field. Eastman Immigrant Services (EIS) in rural Steinbach, MB, offers an array of employment services to provincial nominees which includes "career coaching, resume writing, job search support, on the job language training, occupational and safety training, and training programs for immigrant truck drivers", which may be the result of more than 5,000 newcomers settling in the area in the past decade (Carter & Amoyaw, 2011, p. 181). These services and more continue to exemplify that communities and ISPs, even in small and rural areas aim to improve the economic situation for newcomers When examining employment services in a small city like Brandon, MB where the company Maple Leaf has increasingly been providing settlement services like language classes and housing, employment services are noticeably absent. This is not surprising, as employers do not want their employees to learn of new opportunities or ways to increase their human capital to search for work elsewhere. Nominees may seek employment counseling at a local ISP while there is one in Brandon, yet many smaller areas where nominees settle may not have that good fortune. This is another example of why online employment counseling can be beneficial for those who cannot seek the services due to logistics.

 

47

Networking opportunities Networking with community and business members is important for all newcomers and nominees to Canada for economic integration, yet in the nominee stream the networking initiatives and opportunities appeared predominantly in the settlement of potential nominee international graduate students. In Halifax, Nova Scotia, the Atlantic Association of Community Business Development Corporation and HRDA Employment Centre execute the International Students' Post-Graduate Project (Gates-Gasse, 2012, p. 284). The project not only educated recruiters, employers and community members on hiring international students, but also allowed international students to meet with recruiters, practice-networking skills and to better understand both sides perspectives (Gates-Gasse, 2012, p. 284). Bringing potential nominees and employers and local stakeholders together is fundamental in allowing all parties to understand each others needs, to see what skill sets are available and for potential recruitment of these international students who have been trained locally. The University of British Columbia recognizes the importance of educating their international students, as they have created a networking event called Launch a Career in Canada, which is dedicated to career development (Centre for student involvement & careers, 2013). Students are given the opportunity to connect with local employers, as well as UBC international alumni to find out more about the Canadian and BC economy, job market and "to gain valuable and practical tips on establishing their careers in Canada" (Centre for student involvement & careers, 2013). The occasion to network with

 

48

fellow international alumni is particularly worthy of noting as the realities of the labour market and economy for international students will surface. As this type of opportunity has significant value added for international students seeking employment in Canada, it is a best practice that could also be duplicated for skilled workers and professionals arriving to Canada. Challenges As the PNP continues to be a prominent immigration stream into Canada, it is essential to concentrate not only on what is `working' for the integration and retention of potential and actual nominees through the best practices as this study has shown, but it is equally crucial to focus on particular on-going challenges that are clear themes in the literature. As much attention has been put into the attraction of these nominees, as well as their "fit" into the regional economy, less attention has been made towards the lives of the nominees outside of their employment and qualitative research on their settlement. Little attention was provided on the settlement experiences of the spouses and dependents of the principal applicant within the literature. Although this paper has demonstrated the trend of the private sector's participation in settlement provision for nominees, challenges that continue to arise in the literature were of adequate housing, education and health care. Affordable Housing The lack of appropriate and affordable housing for immigrants remains a problem, particularly for nominees' relocating to remote areas. As Palacio (2011) explains, housing in Brandon, MB is challenging as rent is high and buying a home is almost   49

"unthinkable for many newcomers" (p. 59). According to interviewees in his study, certain community stakeholders did not view this as a huge problem as they assume the influx of foreign workers is temporary. Palacio (2011) states that stakeholders have been "slow to understand that the influx is not temporary, but permanent" (p. 59). Housing remains a huge challenge for newcomers and communities, as ultimately owning a house could lead to retention within the area. In the communities of Winkler, MB, the lack of temporary and affordable housing creates difficulty in transitioning to the new area (Rural Development Institute, 2005), while housing shortages in Steinbach have led to a greater dispersal of nominees which results in challenges for service provision and a spatial mismatch (Carter et al., 2008). Although housing challenges are not specific to immigrants in Canada, as a lack of available affordable housing is a nation wide crisis for native born as well, this issue is exacerbated for newcomers, as they may be uninformed on what is acceptable and unacceptable in the housing market. Housing, apartments and temporary arrangements for newcomers is an issue that requires further exploration. Education Nominees are eligible to sponsor both spouses and dependent children to Canada. With this sponsorship of children arise issues with the integration of these nominee children into the education system as well as the adjustment of the infrastructure with the numbers of students growing. Carter et al. (2008) discuss the increase of enrollment for English as Additional Language students in the Hanover School Division, Steinbach, MB, as over 1,200 nominee children have settled in the area. The school division has

 

50

faced many obstacles with this fast increase, including not being aware of the number of students to be received, where the children will attend school depending on where the nominee family settles, lack of additional funding for the new arrivals, as well as the supplementary programming, support and infrastructure needed (Carter et al., 2008). Immigrant children new to school are expected to deal with a new language, subjects and material, but what may be most challenging for these newcomer children is the social setting. Wilson-Forsberg's (2011) book on adolescent immigrants in Fredericton, NB explains, "the majority (of the youth) indicated that their first year in Canada was difficult, and that school was traumatic; these immigrant youth described school as a place where they felt homesick and socially isolated" (p. 97). One student in Fredericton that she spoke with described it as "being thrust into a sink or swim situationhaving to learn the language and make friends quickly"(p. 97). While the social and economic integration of adult nominees has been of great interest of this study, it is essential not to forget the children, as these immigrant children go through an important and challenging transition period to a new country as well as their parents. School boards in communities that receive nominees should be informed and educated on that influx of newcomer children and what should be done to facilitate their arrival and settlement. Extra funding is needed to help integrate the nominee children, yet may not be made available in smaller areas. Health Care While Medicare is available to both citizens and permanent residents when in need, the topic of health care services remains a challenge for newcomer nominees. This

 

51

is not surprising as the population grows in communities that have a limited amount of doctors, nurses and medical staff. This is expressed in the Rural Development Institute (2005) report on the community of Winkler, MB as nominees in the community expressed concerns with the local medical system, particularly the shortage of doctors and specialists. Some nominees were also not impressed that Canadian Medicare does not cover dental appointments and costs (Rural Development Institue, 2005). Carter et al. (2008) reveal that in Steinbach, the service provider SISP connects newcomers with local health services by offering information and orientation on how to access it, as well as language interpretation services. But as the PNP program favour young applicants, which may mean those who have many children, primary health care services are put under pressure as community populations grow rapidly, yet the infrastructure does not grow correspondingly. As health services are a provincial and territorial matter, provinces and territories need to take health care services as an immigrant related issue as well. The attraction of medical staff to rural and remote area across Canada continues to be a challenge for both local and immigrants to access essential and immediate health care needs locally. Recommendations When making recommendations to communities, ISPs and the private sector on nominee settlement practices, it is important to examine what has already been published and created concerning immigrants in non-traditional immigrant receiving communities. The National Working Group on Small Centre Strategies has published the document Attracting and Retaining Immigrants: A Tool Box of Ideas for Smaller Centres (2005), which was funded by Citizenship and Immigration Canada. This Toolbox is an especially   52

essential resource for smaller centres that may not have traditionally received immigrants in recent years, yet looks to create a strategy to help with the welcoming of newcomers as they recognize that immigrants may be arriving to unprepared communities. This toolbox is intended to create welcoming communities, which is very important for both the social and economic integration and retention of newcomers. Case studies have been done in many smaller communities in Manitoba (Portage de la Prairie, Parkland, Steinbach, Brandon) by the Rural Development Institute at Brandon University. These case studies should be documented in communities in different provinces and territories across the country that may have taken various approaches and have had different outcomes in nominee settlement provision. As community and newcomer needs vary greatly, identifying unique best practices and challenges for welcoming communities should be shared for lessons learned. It is through documenting these successes and challenges in small centres and bigger cities alike, that ideas and strategies can be circulated to see what may work for any particular area. This recommendation could also work for services provided by employers, universities and any other third party service provider that could use their successes and challenges to create a best practices and challenges document. The settlement sector evolves quickly, as Canadian immigration public policy is ever changing and the literature becomes quickly outdated. There is a call for research on the retention of nominees throughout Canada, particularly nominees who receive services from the private sector. Although this report of best practice and challenges is inclusive of all provinces and territories that have a provincial/territorial nominee agreement, the literature on the PNP is Manitoba-heavy, as many academics have taken a keen interest in Manitoba's

 

53

PNP's attraction and retention successes. The lack of literature concerning PNP settlement in all provinces and territories calls for more research across the nation so that the reader can have a more complete understanding of contemporary settlement practices in Canada. This is also important for the provinces and territories to be able to learn from each other's successes, challenges, innovation and creativity.

 

54

Chapter 5 Conclusion As Canadian immigration streams evolve and new attraction initiatives are constantly surfacing, it is relevant to ask if as much attention, time, resources and evaluation are put into the settlement as there is of attraction and recruitment of newcomers. As there is no national settlement policy that dictates that settlement provision must be provided where newcomers are living, many newcomers in Canada go without, or do not have access to the same amount of services of those in bigger centres. This is acutely true for nominees. There is a two-tier system of settlement provision for nominees: those who receive settlement services from ISPs and those who receive services from the private sector. As witnessed in Chapter 3, third party actors have stepped in to provide provision; at times funded by the government, at times privatized all together. This discrepancy of settlement provision creates an unbalanced and unstandardized system across the board for newcomers, particularly for provincial and territorial nominees upon arrival and during their stages of adjustment to Canadian life. Although this study has focused primarily on provincial and territorial nominees, the phenomenon of the privatization of settlement provision may occur in other Canadian immigration streams as responsibility and accountability for immigrant selection is increasingly being handed over to the private sector. The upcoming immigration approach called the "Expression of Interest" (EOI) is no exception. The implementation of a "fast and flexible economic immigration system whose primary focus is on meeting Canada's labour needs" (CIC 2012b, p. 1) was introduced in the Government of Canada's 2012 Budget with intentions to "explore with provinces, territories and employers

 

55

approaches to developing a pool of skilled workers who are ready to begin employment in Canada" (CIC, 2013c, p. 1). The new immigration approach, which is expected to commence by the end of 2014, will allow employers to "cherry-pick" potential immigrants to fill regional labour shortages from a pool of skilled-worker candidates and expectantly, have them in the labour market faster than other existing immigration streams. Steven Chase of the Globe and Mail (2013) has referred to the EOI system as an "online matchmaker", as Ottawa will be connecting would-be foreign workers with employers who are looking to hire from abroad. Jason Kenney, the recent past CIC Cabinet Minister has confirmed Chase's comparison, as he has stated that "[the foreign workers] will go into this pool, and then employers or my department and or provinces will be able to fish out of that pool, it's like a dating site" (Chase, 2013, p.1). The system looks to benefit both the foreign worker and the Canadian labour market by matching them pre-arrival to Canada, which in turn, is expecting to have them on the job, in their field, quicker. The current FSWP model still leaves prospective immigrants vulnerable when looking for immediate employment upon arrival to Canada, and often un-under employed. as only 42% of immigrants actually find employment in their field of expertise (Frank & Saunders, 2009). The EOI could take this element out of the question, as it will allow Canadian employers to do the work of contacting applicants they deem qualified for a certain job. This leaves the question of what direction Canadian immigration is heading by allowing employers to select future citizens of Canada, as CIC seemingly is backing away. The Canadian government is not only listening to the needs of Canada's businesses and companies, but also inviting them to be partners in the selection and settlement provision. As there has not been adequate evaluation or research on this new

 

56

governance of immigration and selection as it has happened so rapidly, it is difficult to know where this pathway of unaccountability will take Canada and its current and future immigrants. It may be predicted that one day immigrant attraction and settlement will be completely out of the federal government's control. Neoliberal values of immigration and settlement are becoming more apparent and certain consequences accompany the profit-driven ideology. As provinces, territories and municipalities have more responsibility and flexibility in immigrant attraction and settlement, a sense of competition has arisen between provinces and municipalities in immigrant attraction and settlement. Provinces and its cities want both population and economic growth. Immigration and in particular, programs like the PNP, are looked at as useful tools in boosting this growth with more control in the province or territory's hands. This surge in competition between jurisdictions for immigrants is prominent with devolved programs like the PNP's and can be a very positive aspect as the increasing control of selection and attraction encourages the region to offer the best and to be creative in their attraction and retention methods. This study aims to provide insight on the very uneven and ever changing settlement provision for provincial nominees, as well as potential nominees, in different jurisdictions across Canada. This could also be said for all immigrant settlement in Canada, but it has been exacerbated by third party involvement in both attraction and settlement of the PNP. As the best practices provided have been targeted to suggest, there are many settlement practices that are working in favour of the successful social and economic integration and retention of nominees. Yet while there are many communities working with what they have made available to them by government funding to provide   57

services, critical challenges remain an issue as discussed. The importance of settlement provision for newcomers is well known to government officials, policy makers, immigrants, and increasingly the public, yet there remains a lack of open dialogue about the inadequacy of provision for temporary migrants and current shifts from public to private settlement provision. If the federal government is accepting and prepared to allow third parties to provide settlement provision, regulations must be made and put into place to assure newcomers are given quality services that are up to par. As players who have not traditionally been involved in settlement services are filling the provision gaps that the federal government is failing to provide, concerns mount regarding what direction immigrant settlement provision is heading. A failed integration process at the local level due to inadequate settlement services leads to the newcomer family relocating elsewhere, which defeats the concept of the regionalization of immigrant settlement, a main goal of the PNP. An emphasis of the value of settlement services for newcomers and Canadian society at large is important to recognize and support. Immigrants have needs and will relocate if those needs are not fulfilled. Regulated, well-supported settlement services across Canada are in order. As Canadian immigration policy continues to download the attraction, selection and settlement processes into the hands of others, the wellbeing of the newcomers cannot be marginalized. Although the Government of Canada commits a significant amount of funding into settlement services on an annual basis, the allocation of funds needs to better match actual immigrant settlement patterns. Immigrants, who have arrived in St John's, NL or Cold Lake, AB, whether through the Family Reunification Class, PNP, FSWP, or

 

58

TFWP should have access to quality settlement services to fit their needs for their new life in Canada. The settlement sector is in a crucial period as it continues to shift towards third party provision, and it is essential for policy makers to consider not only what is working for short term narrow budgeting restraints in Ottawa, but also to consider the long term goals of immigrant settlement integration and retention from coast to coast. The benefits to longer term state fiscal, but even more importantly to Canada's overall wellbeing is worthy of the investment.

 

59

Appendix  Page 1 of Alberta Immigrant Nominee Program: EmployerDriven  Settlement & Retention Plan Form  

 

60

Page 2 of Alberta Immigrant Nominee Program: EmployerDriven Settlement  & Retention Plan Form 

 

61

Page 3 of Alberta Immigrant Nominee Program: EmployerDriven Settlement  & Retention Plan Form 

Alberta Government, Alberta Immigrant Nominee Program (AINP). (2013). Employer-driven settlement & retention plan. Retrieved from website: https://www.albertacanada.com/AINP-EDS-SettlementRetentionPlan.pdf   62

Bibliography Anderson, K., & Leo, C. (2006). Immigration and settlement in Saint John, New Brunswick: Community perspectives on a federal-provincial agreement. University of Winnipeg. Retrieved from http://blog.uwinnipeg.ca/ChristopherLeo/ISSJecomm06-04-18.pdf Andrew, C., & Abdourhamane Hima, R. (2011). Federal policies on immigrant settlement. In E. Tolley & R. Young (Eds.), Immigrant Settlement Policy in Canadian Municipalities McGill-Queen's University Press 2011. Baglay, S. (2012). Provincial nominee programs: A note on policy implications and future research needs. Journal of International Migration & Integration, 13(1), 121-141. Baxter, J. (2010). Precarious pathways: Evaluating the Provincial Nominee Programs in Canada. A research paper for the Law Commission of Ontario. Retrieved from: http://www.ontla.on.ca/library/repository/mon/24012/306589.pdf Bruce, D. (2007). The challenge of immigration as a rural repopulation strategy in Maritime Canada. Our diverse cities , 3, 90-96. Retrieved from http://canada.metropolis.net/pdfs/ODC_Summer07_3_en.pdf Canadian Council for Refugees. (1998). Best settlement practices: Settlement services for refugees and immigrants in Canada . Retrieved from website: http://ccrweb.ca/bpfina1.htm Carter, T., Morrish, M., & Amoyaw, B. (2008). Attracting Immigrants to Smaller Urban and Rural Communities: Lessons Learned from the Manitoba Provincial Nominee Program. Journal of International Migration and Integration, 9(2), 161-183. Carter, T., Pandey, M., & Townsend, J. (2010). The Manitoba Provincial Nominee Program: Attraction, Integration and Retention of Immigrants. Institute for Research on Public Policy, (10), 1-44. Carter, T., & Amoyaw, B. (2011). Manitoba: The struggle to attract and retain immigrants. In J. Biles, M. Burstein, J. Frideres, E. Tolley & R. Vineberg (Eds.), Integration and Inclusion of Newcomers and Minorities Across Canada Kingston: School of Policy Studies, Queen's University. Centre for student involvement & careers: Launch a career in canada. (2013). Retrieved from http://www.students.ubc.ca/careers/students/international-studentresources/launch-a-career-in-canada/

 

63

Chase, S. (2013, 01 01). Ottawa to play matchmaker for foreign workers. The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/ottawa-toplay-matchmaker-for-foreign-workers/article6840232/ Chiasson, G., & Koji, J. (2011). Quebec immigrant settlement policy and municipalities. In E. Tolley & R. Young (Eds.), Immigrant settlement policy in Canadian municipalities McGill-Queen's University Press 2011. Collacott, M. (2002). Canada's immigration policy: the need for major reform. Public Policy Sources: The Fraser Institute, (64) Cragg, A. (2011). Neoliberalising immigration in canada: the pilot project for occupations requiring lower-levels of formal training and the expansion of canada's temporary foreign worker program. (Master's thesis, Trent University ). Dhillon, S. (2013, 02 22). Toronto officially opens services to undocumented residents . The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/toronto-officially-opens-servicesto-undocumented-residents/article8964530/ Dobrowolsky, A. (2011). The Intended and Unintended Effects of a New Immigration Strategy: Insights from Nova Scotia's Provincial Nominee Program. Studies in Political Economy, 87, 109-141. Dobrowolsky, A. (2012). Nuancing Neoliberalism: Lessons Learned from a Failed Immigration Experiment. Journal of International Migration & Integration, 87, 109-142 Dominion Bureau of Statistics. (1959) Canada Year Book 1959. Otawa: Queen's Printer. Evans, B., Richmond, T., & Shields, J. (2005). Structuring neoliberal governance: the nonprofit sector, emerging new modes of control and the marketisation of service delivery. Policy and Society, 24(1), 73-97. Frank, B., & Saunders, P. (2009). Integration of international medical graduates into rural Nova Scotia communities: A qualitative pilot study. Halifax, NS, Atlantic Metropolis Center. Frideres, J.S. (2006). "Cities and Immigrant Integration: The Future of Second- and Third-Tier Centres." Our Diverse Cities Vol. 2: 3-8. Gates-Gasse, E. (2012). International students as immigrants. In H. Bauder (Ed.), Immigration and Settlement: challenges, experiences and opportunitiesToronto: Canadian Scholars' Press Inc.

 

64

Haan, M., & Theriault, L. (2012). Non-profit immigrant settlement agencies in New Brunswick: answering the call for population growth? The Atlantic Metropolis Centre's Working Papers Series, (44), Retrieved from http://community.smu.ca/atlantic/ Haddow, R. (2011). Multilevel governance and immigration policy in Nova Scotia. In E. Tolley & R. Young (Eds.), Immigrant Settlement policy in Canadian municipalities (pp. 192-241). McGill-Queen's University Press 2011. Harvey, D (2007). Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Hou, F, (2007). Changes in the initial destination and redistribution of Canada's major immigrant groups: reexamining the role of group affinity. International Migration Review, (41)3, 680-705 Hyndman, J., Schuurman, N., & Fiedler, R. (2006). Size matters: attracting new immigrants to Canadian cities. Journal of International Migration and Integration, 7, 1­25. Immigrant Settlement & Integration Services (2013) Innovation, technology and the human touch- pre-arrival programs for immigrants at ISIS. Unpublished conference paper presented at the 2013 RCIS Conference: Immigration & Settlement: Precarious Futures? , Toronto, ON Kataoka, S., & Magnusson, W. (2011). Immigrant settlement policy in British Columbia. In E. Tolley & R. Young (Eds.), Immigrant Settlement policy in Canadian municipalities (pp. 241-294). McGill-Queen's University Press 2011. Leo, C., & August, M. (2009). The multilevel governance of immigration and settlement: making deep federalism work. Canadian Journal of Political Science, 42(2), 491510. Lewis, N. (2010). A decade later: assessing successes and challenges in manitoba's provincial immigrant nominee program. Canadian Public Policy, 36(2), 241-246 Ley, D. (2006). Explaining variations in business performance among immigrant entrepreneurs in Canada. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 32(5), 743764. Lo, L., Wang, L., Wang, S., & Yuan, Y. (2007). Immigrant settlement services in the Toronto CMA: a GIS-assisted analysis of supply and demand. CERIS- The Ontario Metropolis Centre. CERIS Working Paper No.59. McDonough, P. (2008). Nova Scotia's provincial immigration policy: the failure of the business mentorship program. Master's Thesis, Ryerson University. Moore, H. (2008). From Student to Migrant: Migration Narratives of International Students in Canada. Master's Thesis, York University   65

Moss, A., Bucklaschuk, J., & Annis, R.C. (2010). Small Places, Big Changes: Temporary Migration, Immigration and Family Reunification. Canadian Issues, Spring 2010, p.33-36. National Working Group on Smaller Centre Strategies. (2005). Attracting and Retaining Immigrants: A Tool Box of Ideas for Smaller Centres, Funded by Citizenship and Immigration Canada. Retrieved from www.icavictoria.org Nova Scotia Start: Information and referral for new immigrants. (2013). Retrieved from http://www.novascotiastart.ca/english.html Pagliaro, J., & Mahoney, J. (2012, 08 23). Funding cuts threaten immigrant agencies . The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from http://m.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/funding-cuts-threaten-immigrantagencies/article1848219/?service=mobile Palacio, N. (2010). Integration of low-skilled immigrants through Manitoba's provincial nominee program. (Master's Thesis, Ryerson University). Pandey, M., Townsend, J. (2010). Provincial nominee programs: An evaluation of earnings and retention rates of nominees. Retrieved from: http://economics.uwinnipeg.ca/RePEc/winwop/2010-01.pdf Richmond, T., & Shields, J. (2005). Ngo-government relations and immigrant services: Contradictions and challenges. Journal of International Migration and Integration, 6(3/4), 513-526. Roach, E. (2011). Service needs and gaps for international students transitioning to permanent residency in a "two-step" immigration process: a Toronto-based study. (Master's Thesis, Ryerson University). Rural Development Institute (2005) Manitoba rural immigration community case studies: Winkler. Working Paper. Rural Development Institute. (2008). "Settlement: Considerations for Temporary Foreign Workers in Brandon and Area." Discussion Paper No. 2. Retrieved from www.brandonu.ca/rdi/TFW/RDI_DiscussionPaper2.pdf. Sadiq, K. (2004). The two-tier settlement system: a review of current newcomer services in Canada. CERIS- The Ontario Metropolis Centre. CERIS Working Paper No. 34 Stasiulis, D., Hughes, C., & Amery, Z. (2011).From government to multilevel governance of immigrant settlement in Ontario. In E. Tolley & R. Young (Eds.), Immigrant Settlement policy in Canadian municipalities McGill-Queen's University Press 2011.

 

66

Tolley, E. (2011). Introduction: Who invited them to the party? Federal-municipal relations in immigrant settlement policy. In E. Tolley & R. Young (Eds.), Immigrant Settlement Policy in Canadian MunicipalitiesMcGill-Queen's University Press 2011. Tossutti, L. (2012). Municipal roles in immigrant settlement, integration and cultural diversity. Canadian journal of political science, 45(3), 607-633. Vineberg, R. (2012). Responding to immigrants' settlement needs: the Canadian experience. Springer. Walton-Roberts, B. (2007). Immigration regionalization in Ontario: policies, practices and realities. In K. Graham (Ed.), Our diverse cities: Ontario (4 ed., pp. 13-19). Welcoming Communities Initiative Bulletin. (2012, 04) A view on the termination of the Manitoba and B.C immigration agreements. Retrieved from p2pcanada.ca Wilson-Forsberg, S. (2012). Getting used to the quiet: immigrant adolescents' journey to belonging in New Brunswick, Canada. McGill-Queen's University Press. Wolch, J. 1990. The Shadow State: Government and Voluntary Sector in Transition. (New York: Foundation Centre). Zahtab-Martin, A., Bucklaschuk, J., & Ashton, B. (2010). Rural employers' information pathway for hiring temporary foreign workers in Manitoba. (Rural Development Institute, Brandon, MB). Government Documents, Reports & Websites Alberta Government, Alberta Immigrant Nominee Program (AINP). (2013). Employerdriven settlement & retention plan. Retrieved from website: https://www.albertacanada.com/AINP-EDS-SettlementRetentionPlan.pdf Canada's Economic Action Plan , (2013). Strengthening Canada's immigration system. Retrieved from website: http://actionplan.gc.ca/en/initiative/strengtheningcanadas-immigration-system (CIC, 2001) Citizenship and Immigrant Canada, (2001) Towards a More Balanced Geographic Distribution of Immigrants. Cat. no. CI51-109/4- 2002E. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada. (CIC, 2011a) Citizenship and Immigration Canada, (2011). Evaluation of the provincial nominee program-evaluation division. Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/pdf/research-stats/evaluation-pnp2011.pdf

 

67

(CIC, 2011b) Citizenship and Immigration Canada, (2011). Strategic outcomes and program alignment architecture: program 3.1 settlement and integration of newcomers . Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/paa/2012/activity-31.asp (CIC, 2012a) Citizenship and Immigration Canada , (2012). Fact sheet- provincial nominee program. Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/employers/provincialnominee-program.asp (CIC, 2012b) Federal, provincial, and territorial governments envision Canada's future immigration system. (2012). Citizenship and Immigration Canada- News Release . Retrieved from http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/media/releases/2012/2012-11-16.asp (CIC, 2012c) Citizenship and Immigration Canada,(2012). Funding guidelines: national call for proposals- 2012 grants and contributions settlement and resettlement programs. Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/grants-contributionsfunding/documents/pdf/cfp-guidelines-2012.pdf (CIC, 2012d) Citizenship and Immigration Canada, (2012). Preliminary tablespermanent and temporary residents 2012. Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/statistics/facts2012-preliminary/01.asp (CIC, 2012e) Citizenship and Immigration Canada, (2012). The government of Canada invests record funding for settlement services for newcomers to Manitoba. Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/media/releases/2012/2012-12-13b.asp (CIC, 2013a) Citizenship and Immigration Canada, (2013). Provincial nominees. Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/immigrate/provincial/index.asp (CIC, 2013b) Citizenship and Immigration Canada, (2013). Report on plans and priorities 2013-2014. Retrieved from website: http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/rpp/2013-2014/index.asp (CIC,2013c) The role of employers in an expression of interest system. (2013, 03 26) Citizenship and Immigration Canada- Consultations Retrieved from http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/consultations/eis/index.asp Government of Canada, (1982). Canadian charter of rights and freedoms. Ottawa, Canada

 

68

Government of New Brunswick, (2013). Population growth division. Retrieved from website: http://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/contacts/dept_renderer.145.19943.html Government of Manitoba, (2011). Manitoba immigration facts-2011 statistical report. Retrieved from website: http://www.gov.mb.ca/immigration/pdf/mpnp-manitobaimmigration-statistics-facts-2011.pdf

             

 

69

