Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research 10-1-1994 Politics and Public Administration

Review [untitled]
Paul Kellogg
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics Part of the Public Affairs, Public Policy and Public Administration Commons Recommended Citation
Kellogg, Paul, "Review [untitled]" (1994). Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research. Paper 1. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/politics/1

This Other is brought to you for free and open access by the Politics and Public Administration at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Politics and Public Administration Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

REVIEWS
contribution household sumer not cuses this, war rians Grazia of cinema have Cross's items of women's of to the wages the new con 1920s could also fo the

/ COMPTES
A.

RENDUS

345
?

many budget, available in the purchased. discussion of on

whose World ham,

George most War

Hormel

famous

Company was produce canned

the

been

leisure

exclusively

the male

he argues, reflects simply debates. Yet feminist social such have as Kathy shown Peiss both pastimes the

worker; the inter histo de

wage its seven tland. Food

II creation of or Spam ? announced cut for and benefits Of

spiced a 23 per cent in hear 1,500

the workers

in the American plants these workers, it was the Workers

members of the P-9 local of the United
and Commercial (UFCW) 25,000), the sum in Austin, Minnesota (a town of who the contract. By challenged not before sions

and Victoria

commercialized and

importance such as the in commen the but also

popular magazines lives of interwar working women, how much official and anxiety

mer of 1986, they had lost their battle, but
in action how conces showing the employers' offensive could be opposed. This is captured marvellous account Green's of the battle ly in Hardy at Hormel. and This place 1980s. market victory at "middle America" of strike took the mid-point state and The and was free the Reaganite saw the employers

tary these pleasures generated. Similarly, nowhere in his lengthy discussion of in tellectuals consider and mass culture does Cross the gendered of de organization bates about and low culture, the high as de "traditional" and the popular. Yet, Grazia culture be and with others have argued, "prevail

ing intellectual opinion
femaleness."

identified mass

the 1980s as marking

the triumph of the

In the end, to the book's claim then, "the making cul of consumer to fully ture" is limited by Cross's failure about take into the gender processes in the material he analyses. At often buried does the book account at the

prosperity, ling down"

This capitalist enterprise. to lead to wealth, supposed and all the good things "trick to the workers the But below. produced flowed up

at Hormel triumph of the market not a trickle but a stream that

work same and

time, while dull prose,

in inelegant raise some

to the rich, not down to the poor. To cite after the defeat of the just one example, around from strike, wages plummeted

about the central questions of time and money. While they some with of Cross's may argu quarrel and evidence, his ments, interpretations, torians of labour, con and mass leisure, stimulating dilemmas should nevertheless sumption/culture find Time and Money worthwhile.

$10 an hour to $6.50 for those 300 wor
kers whose Much 1980s of jobs the were subcontracted to the

Quality Pork Processors.
academic the But as marking the working class. P-9

(293)
left saw of disappearance 1985-86, "during of letters of sup

Cynthia Wright York University

received thousands ... union officers and individ port. Many on picket uals said that they had walked lines and knew all the associated anxieties "over (287) three In the course unions from to P-9 from to attend of the and thousand

well."

strike, other

Hardy Struggle

Green, for

On

Strike

at Hormel: Labor

The Move

organizations sponded" "Supporters to Austin

a Democratic

ment (Philadelphia: Press 1990).

Temple University

re state every for appeals solidarity. across came the country

THIS YEAR MARKS the tenth anniversary of the beginning of the great Hormel
meatpackers' strike, one of the central

mass demonstrations, sent let and rallies. Thousands marches, ters of support, food, and funds and joined in the anti-Hormel that activities protest took place in virtually every U.S. city."

industrial disputes of the 1980s. In 1984,

(4) Even

deep

in the heart of Texas,

346

LABOUR/LE TRAVAIL
annual of a heavily publicized bar the SPAM-O-RAMA event, announced the event's postpone that they had the nationwide instead Boycott 'de of He is not clear, three factors. these on the third ? inher the limits however, ent in the corporate strategy. campaign three factors Let us look at each of these of in turn. Green state strike. keting acted The shows strikers how in concert employers to attack point Bank and the were as part the P-9 pic of

"sponsors spoof becue, ment, cided

saying to honor

Hormel products.'"

(254) The spread of

and posters T-shirts, buttons, invoking to "CRAM YOUR SPAM" be the viewer came from the slogan dead. which demonstrated that

at one of First

branches

theworking class in the US was indeed far Finally, the official union leadership, particularly in the US, saw the 1980s as
marking struggle the workers' a transition the and end the of the era of class of for and "traditional" the tactics time reason

of making strategy Rogers' to Hormel tion closely linked omically. temporary On 23 September

any corpora suffer econ 1985, US Dis fur

trictCourt Judge Edward Devitt "issued a
injunction prohibiting any

and movement, to the realm of But as Green

ther First Bank activities." (79) In April 1986, the same judge issued an injunction
or harassing threatening "prohibiting 2 June, scabs (241) On by any means."

class struggle to fight at all. In the workers and February 1986, mass January pickets out of the and again scabs again kept and the National Guard, plant, fought allowed out several brought towns in nearby Green as sees these to the the key leaders strike gone Hormel-owned in sympathy plants strikes. highpoints that had the steps fur

compromise. it was only

clearly unionism

shows, which

Devitt upheld the right of the anti-Hormel
strike month was no UFCW bureaucracy to place the P-9

local under trusteeship.
later, he

(253) And one

property The

union hall ruled that P-9's ? that it was now the theirs longer who had of the UFCW leadership close link between state and em

sabotaged the strike. (261) ployer did not end with the judiciary. On
to tried the company 13 January 1986, mass After the struck plant. reopen pic them from doing kets prevented so, Gov

class

struggle and strike, just a few

ther, "Hormel would have had to find a way out." (286) There is no doubt inmy mind thatGreen is absolutely right.
However, after tors the strike was Green's account, reading seem to have been all-important First, the concerted lost, three and fac in

ernor Rudy Perpich called in theNational
Guard. used with local police, They, together tear gas, mass and armoured arrests, to slow to allow scabs carriers personnel into the Austin ly filter State Patrol, Highway banned by law from any labor dispute," at one plant. Even the in a P-9 "supposedly involvement prevented

that defeat.

and often the state

times illegal violence
kept

organized by the
Second, national

of and the agencies employer on the defensive. workers stand of the

point was

the incredible betrayal and pro-employer,
pro-concessions

strikers from keeping
(137) This, plant. of "free" enterprise then,

scabs out of the

leadership of theUFCW undercut labour's resistance. Third, the limits inherent in
the "corporate was centrally union campaign" involved in which (he was, Green at the

transigent employer, and the army, unencum the cops, courts, bered in its use of any and all means crush But the P-9 vicious and the for strikers. as have the the attacks defeated role of

the real face ? an in triumphant access to the with to

time of the strike, employed by Ray Ro
gers' Campaign firm, consulting circumscribed Inc.) Corporate and con

the em not if strike national

tained the challenge to Hormel. Green is without question right to lay the principle blame for the defeat of the strike at the
foot of boss and bureaucrat, the first two

ployer in themselves it were not

state were,

they the the

could

of

leadership of the UFCW. Along with the entire union leadership in the US, the

REVIEWS
UFCW resistance the bureaucrats to attacks believed that strongly on wages and jobs in was The impossible. had a devastating im

/ COMPTES

RENDUS

347

March
local

1986, they killed the strike. A P-9

1980s early recession 1979-82

In that context, pact on US employment. under the sheltering umbrella of Reagan threatened ism, employers everywhere plant agreed benefits sions fought. perhaps union agree closures unless their workforces to wage cuts in and reductions ? in short, the type of conces over which the Hormel strike was And more the US than union any believed would bureaucracy, other national that mean not an to ine this de

a resolution had passed meeting for unity between their local and calling the UFCW national leadership. Wynn an "seized to order the resolution upon end to the strike had and cut off strike bene In

fits" (200) something no one voting for
the resolution in any way intended.

May and June, the UFCW took legal steps to place the local under trusteeship. With
the ciary, union enthusiastic hall it seized cooperation P-9's assets, went and even an of the occupied so far judi the as class to

leadership, to concessions

sandblast

vitable
leaders

loss
were

in jobs. UFCW national
enthusiastic policy. this UFCW backers of

mural of the struggle was P-9 struggle. The betrayal complete a strike when settlement they "signed

internationalist, in support painted

pro-concessions In 1981,

with Hormel that gave scabs priority job
bureaucracy rights were them the ... And issued out strike. of and But the 1,000 withdrawal the union bureaucrat the defeat loyal union people forcing (5) broke cards, altogether." together did not

cided that all Hormel

locals should agree

to concessions lower wage (41) to "bring more in line with master agree operators ment and "minimize the companies" wave sponse money of of plant of the closings." company to finance was a new (46) The to use $100-mil workers, with little a result was re the

Boss

The best challenged. is his documentation self-organization P-9 strikers and and the way

go un book part of Green's of the tremendous of the

saved

lion plant opened in August
of 2,600 and hire on or no union the 1,000 3,000 new old-plant workers

1982, get rid

and self-activity the Austin working in which this inspired

class, mass

The experience. of 1,500, workforce half the size of the and with many of the most 1970s, experi no longer employed. enced unionists This con their drastic done, Hormel imposed a 23 per cent cessions in 1984 ? package and benefits cut that became the wage spark for the strike. to concessions had ? done

working-class Green provides

across the US. support of evidence show pages in this self-activity and ing that there was, to beat back Hor the potential solidarity,

the employer and the defeat mel, setting on their heels. ist union leadership to the company's In response attacks, of the workers, wives spouses "primarily and a few husbands," the United formed a meet Two wives called Support Group.

Agreeing aucracy strikers. still

nothing to save jobs. But the UFCW bure
refused to fight. Worse director at

ing in a park in September 1984, almost a year before the strike began, and 300
tober tion and men In Oc attended. (13-4) the dispute the atten 1984, captured of Rogers' Corporate Campaign. came amazed with to greet to town ... in October several banners rather 1984, they hundred waiting than the the thou (14-5)

every point it actively sabotaged the P-9
Lewie Anderson, of

women

UFCW's Packinghouse Division, began openly denouncing the tactics of the local as early as 1984. (26) In March 1985 UFCW president William Wynn "sent out a letter notifying all UFCW meatpacking
locals nor that they should financial support offer for neither P-9's moral 'ill-ad

"When Rogers and his partner Ed Allen
first were women outside anticipated hall was sand P-9ers [to find] and signs them. And

vised' campaign" (27) of picketing cor porations with links toHormel. And on 15

union members, fifty-odd over crammed with three and family members."

348

LABOUR/LE TRAVAIL
and On the mass self-activ were of the campaign other aspects to demobilize long-run impact was than mobilize the rank and file. the campaign to was reason, was based on whose rather At an its as at that

Again forward. into the

again

ity of the P-9 strikers pushed the strike
one week 23 August 1986, "a thousand strikers and strike, ... the ringed completely block" First Bank containing in Minneapolis. their direct Between More approach 26 August signi to other and

core,

supporters downtown headquarters was ficant Hormel went

sumption that theUFCW leadership would
respond Hormel much that management rational, essentially

workers.

31 August facility

that year, 300 P-9 members
to hit every Hormel

as else at Hormel, of the dispute was on misunderstanding, based where, and that therefore the rank and file should the mass exerted pressure to appeal the corporate through campaign to the positive and side of bureaucrats were essen who businessmen, people Thus tially Rogers "good." emphasized consumer information pickets, boycotts, structure and civil

on a car caravan

within

driving

distance.

The

included home every strategy "leafleting in front in the town, then lining up P-9ers not to block to of the plant, but entry, show their potential and to get strength workers the (63-4) At they came off shift." in Iowa Hormel Ottumwa, large plant the road side of and extend as

mass pathy front

the 300 P-9ers formed two lines of pickets
both sides of "along ing 300 feet on each The who ment dock P-9 cent down reaction drove with was ... the plant drivers

as opposed to disobedience, to result in sym pickets designed and large pickets in strikes, militant of the struck plant, and self defence

electric.

Truck

making deliveries

to the plant and others
enthusiastic agree ... From the signs the plant workers raised after work, 80 per came

by showed the ... P-9

the the organized violence of against was a state. The corporate step campaign towards and the self-activity, solidarity, it unionism. But of politics class-struggle short, derailed always by a naive stopped trust in the good will that of the powers were the strikers. confronting Immediately in the dispute, strike began, Wynn man." Rogers Wynn, intention of (15) on several becoming months involved before the

at the rear of members." of to the the

clenched fists to show solidarity with the
And local's city membership Local park.

executive

board member Lynn Huston described the
meeting. One after another they [the Ottumwa workers] got up and talked ... A lot of them had tears in their eyes. They said we had to stick together, that itwas the only way we'd get fair treatment ... been a say, I haven't Guys would always good union man, but I'm here to tell you that seven or eight said that I've changed. About never without been able following to say the word Austin it with the word as

Rogers the UFCW This

that Bill argued was a "reasonable who with who with, believed the had who real no did to deal

left P-9ers bureaucrat reasoned the strike.

unprepared a cynical of being to wreck

everything
power

in his not

inconsiderable

they'd before

what Austin sholes. They'd always wondered looked like. Now, they said, we know people that you're just like us. (68) This corporate ravan of powerful livered, any leaflet of Rogers' was the great strength In using striking of direct of Rogers' a car ca a

Instead of using the consumer boycott as a tactic to pull supporters to the picket ? an effective line used and frequently ? of strike method organizing Rogers to picket lines, ar boycotts counterposed line around that staffing the picket guing the Austin ary activity. a second plant was very much He argued for a "minimum the caravans being to surround

campaign. dozens of message far more

number of pickets" (63) outside the Aus
tin plant while ing towns were the local wise plant have when left This organized. than itmight other defence sheltered of by their the

workers, was de solidarity and effective than There

or newsletter. approach

However, had this effect.

not all

less prepared been for a mass the company,

REVIEWS
armed state, of several of the agencies might scabs into the struck began running in January. facility sense to have made it might True, ca "minimize" the Austin if the pickets ravans facilities months formation desperation, that these the were to other Hormel travelling to try to shut them down. But for to have in instructed they were pickets five changed only. months It was into only the out of strike, lines, as

/ COMPTES

RENDUS

349

caravan the whole there arrived, is a very good chance that Fremont would have closed, and the Austin strike would that had The immensely strengthened. to have should all build rung phones night the picket, rather than call it off. But by have been looking sonable" magnificent Green 24 Never close mel not the January to show men to the "rea faith" "good a of Hormel management, was thrown away. opportunity sees clearly of that these events were to the strike. the key to be so the P-9 workers the three decisive But was he Hor does to

to real picket to realize that Hormel began was to reopen determined the Austin fa scabs. cility with were When the information pickets strikers

again were to shutting

simultaneously. plants see how this decision

linked

for pickets for solidarity scrapped calling result and the initial strikes, sympathy was On 21 January 1986, 75 spectacular. P-9 strikers closed P-9ers Hormel's to cross had less But Ottumwa their success line. at 850 plant when On 22 January, two other Hormel Fremont, shut the Hormel side refused

whole The logic of Rogers' approach. to shut Fremont cannot be failure directly pinned at the 24 on Rogers. In fact he was furious for calling off the executive But because the whole January picket. local was based

plants. If Nebraska.

the key was the P-9ers could

the plants Hormel enough

in that town, along plant in Ottumwa and Austin, would be af production

fected that the company would be econ hurt. On 24 January, then, a ca omically ravan of pickets to try set out for Fremont and close the plant. "Then the executive

the exactly ? Rogers must take indirect Em responsibility. ? are not reasonable they under ployers the rational and loss. stand only of profit ? The state is not reasonable in a capital reason ist society, its only for involving itself assist in industrial employers For difficulties. reason serves, to is in order disputes and loss with their profit to to appeal leaders strike that argu unpre

strategy corporate campaign on appealing to "reason" ? used by the executive argument

board

[of the local]

flinched."

They

was to shut Fremont the attempt thought "too rash," that they had to show Hormel some faith." the management "good By was time this decision the ca reached, ravan had already set out. So they worked the phones stopped. those on Most and one van, night In the months all to get the caravan to come, many of see that night would were home. 5 P-9ers executive contacted At least in that had morn

management ment, pared which collective As this

to sow illusions then, will listen to a rational the rank and and file

leaving for the is the

cynicism essence of

brutality

employer-side movement, is a need

bargaining. an issue in the

labour There

the phones this as an enormous cars and to missed. instructed van was not

mistake. vans return The that

is a major point. return to class-struggle in the way this of

to

unionism, As

a need of this the

to dispel any and all illusions which stand
that return. a criticism For with it is a minor book, account of a major strike point. breathes

knowing at 4:45

their

called off the picket,
themselves

set up a line by

life of the picket line. It shows the deep
and heroism of humanity kers in small-town America. mercy corrupt belief. to a union in a way It provides wor ordinary no It shows

am on Saturday

ing, in spite of the presence of 50 deputy sheriffs and the Highway Patrol. These five kept over 200 people out for 2-1/2
hours. instead The of 200 went to the union hall to work. There is no question

ossified and bureaucracy that is almost beyond evidence that powerful

350

LABOUR/LE TRAVAIL
is very far

the state in capitalist society
from all being to see neutral. in this first-hand

The lessons of Hormel are there for
account. And these lessons need in spite of the defeat, are only one pessimistic. not make There a handful at work in the of former strikers ? were more than 1,000 today plant out and bureaucrat. driven by boss "Nevertheless," "in reported, relative the plant executive HormeTs workers Local become as one account recently from the candidates 1993, still in strikers handful of former won board, on a majority and a former Iowa plant, the local's at had worker who

Ottumwa, in January 9 secretary." fashionable

helped to lead a solidarity walkout of 500
So was elected 1986, don't discard that

"CRAM YOUR SPAM" t-shirt. It just may
again.

Paul Kellogg Ryerson Polytechnic University


