     

EVALUATING  SUCCESSFUL  PARTNERSHIPS  IN  PLANNING  FOR  HEALTHY  COMMUNITIES      by      Joanna  (Joey)  Reeder   BA,  University  of  British  Columbia,  2009      A  Major  Research  Paper   presented  to  Ryerson  University      In  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of      Master  of  Planning     in     Urban  Development         Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014  

©Joey Reeder 2014

  

  

Author's  Declaration  
   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  major  research  paper.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the   major  research  paper,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  major  research  paper  to  other  institutions  or   individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  major  research  paper  by  photocopying   or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  others  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  major  research  paper  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.                                                     

ii  

   EVALUATING  SUCCESSFUL  PARTNERSHIPS  IN  PLANNING  FOR  HEALTHY  COMMUNITIES      ©Joey  Reeder  2014      Master  of  Planning     in     Urban  Development   Ryerson  University     

ABSTRACT  
Intersectoral  collaborations  between  planning  and  health  partners  have  emerged  as  a  solution   to  mitigating  the  problems  of  urban  health.  Understanding  what  makes  these  partnerships   successful  by  evaluating  precedents  in  the  local  context  provides  a  useful  resource  for  action.   Adequately  evaluating  the  successes  of  intersect  oral  evaluation  requires  work  in  developing  an   analytic  framework  for  assessment.  This  study  analyzes  a  case  study  around  the  partnership   work  evolving  around  the  Region  of  Peel's  built  environment  and  health  initiatives.  Through  the   analysis  of  key  informant  interviews  and  documentation  a  logic  model  framework  for  the   partnership  is  hypothesized  and  discussed  in  the  context  of  its  potential  application  within  an   evaluation  program.        

Key  words:    
Intersectoral  partnerships;  collaborations  in  public  health  and  planning;  healthy  cities   evaluation;  logic  model  analysis  

iii  

     

Acknowledgments  
   I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  extensive  contributions  of  Dr.  Joe  Springer,  soon-to-be   Professor  Emeritus  at  the  School  of  Community  and  Regional  Planning  and  supervisor  to  this   Major  Research  Project.  His  substantive  knowledge  in  the  subject  area  and  pointed  wisdom  in   all  else  made  the  research  process  that  much  more  rewarding  and  the  work  that  much   stronger.  I  would  like  to  also  extend  my  gratitude  to  my  second  reader,  Dr.  Corinne  Hart,   Academic  Lead  for  Ryerson  University's  Interprofessional  Education,  who  went  above  and   beyond  in  ensuring  the  work  could  be  successfully  applied  intersectorally.  Dr.  Pamela  Robinson   and  Julia  Macan  created  a  support  system  in  producing  the  work  for  which  I  am  immensely   thankful.  Finally,  the  contributions  of  Jeromy  Lloyd,  Jane  Wakefield  and  Tom  Wynn  Jr.  to  the   process  and  product  cannot  be  overstated:  thank  you  all  for  taking  the  time  to  apply  your   considerable  talents  in  supporting  the  project  and  its  author.  

  

iv  

  

Table  of  Contents  
  
AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION   ABSTRACT   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS   III   IV   1   2   14   22   33   37   38   41  
II  

  

INTRODUCTION   CHAPTER  I:  LITERATURE  REVIEW   CHAPTER  II:  METHODOLOGY  AND  STUDY  DESIGN   CHAPTER  III:  ANALYSIS  OF  FINDINGS   CHAPTER  IV:  NEXT  STEPS:  EVALUATION  PLANNING   CONCLUSIONS  

        

APPENDICES   REFERENCES  

List  of  Figures  
  
FIGURE  1  ­SETTLEMENT  HEALTH  MAP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3   FIGURE  2  ­PEEL  BUILT  ENVIRONMENT  &  HEALTH  INITIATIVES  LOGIC  MODEL  ANALYSIS                                                                                                24   FIGURE  3  ­HOW  LOGIC  MODELS  BETTER  POSITION  PROGRAMS  TOWARD  SUCCESS                                                                                                                        33   FIGURE  4:  APPLICATION  OF  THEORETICAL  FRAMEWORK  TO  PEEL  REGION  CASE  STUDY                                                                                                          40  

  

List  of  Appendices  
  
APPENDIX  A-  SAMPLE  INTERVIEW  QUESTIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            38   APPENDIX  B-  RECRUITMENT  STRATEGY  AND  DATA  SOURCES                                                                                                                                                                                                                  39   APPENDIX  C-  LOGIC  MODEL  FRAMEWORK  ANALYSIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40  

  

v  

  

Introduction  
  
The  historical  alignment  of  public  health  and  planning  professions  is  seeing  a  renaissance  in  tackling   major  urban  health  issues:  understanding  what  is  required  of  a  "healthy  city"  has  been  reconceptualized   as  a  joint  task.  Consequently,  intersectoral  collaboration  has  emerged  as  a  potential  avenue  to  reshape   aspects  of  the  city  and  the  built  environment  where  deleterious  effects  on  health  raise  a  host  of   problems  intractable  for  the  disciplines  in  isolation.  A  precursor  to  replicating  success  in  collaboration  is   to  define  that  vision  of  success  and  understand  the  pathways  leading  from  action  to  outcomes.  This  is   the  work  of  evaluation,  which  helps  stakeholders  in  the  project  and  others  who  hope  to  access  its   benefits  understand  the  complex  transformations  of  networks,  norms  and  skills  that  are  the  hallmark  of   collaboration.   The  following  study  analyzes  intersectoral  collaboration  through  a  case  study  in  Ontario's  Peel  Region   that  aligns  the  work  of  public  health  and  planning  in  developing  more  supportive  environments  for   health  outcomes.  While  grounding  the  design  in  the  literature  of  healthy  cities  and  evaluations,  its   findings  are  intended  for  practical  use.  The  following  pages  illustrate  data  collected  from  interviews  with   partnership  stakeholders  and  from  documentation  about  the  factors  that  facilitate  success  within  the   collaboration.  The  study  frames  this  data  in  such  a  way  as  to  support  evaluation  activities  for  this  project   and  similar  cases  in  the  Ontario  context.            

1  

  

Chapter  I:  Literature  Review  
i.  Urban  Health  Problems  
The  complexity  of  urban  issues  has  long  been  characterized  as  a  major  challenge  to  planners   seeking  to  remedy  the  "wicked  problems"  of  the  city,  due  to  the  diversity  of  city  stakeholders  and  fluid   nature  of  urban  issues'  scope,  timeframe  and  available  remedies  (Rittel  and  Webber,  1984).  Urban   health  embodies  such  a  longstanding,  though  perhaps  not  intractable,  problem,  where  the  fields  of   public  health  and  urban  planning  grapple  with  the  tools  and  conditions  for  the  healthy  city  and  seek   both  new  frames  for  the  issues  and  tools  to  address  them.     The  links  between  population  health  and  social  and  environmental  factors  have  been   extensively  explored  in  the  literature  and  policy  frameworks  for  action  on  the  "social  determinants  of   health"  (SDOH).  Both  epidemiological  and  place-based  studies  revealing  the  rootedness  of  health   inequities  in  the  inequitable  distribution  of  political,  social,  and  economic  resources  (Baum,  2009;   Dahlgreen  &  Whitehead,  1992;  Jacobs  et  al,  2009).  The  consequence  for  public  health,  in  seeking  to   fulfill  its  mandate  in  redressing  these  health  inequities,  is  a  reconceptualization  in  many  jurisdictions  so   that  "strategies  aimed  at  particular  issues  need  to  be  complemented  by  attention  to  those  root  causes   of  poor  health:  poverty,  discrimination,  poor  housing  and  other  social  inequities"  (Karpati,  2004;   Corburn,  2009).  In  looking  towards  the  "causes  of  the  causes"  of  health,  the  approach  in  population   health  not  only  transcends  the  idea  that  individual  and  environmental  conditions  are  sufficient   explanations  for  health,  but  also  crosses  over  into  domains  partially  administered  by  civic  leaders  and   planners.  Social  determinants  of  health  for  individuals  and  groups  interface  with  their  social  position,   stress,  early-life  support,  educational  status,  employment,  working  conditions  and  unemployment,  and   access  to  food,  housing,  transportation  and  health  services  (Raphael,  2006;  WHO,  2008).   The  benefits  and  failures  of  intervening  in  the  root  causes  of  health  are  particularly  relevant  at   the  local  scale,  and  healthy  cities  require  attention  to  the  combination  of  the  forces  that  drive  both  the   nature  and  the  distribution  of  health  outcomes  at  a  local  level  (Krieger,  2008).  The  impacts  of  urban   spaces  and  planning  processes  on  population  health  have  been  well-researched,  whether  it  is  the  effects   of  place,  neighbourhood  and  context  (Cummins  et  al,  2005;  Diez-Roux,  2001,  2002;  Frumkin,  2005;   Geronimus,  2000;  Macintyre  et  al,  2002)  or  the  health  effects  of  land  use  projects,  policies  plans   affecting  urban  conditions  and  the  built  environment  (Evans  et  al,  1994;  Yen  and  Syme,  1999;  Wellesley,   2013).  The  nature  of  the  relationship  between  health  the  form  of  human  settlements  -  the  shape  of  the  

2  

  
city  and  aspects  of  the  built  environment  -  is  conceptualized  by  the  World  Health  Organization  in  the   settlement  health  map  below  (Barton  and  Grant,  2011).  

  
Figure  1:  Settlement  health  map  illustrating  the  impacts  of  human  settlement  form  on  health  (Barton  and  Grant  (2011)     

The  intersection  of  social  and  environmental  impacts  on  health  has  prompted  an  extensive   exploration  of  what  constitutes  the  "healthy  city"  and  what  type  of  interventions  are  most  effective  in   reducing  health  inequities  (Baum,  2009;  Gamm,  1998;  Green  et  al,  2009;  Macintyre  et  al,  2002).    

The  failures  of  early  responses  to  urban  health  
Early  alignment  between  public  health  and  municipal  governments  attempted  to  remedy  the   health  problems  of  cities  -  whether  through  sanitation  infrastructure,  the  separation  of  uses  through   zoning,  creation  of  building  codes,  housing  regimes,  or  the  neighbourhood  as  a  mechanism  for  municipal   service  delivery  (Corburn,  2009).  However,  in  many  cases  these  transformations  had  ultimately  perverse   effects,  exacerbating  inequalities  in  health,  whether  along  racial  or  economic  lines  (Babcock,  1966;   Isaacs,  1948).  Ultimately,  the  idea  that  health-promoting  outcomes  could  be  manufactured  by   technocratic  "city  science"  delivered  by  public  health  and  planning  departments,  their  divisions  

3  

  
reinforced  by  academic  and  professional  boundaries  (Peterson,  2003),  crystallized  with  urban  renewal   projects  of  the  1960s  and  70s.  Meeting  profound  resistance  by  citizen  groups  from  the  poor  inner-city   neighbourhoods  ravaged  by  public  works  projects,  the  planning  and  public  health  professions  began  to   question  their  foundational  practices  (Babcock,  1966;  Corburn,  2009;  Mohl,  2000).  While  participatory   planning  practices  developed  by  building  coalitions  with  these  community  groups  and  social   movements,  public  health  saw  the  rise  of  social  epidemiology,  which  used  the  model  of  interconnected   social  and  economic  factors  to  explain  the  unequal  distribution  of  health  outcomes  in  urban  settings   (Krieger  2001;  Link  and  Phelan,  2000;  Geronimus,  2000;  Fitzpatrick  and  LaGory,  2000;  Young,  2006).     The  legacy  of  scientific  city  planning  is  apparent  in  many  current  processes  designed  to  mitigate   urban  ills  (Lawrence,  2003;  Geronimus,  2000;  Wilkinson,  1996).  Jason  Corburn  (2009)  points  out  that   environmental  impact  assessments  ignore  health  outcomes,  despite  the  evidence  of  impact  between   the  two.  Others  characterize  the  integration  of  health  in  planning  as  a  reductive  exercise  that  seeks  to   know  whether  a  project  meets  health-based  environmental  standards,  and  fails  to  adequately  deal  with   either  the  socially  determined  aspects  of  health  or  issues  of  health  equity  (Kuehn,  1996;  Lawrence,2003;   Geronimus,  2000;  Wilkinson,  1996).  In  effect,  harmful  health  effects  may  have  their  origins  in  some  of   the  prominent  norms  and  practices  of  planning.  Barton  and  Grant  outline  a  typical  example  where   planning  institutions  facilitate  market-driven  urban  development  trends  that  promote  car-dependent   lifestyle  (2011).  Individuals  choices  for  more  active  lifestyles  are  thus  constrained  by  lack  of  opportunity,   exacerbating  health  inequities  for  those  with  fewer  resources  and  choices,  and  results  in  poorer  long- term  population  health.  Duhl  and  Sanchez  characterize  the  problem  that  "urban  planning  can  and  does   serve  as  a  form  of  primary  prevention  and  contributor  to  health  outcomes"  with  the  implication  that  "a   holistic  approach  to  building  cities  is  key."  (Duhl  and  Sanchez,  1999:8)  

The  emergence  and  implications  of  collaborative  problem-solving  
More  optimistically,  urban  planning's  responsibility  for  creating  and  exacerbating  urban  health   problems  comes  with  a  similar  opportunity  to  mitigate  these  problems.  This  would  theoretically  occur   by  embedding  knowledge  and  better  practices  recognizing  the  connection  between  place  and  health   into  planners'  influence  over  activities  occurring  well  before  the  environmental  review  process.  Such   activities  might  include  regional,  city  and  secondary  plans  that  shape  communities,  and  the  zoning  and   tax  codes  that  provide  both  the  scope  and  incentives  for  development  (Corburn,  2009:65).  This   represents  a  major  shift  in  the  traditional  approach  to  urban  planning  practice,  and  has  been  the  subject   of  a  vast  body  of  literature  and  applied  research  practices  on  "healthy  cities",  "healthy  urban  planning",  

4  

  
and  focused  literatures  such  as  those  on  health  and  built  environment.  What,  then,  are  the   transformations  in  practice  that  are  required  of  healthy  city  planning?  Barton  and  Tsourou  simply   describe  healthy  urban  planning  as  planning  for  people  in  cities  (2000)  ;  Jason  Corburn  elaborates  on   this  definition:   "A  [...]  challenge  for  the  new  politics  of  health  city  planning  is  to  address  the  disciplinary  specialization,   bureaucratic  fragmentation,  and  professionalization  currently  plaguing  both  planning  and  public  health   and  acting  as  a  barrier  toward  crafting  a  coordinated,  healthy  city  research  and  action  agenda.  New   models  of  collaborative  research  and  urban  governance  will  need  to  accompany  the  construction  of   new,  cross-disciplinary  and  sector  coalitions  both  within  and  outside  government."    (Corburn,  2009:  84)   While  action  by  health  and  city  stakeholders  has  been  siloed  throughout  much  of  the  20th   century  (Peterson,  2003),  there  is  nonetheless  a  historic  precedent  for  partnership  (Corburn,  2009;   Rosen,  1971).  Emerging  from  this  precedent  is  a  transdisciplinary  notion  of  healthy  city  planning,  which   since  the  1990s,  has  been  constantly  articulating  itself  through  theory-building  and  practical  application   of  healthy  cities  projects  (Barton  and  Grant,  2011).  While  their  impacts  on  health  outcomes  and  health   equity  are  still  gaining  coherence  (de  Leeuw,  2012),  some  ideas  have  emerged  that  are  relevant  for   further  study.     The  idea  within  healthy  planning  of  the  "relational  view  of  place"  -  that  the  physical  and  social   characteristics  of  place  are  important  because  of  their  constructed  meanings  and  their  accompanying   institutions,  networks  and  processes  ­  has  gradually  begun  to  accompany  the  notion  of  "place  effects  on   health".  Place  effects  highlight  physical  determinism  and  do  not  always  take  into  account  the  crucial   norms,  and  formal  structures  that  shape  how  institutions  address  social  issues  (Cummins  et  al,  2007;   Gieryn,  2000;  Graham  and  Healey  ,1999;  Jackson,  1994;  Whyte,  1980).  Concretely,  re-examining  norms   implies  the  reconsideration  of  the  institutions  themselves  (Healey,  1999)  in  establishing  new  solutions   for  healthy  city  planning.     Re-examining  the  norms  of  professional  practice  is  of  concern  to  planning,  but  also  to  public   health.    Duhl  and  Sanchez  (1990)  expalin  that  not  only  has  the  definition  of  health  shifted  and  effectively   broadened,  but  the  leading  causes  of  death  in  developed  nations  are  attributed  now  to  chronic  rather   than  infections  diseases.  They  posit  that  these  challenges  -  to  strategic  planning,  resourcing,  and   capacity  to  develop  workable  solutions  ­  demonstrate  the  need  for  multisectoral  prevention.  (Duhl  and   Sanchez,  1990).  

5  

  
Shared  roots  in  theory  and  practice  have  shored  up  rationales  in  the  past  decade  for   collaborations  in  both  public  health  and  urban  planning  spheres  (Green  et  al,  2009;  Northbridge  and   Freeman,  2011).  For  instance,  establishing  neighbourhood  health  centres  of  the  early  20th  century  in   the  United  States  that  combined  clinical  and  social  services  for  the  poor  tackled  SDOH  and  health   inequities  in  American  cities  (Rosen,  1971).    Public  health  and  planning  never  were  fully  siloed  -  even  in   the  era  of  the  City  Scientific,  theories  emerged  about  the  importance  of  health  equity  to  planning's   legitimacy  (Marsh,  1909).    By  the  21st  century,  the  disconnect  between  environmental  health  and  urban   planning  decision-making  has  emerged  as  a  major  issue  to  tackle  in  addressing  urban  health  inequality.     The  international  "healthy  city"  movement  developed  by  the  World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  in  1986   committed  cities  to  linking  health  and  planning.  The  WHO  has  driven  much  of  the  emergence  of  a  co- produced  "science  of  the  city"  rooted  in  the  theoretical  frameworks,  methods  and  available  tools  of   both  public  health  and  city  planning  as  well  as  case  studies  in  preventative,  versus  curative,  approaches   to  health  rooted  in  collaborative  urban  governance  (Corburn,  2009;  Barton  and  Grant,  2011).     Looking  to  the  research  around  solutions  to  urban  health  problems,  the  criteria  for   interdisciplinary  action  laid  out  by  Freudenberg,  Klitzman  and  Saegert  (2009)  explain  why  a  collaborative   approach  best  serves  the  problems  of  urban  health:   1)  The  problems'  causes  and  consequences  are  cross-cutting  across  multiple  disciplines;   2)  The  solution  to  the  problems  falls  in  the  bailiwick  of  multiple  disciplines  or  institutions;   3)  The  problems  are  embedded  in  a  complex  social  /physical  environment  or  multiple  sectors;   4)  Both  fundamental  and  proximate  causes  of  a  health  problem  are  under  investigation  and   stakeholders  who  work  at  both  ends  of  this  spectrum  are  needed  to  understand  the  issue;   5)  If  the  goal  is  to  fix  rather  than  describe  the  issue,  then  stakeholders  representing  the  scope  of   research  to  action  in  policy  or  programming  are  needed.  (299)     Ultimately,  dealing  with  complex  and  interconnected  major  public  health  issues  where  the  role   of  urban  planning  could  better  support  health  outcomes  highlights  the  importance  of  a  combined   approach  (Northbridge  and  Freeman,  2011).  Moreover,  it  is  crucial  for  planners  to  investigate  more  than   simply  the  "formal  processes  of  spatial  planning",  which  could  be  characterized  as  such  practices  as   environmental  impact  assessments,  general  plans  and  zoning  by-laws  (Huxley  and  Yiftachel,  2000).   Planning  must  also  re-examine  the  processes  of  decision-making  and  the  macro-policy  contexts  in  which   local,  place-based  projects  operate  (Healey,  2007).  

6  

  
Jasanoff  describes  the  process  of  disentangling  and  critically  examining  norms  of  practice  in   healthy  city  planning  as  the  "co-production  of  the  science  of  the  city"  (2004:  3).    Social  and  political   commitments  can  help  widen  the  scope  and  relevance  of  urban  regulatory  frameworks  (Jasanoff,  1990).   Concretely,  the  re-examination  of  norms  implies  reconsidering  aspects  of  the  institutions  themselves   (Healey,  1999)  in  establishing  new  solutions  for  healthy  city  planning.  In  effect,  the  WHO  Healthy  Cities   Movement  has  developed  an  emphasis  on  building  formal  partnerships  across  agencies  to  form  new   communities  of  practice  in  research,  resource  allocation,  and  strategic  planning  (Tsourou,  1994).     While  historically,  planner's  legitimacy  in  establishing  sanitarian  measures  in  the  19th  century   was  only  ensured  by  strategic  coalition-building  within  the  community  sector  (Rosencrantz,  1972),  there   is  a  continuing  rationale  to  look  to  coalition-building  as  an  avenue  for  successful  interventions  in  urban   health  issues:  the  built  environment  alone  is  stewarded  by  multiple  stakeholders  whose  capacity  to   intervene  on  any  of  the  psychological,  social  and  physical  health  factors  of  place  is  necessarily  limited  in   isolation  (Corburn,  2009;  Wellesley,  2013).     The  relative  advantage  of  partnerships  and  coalitions  over  single-entity  actors  working  in   isolation  or  even  loose  networks  is  extensively  explored  in  governance  literature.  One  key  rationale  for   our  purposes  includes  the  "collaborative  advantage",  where  collaborating  organizations  produce   "unusually  creative",  or  synergetic,  outcomes  as  a  result  of  partnership  (Huxham,  1996  in  Boydell,  2007).   Another  is  the  explanation  that  concentrating  resources,  technical  expertise,  and  organizational  capacity   for  the  purpose  of  a  common  goal  enables  the  success  of  otherwise  weaker  actors.  Collaboration  is  then   essentially  a  capacity-building  exercise  predicated  on  the  fulfillment  of  shared  goals.  (Burris  et  al,  2007)  

ii.  The  role  of  intersectoral  partnerships  in  urban  health  solutions  
While  siloing  of  health  and  planning  has  created  barriers  to  the  level  of  collaboration  described   above,  the  re-emergence  of  attention  to  the  social  determinants  of  health  within  health  assessment   frameworks  has  reignited  an  interest  in  forming  intersectoral  partnerships  as  one  way  to  address  the   social  and  environmental  aspects  of  health  (Danaher,  2011;  Gamm  et  al,  1998;  Koh  et  al,  2010).   Similarly,  the  emergence  of  sustainable  systems  perspectives  within  both  public  health  and  urban   planning  has  illuminated  the  need  for  partnerships.  This  need  is  only  growing  in  increasingly  complex   urban  environments  and  in  light  of  the  failures  of  health  promotion  within  contemporary  health  delivery   systems,  particularly  at  redressing  inequitable  distribution  of  good  health  (Green  et  al,  2009;  Green  et  al,   2010;  Northbridge  and  Freeman,  2011).    

7  

  
Barton  and  Grant  ascertain  that  "the  importance  given  by  some  cities  to  the  need  for  training,   professional  development,  inter-departmental  cooperation  and  political  awareness  reinforces  the   message  that  organizational  development  is  necessary  to  tackle  healthy  urban  planning  effectively."   (Barton  and  Grant,  2011)  The  impetus  is  highest  within  a  well-developed  partnership  for  the  idea- sharing  and  social  learning  required  of  policy  innovation  (Frug,1999:  80),  and  the  norms  of  practice   within  respective  partner  institutions  may  co-evolve  as  the  partnership  progresses  (Healey,  1999).    The   transformation  of  organizational  structure  and  norms  of  practice  through  intersectoral  partnerships   aimed  at  planning  for  healthier  communities  is  the  focal  point  of  this  research  project.  

Understanding  intersectoral  partnerships  
What  the  literature  reveals  about  intersectoral  partnerships  is  that  they  are  widely  considered   to  be  an  essential  tool  in  addressing  urban  health  issues,  whether  regional  coalition-building  as  a   mechanism  to  alleviate  the  challenges  of  competition  for  municipal  resources  and  ensure  the   representation  of  key,  local  stakeholders  in  cities  and  neighbourhoods  (Pastor  et  al,  2007),  or  with   strong  social  movements  to  provide  leverage  for  action  (Danaher,  2011;  Corburn,  2009;  Freudenberg  et   al,  2009).    An  evaluation  conducted  by  the  World  Health  Organization  of  their  global  Healthy  Cities   initiative  provides  a  rationale  for  interdisciplinary  partnership  at  a  local  level.  This  rationale  includes:  a   concern  for  the  same  population,  more  opportunities  to  meet  and  collaborate  locally  as  compared  to   the  national  level,  and  the  historic  precedent  of  public  health  and  planning  collaboration  (Green  et.  al,   2009).  Other  potential  benefits  to  partnerships  at  the  scale  of  the  city  derived  from  these  case  studies   involved  more  focused  investment  in  upstream  policy  initiatives  to  reduce  organizations'  competition   for  strategic  attention  and  scarce  resources,  coordinating  action  across  non-health  policy  areas  of   government  in  health  promotion  (Green,  2012;  WHO,  2008).     Whatever  the  value  of  intersectoral  action,  organizations  will  only  shift  their  norms  and   behaviours  if  the  theoretical  rationale  for  collaboration  is  shored  up  by  the  realpolitik  of  what  is  possible   (Gray,  1985).  It  is  thus  useful  to  consider  the  conditions  for  when  partnership  work  is  both  important   and  most  likely  to  occur:     · · · stakeholders  are  challenged  by  a  multitude  of  challenging  issues;   problems  are  perceived  to  exceed  the  problem-solving  capacities  of  autonomous  stakeholders;   traditional  routines  of  problem-solving  no  longer  yield  results;  

8  

  
· competing  agencies  or  units  start  creating  unanticipated  and  dissonant  consequences  of  actions  that   might  still  be  considered  `routine'  responses;  and   · stakeholder  agencies  or  units  recognize  mutual  and  often  reciprocal  temporal  and  causal   interdependencies.       (Gray,  Hueben  and  de  Leeuw  in  Lipp  et  al  2012)   The  burgeoning  literature  on  healthy  city  planning  and  the  emergence  of  widespread  responses,   including  the  requirement  by  the  WHO  to  include  the  development  of  intersectoral  partnerships  in  their   designation  of  Healthy  Cities  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  conditions  are  ripe  for  planning  and  public   health  to  explore  the  potential  for  successful  responses  to  urban  health  problems  through   partnership(de  Leeuw,  2012;  Green,  2012,  Barton  and  Grant,  2011).  

Defining  the  terms  
What,  exactly,  does  an  intersectoral  partnership  imply?    Stern  and  Green  elaborate  a  singular   "pragmatic  definition"  of  partnership  as  "a  programme  that  has  a  high  level  of  commitment,  mutual   trust,  equal  ownership  and  the  achievement  of  a  common  goal',  as  distinct  from  networks  which  might   `involve  sharing  information  or  other  resources  but  not  for  the  explicit  purpose  of  joint  working'.  (Stern   and  Green  (2005:270).  However,  El  Ansari  et  al  describe  a  range  of  configurations  for  intersectoral   collaboration:  front  line  service  delivery,  jointly  managed  services,  strategic  alignment,  special-purpose   governance  bodies  and  community  development  initiatives  that  involve  multiple  agencies  (2001).   Moreover,  a  literature  review  on  partnership  processes  for  health  promotion  found  that  terms  of   partnership  -  collaboration,  cooperation,  coordination,  coalition,  network,  alliance  and  partnership-  are   often  used  to  describe  the  same  thing  (Huxham  1996  in  Boydell,  2007),  and  reveals  too  that  the   consideration  to  the  level  of  integration  is  important  in  qualifying  partnerships.  The  WHO's  evaluation  of   their  Healthy  Cities  case  studies  relating  to  urban  planning  reveals  a  useful  framework  of  these  levels  of   conceptual  integration  that  influence  organizational  integration  and  can  help  us  characterize  the  success   of  partnerships  in  the  context  of  urban  health.   1)  Basic  recognition  within  the  partnership  of  environmental  health  and  the  role  of  settlements  on   health  systems  (shelter,  access  to  food  and  clean  water,  effective  sewage  treatment).   2)  Recognition  of  the  impact  of  settlement  planning  and  design  on  health.  Examples  include  attention  to   resources  for  healthy  lifestyles  (parks,  food  sources),  healthy  environments  (unpolluted  air,  green  space   and  walkable  neighbourhoods).  While  this  level  of  integration  may  permit  the  accrual  of  extra  political  

9  

  
support  and  resources  for  the  outcomes  of  "poorly  integrated  planning"  it  does  not  deal  with  the   transformation  of  environments  or  conditions  for  health.   3)  Health  is  fully  integrated  into  the  planning  process,  and  is  both  present  and  integrated  with  other   themes  of  sustainability  in  the  planning  process  at  local,  city  and  regional  levels.  It  relies  on  the  bridging   of  silos  and  collaborative  practices  and  programmes.  (Barton  and  Grant,  2011)   Integration  at  this  third  level  is  evidently  the  most  desirable,  but  also  the  more  difficult  to   accomplish  in  the  context  of  healthy  urban  planning-  requiring  profound  changes  to  the  norms   influencing  the  way  that  things  are  planned  and  the  way  that  things  are  done.  Barton  and  Grant  suggest   that  these  changes  can  ultimately  be  supported  by  knowledge  exchange  and  reflective  discourse  on   values  between  partners"    (2011).    They  caution  that  if  the  practitioner  is  to  apply  the  research  and   available  tools  in  transforming  their  practice,  it  is  necessary  to  further  investigate  what  other  qualities  in   a  partnership  are  liable  to  lead  to  viable  solutions  to  the  problems  of  urban  health.  

The  qualities  of  successful  intersectoral  partnerships  
The  typology  of  successful  partnerships  has  been  explored  fairly  broadly  at  the  international   level  and  constitutes  a  robust  body  of  knowledge  surrounding  the  value  of  collaborative  planning   practice,  meaningful  stakeholder  engagement,  strategic  and  long-range  alignment  of  budgets  and   priorities  that  constitute  effective  partnerships  in  bridging  health  inequities,  particularly  in  relation  to   urban  planning  (Gardner  et  al,  2010;  Green,  2012;  Health  Development  Agency,  2003;  Lipp  et  al,  2012;   Macintyre  et  al,  2002).       In  terms  of  what  requirements  exist  for  the  formation  of  an  effective  framework  for  healthy  city   planning,  research  on  emerging  case  studies  points  to:  the  identification  of  and  a  shared  commitment  to   common  ground  in  their  institutional  missions,  goals  or  agendas  across  departments  and  programs   (Katz,  2006);  a  recognition  of  each  partner's  unique  contributions/expertise;  longevity  of  the   partnership;  developing  processes  for  resolving  issues  (Freudenberg  et  al,  2009).  A  framework  by  the   Heath  Development  Agency  as  framed  by  Geoff  Green,  with  elements  duplicated  in  El  Ansari  et  al,  Jones   and  Barry  (2011)  states  that  the  qualities  of  successful  partnerships  in  integrating  health  objectives  into   the  "well-being  and  health  of  local  populations"  include:   1)  Working  across  boundaries;   2)  Partnership  arrangements  and  accountability  structures;   3)  Planning  arrangements  (strategies);  

10  

  
4)  Community  involvement;   5)  Members'  (political)  involvement;   6)  Joint  priorities,  indicators  and  targets;   7)  Reducing  inequalities  and  tackling  deprivation;   8)  Using  flexibilities  -  pooled  budgets,  joint  posts  and  integrated  services   ("Planning  Across  the  Local  Strategic  Partnership,  Health  Development  Agency,  2003  in  Green,  2012)   In  order  to  maintain  a  partnership,  specific  skills  and  resources  that  develop  and  organize  the   partnership's  assets  and  membership  are  needed.    Duhl  and  Sanchez  suggest  that  "the  ability  to  set   goals,  mediate  between  member  and  collective  needs,  effective  leadership  and  decision-making   processes  are  key  to  ongoing  success"(1999:  26).  Similarly,  challenges  to  effective  partnerships  have   been  enumerated:  the  realpolitik  of  transforming  planning  processes  with  potential  health  ramifications   is  complex,  as  norms  are  deeply  embedded  within  planning  departments;  there  is  insufficient  training  to   establish  the  cultural  sensitivities,  common  vocabulary  and  mutual  understanding  instrumental  in   effective  co-production;  the  actual  regulatory  authority  of  even  successful  partnerships;  and  the   influence  of  private  sector  development  interests  seeking  stability  rather  than  innovation  (Bergeron,   2011;  Corburn,  2009;    Freudenberg  et  al,  2009).       The  vision  of  success  is  far  from  unified,  however.  Certain  universal  qualities  of  success,  such  as   effective  community  engagement,  are  rooted  in  values  of  inclusion  assumed  to  be  embedded  in  both   sectors,  and  warrant  exploration  (Lipp  et  al,  2012).  Moreover,  monitoring  the  balance  between  activities   that  support  the  maintenance  of  the  partnership  structure  itself  and  the  outcomes  it  produces  is   necessary  in  qualifying  whether  success  is  both  meaningful  and  sustainable  (Duhl  and  Sanchez,  1999:   26).    Duhl  and  Sanchez  (1999)  identify  a  "final  component"  necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  a  coalition:   assessing  its  accomplishments,  either  as  short  term  or  long  term  changes.  Assessment,  either  through   formal  or  informal  evaluations,  can  ultimately  help  illuminate  the  ways  that  intersectoral  partnerships   are  an  effective  tool  to  deal  with  the  wicked  problems  of  urban  health.    

iii.  Assessing  the  effectiveness  of  intersectoral  partnerships  
Developing  an  understanding  of  what  is  needed  for  successful  intersectoral  partnerships  is  a   necessary  part  of  achieving  real  solutions  to  urban  health  issues.  The  work  of  the  WHO  has  piqued  the   interest  of  various  levels  of  government  internationally  who  have  participated  in  the  Healthy  Cities  pilot   work,  and  there  is  a  need  to  develop  the  evidence  base  about  whether  partnerships  add  value  to  policy,  

11  

  
or  warrant  the  allocation  of  further  resources  (El  Ansari  et  al,  2011;  Boydell,  2007).  Evaluation  methods   provide  a  systematic  review  that  assesses  the  effectiveness  of  an  intervention    (Duhl  and  Sanchez,  1999;   Mark  et  al,  2002;  Scriven,  1967).  While  WHO  Healthy  Cities  evaluations  have  revealed  that  partnerships   remain  a  core  component  of  success  in  Healthy  Cities,  they  substantiate  the  concern  of  methodological   challenges  and  the  complex  need  to  attune  our  ways  of  understanding  the  outcomes  of  collaboration  to   the  "multifactorial  nature  of  this  concept."  (El  Ansari  et  al,  2001;  Lipp  et  al,  2012).     Measuring  the  accomplishments  of  intersectoral  partnerships  and  assessing  their  value  for   healthy  urban  planning  is  a  challenging  proposition.  The  diversity  of  actors  involved  in  different  stages   and  outcome  areas  of  healthy  cities  makes  it  difficult  to  propose  a  general  theory  of  effectiveness:   success  is  contingent  on  the  local  context  and  the  values  intrinsic  in  this  judgment  of  effectiveness  (Duhl   and  Sanchez,  1999;  Lipp  et  al,  2012).  Compounding  the  complexity  of  assessing  urban  health  issues  is   the  fact  that  evidence  of  effectiveness  in  partnership  structures  is  a  contested  research  area  -  the   shifting  of  norms  and  development  of  activities  within  partnerships  are  in  fact  characterized  by   complexity  and  uncertainty,  without  a  clear  path  to  success  (Lipp  et  al,  2012).   While  early  findings  are  promising  in  developing  theories  and  frameworks  for  effective   intersectoral  partnerships  on  healthy  city  planning  (Bergeron,  2013;  Danaher,  2011),  best  practices  in  a   Canadian  context  limited.  The  value  of  local  assessments  is  that  it  helps  researchers  and  practitioners   develop  concrete  observations  about  interventions  in  the  complex  causal  systems  they  operate  in  (de   Leeuw,  2013;  Koh  et  al,  2010;  Macintyre  et  al,  2002).    The  lack  of  standardized  metrics  to  establish  the   effectiveness  of  intersectoral  partnerships  can  frustrate  local  efforts  in  establishing  success  (Northbridge   and  Freeman,  2011;  Wellesley,  2012).  The  need  for  "objective"  measures  in  assessment  is  described  as  a   necessity  for  intersectoral  action  that  coordinates  governance  strategies,  local  action,  and  funding   streams  (Green  et  al,  2009;  MacIntyre,  2002;  Wellesley  Institute,  2012).  In  effect,  the  lack  of  evaluation   standards  in  intersectoral  collaboration  has  been  attributed  to  the  transience  of  previous  collaboration   efforts  between  public  health  and  planning  over  the  course  of  the  19th  and  20th  century  (Banerjee  and   Baer,  1984).   Beyond  measurements  and  indicators,  it  is  useful  to  consider  how  partnerships  function,  the   process  measures  that  de  Leeuw  articulates  as  a  major  component  of  WHO  evaluations  research  over   the  past  decade  (2013).  Looking  to  the  emergence  of  the  "science  of  team  science"  that  guides   interdisciplinary  practice    (Freudenberg  et  al,  2009),  it  is  useful  to  understand  the  conditions  for   successful  partnership,  including  prevailing  attitudes  toward  partnership  and  projects;  looking  at  

12  

  
collaborative  processes  including  knowledge  transfer  from  one  discipline  to  another;  the  amount  of  time   members  perceive  to  be  necessary  for  completing  the  team  project;  collaborative  outcomes  around   dissemination  and  impact  of  project;  generally  looking  at  the  evaluation  of  transdisciplinary   collaboration  that  will  provide  the  greatest  insights  into  what  constitutes  a  successful  partnership   (Fuqua  et  al  in  Freudenberg  et    al,  2009).     So,  while  the  development  of  indicators  and  measurement  tools  can  be  considered  an  ultimate   objective  for  assessing  the  success  of  intersectoral  partnerships,  it  must  be  preceded  by  the  elaboration   of  "a  more  rigorous  analytical  framework  and  theory-informed  approach  to  reviewing  partnership  and   collaboration  parameters"  (Lipp  et  al,  2012).  Answering  key  questions  about  the  evidence  behind   quality,  effectiveness  and  efficiency,  ownership  and  accountability  within  the  partnership  structure,  and   feasibility  of  the  activities  is  intrinsically  linked  to  enhancing  outcomes  (Danaher,  2011;  de  Leeuw,  2013).   Given  the  need  for  further  research  and  concrete  tools  for  evaluating  partnerships  in  planning   for  healthy  communities,  the  objective  of  this  study  is  to  investigate  a  case  of  intersectoral  partnership   and  the  ways  that  this  partnership's  work  is  linked  to  successful  results.  This  analysis  will  support  a   broader  evaluation  program  for  the  case  study  and  add  to  an  understanding  of  intersectoral   partnerships  in  planning  for  healthy  communities  in  Ontario.  

13  

  

Chapter  II:  Methodology  and  Study  Design  
The  call  from  Ontario  researchers  Bergeron  and  Levesque  to  develop  standardized   measurements  and  conceptual  frameworks  for  collaborative  partnerships  (2011)  should  be  approached   with  a  mix  of  methods  that  identify  and  explore  issues  in  a  way  that  allows  some  standardized  measure   of  effectiveness,  while  gaining  greater  insights  into  the  meanings  and  embedded  norm  within  practices   (Jones  and  Liburd,  in  Freudenberg  et  al,  2009).  Filling  in  the  gaps  of  healthy  cities  research  ultimately   requires  the  evaluation  of  the  policy  processes,  development  of  norms  and  networks  among   organizations  that  contribute  to  healthy  urban  development  (Tankano,  2003).  This  in  turn  requires   "unconventional,  intuitive  and  holistic  measures  to  supplement  the  hard  data".  Mapping  the  roles,   relations  and  objectives  within  partnerships  and  ultimately  establishing  criteria  for  success  that  can  be   measured  through  quantitative  means  is  one  place  to  start.  (Hancock  and  Duhl,  1988;  Lipp  et  al,  2012).   Drawing  on  these  methodological  considerations,  this  study  is  designed  to  assess  the  qualities  of   a  case  in  intersectoral  partnerships  in  the  domain  of  health  and  urban  planning  that  lead  to  success.  The   value  in  this  approach  is  that  it  sets  the  up  a  framework  for  evaluation  of  the  partnership  process  as  well   as  its  products,  consequently  expanding  local  research  about  intersectoral  action  and  testing  existing   frameworks  of  successful  partnerships  integrating  public  health  concerns  in  planning.       

i.  Case  Research  
The  decision  to  use  a  case  study  method  is  guided  by  the  qualities  Robert  K.  Yin  outlines  in   selecting  appropriate  methods  for  research.  Case  research  can  answer  questions  about  "how"  and   "why"  the  partnership  functions,  the  investigator  has  multiple  sources  of  data  covering  a  number  of   variables,  yet  too  little  control  over  events  to  run  an  experiment,  and  the  focus  is  on  a  "contemporary   phenomenon  within  a  real-life  context.  (Yin,  2008:18).       The  case  selected  is  work  at  the  regional  level  in  Peel  -  primarily  the  alignment  between  regional   bodies  in  Public  Health  and  Planning  to  develop  joint  work  on  supportive  environments  for  health.  Peel   Region  is  an  upper-tier  municipality  in  the  province  of  Ontario,  and  encompasses  three  lower-tier   municipalities:  Brampton,  Caledon  and  Mississauga.  The  regional-level  divisions  of  Peel  Public  Health   and  Peel  Public  Works  (formerly  known  as  Planning,  and  referred  to  as  Planning  in  this  study  for  clarity)   are  the  main  stakeholders  that  emerged  in  the  analysis,  who  report  to  Peel  Regional  Council.  The  built   environment  and  health  initiatives  work  has,  however,  expanded  to  include  the  three  local  area  

14  

  
municipalities,  the  Federal  Council  of  Transportation  Engineers,  and  the  Medical  Officers  of  Health  in   municipalities  across  the  province.  The  analysis  in  Chapter  III  offers  information  about  the  qualities  of   the  partnership  between  Public  Health  and  Planning  and  its  expansion.    

ii.  Methodologies  for  Evaluating  Intersectoral  Partnerships  
Despite  the  rhetoric  behind  developing  intersectoral  partnerships  in  healthy  urban  planning,   there  is  in  effect  fairly  limited  evidence  around  how  to  best  adopt  changes  leading  to  success.  (Asthana   et  al,  2002:  218)  As  a  result,  methodological  insight  into  how  best  to  approach  the  evaluation  of  such   programs  is  similarly  limited.  What  evidence  does  exist  is  drawn  from  literature  around  evaluations  and   research  on  partnerships  as  they  relate  to  organizational  development,  health  promotion  and  policy.     The  main  focus  of  the  wider  suite  of  WHO  Healthy  Cities  evaluations  has  been  around  measuring   successful  outcomes.  It  is  this  type  of  research  which  drove  much  of  the  longitudinal  data  collection   around  integrated  and  sustained  collaboration  through  questionnaires  and  case  study  research  (Lipp  et   al,  2012).  However,  Peel's  work,  which  began  in  2005,  is  at  the  point  where  it  can  only  begin  to  answer   "how"  the  partnership  process  works,  rather  than  to  what  extent  it  works  well.  Creating  opportunities   for  less  sedentary  lifestyles  in  Peel  is  a  lengthy  endeavour.  The  necessary  shift  from  sprawl  to  compact   development  patterns  must  be  preceded  by  changes  to  policy  and  plans,  which  can  themselves  span   many  years  if  they  are  appealed  to  the  Ontario  Municipal  Board,    and  reshaping  the  built  environment  is   a  long-term,  continuous  process.  

Why  evaluate?  
The  previous  chapter  outlined  the  rationale  for  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  intersectoral   partnerships  and  supports  the  argument  in  the  literature  that  evaluation  is  the  approach  to  use  in  doing   so.  Underpinning  the  focus  on  evaluations  is  both  the  need  to  justify  resource  allocation  and  to  identify   what  works  and  does  not  in  order  to  guide  practice  (Boydell,  2007).  The  rationale  of  intersectoral   partnerships  is  ultimately  to  improve  the  situation  (Freudenberg,  Klitzman  and  Saegert,  2009:  299),  and   evaluations  can  assist  in  developing  a  sense  of  the  merit  and  worth  of  what  is  being  evaluated  (Scriven,   1993).    Merit  in  this  case  is  described  as  the  quality  of  performance  of  a  program  or  policy;  worth  is   considered  to  be  the  value  of  the  program's  effects  on  social  good  (Patton,  1997;  Scriven,  1993;  Mark  et   al,  2000).    

15  

  
However,  evaluation  activities  may  extend  beyond  the  measurement  and  assessment  of   outcomes,  and  can  focus  instead  on  the  "sensemaking"  aspects  of  the  components  and  values  driving   the  project  at  hand  (Mark  et  al,  2000).  In  effect,  so-called  "summative  evaluation"  where  merit  and   worth  is  assessed  at  the  end  of  a  project,  may  not  provide  sufficient  information  about  "how"  and  "why"   a  project  succeeded  or  failed  and  will  have  limited  impact  on  how  projects  are  supported  politically  and   funded.  Thus,  questions  about  how  and  why  the  partnership  operates  in  the  ways  that  it  does  are  closer   to  the  concerns  of  this  study,  aligned  more  closely  with  mid-stream  formative  evaluation  (Wholey,   1996).  

Designing  the  evaluation  program  
In  practice,  the  reasons  for  the  evaluation  will  guide  the  ways  the  evaluator  will  collect  and   subsequently  assess  data  (Scriven,  1967).  The  purposes  of  evaluation  frame  the  questions  asked  in  the   evaluation,  the  types  of  data  needed,  and  the  range  of  solutions  the  evaluation  is  intended  to  support   (Mark  et  al,  2000).  It  is  important  for  the  partnership  stakeholders  to  be  involved  in  conceptualizing  the   goals  of  an  evaluation  to  facilitate  the  use  of  the  evaluation  (Davidson,  2012).  Nevertheless,  this  study   can  hypothesize  some  basic  evaluation  goals  for  Peel  Region:   1)  Demonstrating  the  merit  and  worth  of  work  to  date  in  relation  to  longer-range  objectives;   2)  Understanding  and  assessing  the  consistency  of  processes  leading  to  successful  outcomes  in   order  to  either  correct  or  replicate  these  processes.   Another  major  consideration  stems  from  the  "realist  paradigm"  in  modern  theories  of  evaluations   design  (Mark  et  al,  2000),  and  the  criterion  of  "actionability"  for  the  evaluation  program  associated  with   Patton's  utilization-focused  evaluations  (Davidson,  2012;  Patton,  1997).  The  realist  paradigm  suggests:     · · · investigating  underlying  mechanisms  and  structures  that  influence  events  and  experiences;   prioritizing  practice  and  the  lessons  drawn  from  practice;   combining  any  methods  is  appropriate  as  long  as  they  support  evaluation  and  do  what  they  are   designed  to  do;   · thinking  in  terms  of  an  evaluation  program,  since  no  single  evaluation  can  provide  all  the   information  needed  for  current  and  future  needs  (Mark  et  al,  2000:137).   The  benefits  of  realist  evaluation  in  healthy  cities  research  are  that  it  drives  the  production  of  a   context-specific  theory  of  how  the  program  works,  bringing  to  light  the  causal  mechanisms  that  interact   with  the  context  of  the  program  in  order  to  achieve  specific  outcomes.  (De  Leeuw,  2011).  El  Ansari  goes  

16  

  
on  to  suggest  that  "it  is  important  to  know  more  than  whether  it  works  if  the  evidence  is  to  be  of   practical  use.  This  type  of  knowledge  is  much  more  likely  to  be  revealed  by  evaluations  that  use  the   `mechanics  of  explanation'  (El  Ansari  et  al,  2001:  222).     In  order  to  test  the  mechanisms  of  change  within  successful  partnership  configurations,  efficacy   studies  using  randomized  controlled  trial  design  would  be  ideally  suited  to  building  valid  and  reliable   conclusions  from  the  evidence  gathered  (El  Ansari  et  al,  2001;  Yin,  2008).  However,  community-level   initiatives  typically  do  not  lend  themselves  well  to  experiments,  and  the  focus  of  this  study  is  intended   to  encompass  not  just  a  single  mechanism  but  the  wider  range  of  factors  influencing  successful   partnership  functioning.  As  a  result,  it  is  preferable  to  look  to  qualitative  methods  -  participant   observation,  focus  groups  or  interviews  -  in  order  to  explain  the  change  process  and  answer  questions   about  how  and  why  collaboration  works  in  certain  contexts.  (El  Ansari  et  al,  2001).  As  for  data  collection   through  surveys,  the  exact  nature  of  definitions  surveys  require  (of  successful  outcomes  and  the   mechanisms  leading  to  success)  mean  surveys  are  unsuitable  for  data  collection.  Therefore  interviews   are  methodologically  the  best  strategy  for  research  to  better  understand  effective  partnerships,  as   interviews  can  provide  data  about  perceived  causal  inferences  and  explanations  (Yin,  2008).      Considering  the  aforementioned  goals  and  working  within  a  realist  paradigm,  the  following  

assumptions  guided  the  study  design:     · Investigating  the  relationship  between  partnership  structure,  activities  and  outcomes  should  be   a  priority:  interviews  are  better  suited  to  this  task  than  surveys.   · Methods  should  deliver  rich  insights  into  group  and  individual  attitudes  about  "what  is"  and   "what  should  be"  related  to  how  the  partnership  operates  and  as  well  as  how  it  achieves  its   goals.  Qualitative  data  is  well-suited  to  this  task.     · Analysis  should  conceptualize  the  mechanisms  for  change  and  assess  conceptual  gaps  either   between  and  among  different  stakeholder  groups  or  between  the  case  and  generalized  theory.   · The  goal  of  the  study  is  to  develop  a  reference  point  that  can  be  used  for  an  evaluation   program.  This  evaluation  program  should  be  designed  by  its  users  (Mark  et  al,  2000:137).  

   Logic  Modeling  Analysis  
In  evaluations  of  intersectoral  partnerships  in  planning  and  health,  there  is  a  precedent  for  using   logic  modeling  to  assess  the  "process  measures,  intermediate  outcome  measures  and  distal  outcome   measures  that  correspond  to  stages  of  partnership  activity"  (Fawcett  et  al,  1995  in  El  Ansari  et  al,  2001).  

17  

  
Thinking  about  collaborations  as  processes  as  well  as  outcomes  can  help  break  down  the  ways  that   partners  can  benefit  from  learning  to  work  intersectorally  (Asthana  et  al).  More  generally,  logic   modeling  is  considered  useful  in  evaluations  for  complex  chains  of  events.  (Yin,  2008)  A  logic  model  can   lend  clarity  to  the  long  timelines  and  complexity  of  work  within  the  Peel  case  study.    

Logic  Modeling  (Adapted  from  W.K.  Kellogg  Foundation  ,  2004)  
Purpose:     Often  called  a  program  theory,  a  logic  model   describes  how  a  program/policy/process  works   and  what  its  results  should  look  like.  The   elements  and  presentation  of  the  logic  model   can  vary,  but  all  essentially  map  out  the   connections  between  the  "planned  work  and   intended  results."   A  logic  model  helps  reveal  the  underlying   assumptions  in  the  project  about  what  happens   and  in  what  order  for  the  desired  results.   Clarifying  assumptions  can:  
·

areas  are  most  important  in  achieving   the  results  so  that  they  can  be   prioritized  for  data  collection  and   tracking,  and  identifies  what  is  and  is   not  being  tracked  to  demonstrate   success.   A  logic  model  is  essentially  a  snapshot  of  the   program  at  one  point  in  time  -  it  should  be   revisited  as  priorities,  resources  and  programs   shift,  outputs  become  more  clear  or  change,  and   the  program  gets  closer  or  further  away  from  its   "intended  results".   How  to  Use  a  Logic  Model   Logic  modeling  can  set  the  stage  for   measurement:  it  makes  sense  of  the   components  of  the  program  work  that  will  be   assessed,  and  defines  what  constitutes  the   outcomes  that  should  be  measured.     There  are  two  main  tasks:     1)  Collecting  the  components:     Identifying  program  work  and  its  results  will   inventory  the  inputs,  outputs,  and  outcomes   and  operating  context  for  the  program.   Collecting  data  from  all  stakeholders  involved-  

build  the  narrative  needed  to   communicate  progress  to  funders  and   stakeholders;  

·

help  program  design  and   implementation  by  developing  a  shared   understanding  of  what  is  supposed  to   happen,  highlighting  any  problems  (such   as  logical  inconsistencies  or  poor   practices)  in  how  this  process  is   supposed  to  work,  and  identifying   program  areas  that  need  developing;  

·

develop  capacity  for  monitoring  and   evaluation  in  identifying  which  program  

18  

  
staff,  participants,  stakeholders  such  as   governing  boards  and  partners  ­  helps  make  the   connections  between  what  the  program  is   expected  to  do  and  what  it  actually  does.     2)  Analyzing  relationships  between  components.     One  way  of  tracing  the  connections  is  to  ask   questions  about  outcomes  first  and  "backwards- map"  -  asking  what  the  final  product  is  and  then   what  needed  to  be  in  place  before  that,  and   what  needed  to  be  in  place  before  that.   Prioritizing  outcomes  in  the  discussion  can  also   develop  consensus  around  what  success  looks   like,  specifically:  vague  or  unrealistic  goals  may   mask  a  poorly-defined  vision  of  success  that   cannot,  ultimately,  be  evaluated.  (Aspen   Institute,  2003)   Another  potential  practice  in  logic  modeling  is  to   develop  a  theoretical  proposition  ahead  of   observations,  to  then  compare  the  predicted   and  observed  outcomes,  as  a  type  of  pattern   matching  analysis  (Mark  et  al,  2001).  The   development  of  a  conceptual  framework   emerges  from  theory-driven  evaluations   approaches,  which  build  our  understanding  of   the  assumptions  and  mechanisms  underpinning   a  given  program  (Coryn  et  al,  2009).   How  exactly  either  of  these  tasks  is  carried   out,  should  reflect  the  particular  resources  and   limitations  of  the  evaluation  activities  as  well  as   the  goals  of  the  evaluation  on  the  whole.

iii.  Application  of  Logic  Modeling  in  the  Research  Design   Data  collection:    
· Selection  of  data  sources  (political  resolutions,  position  statements,  strategic  reports,  tools,   interviews  with  key  informants)  that  could  show  the  range  of  logic  model  components,  including   processes,  resources  and  the  social  aspects  of  the  partnership  process,  not  only  the  products  and   results  of  the  work  itself.     · Questioning  technique  (semi-structured  interviews  using  backwards-mapping  approach)  that   prioritized  the  articulation  of  successful  outcomes,  clarified  assumptions  about  conditions  for   success  and  linked  components  in  the  logic  model.  

Analysis  
· Using  an  applicable  logic  model  framework  as  a  basis  of  comparison  for  the  data  collected  from  the   case  study.  Doing  so  develops  readers'  understanding  of  how  the  local  context  affects  broader  

19  

  
theories  of  partnership  working  (El  Ansari  et  al,  2001)  and  better  situates  the  Peel  partnership   within  the  field  of  effective  healthy  planning  partnerships.  UK  researchers  Asthana,  Richardson  and   Halliday  have  developed  a  framework  for  partnership  evaluation  in  the  context  of  Health  Action   Zones  (local  intersectoral  partnership  initiatives  aimed  at  health  equity  solutions)  that  is   comprehensive  in  addressing  the  issues  around  partnership-building,  is  grounded  in  practice,  and  is   sufficiently  rigorous  to  allow  comparative  analysis  between  case  studies  (Asthana  et  al,  2002:  782).   See  Appendix  C  for  the  framework  elements  and  analysis  of  the  case  study's  consistency  with  its   suggested  components.   · A  draft  logic  model  was  developed  from  the  review  of  project  documentation  and  shown  to  key   informants  to  prompt  questions  about  the  relevance  and  gaps  in  various  model  components  as  well   as  the  relationships  between  them.  

Summary  of  methods   I.  Preparation:  
· Theoretical  proposition  of  logic  model   (Asthana  et  al  HAZ  partnership  model)   · Purposive  selection  of  key  informant   interview  candidates.   · Identification  of  material  for  document   analysis  (selection  criteria  based  on   material's  potential  for  logic  modeling   analysis)  

working  and  other  mechanisms  leading  to   success  factors.  Use  of  a  draft  logic  model   as  the  basis  for  discussion  (see  Appendix  A   for  sample  questions).  

III.  Data  analysis:  
· Testing  the  theory:  highlight  differences   between  observed  characteristics  and  those   predicted  by  in  the  logic  model.     · Logic  model  development:  using  findings   from  interviews  and  document  analysis  the   logic  model  components  are  elaborated,   and  their  relationships  are  described.  

II.  Data  collection:  
· Document  analysis:  highlight  instances  of   Asthana  et  al  model  components  in  case   study's  process  documentation  including   resolutions  from  Council  meetings,   conference  websites  and  reports.   · Key  informant  interviews  (semi-structured):   preparation  of  questions  about  partnership  

IV.  Products  
· Peel  Region  Built  Environment  and  Health   Initiatives  logic  model  chart  and  analysis   · Framework  for  integrating  logic  model  into   an  evaluation  plan.

20  

  

iv.  Limitations    
The  time  between  project  scoping,  evaluation  design,  data  gathering  and  analysis  and  reporting   is  significantly  shorter  than  typical  external  evaluation  activities.  Accessing  the  range  of  stakeholders   within  the  partnership  would  reflect  a  more  holistic  picture  in  the  findings.  However,  the  external   position  of  the  investigator  and  the  shortened  timeframe  to  build  relationships  and  bonds  of  trust   needed  to  access  data  presented  social  and  logistical  barriers  to  accessing  key  informants  in  the   partnership.  The  subjective  nature  of  responses  raises  the  issue  that  data  gathering  may  present   inaccuracies  affecting  the  validity  of  the  study,  given  that  respondents  may  be    "may  be  biased  toward   achievement"  in  order  to  justify  the  efforts  of  their  program.  (Lipp  et  al,  2012:  4).  This  is  a  common   thread  in  healthy  cities  evaluations  where  self-reporting  was  not  substantiated  with  external  outcomes   assessment  (El  Ansari  et  al,  2001;  Barton  and  Grant,  2011)

21  

  

Chapter  III:  Analysis  of  Findings  
i.  Overview  
Peel  Public  Health  has  undertaken  a  series  of  projects  in  alignment  with  Planning  at  the  regional   level.  Alignment  has  facilitated  not  only  joint  work  on  healthier  built  environments,  but  also  the   expansion  of  the  partnership  network  into  other  disciplines  aligned  with  the  planning  field,  such  as   transportation  engineering.  It  has  also  facilitated  Peel  Public  Health's  access  to  municipal  development   stakeholders.    Concurrently,  the  Region  is  seeking  political  support  for  healthier  planning  policy  and   investments  at  the  provincial  level  and  building  interregional  coalitions  to  reach  higher  levels  of   government.  Finally,  collaboration  with  experts  and  direct  outreach  to  municipalities  and  the   development  industry  have  also  contributed  to  moving  the  partnership's  work  forward.   The  nature  of  partnership  work  in  Peel  is  both  formal  and  informal.  On  the  one  hand,  a  Peel   Regional  Council  resolution  in  2005  formally  directed  the  alignment  of  planning  and  public  health  staff   and  joint  work  such  as  the  Healthy  Development  Index  and  subsequent  Health  Background  Study   Framework  has  been  supported  and  in  the  case  of  Peel's  Active  Transportation  Study  and  subsequent   Plan,  funded.  On  the  other  hand,  the  strategic  alignment  and  working  relationships  between  leaders  in   Planning  and  Public  Health  is  not  an  institutionalized  partnership  with  defined  roles  and  responsibilities   ­  although  these  may  be  set  out  at  the  project  level.  Along  with  the  absence  of  identifiable   accountability  structures  beyond  joint  reporting  to  Regional  Council  on  progress,  it  is  clearly  not  formal   structures,  but  relationships  that  move  the  work  of  health  and  the  built  environment  forward.     Moreover,  the  partnership  processes  are  responsive  to  current  political  and  fiscal  conditions  and   interprofessional  networks:  interviews  indicate  that  staff  have  been  starting  to  see  the  value  of   partnership  work  in  different  areas  and  have  been  expanding  the  network  accordingly.     The  2012  report  from  Peel  Public  Health  on  Creating  Supportive  Environments  for  Health  lays   out  some  of  the  explicit  principles  underlying  the  partnership  work  within  Public  Health's  portfolio:   · Strategic  planning  and  work  is  intentionally  intersectoral.  It  identifies  the  Regional  Planning   department,  lower-tier  municipalities,  school  boards,  developers,  public  opinion,  and  higher   levels  of  government  as  potential  partners.     · Multi-year  action  plans  that  are  designed  to  accompany  strategic  planning  will  identify   objectives,  prioritize  action  and  establish  and  an  understanding  of  baseline  conditions.  Action  

22  

  
planning  is  designed  to  be  iterative,  seeking  alignment  with  partnership  initiatives  to  achieve  a   longer  reach  and  prioritize  more  timely  action.  (Peel  Public  Health,  2012)   With  these  considerations  in  mind,  the  logic  model  on  the  next  page  visually  summarizes  the   context  for  partnership,  Peel  Region's  partnership  activities,  resources  and  processes  (inputs),  the   immediate  results  of  partnership  work  (outputs),  and  what  results  are  expected  in  the  medium-term   (outcomes)  and  the  long-term  (impacts).  The  components  of  the  logic  model  (context,  inputs,  outputs,   outcomes,  impacts)  and  the  relationships  between  them  emerged  from  the  analysis  of  key  informant   interviews  and  documentation  (see  Appendix  C  for  the  list  of  documentation  used).    Following  the  logic   model  table  is  a  narrative  describing  the  connections  between  components  with  further  analysis  around   the  conceptual  linkages  and  gaps  between  what  has  already  occurred  what  is  expected  to  occur  in   planning  healthier  communities  in  Peel.  A  separate  section  characterizing  of  some  of  the  challenges   identified  to  date  in  partnership  work  and  provides  an  additional  layer  of  analysis  around  how  the   partnership  functions,  and  offers  insights  into  planning  an  evaluation  assessment,  which  is  explored  in   greater  detail  in  Chapter  IV.

23  

  

Figure  2:  Peel  BE  &  Health  Initiatives  Logic  Model  Analysis  

24  

  

ii.  Logic  Model  Analysis   A.  Context  and  Resources  
Peel's  work  on  alignment  did  not  simply  begin  in  2005,  although  the  period  following  the  Regional   Council  resolution  directing  staff  in  Planning  and  Public  Health  to  work  jointly  on  the  healthy  built   environment  portfolio  could  be  characterized  as  a  shift  from  developing  a  rationale  for  action  to  taking   action  itself.  

Political  Context:  
Political  support  for  alignment  came  from  Public  Health  staff's  work  to  increase  Regional  councilors'   basic  understanding  of  the  role  of  environments  in  obesity  &  diabetes,  essentially  laying  the  groundwork   for  action  on  the  issue.  Peel's  position  as  a  rapidly-growing  municipality  provided  the  facilitating  fiscal   conditions  for  innovation  and  investment.  

Rationale  for  action  on  alignment:  
While  healthy  built  environments  are  now  a  core  component  of  Public  Health's  strategic  direction   on  Supportive  Environments  for  Healthy  Living,  the  long-term  vision  for  Planning  in  Peel  is  for  compact   communities  that  also  support  active  and  healthy  lifestyles:  the  vision  of  success  is  a  shared  one.  This   vision  provides  a  natural  rationale  for  action  on  alignment  in  Planning  and  Public  Health's  work  that   operates  at  a  political  and  institutional  level.  The  underlying  assumption  is  that  messages  about  health   can  leverage  and  justify  good  planning,  while  planning  can  act  as  a  useful  tool  for  healthy  outcomes.      

Broader  interest  in  health  and  BE:    
It  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  the  work  in  Peel  has  not  occurred  in  a  vacuum.  Existing  interest   in  both  implementation  research  for  healthy  communities  and  partnership  working  meant  that   academic  partnership  opportunities,  funding,  and  best  practices  from  other  jurisdictions  were  available   to  support  Peel's  work.  Identifying  and  leveraging  these  opportunities  was  a  crucial  part  of  the  process.  

B.  Impacts/Long  Term  Outcomes:     Developing  a  shared  vision  of  success  
The  long-term  goals  of  Peel's  partnership  work  on  healthy  communities  are  fairly  clear  for  Public   Health:  reducing  the  prevalence  chronic  diseases  and  mitigating  risk  factors  that  result  from  unhealthy  

25  

  
environments.  Public  Health  assumes  that  the  shift  in  health  outcomes  must  be  preceded  by  a  shift   towards  supportive  environments  for  healthy  living.  Baseline  measurements  of  disease  prevalence  and   risk  factors  have  been  established  in  Peel  that  act  as  a  proxy  for  health  improvement  successes,  and  can   help  establish  progress  along  these  long-range  goals.   Population  health,  while  a  laudable  goal  for  planning,  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  success.  Urban   and  regional  planners  frame  successful  outcomes  more  broadly  than  the  public  health  agency.  In  effect,   the  primary  planning  document  at  the  regional  level,  Peel's  Regional  Official  Plan,  acknowledges  health   within  its  four  "primary  goals":   · · · · create  a  healthy  community   recognize  the  importance  of  the  environment   recognize  the  importance  of  a  vibrant  economy   support  balanced  growth  and  development   (Peel  Region  Official  Plan,  2013).     While  a  broader  frame  might  dilute  the  goals  of  health  within  planning,  the  goal  of  creating   "supportive  environments  for  healthy  living"  has  made  it  possible  to  establish  a  common  vision  of  long- range  success.  Aligning  public  health  action  with  planning  priorities  in  energy  consumption,  pollution,   traffic  congestion  and  injury  rates  was  an  important  piece  in  boosting  the  supportive  environments   agenda,  as  planning  partners  saw  mutual  benefit  in  several  areas  to  partnership.  

Necessary  Conditions  for  Success  
Peel  Public  Health's  first  priority,  in  consultation  with  academic  experts,  was  converting  their  shared   vision  of  success  into  specific  opportunities  for  actionable  work.  The  assumption  in  strategic  planning   was  that  defining  opportunities  for  action  in  light  of  factors  specific  to  Peel  Region  would  help  address   "the  magnitude  of  the  challenge  and  the  finite  set  of  available  resources."  (Peel  Public  Health,  2012:  44)   The  four  priority  areas  selected  (Preschools,  Schools,  Workplaces,  Built  Environment)  came  out  of  a   feasibility  analysis  that  considered  Public  Health's  sphere  of  influence,  opportunities  to  build  on  action   already  underway,  resource  requirements,  and  the  extent  of  project  impacts  on  the  population.     It  is  self-evident  that  planners  should  be  key  partners  in  influencing  the  Built  Environment  priority   area.  The  role  of  increasing  options  for  physical  activity  and  active  transportation,  developing  healthy   food  policy,  and  attending  to  socioeconomic  status  in  Preschool,  School  and  Workplace  interventions  fall   similarly  within  the  planning  bailiwick.    

26  

  
Some  of  the  conditions  identified  in  creating  these  supportive  environments  for  health  include   building  the  infrastructure  necessary  for  walking  and  cycling,  capitalizing  on  opportunities  for  healthy   land  use  planning  -  mixed  use  zoning  and  development  that  improves  walkability  and  cyclability  and   proximity  to  services  -  and  establishing  policies  that  govern  more  active  use  of  spaces  and  access  to   healthy  food.    Adequate  funding  and  appropriately  aligned  legislative  and  strategic  policies  were   identified  as  the  necessary  preconditions  for  implementing  infrastructure  and  development  projects  and   transforming  regulatory  policies  and  practices.  

C.  Inputs:  Projects,  Processes,  People   Building  Buzz  about  Supportive  Environments  for  Healthy  Living  
Interviews  identified  a  number  of  catalysts  to  create  and  sustain  interest  among  politicians,  the   general  public,  and  staff  for  action  on  healthier  built  environments.  The  first  of  these  was  the  Healthy   Peel  by  Design  symposium  held  in  2012  that  drew  a  large  group  of  stakeholders  to  a  Mississauga  venue   and  featured  what  were  described  as  attractive  and  exciting  presentation  of  best  practices  from  New   York  City.  Healthy  Peel  by  Design  created  the  necessary  buzz  to  identify  political  champions  for  the  built   environment  and  health  agenda.  These  champions  were  later  formalized  in  a  Consultation  Committee,   which  would  attract  political  capital  to  the  alignment  of  work  at  conferences  and  in  Council  and  support   demonstration  projects  in  their  wards,  further  building  the  case  for  moving  from  policy  to  action.     Decision-makers  within  Public  Health  realized,  too,  that  in  order  to  transform  built  environments,   interventions  would  need  to  happen  at  multiple  levels,  not  simply  at  the  regional  scale.  Advocacy  work   for  changes  in  local,  provincial  and  federal  planning  policy  had  the  added  benefit  of  boosting  Peel's  work   at  the  regional  scale.  Advocacy  involved  coalition-building  and  using  this  coalition  to  provide   commentary  from  the  Chief  Medical  Officers  of  Health  (MOH)  in  Ontario  around  the  Provincial  Policy   Statement,  GTHA  Growth  Plan  and  support  for  transit  funding.          On  the  municipal  end,  Peel  Public  Health  reached  out  to  municipalities  and  supported  their   strategically  important  projects,  such  as  Caledon's  Community  Improvement  Plans  and  Brampton's   Framework  for  Sustainable  Development.  Their  proactive  approach  created  the  conditions  for   promoting  both  the  use  of  the  health-related  development  tools,  and  the  shift  in  norms  to  bring  health   staff  in  as  consultants  to  planning  processes.  Regional  Planning  staff  also  supported  this  process  in   bringing  Public  Health  staff  to  meetings  with  municipalities,  and  the  remaining  municipality  in  Peel,   Mississauga,  ultimately  also  engaged  with  health  staff.  While  Peel's  Medical  Officer  of  Health  secured  

27  

  
Council  approval  to  conduct  advocacy,  the  general  strategy  has  been  for  staff  to  take  leadership  on   multi-level  interventions  without  waiting  for  explicit  direction  from  Council.  The  method  to  this  process   is  that  project  work,  and  thus  project  results,  might  be  delivered  more  expediently  and  further  shore  up   the  political  support  for  their  agenda.  

Developing  Resources  that  Move  Policy  to  Action  
Another  catalyst  for  action  was  contracting  academic  experts  to  develop  a  range  of  work.  Some  of   this  work  was  strategic  planning  prior  to  the  launch  of  the  Supportive  Environments  report.  Putting   resources  into  conceptualizing  the  intersectoral  process  was  valuable  for  Peel  Health,  given  the   challenge  of  scale  in  the  alignment  work  they  had  undertaken.  Using  an  understanding  of  best  practices   and  a  combination  of  Regional  and  external  funding  for  research,  experts  were  able  to  expand  the   strategic  vision  beyond  the  built  environment  and  set  the  stage  for  longer-range  partnership   networking.    Academics  also  produced  background  research  such  as  the  Diabetes  Atlas,  as  well  as   functional  tools  such  as  the  Healthy  Development  Index  and  Health  Background  Study  that  might  be   leveraged  in  developing  "quick  wins"  for  the  region's  vision  of  success.     Setting  up  this  work  involved  identifying  reciprocal  benefits  with  academic  partners  who  had  an   interest  in  developing  locally  relevant  work,  as  well  as  funding  for  these  projects.  Funding  was  produced   in  some  cases  by  jointly  applying  to  grants  such  as  the  Healthy  Canada  by  Design  funding  for  action.     Public  Health  has  been  the  primary  client  of  academic  consultants  in  these  joint  tools.  Nonetheless,   ensuring  the  involvement  of  planning  staff  in  the  development  of  tools  provided  useful  insight  into  what   would  work  best  in  their  respective  professional  practices.  One  such  idea  was  to  use  quantifiable   standards  that  could  be  applied  at  the  site  level  that  mirror  existing  planning  metrics  (e.g.  Noise  level   assessments)  that  were  included  in  the  Healthy  Development  Index  tool.  The  result  of  these   collaborations  has  been  a  series  of  applied  research  studies  in  the  Peel  context.  These  are  necessary   evidence  to  help  demonstrate  the  value  of  funding  work  around  supportive  environments  for  health  and   safeguard  against  challenges  to  its  legitimacy  at  the  OMB  or  otherwise.     Adding  to  the  growing  body  of  evidence  that  supportive  environments  for  healthy  living  are   necessary  and  possible  in  Peel,  Peel  Region's  Resolution  HE-B1  designated  the  Region  of  Peel  a  "model   employer".  This  put  resources  into  design,  facilities  and  service  improvements  to  promote  physical   activity  and  healthy  food  choices  among  the  Region's  workforce.  Paths  for  active  transportation  were  

28  

  
integrated  into  the  redesigned  site  plan  for  Peel  Region  buildings,  showing  tangible  evidence  of  this   early  success  in  the  spaces  both  within  and  around  buildings.  

Key  People  
Institutional  champions  ­  that  is,  major  decision-makers  influencing  partnership  work  -  at  both   Public  Health  and  in  Planning  appear  to  have  driven  much  of  the  process  at  both  the  strategic  and   working  level.  An  understanding  of  the  need  to  seize  opportunities  for  action  at  the  forefront  of  the   agenda  and  to  invest  in  the  time  and  resources  necessary  for  a  functional  partnership  were  vital  assets   for  the  development  of  a  working  partnership.  One  resource  is  a  shared  staff  member  who  was   described  as  bridging  collaborative  barriers,  such  as  professional  jargon,  and  supporting  intersectoral   education  so  that  Public  Health  could  learn  about  constraints  and  levers  in  the  planning  profession  and     Planning  could  learn  about  how  to  incorporate  health  considerations  and  use  joint  tools  in  developing   and  approving  plans  and  policies.  The  interpersonal  and  communications  skills  of  institutional   champions  were  reported  to  have  shored  up  both  cross-departmental  relationships  and  access  to  the   networks  of  experts  who  have  supported  the  intersectoral  work  at  different  stages.   At  the  staff  level,  a  recognition  in  both  disciplines  of  the  reciprocal  benefits  of  aligning  the  health   and  planning  agendas  and  joint  working  appears  to  have  changed  the  norms  of  networks  for  data   exchange  and  decision-making.    Public  Health  staff  are  looped  into  new  meetings  with  Planning  staff,   such  as  with  Transportation  Planning  and  with  stakeholders  at  municipalities.  Moreover,  an  increasing   understanding  of  intersectoral  work  has  prompted  the  inclusion  of  cross-sectoral  competencies  into   professional  development.  Public  Health  developed  an  understanding  of  planning's  levers  and   constraints,  while  Planning  worked  to  effectively  implement  the  tools  that  integrated  health  concerns   into  the  planning  process,  such  as  the  Healthy  Development  Index.  

Networking  Effects  
Collaborative  working  between  Planning  and  Public  Health  staff  ultimately  expanded  the   partnership  network  to  involve  other  key  players  in  the  built  environment  and  transportation  planning,   such  as  the  national  association  governing  transportation  engineers,  in  projects.    Strong  relationships   and  buy-in  around  the  joint  agenda  supported  external  communications  about  the  rationale  for  aligned   project  work.  For  instance,  partners  co-presented  on  joint  panels  and  at  conferences,  and  formal  and   informal  linkages  between  public  health  partners  and  planning's  own  networks  moved  the  networking   process  along.  Another  activity  that  emerged  out  of  work  with  municipalities  were  the  resolutions  in  

29  

  
Mississauga  and  Brampton  to  network  with  planning's  professional  associations  (CIP  and  OPPI)  as   partners  in  health.  

D.  Partnership  Results  (Outputs)  
The  "outputs"  or  results  of  Peel's  supportive  environments  initiatives  aligning  health  and  planning   are  the  necessary  precursors  to  the  adequate  funding  and  appropriately  aligned  legislative  and  strategic   policies  that  sustain  longer-range  outcomes  for  the  project.    

Creating  political  champions  
Politicians  with  a  political  and  personal  interest  advocate  for  the  issues  in  Council,  which  are   intended  to  provide  emerging  policies  the  requisite  "teeth"  (funding  and  political  direction).  A  challenge   to  building  political  will  on  the  issue  is  that  the  mismatch  of  project  cycles  and  electoral  timelines  makes   success  a  moving  target.  With  decades-long  timelines  in  shifting  the  built  environment  and  four-year   election  cycles,  champions  for  healthy  environments  cannot  be  counted  as  consistent  assets  from   projects'  inception  to  their  results.  The  rationale  for  healthier  built  environments  may  need  to  be  re- stated  and  influence  rebuilt  in  order  to  maintain  momentum  and  funding  for  projects.  However,  the   instrumental  value  of  championship,  even  transitory  ones,  is  in  getting  pilots  off  the  ground  and  in   sustaining  broader  public  interest  in  the  approach.    

  Building  public  interest  
Public  support  beyond  political  championship  is  conceived  as  a  longer-  term  requirement  of  the  joint   work,  as  it  is  considered  by  key  informants  to  be  too  soon  to  gauge  examples  of  success  in  this  area.   Building  public  support  requires  creating  the  right  narrative:  one  that  is  locally  relevant  and  turns  the   best  evidence  into  a  tangible  vision  of  the  qualities  of  the  communities  that  could  sustain  the  best   possible  health  outcomes.  Building  media  interest  to  develop  public  awareness  is  another  branch  of  this   strategy.  The  rationale  for  clear  local  evidence  of  the  problem  and  pilot  projects  leading  to  solutions  that   are  easily  communicated  to  a  broader  public  is  that  support  is  needed  for  public  funds.    

Building  tangible  local  evidence:  
  One  strategy  for  delivering  successful  pilot  projects  is  to  develop  usable  tools  for  action  on  policy.   The  best  example  of  how  project  work  has  shifted  to  meet  this  objective  over  time  is  that  the  Healthy   Development  Index  for  Peel,  initially  produced  as  a  conceptual  framework,  has  had  funding  allocated  for  

30  

  
refinement  and  piloting.  It  has  been  complemented  by  a  Health  Background  Study  Framework  tool,  and   will  soon  be  joined  by  Healthy  Development  Checklist  that  makes  including  health  considerations  in   development  projects  more  developer-friendly.  The  assumption  underlying  this  process  is  that  it  is   crucial  to  build  tangible  evidence  of  how  healthy  environments  can  actually  function  in  Peel.  

Collaborative  partnership  work:  
A  great  deal  of  activity  stemmed  from  partnership  work  at  the  staff  level,  deemed  to  have  moved   from  "ad  hoc  consultation"  typical  of  previous  intersectoral  work  into  meaningful  and  reciprocal   partnership  working.  Three  components  were  identified  as  evidence  of  improvement:   · · · Health  staff  were  brought  in  to  comment  on  planning  decision-making/  projects;   Professional  development  was  adapted  to  include  capacity-building  in  health  assessment  tools;   A  coordinated  vision  of  success  has  manifested  itself  in  the  similarity  of  interdepartmental   messaging  and  easier  communication  in  interdisciplinary  strategic  and  working  meetings.   Twinning  objectives  and  investing  in  partnership  processes  such  as  shared  resources,  meetings  and   intersectoral  skills  development  between  both  partners  resulted  in  the  promotion  of  partnership  work   at  panels  and  conferences.  For  instance,  a  recent  growth  management  workshop  under  Planning's   sphere  of  influence  included  health  as  one  of  key  points:  the  need  for  growth  to  occur  within  a  healthy   communities  structure.  In  identifying  guest  speakers,  Planning  asked  Public  Health  for  recommendations   on  experts  on  health  and  the  built  environment  who  had  experience  with  growth.   The  networks  and  influence  that  each  partner  brings  to  the  table  has  not  only  expanded  promotion,   but  has  catalyzed  additional  work  such  as  suburban  road  standards  reassessment.  Certain  other   networking  effects  have  been  identified  as  a  result  of  a  strengthened  partnership  with  planning  staff:   connections  to  other  stakeholders,  such  as  transportation  engineers  and  municipal  planning   departments,  enable  the  promotion  of  the  healthy  planning  agenda  in  a  wider  sphere.    

Expansion  of  regional  work:  
The  pursuit  of  a  joint  agenda  on  healthy  communities  integrated  the  expansion  of  the  partnership's   influence  beyond  the  region  alone.  It  was  necessary  to  develop  an  understanding  of  the  planning  system   to  identify  where  planning  could  leverage  development  and  where  higher-order  (provincial  and  federal   advocacy)  or  lower-order  (municipal  development  and  planning)  interventions  were  necessary  to   promote  this  agenda.    

31  

  

iii.  Challenges  in  Peel  Region's  built  environment  and  health  initiatives  
Separating  out  the  challenges  in  the  partnership  work  from  the  logic  model  clarifies  its  conceptual  gaps.   Challenges  are  essentially  points  of  tension  where  inputs  do  not  lead  smoothly  to  outputs  associated   with  successful  outcomes.  The  specific  challenges  in  this  case  were:   · Marginal  amount  of  activity  aimed  at  building  public  support  through  media  buzz.  NIMBYism   relating  to  the  proposed  shift  from  sprawl  to  compact  development  patterns  has  been   identified  as  a  current  and  potentially  major  future  barrier  to  the  project  as  a  whole.   · Building  political  will:  the  long  time  frame  between  action  and  success:  even  short-range   outcomes  such  as  changes  to  the  built  environment  extend  far  beyond    political  cycles.   Politicians  are  subject  to  different  influences  and  risk  dropping  support  when  it  comes  to  a   decision  to  commit  resources  or  political  capital.   · Difficulty  in  establishing  clear  attribution  pathways  between  projects  and  outcomes:  there  are   no  comparison  groups  and  measuring  shifts  in  health  outcomes  is  a  difficult  process.   · Scale  of  the  work  in  driving  change  at  provincial  level:  the  documents  are  not  only  out-of-date,   but  the  process  to  change  the  PPS,  Growth  Plan  is  slow  and  subject  to  OMB  appeal.   ·   Designing  appropriate  tools:  not  all  of  the  elements  of  healthy  built  environments  are  easily  set   at  thresholds  that  can  be  incorporated  into  the  current  planning  assessment  process  (e.g.   Complete  Streets).  This  illuminates  the  need  to  develop  cross-sectoral  competencies  so  that   planning  can  transform  the  tools  relating  to  health.   · Practical  challenges  of  intersectoral  work:     o Differences  in  processes  (approvals  process,  documentation  and  timelines).  Public   health  is  flexible  to  shift  action  and  approach  as  evidence  shifts,  while  other  disciplines   may  be  less  flexible  and  be  driven  by  industries  and  standards.  Communication  about   what  is  being  compromised  by  the  above  hurdles  can  help.   o Time  needed  to  collaborate  is  difficult  to  obtain.  The  next  best  solution  is  to  keep   partners  informed  of  decisions  and  work.  

32  

  

Chapter  IV:  Next  Steps:  Evaluation  Planning  
  
   The  way  logic  model  analyses  are  used  in  support  of  evaluations  planning  varies  according  to  the  

goals  of  the  evaluations  process.  Goals  are  themselves  influenced  by  the  evaluation  timing,  resources,   users  and  the  scope  of  the  project.  The  diagram  below,  from  the  W.K.  Kellogg  Foundation's  evaluations   handbook,  highlights  variations.    

  
Figure  3:  How  Logic  Models  Better  Position  Programs  Toward  Success  (W.K.  Kellogg  Foundation,  2004)  

However  it  is  ultimately  mobilized,  this  study's  logic  model  analysis  is  an  asset  that  can  support   evaluation  activities  around  Peel's  work  in  the  following  ways:   1a.  Inventories  the  resources,  processes  and  activities  that  are  required  for  specific  results;   2a.  Frames  connections  between  components  (inputs,  outputs,  outcomes)  of  the  logic  model;   3a.    Describes  the  partnership's  "vision  of  success":  specific,  actionable  outcomes  that  can   eventually  be  attached  to  indicators  and  assessed.   Given  the  limitations  of  this  study,  the  logic  model  should  be  refined  with  a  larger  and  more  diverse   sample  within  the  partnership  stakeholders,  and  revisited  over  time.  Moreover,  to  evaluate  the  process,   stakeholders  must  go  one  step  further  than  making  sense  of  the  activities  and  assess  the  merit  of  the  

33  

  
outputs  and  outcomes  above  to  create  good  measures  and  benchmarks  (Mark  et  al,  2000).  Questions   might  assess:   1b.  How  should  the  partnership  work  prioritize  its  results  and  outcomes  and  consequently   highlight  its  key  activities?   2b.  How  strong  are  the  connections  between  partnership  work  and  its  results  and  what  other   variables  might  be  involved?   3b.  What  are  appropriate  indicators,  thresholds,  and  measurement  tools  for  each  outcome?  

i.  The  implication  of  partnership  working  on  evaluating  results:  
Peel's  current  framework  for  assessing  success  around  action  on  healthy  built  environments  is  the   "comprehensiveness  of  [its]  portfolio"  (Peel  Public  Health,  2012).  Goal-setting  around  the  healthy  built   environments  agenda  has  been  guided  by  expert  opinions  from  public  health,  which  is  reasonable  given   the  role  Peel  Public  Health  has  taken  in  driving  the  process  of  alignment  with  planning  priorities  and   staff.  However,  given  the  strength  of  current  collaborations  with  Peel  Planning  and  the  expansion  of  the   partnership  network,  it  might  be  worthwhile  to  include  partners  in  the  strategic  priority-setting  process,   setting  the  standards  against  which  project  success  can  be  measured.  Getting  contributions  and  buy-in   from  partners  would  not  only  establish  action  within  a  more  comprehensive  framework,  but  from  a   program  improvement  standpoint,  would  also  identify  opportunities  to  leverage  the  partnership's   expanded  capacity  to  intervene  and  access  new  resources  available  outside  of  Public  Health.     Projects  emerging  from  the  partnership  are  conceived  as  a  valuable  mechanism  to  sell  the  public  on   the  value  of  Peel's  work  and  leverage  further  resources  and  support.  Health  outcomes  are  an  attractive   goal,  but  the  difficulty  of  attributing  health  outcomes  directly  to  projects  and  the  prospect  that  changed   environments  might  fail  to  prompt  the  uptake  of  healthier  lifestyles  could  diminish  support  for  project   work  over  the  long  term.  Conversely,  the  benefits  of  healthier  community  plans  are  more  easily  tracked   and  measured.  Reductions  in  pollution,  reduced  injury  rates,  community  designs  that  retain  an  aging   population,  and  other  metrics  of  building  compact  and  health-supportive  communities  are  attributable   to  planning  interventions.    There  is  thus  a  better  guarantee  of  measuring  success  by  considering  the   outcomes  articulated  by  both  planning  and  health  and  tracking  both  in  the  assessment.    

ii.  Assessing  what  is  working  in  the  partnership  approach:    
As  the  analytic  component  of  this  work  reveals,  Peel's  collaborative  approach,  although  formally   supported  by  Regional  Council,  is  underpinned  by  deepening  relationships  between  staff,  the  support  of  

34  

  
divisional  leaders  and  external  support  for  healthy  environments  in  Peel.  This  particular  structure  lends   informal  qualities  to  the  partnership  as  expressed  in  Chapter  III,  which  raises  some  difficulty  in  tracking   and  assessing  its  activities  and  results.  Moreover,  the  unit  of  analysis  is  not  a  single  partnership  between   public  health  and  planning  at  the  regional  level.  Rather,  it  is  more  accurately  understood  as  an  evolving   network:  the  successes  of  the  project  are  deeply  entwined  with  burgeoning  collaborations  with   transportation,  municipalities  and  supportive  coalitions  with  interested  academics,  higher  orders  of   government,  and  other  leaders  in  health  and  the  built  environment  in  Ontario.   Nevertheless,  in  order  to  provide  any  measure  of  continuous  improvement  of  the  whole  action   process,  Peel  should  attempt  to  understand  and  assess  the  value  of  the  intersectoral  process  that  has   not  motivated  action  around  its  supportive  environments  for  healthy  living  agenda.  This  would  help   contextualize  its  work  within  the  context  of  action  research  planning  healthy  communities  and   demonstrate  the  value  of  its  choices  in  achieving  success  over  the  longer  term.   The  framework  that  Peel  Public  Health  lays  out  for  assessing  their  projects  on  health  and  built   environment  acknowledges  the  need  to  track  both  the  metrics  of  shifting  policy  and  whether  the  shifts   actually  had  the  desired  effects.    (Peel  Public  Health,  2012:  55)  Doing  so  will  involve  descriptive   questions  such  as  which  and  how  many  areas  were  impacted  and  to  what  extent  -  the  outputs  laid  out  in   the  logic  model  represent  a  good  starting  point  for  what  to  measure.     To  date,  Peel  Health  has  not  formally  identified  specific  measures  for  success  around  partnership   work  itself,  but  has  identified  a  current  capacity  to  track  some  activities.  Measurable  activities  include   co-presentations  at  conferences  and  in  Council  meetings,  joint  meetings  attendance.  Evaluations  work   could  further  explore  the  scope  of  collaborative  opportunities  to  date  by  investigating  how  public  health   issues  and  individuals  are  positioned  on  planning's  meeting  agendas  and  the  converse.     In  addition,  given  the  primacy  of  time  allocated  to  build  relationships,  it  might  be  valuable  to  further   develop  the  timelines  for  partnership  work  in  order  to  better  understand  and  replicate  this  intersectoral   competency.  With  institutional  champions  playing  such  a  pivotal  role  in  nurturing  these  relationships,  it   might  also  be  worth  exploring  the  tactics  of  key  leaders  in  both  departments  in  order  to  understand  how   their  assets  and  skills  contributed  to  more  effective  intersectoral  collaboration.  Another  possibility  in   developing  the  partnership  further  is  to  consider  ways  that  the  attributes  of  individuals  can  be   institutionalized,  to  minimize  the  risk  of  losing  both  the  resources  and  networks  individuals  bring  to  the   table  if  circumstances  change.  (Asthana  et  al,  2012)  

35  

  
   The  challenges  identified  around  insufficient  time  to  work  collaboratively,  and  the  remaining  

barriers  to  effective  partnership  work  related  to  mismatched  processes  speak  to  the  need  to  further   examine  which  cross-sectoral  competencies  are  needed  so  that  all  parties,  including  new  additions  to   the  partnership  network,  can  take  the  initiative  to  problem-solve  around  barriers  to  effective   intersectoral  work.  Identifying  these  competencies  and  tracking  which  ones  lead  to  a  more  streamlined   process  and  how  will  allow  Peel  to  rechart  its  course  if  needed,  as  well  as  demonstrate  the  value  of  its   approach.   In  all  instances,  while  it  will  be  important  to  refine  the  components  identified  in  this  logic  model  and   find  ways  to  measure  Peel's  success,  assessing  the  value  of  these  collaborative  opportunities  will  remain   a  crucial  piece  of  demonstrating  the  merit  of  the  partnership  processes  currently  underway.  Questions   that  establish  the  thresholds  for  successful  outcomes,  and  the  means  by  which  Peel  should  conduct  its   monitoring  and  evaluation  would  be  best  determined  collaboratively  between  Public  Health  and   Planning  if  possible,  in  order  to  capture  the  synergies  within  the  project.              

36  

  

Conclusions  
  
It  is  not  enough  to  simply  decide  to  work  intersectorally  in  mitigating  the  issue  of  silos  around  

urban  health  problems.  The  transformation  of  organizational  structures  and  norms  through  intersectoral   partnerships  is  profound:  developing  an  understanding  of  what  makes  a  successful  partnership  will  be   instrumental  in  this  work.  Evaluating  precedents,  preferably  in  the  local  context,  provides  a  good   starting  point  for  this  understanding  and  establishes  best  practices.  Evaluating  the  successes  of   intersectoral  partnerships  is  a  complex  task:  a  precondition  to  developing  indicators  and  measurement   tools  is  establishing  an  analytical  framework  that  develops  parameters  for  the  assessment.  Ultimately,   this  study  intends  to  situate  the  partnership  and  process  underpinning  Peel's  suite  of  initiatives  within   the  literature  on  healthy  cities  partnerships:  describing  aspects  of  its  governance,  its  representation,  its   wider  goals  and  methods  of  achieving  these  goals.   Collecting  documentation  and  qualitative  data  from  stakeholders  in  a  logic  model  analysis   explores  the  processes,  norms  and  networks  mobilized  in  achieving  successful  outcomes,  and  where   ongoing  challenges  to  those  outcomes  still  exist.  The  analysis  produced  of  Peel's  partnership  structure  is   a  necessary  precedent  for  an  evaluation  of  outcomes.  More  extensive  definition  of  cross-sectoral  goals,   benchmarks  and  measurement  tools  to  assess  the  outcomes  of  the  partnership  will  be  necessary.  What   this  provides  is  insight  into  the  process  -  facilitating  factors  and  obstacles,  conceptual  mapping  of  the   underlying  mechanisms  that  are  designed  to  turn  goals  into  successful  outcomes.  This  can  support   strategic  planning  both  in  the  ongoing  work  of  the  project  and  in  using  Peel  Region's  successes  as  a   template  for  other  local  intersectoral  partnerships  in  healthy  city  planning.   This  logic  model  is  a  useful  resource  in  evaluating  the  work  behind  the  Peel  built  environment   and  health  initiatives.  It  offers  an  inventory  of  what  will  be  evaluated,  a  theory  about  how  partnership   components  are  connected,  and  a  description  of  Peel's  vision  of  success.  Showing  shorter-term   outcomes  as  well  as  long-term  impacts  helps  Peel  build  the  narrative  of  what  progress  it  has  made  and   how  it  is  on  the  path  to  achieving  its  long-term  goals.  After  Peel  has  developed  measurable  indicators   and  benchmarks  for  these  indicators,  which  are  needed  to  actually  evaluate  how  well  the  goals  have   been  met,  the  logic  model  can  be  used  for  assessment.  Plugging  different  measurements  of  indicators   into  the  logic  model  will  allow  Peel  to  understand  its  progress.  Refining  the  logic  model  with  further   stakeholder  interviews  is  a  necessary  next  step  in  developing  consensus  about  what  success  for  the   Region  should  look  like  at  different  stages.  

37  

  

Appendices  
Appendix  A.  Sample  Interview  Questions      A.  Logic  Model  discussion:   o Confirm  timeline   o Identify  stakeholders  (organizations,  people)   o Understand  the  activities  and  how  they  fit  together   o Discuss  successful  outcomes  and  the  conditions  for  success      B.  Questions   1. Can  you  tell  me  about  your  role  in  the  health  and  built  environment  initiatives?   2. Describe  the  partnerships  within  the  project.   3. In  what  ways  are  /  were  these  partnerships  successful?  What  are  the  outcomes  that   show  you  have  been  successful?   4. What  are  some  of  the  conditions  for  these  successes?   5. What  needed  to  be  in  place  for  these  conditions?  (Backwards  map)   6. How  would  you  measure  these  outcomes  of  success  (develop  indicators)?  How  do  you   know  when  your  indicators  are  meeting  your  targets?   7.   Describe  the  ways  that  activities  lead  to  successes  in  the  partnership.  

38  

  

Appendix  B.  Data  Sources   Key  Informant  Interviews:     Interviews  were  conducted  with  the  Peel  Public  Health  component  of  the  partnership  (1   interview  with  upper-level  management;  1  interview  with  manager  at  operational  level)  and   with  an  academic  partner  who  has  worked  with  Peel  Public  Health  throughout  the  duration  of   partnership  work.   Documents  Analysis  Summary  Table  
Reports  
State  of  the  Region's  Health  2005:  Focus  on   Overweight,  Obesity  and  Related  Health   Consequences  in  Adults  (October  14,  2005)   Lawrence  Frank  Ltd:  Evaluating  the  Public   Health  Impacts  of  Land  Use  Development  in   Peel:  Final  Report   Peel  Public  Health  (June  4  2012):  Report  to   Council  re:  Peel  Diabetes  Atlas   Region  of  Peel  Report  to  General  Committee:   September  29,  2008:  Health  Assessment  Tool   Initiative  to  provide  quantifiable  comment  on   neighbourhood  development  proposals     CRICH,  McMaster,  Peel  Public  Health  (2009):   Peel  Healthy  Development  Index   Gladki  Planning  Associates  (2011):  Healthy   Development  Index  Recommendations  Report   Peel  Public  Health  (2012).  Changing  Course:   Creating  Supportive  Environments  for  Healthy   Living  in  Peel  .   Health  Background  Study  Framework;  Health   Background  Study  Implementation  Strategy   (May  27,  2011)  -  The  Planning  Partnership   Health  Background  Study  Evaluation  Report   (May  27,  2011)  -  The  Planning  Partnership   Peel  Region  Council  (October  30,   2008):  Council  Minutes.   Excerpts  from  The  Council  of  the   Regional  Municipality  of  Peel:     -  HE-B1  (June  14,  2012)     -  2014-53  (January  23,  2014   -  HE-B2  (November  8,  2012)   -  PW  ­A1  (February  9,  2012)     Peel  Public  Health:  Peel  Health   Position  Statement.   Town  of  Caledon  (Februrary  14,   2012):  2012-050,  2012-063;   City  of  Brampton  (June  6,  2012):   C114-2012   City  of  Mississauga  (May  9,  2012):   0112-2012      Regional  Municipality  of   Peel  Official  Plan  (2013)   Correspondence:  Healthy   by  Design  Consultant   Committee  Group  

Resolutions  

Other  

Peel  Region  Council  (December  1,   Presentation:  Healthy   2005):  Special  Regional  Council   Canada  by  Design  -  Peel   Minutes   Public  Health  Node   (November  24,  2010).    

Healthy  Peel  by  Design   website  &  Symposium   Report  (2009)   Provincial  Policy  Statement,   2014:  Key  Changes  by  Policy   Area       

Peel  Public  Works  (2012).  Active   Transportation  Study     Peel  Public  Works  (2012).  Peel  Active   Transportation  Plan  and  Implementation   Strategy.  

39  

   Appendix  C.  Logic  Model  Framework  Analysis  

Figure  4:  Application  of  theoretical  framework  from  Asthana  et  al  HAZ  partnerships  to  Peel  Region  case  study    

  

40  

  

References  
Asthana,  S.,  Richardson,  S.,  &  Halliday,  J.  (2002).  Partnership  working  in  public  policy  provision:  A  framework   for  evaluation.  Social  Policy  and  Administration,  36(7),  780-795.     Aspen  Institute  (2003).  Theory  of  Change:  Guided  Example  ­  Project  Superwomen.  ActKnowledge  and  the   Aspen  Institute  Roundtable  on  Community  Change.   Babcock,  R.F.  (1966)  The  Zoning  Game:  Municipal  Practices  and  Policies.  Madison:  University  of  Wisconsin   Press.   Banerjee,  T.,  and  Baer,  W.  C.  (1984)  Beyond  the  Neighbourhood  Unit:  Residential  Environments  and  Public   Policy.  New  York:  Plenum.   Barten,  F.  (2011).  Toward  healthy  cities.  people,  places,  the  politics  of  urban  planning  and  power.  Journal  of   Urban  Health,  88(2),  376-377.     Barten,  F.,  Mitlin,  D.,  Mulholland,  C.,  Hardoy,  A.,  &  Stern,  R.  (2007).  Integrated  approaches  to  address  the   social  determinants  of  health  for  reducing  health  inequity.  Journal  of  Urban  Health,  84(1),  164-173.     Barton,  H.,  &  Grant,  M.  (2013).  Urban  planning  for  healthy  cities.  Journal  of  Urban  Health,  90,  129-141.     Barton,  H.  and  Tsourou,  C.  (2000)  Healthy  Urban  Planning.  London:  Spon  Press.   Baum,  F.  (2009)  Reducing  health  inequities  requires  a  new  national  health  research  agenda.  Health   Promotion  Journal  of  Australia,  20  (3),  163-164.   Bergeron,  K.,  Levesque,  L.  (in  press).  Designing  Active  Communities:  A  Coordinated  Action  Framework  for   Planners  and  Public  Health  Professionals.  Journal  of  Physical  Activity  and  Health.   Bergeron,  K  and  Levesque,  L.  (2011).  Development  of  a  joint  glossary  of  terms  for  planners  and  public  health   professionals.  Plan  Canada,  52  (3),  41-44.     Bergeron,  K  and  Levesque,  L  (2012).  Government  policies  for  active  community  design  in  Ontario:  Challenges   to  achieving  collaboration  between  five  Ministries.  Canadian  Journal  of  Urban  Research:  Canadian   Planning  and  Policy,  21(1),  29-54.   Bernier,  N.  F.  (2009).  Extending  the  realm  of  health  policy  with  a  new  public  health  approach:  A  comparative   look  at  the  Canadian  and  Swedish  national  experiences.  Canadian  Public  Administration,  52(1),  71-71.     Burris,  S.,  Hancock,  T.,  Lin,  V.,  &  Herzog,  A.  (2007).  Emerging  strategies  for  healthy  urban   governance.  Journal  of  Urban  Health,  84(1),  154-163.     Colgrove,  J.  K.,  Markowitz,  G.  E.,  &  Rosner,  D.  (2008).  The  contested  boundaries  of  American  public  health.   Corburn,  Jason  (2009).  Toward  the  Healthy  City:  People,  Places  and  the  Politics  of  Urban  Planning.   Cambridge:  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  

41  

  
Coryn,  C.  L.,  Noakes,  L.  A.,  Westine,  C.  D.,  &  Schröter,  D.  C.  (2011).  A  systematic  review  of  theory-driven   evaluation  practice  from  1990  to  2009.American  Journal  of  Evaluation,  32(2),  199-226.   Cummins,  S.,  Stafford,  M.,  Macintyre,  S.,  Marmot,  M.  And  Ellaway,  A.  (2005)  Neighborhood  environment  and   its  association  with  self-rated  health:  Evidence  from  Scotland  and  England.  Journal  of  Epidemiology  and   Community  Health  59,  207-31.   Dahlgren,  G.  and  Whitehead,  M.  (1992)  Policies  and  Strategies  to  Promote  Equity  in  Health.  WHO  Regional   Office  for  Europe,  Copenhagen.   de  Leeuw,  E.  (2012).  Do  healthy  cities  work?  A  logic  of  method  for  assessing  impact  and  outcome  of  healthy   cities.  Journal  of  Urban  Health  :  Bulletin  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine,  89(2),  217-231.     de  Leeuw,  E.  (2013).  Evaluating  WHO  Healthy  Cities  in  Europe:  Issues  and  Perspectives.  Journal  of  Urban   Health  :  Bulletin  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine,  90(S1),  S14-S22.     de  Leeuw,  E.  d.,  McNess,  A.,  Crisp,  B.,  &  Stagnitti,  K.  (2008).  Theoretical  reflections  on  the  nexus  between   research,  policy  and  practice.  Critical  Public  Health,  18(1),  5-20.     De  Leeuw,  E.,  Skovgaard  (2005).  Utility-driven  evidence  for  healthy  cities:  Problems  with  evidence   generation  and  application.  Social  Science  and  Medicine  61,  1331-41.   de  Wet,  T.,  Plagerson,  S.,  Harpham,  T.,  &  Mathee,  A.  (2011).  Poor  housing,  good  health:  A  comparison  of   formal  and  informal  housing  in  Johannesburg,  South  Africa.  International  Journal  of  Public  Health,   56(6),  625-633.     Danaher,  A.  (2011).    Reducing  Health  Inequities:  Enablers  and  Barriers  to  Inter-sectoral  Collaboration.   Wellesley  Institute:  Toronto.   Davidson,  Jane.  (2012).  Actionable  Evaluation  Basics:Getting  succinct  answers  to  the  most  important   questions  [minibook].  Real  Evaluation  Ltd.   Diez-Roux,  A.V.  (2001).  Investigating  neighborhood  and  area  effects  on  health.  American  Journal  of  Public   Health  91:  1808-14.   Donchin,  M.,  Shemesh,  A.  A.,  Horowitz,  P.,  &  Daoud,  N.  (2006).  Implementation  of  the  healthy  cities'   principles  and  strategies:  An  evaluation  of  the  Israel  healthy  cities  network.  Health  Promotion   International,  21(4),  266-273.     Duhl,  L.J.  and  Sanchez,  A.K.  (1999).  Healthy  Cities  and  the  City  Planning  Process:  A  background  document  on   links  between  health  and  urban  planning.  WHO  Regional  Office  for  Europe:  Copenhagen.     El  Ansari,  W.,  Phillips,  C.  J.,  &  Hammick,  M.  (2001).  Collaboration  and  partnerships:  Developing  the  evidence   base.  Health  &  Social  Care  in  the  Community,  9(4),  215-227.     Fitzpatrick,  K.  and  LaGory,  M.  (2000)  Unhealthy  Places;  The  Ecology  of  Risk  in  the  Urban  Landscape.  London:   Routledge.  

42  

  
Frankish,  C.  J.,  Moulton,  G.  E.,  Quantz,  D.,  Carson,  A.  J.,  Casebeer,  A.  L.,  Eyles,  J.  D.,  Evoy,  B.  E.  (2007).   Addressing  the  non-medical  determinants  of  health:  A  survey  of  Canada's  health  regions.  Canadian   Journal  of  Public  Health.  Revue  Canadienne  De  Santé  Publique,  98(1),  41.     Frankish,  J.,  Veenstra,  G.,  &  Moulton,  G.  (1999).  Population  health  in  Canada:  Issues  and  challenges  for   policy,  practice  and  research.  Canadian  Journal  of  Public  Health.  Revue  Canadienne  De  Santé  Publique,   90  Suppl  1,  S71.     Freudenberg,  N.,  Klitzman,  S.  and  Saegert,  S.  (2009)  Urban  Health  and  Society:  Interdisciplinary  Approaches   to  Research  and  Practice.  San  Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.   Friel,  S.,  Akerman,  M.,  Hancock,  T.,  Kumaresan,  J.,  Marmot,  M.,  Melin,  T.,(2011).  Addressing  the  social  and   environmental  determinants  of  urban  health  equity:  Evidence  for  action  and  a  research  agenda.  Journal   of  Urban  Health,  88(5),  860-874.     Frumkin,  H.  (2005).  Health,  equity  and  the  built  environment.  Environmental  Health  Perspectives  113:  A290- 91.   Gamm,  L.  D.,  Rogers,  J.  H.,  &  Work,  F.  (1998).  Advancing  community  health  through  community  health   partnerships  /  practitioner  response.  Journal  of  Healthcare  Management,  43(1),  51-66;  discussion  66-7.     Gardner  B,  Lalani  N,  Plamadeala  C.  Comprehensive  community  initiatives:  lessons  learned,  potential  and   opportunities  moving  forward.  Toronto:  Wellesley  Institute;  2010.   Geneau,  R.,  WHO  Collaborating  Centre  on  Chronic  Non  Communicable  Disease  Policy,  &  Public  Health   Agency  of  Canada.  (2009).  Mobilizing  intersectoral  action  to  promote  health:  The  case  of  ActNowBC  in   British  Columbia,  Canada.   Geronimus,  A.  T.  (2000)  To  mitigate,  resist,  or  undo:  Addressing  structural  influences  on  the  health  of  urban   populations.  American  Journal  of  Public  Health  90:  867--72.   Gieryn,  T.  (2000)  A  place  for  space  in  sociology.  Annual  Review  of  Sociology  26:  463-96.   Graham,  S.  and  Healey,  P.  (1999)  Relational  concepts  of  space  and  place:  Issues  for  planning  theory  and   practice.  European  Planning  Studies  7:  623-46.   Gray,  B.  (1985).  Conditions  facilitating  interorganizational  collaboration.  Human  Relations,  38(10),  911-936.     Green,  G.  (2012).  Intersectoral  planning  for  city  health  development.  Journal  of  Urban  Health  :  Bulletin  of   the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine,  89(2),  247-257.     Green,  G.,  Price,  C.,  Lipp,  A.,  &  Priestley,  R.  (2009).  Partnership  structures  in  the  WHO  European  healthy   cities  project.  Health  Promotion  International,  24  Suppl  1,  i37.     Hancock,  T.  and  Duhl,  L.  (1988)  Promoting  Health  in  the  Urban  Context.  World  Health  Organization,  Healthy   Cities  Papers.  Copenhagen:  FADL  Publishers.   Healey,  P.  (1999)  Institutionalist  analysis,  communicative  planning  and  shaping  places.  Journal  of  Planning   and  Environment  Research  19  (2):  111-22.  

43  

  
Healey,  P.  (2007)  Urban  Complexity  and  Spatial  Strategies:  Towards  a  Relational  Planning  for  Our  Times.   London:  Routledge.   Health  Development  Agency.  (2003)  Partnership  Working:  a  Consumer  Guide  to  Resources.  Health   Development  Agency,  London.   Hoeijmakers,  M.,  De  Leeuw,  E.,  Kenis,  P.,  &  De  Vries,  N.  K.  (2007).  Local  health  policy  development  processes   in  the  Netherlands:  An  expanded  toolbox  for  health  promotion.  Health  Promotion  International,  22(2),   112-121.     Hunter,  B.  D.,  Neiger,  B.,  &  West,  J.  (2011).  The  importance  of  addressing  social  determinants  of  health  at   the  local  level:  The  case  for  social  capital.  Health  &  Social  Care  in  the  Community,  19(5),  522-530.     Institute  of  Population  and  Public  Health  (Canada),  &  Canadian  Population  Health  Initiative.  (2011).   Population  health  intervention  research  casebook     Boydell,  L.  (2007).  Partnerships:  A  Literature  Review.  Dublin:  Institute  of  Public  Health  in  Ireland.   Intersectoral  collaboration  workshop  featuring  the  cloverleaf  model  for  success  -  a  toolkit  for  intersectoral   action  workshop  proceedings  (br).  2003.     Isaacs,  R.  (1948).  The  neighbourhood  unit  is  an  instrument  of  segregation.  Journal  of  Housing  5:  215-19.   Jackson,  J.B.  (1984)  Discovering  the  Vernacular  Landscape.  New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press.   Jacobs,  D.  E.,  Wilson,  J.,  Dixon,  S.  L.,  Smith,  J.,  &  Evens,  A.  (2009).  The  relationship  of  housing  and  population   health:  A  30-year  retrospective  analysis.  Environmental  Health  Perspectives,  117(4),  597-604.     Jasanoff,  S.  (2004)  The  idiom  of  co-production.  In  Jasanoff,  S.  Ed  States  of  Knowledge:  The  Co-production  of   Science  and  Social  Order.  London:  Routledge,  1-45.   Jones,  J.,  &  Barry,  M.  M.  (2011).  Exploring  the  relationship  between  synergy  and  partnership  functioning   factors  in  health  promotion  partnerships.  Health  Promotion  International,  26(4),  408-420.     Karpati,  A.  (2004)  Assistant  Commissioner,  Brooklyn  District  Public  Health  Office.  Testimony  before  New   York  State  Assembly  Committee  on  Health  and  the  Black,  Puerto  Rican  and  Hispanic  Legislative  Caucus.   April  22.  Division  of  Health  Promotion  and  Disease  Prevention,  New  York  City  Department  of  Health  and   Mental  Hygiene.  Assembly  Hearing  Room,  New  York,  New  York.   Http://wwww.nyc..gov/html/dohhtml/public/testi/testi20040422.html.   Koh,  H.  K.,  Oppenheimer,  S.  C.,  Massin-Short,  S.  B.,  Emmons,  K.  M.,  Geller,  A.  C.,  &  Viswanath,  K.  (2010).   Translating  research  evidence  into  practice  to  reduce  health  disparities:  A  social  determinants   approach.  American  Journal  of  Public  Health,  100(S1),  S72-S80.     Kumar,  S.,  &  Preetha,  G.  (2012).  Health  promotion:  An  effective  tool  for  global  health.  Indian  Journal  of   Community  Medicine  :  Official  Publication  of  Indian  Association  of  Preventive  &  Social  Medicine,  37(1),   5.    

44  

  
Krieger,  N.  (2001)  Theories  of  social  epidemiology  for  the  21st  century;  An  ecosocial  perspective.   International  Journal  of  Epidemiology  30:  668-77.   Krieger,  N.  (2008)  Proximal,  distal  and  the  politics  of  causation:  What's  level  got  to  do  with  it?  American   Journal  of  Public  Health  98:  221:30.   de  Leeuw,  E.  (2013).  Evaluating  WHO  healthy  cities  in  Europe:  Issues  and  perspectives.  Journal  of  Urban   Health,  90,  14-22.     Lawrence,  D.  P.(2003)  Environmental  Impact  Assessment:  Practical  Solutions  to  Recurrent  Problems.  New   York:  Wiley  Interscience.   Lipp,  A.,  Winters,  T.,  &  Leeuw,  E.  (2013).  Evaluation  of  partnership  working  in  cities  in  phase  IV  of  the  WHO   healthy  cities  network.  Journal  of  Urban  Health,  90,  37-51.     Link,  B.  and  Phelan,  J.(2000)  Evaluating  the  fundamental  cause  explanation  for  social  disparities  in  health.  In   Bird,  C.,  Conrad,  P.  And  Fremont,  A.  Eds  The  Handbook  of  Medical  Sociology,  5th  ed.  Upper  Saddle   River,  NJ:  Prentice  Hall,  33-46.   Macintyre,  S.,  Ellaway,  A.,  &  Cummins,  S.  (2002).  Place  effects  on  health:  How  can  we  conceptualise,   operationalise  and  measure  them?  Social  Science  and  Medicine,  55(1),  125-139.     Marsh,  B.  (1909).  An  Introduction  to  City  Planning:  Democracy's  Challenge  to  the  American  City.  New  York:   Committee  on  Congestion  of  Population  in  New  York.  New  York.   McNickle,  L.  (2004).  Health  care  meets  housing  in  symbiotic  partnerships.  Journal  of  Housing  and   Community  Development,  61(5),  24-29.     Metcalfe,  O.,  &  Higgins,  C.  (2009).  Healthy  public  policy--is  health  impact  assessment  the  cornerstone?   Public  Health,  123(4),  296-301.     Metcalfe,  O.,  &  Higgins,  C.  (2009).  Healthy  public  policy--is  health  impact  assessment  the  cornerstone?   Public  Health,  123(4),  296-301.     Mohl,  R.A.  (2000)  Planned  destruction:  The  interstates  and  central  city  housing.  In  Bauman,  J.F.  Biles,  R.  And   Szylvian,  K.mM.,  eds.  ,  From  Tenements  to  the  Taylor  Homes:  IN  Search  of  an  Urban  Housing  Policy  in   20th  Century  America.  University  Park:  Pennsylvania  State  University  Press,  226-45.   Northridge,  M.  E.,  &  Freeman,  L.  (2011).  Urban  planning  and  health  equity.  Journal  of  Urban  Health,  88(3),   582-597.     Partnerships  analysis  tool:  For  partners  in  health  promotion.  (2004).  ().  Melbourne,  Australia:  VicHealth.     Paul-Sen  Gupta,  R.  (2005).  Intersectoral  collaboration  for  health:  The  student  health  initiative.  (M.Sc.,   University  of  Alberta  (Canada)).  ProQuest  Dissertations  and  Theses,  .  (305382399).     Peel  Public  Health  (2012).  Changing  Course:  Creating  Supportive  Environments  for  Healthy  Living.    

45  

  
Peterson,  J.  (2003)  The  Birth  of  City  Planning  in  the  United  States,  1840-1917.  Baltimore:  Johns  Hopkins   University  Press.   Pilkington,  P.,  Grant,  M.,  &  Orme,  J.  (2008).  Promoting  integration  of  the  health  and  built  environment   agendas  through  a  workforce  development  initiative.  Public  Health,  122(6),  545-551.     Raphael,  D.  (2006)  Social  determinants  of  health:  Present  status,  unresolved  questions,  and  future   directions.  International  Journal  of  Health  Services  36:  651-77.   Region  of  Peel  (2013).  Peel  Official  Plan.     Rittel,  H.  and  Webber,  M.  (1984).Dilemmas  in  a  General  Theory  of  Planning.  Policy  Sciences  4  135-144.   Rosen,  G.  (1971)  The  first  neighborhood  health  center  movement  -  Its  rise  and  fall.  American  Journal  of   Public  Health  61:  1620-37.   Rosenberg,  M.  W.,  &  Wilson,  K.  (2001).  Exploring  the  links  between  health  and  housing:  The  limitations  of   population  health  surveys.  Geojournal,  53(2),  109-116.     Rosekrantz,  B.  (1972)  Public  Health  and  the  State:  Changing  Views  in  Massachusetts,  1842-1936.  Cambridge:   Harvard  University  Press.   Webster,  P.,  &  Sanderson,  D.  (2013).  Healthy  cities  Indicators--A  suitable  instrument  to  measure   health?  Journal  of  Urban  Health,  90,  52-61.     Wellesley  Institute  (May  2013).  Between  Health  and  Place:  Understanding  the  Built  Environment.  Retrieved   from:  http://www.wellesleyinstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Between-Health-and-Place.pdf   Wholey,  J.  (1996).  Formative  and  summative  evaluation:  Related  issues  in  performance   measurement.  American  Journal  of  Evaluation,  17(2),  145-149.     Whyte,  W.  H.  (1980)  The  Social  Life  of  Small  Urban  Spaces.  New  York:  Conservation  Foundation.   Wilkinson,  R.  G.  (1996)  Unhealthy  Societies:  The  Afflictions  of  Inequality.  London:  Routledge.   W.K.  Kellogg  Foundation  (2004).  Using  Logic  Models  to  Bring  Together  Planning,  Evaluation,  and  Action:   Logic  Model  Development  Guide.     World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  (2008)  Closing  the  Gap  in  a  Generation:  Health  Equity  through  Action  on   the  Social  Determinants  of  Health.  Final  report  of  the  Commission  on  Social  Determinants  of  Health.   Geneva:  WHO.  Retrieved  from:  www.who.int/social_determinants/final_report/en/index.html.   Yin,  R.  K.  (2009).  Case  study  research:  Design  and  methods  (4th  ed.  ed.).  Los  Angeles,  Calif.:  Sage   Publications.     Young,  T.K.  (2006)  Population  Health:  Concepts  and  Methods.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press.        

46  


