Recognizing the Centrality of Cultural Diversity and Racial Equity: Beginning a Discussion and Critical Reflection on Developmentally Appropriate Practice
Judith K. Bernhard
Ryerson University

Janet Gonzalez-Mena
Napa Valley College

Hedy Nai-Lin Chang
California Tomorrow

Michael O'Loughlin
Hofstra University

Costanza Eggers-Pierola
Wheelock College

digital.library.ryerson.ca/object/3

Please Cite: Bernhard, J. K., Gonzalez-Mena, J., Chang, H. N., O'Loughlin, M, EggersPierola, C., Roberts Fiati, G., & Corson, P. (1998). Recognizing the centrality of cultural diversity and racial equity: Beginning a discussion and critical reflection on developmentally appropriate practice. Canadian Journal of Research in Early Childhood Education, 7(1), 81-90.

library.ryerson.ca

Recognizing the centrality of cultural diversity and racial equity: Beginning a discussion and critical reflection on Developmentally Appropriate Practice
Judith K. Bernhard Ryerson Polytechnic University Janet Gonzalez-Mena Napa Valley College, US Hedy Nai-Lin Chang California Tomorrow, US Michael 0' Loughlin Hofstra University Costanza Eggers-Pierola Wheelock College Gloria Roberts Fiati and Patricia Corson Ryerson Polytechnic University
Child care standards in both the United States and Canada are in large measure based upon those set out in the document of the National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) entitled Developmentally Appropriate Practice in early childhood education programs (DAP; Bredekamp & Copple, 1997). This document is intended for "administrators, teachers, parents, policy makers, and others who make decisions about the care and education of young children" (p. 3). The principles ofDAP and their alleged knowledge base shape the ways child care is delivered in North America in broad areas from legislation to teacher training to teacher-child interaction. The revised edition of this document (1997) is motivated, in part, by a recognition of the increasing cultural, racial, and linguistic diversity in the child and family population. The previous edition (Bredekamp, 1987) had discussed cultural context as part of individual differences but did not focus on the effects of context.

Acknowledgments. This manuscript was written while the first author was working under the support of a research grantfrom the Social Science and Humanities Research Council ofCanada. An earlier version ofthis paper was presented at the 1998 Reconceptualizing Early Childhood Education conference in Honolulu. We thank Ryerson Polytechnic University for providing this travel grant and the conference participants for their valuable feedback. We wish to acknowledge the helpful suggestions of three anonymous reviewers and our colleagues Harold White, Inttsar Shareef, Sally Lubeck, June Pollard, and David Corson. We also appreciate the willingness of Sue Bredekamp and Carol Brunson Phillips to discuss our reaction to the revised DAP. Correspondence should be addressed to : Judith K. Bernhard, School of Early Childhood Education, Ryerson Polytechnic University. 350 Victoria St.· Toronto. Ontario. Canada. M5B 2K3. Electronic mail may be sent via internet to [jbernhar@acs.ryerson.caJ.


