ELEMENTS OF SUSTAINABLE CANADIAN FOOD CONSUMPTION: MEASURING SELF-SUFFICIENCY.

by
Charles C. Sule Bachelor of Science - Environmental Science, Royal Roads University

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master's of Applied Science in Environmental Applied Science and Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009

Е Charles C. Sule 2009

PRC~t~Y Cf HVHl:;or~ t.:NIVL'fiiU1Y U~Arrf

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Charles C. Sule

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Charles C. Sule

11

Abstract Elements of Sustainable Canadian Food Consumption: Measuring Self-sufficiency. Charles C. Sule B.sc. M.A.5c. Environmental Applied Science and Management Ryerson University 2009

One aspect of sustainable agricultural development in industrialized nations is a move towards national self-sufficiency in food production. A self-sufficiency indicator (551) that complements the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development's driving force-state-response framework on which Canada's agrienvironmental indicators are based is proposed and demonstrated. A 2001 survey of Canadian household food consumption is analysed to estimate the areal measure of land required for its satisfaction exclusively by domestically produced primary agriculture. Canada is self-sufficient in field crops, which reflects its comparative advantage on the global market. The nation would require about five times the area currently under cultivation to be self-sufficient in fruit production. Vegetables consumed domestically account for just under half the area under cultivation.

111

Acknowledgments Thanks to Dr. Michal Bardecki for his critique and encouragement. Thanks to Dr. Ron Pushchak, whose door was always open as promised. Thanks to Dr. Mustafa KoC; for his thorough review and helpful additions. Thanks to Dr. Andrew Laursen for kindly chairing my defence committee.

IV

Dedication For my mother, Joan Sule, and my sister, Joanne Christopher, for supporting me through this; to my partner Christine Rahim, for her encouragement and for living with me through it; but especially for my son, Alexandre Sule, for providing the reason for all I do.

v

Table of Contents Section Author's declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Dedication List of tables list of figures List of acronyms 1.0 Introduction 1.1 Human carrying capacity 1.2 Dedication to surplus 1.3 Connecting Canadians to their land 1.4 Self-sufficiency is sustainable 2.0 Introduction to literature review 2.1 Sustainable agriculture defined 2.2 Approaches to sustainability 2.3 Sustainability frameworks 2.4 Sustainability indicators 3.0 Introduction to methods 3.1 Reconciling quantities in the FES 3.1.1 Meat (including poultry) 3.1.2 Fish and other marine products 3.1.3 Dairy products and eggs 3.1.4 Bakery and other cereal products 3.1.5 Fruit and nuts 3.1.6 Vegetables 3.1.7 Margarine, fats, and oils 3.1.8 Area for animal feed requirements 3.2 calculation of areas required to support 2001 consumption. Page ii iii iv v viii xiii xiv 01 09 12 20 23 25 25 29 36 40 59 63 63 75 77 84 99 112 122 126 131

VI

Section 4.0 Results and discussion

Page

135 135
142

4.1 The areas of Canadian self-sufficiency 4.2 Inclusiveness of results 5.0 Conclusions
References Appendix 1

145
149 167

Vll

List of Tables Table 1.1 Indicator groups, AEIs and AEls in use by AAFC. Page 22

3.1 The approximate yteld of typical cuts of beef from a dressed carcass. 64 3.2 Share of listed categories supplied by ground beef. 3.3 Ground beef allocation table. 3.4 Allocation of ground beef to specific cuts. 3.5 Calculation of required slaughter cattle. 3.6 Calculation of required slaughter calves. 3.7 The yield of typical cuts of pork from a cold trimmed carcass. 3.8 Share of selected categories added to pork cuts. 3.9 Share of selected categories added to pork shoulder cuts. 3.10 Share of ham categories added to pork leg cuts. 3.11 Share of bacon added to pork loin and belly cuts. 3.12 Calculation of required slaughter pigs. 3.13 Share of listed categories added to lamb and mutton. 3.14 Calculation of required slaughter sheep. 3.15 Percent share of chicken production and average dressed weight. 3.16 Share of listed categories added to chickens. 3.17 Calculation of required slaughter chickens. 3.18 Share of listed categories added to turkeys. 3.19 Calculation of required slaughter turkeys. 3.20 Calculation of required farmed fish. 3.21 Calculation of milk volume required to supply butter. 3.22 Relationship between milk quantity and cheese yield. 3.23 Calculation of milk required to supply cheese consumption. 66 66 66 67 68 68 69 69 70 70 70 71 71 73 73 73 74 74 76 79 81 81

Vlll

3.24 Calculation of milk required to supply evaporated milk consumption. 82 3.25 Calculation of total milk and the animals required for its supply. 3.26 Calculation of eggs and the chickens required for their supply. 3.27 Comparison of contributions of ingredients in bread. 3.28 Calculation of the mass of rolls from initial FES numerical quantity. 3.29 Comparison of contributions of ingredients in various rolls. 3.30 Comparison of contributions of ingredients in crackers. 3.31 Ingredients in muffins and calculation of conversion factor. 3.32 Comparison of contributions of ingredients in pasta. 3.33 Calculation of mass of pasta from canned volume. 3.34 Total mass of pasta. 3.35 Calculation of wheat required for bread, rolls, crackers and pasta. 3.36 Calculation of production proportions for cereals, 2001. 3.37 Calculation for rice as Canadian-grown grain. 3.38 Calculation of wheat required to supply flour. 3.39 Calculation for flour as Canadian-grown grain. 3.40 Calculation of the average moisture content for breakfast cereals. 3.41 Calculation of grain required for breakfast cereal consumption. 3.42 Calculation for breakfast cereals as Canadian-grown grain. 3.43 Calculation of per unit mass for selected fruits. 3.44 Calculation of per unit mass for melons. 82 83 88 88 89 90 91 93 94 94 94 95 96 96 97 97 98 98 99 100

3.45 Calculation of the mass of fruits from initial FES numerical quantities. 101 3.46 Mass of fruit as raisins and dried fruits. 3.47 Calculation of mass of fruit required to make fruit juice. 103 104

3.48 Calculation of starting mass of fruit to make concentrated fruit juice. 105 3.49 Canned fruits consumed and m/v ratio. 3.50 Other canned fruits, m/v ratio and mean of the ratio. 105 106

IX

Table 3.51 Mass of fruit required to provide the initial canned volume. 3.52 Mass of fruit required to manufacture the volume of jam, jelly, other preserves and fruit pie filling. 3.53 Calculation of production proportions for fruit, 2001. 3.54 Masses of domestic fruits substituting for bananas and citrus fruit. 3.55 Masses of domestic fruits substituting for other fresh fruit, other tropical fruit and frozen fruit. 3.56 Masses of domestic fruits substituting for dried fruit, imported fruits for juice and imported fruit for concentrated juice. 3.57 Masses of domestic fruits substituting for dried fruit, imported fruits for juice and imported fruit for concentrated juice. 3.58 Calculation of per unit mass for selected vegetables. 3.59 Calculation of mass of vegetables from FES numerical quantities. 3.60 Mass of vegetables required for frozen vegetables.

Page 107

108 109 109

110

111

111 112 113 114

3.61 Mass of vegetables from dried potatoes and other dried vegetables. 115 3.62 Canned vegetables consumed and mass/volume ratio. 3.63 Mass of vegetables required to provide the initial canned volume. 3.64 Calculation of mass of vegetables required to make an initial volume of juice. 3.65 Calculation of starting mass of vegetables from an initial volume of pickles. 3.66 Calculation of production proportions for vegetables, 2001. 3.67 Masses of domestic vegetables substituting for other leaf and stalk vegetables, other seed and gourd vegetables, and other root vegetables. 120 118 119 117 116 117

x

Table 3.68 Masses of domestic vegetables substituting for other canned vegetables, other frozen vegetables, and other dried vegetables. 3.69 Masses of domestic vegetables substituting for other vegetable juice and pickles. 3.70 Calculation of oil density. 3.71 Calculation of extraction rate for vegetable oil. 3.72 Volume of oil from initial mass of margarine and shortening. 3.73 Calculation of masses of oi/seeds from oil volumes. 3.74 Calculation of production proportions for oilseeds, 2001. 3.75 Masses of domestic oil crops used in the manufacture cooking/salad oil and margarine. 3.76 Barley, corn, and wheat grown to support 2001 Canadian meat, dairy and fish consumption .. 3.77 Mixed grain and oats grown to support 2001 Canadian meat, dairy and fish consumption. 3.78 Legumes and canola grown to support 2001 Canadian meat, dairy and fish consumption. 3.79 Calculation of mass of canola and soybeans required to supply animal feed meal. 3.80 Hay, pasture and silage required to support 2001 Canadian meat and dairy consumption. 3.81 Calculation of production proportions for silage crops, 2001. 3.82 Distribution of production required for silage crops. 3.83 Final area calculations for 2001 consumption of cereals, legumes and oilseeds. 3.84 Final area calculations for 2001 fruit consumption. 3.85 Final area calculations for 2001 vegetable consumption.
xi

121

122 124 124 124 125 125

127

128

128

128

129

130 131 131

132 133 134

Table 4.1 Final areas for cereals, legumes and oil seeds, 2001. 4.2 Final areas for fruits, 2001. 4.3 Final areas for vegetables, 2001. 4.4 Masses and volumes accounted by the 55!.

Page

135 139
142 143

xu

List of Figures Figure
1.1 Supply of dependable agricultural land.

Page
11

2.1 Driving force-outcome-response framework framing Canada's AEI.

39

Xlll

List of abbreviations AAFC - Agriculture and agri-food Canada AEI - Agri-environmental indicator[s] CC - Carrying capacity CTW - Cold trimmed 'weight DCW - Dressed carcass weight DOJC - Department of Justice Canada DSR - Driving force-state-response EF - Ecological footprint FAO - Food and Agriculture Organization FES - Food expenditure survey, specifically for the year 2001 LQI - Land quality indicators MPC - Manitoba Pork Council NASS - National Agricultural Statistics Service NPP - Net primary productivity OECD - Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development SD - Sustainable development SSI - Self-sufficiency indicator USDA - United States Department of Agriculture WCED - World Commission on Environment and Development

XIV

1.0 Introduction
Canadian people generally want to act in an environmentally responsible manner (Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada [AAFC] , 2007) and more specifically have supported efforts, legislation and treaties to reduce the environmental costs of food production, both domestically and internationally (Lefebvre, 2005: 2). However, when there is no discernable impact on their local environment, people are less likely to modify their personal behaviour (Blake, 2001: 712). This has particular significance for the agricultural sector given its broad impact on the environment (Tilman, Cassman, Matson, Naylor & Polasky, 2002: 671) and the degree of urbanization in Canada (Statistics Canada [StatsCan], 2003a), in that consumers living away from farms cannot connect their eating habits with the environmental pressures posed by the production of their food. While anecdotal evidence exists that people are becoming aware their consumption choices affect the environmental sustainability of agriculture, for instance as suggested by the growing organic and local food movements (Junkins, Clark, MacGregor & McRae, 2005: 20), there is a lack of studies speCifically connecting the two.

It is therefore proposed that a characterization of the sustainability of the
agricultural-food (agri-food) system of Canada from the perspective of consumer demand be carried out in a way that is understandable and usable by producers, governments, institutions, non-governmental organizations, and consumers themselves. Establishing clear links between household food demand and the national food supply has already been proposed as a means of more firmly

- 1-

determining the susti;linability of food consumption (Duchin, 2005: 103). However, simply disaggregating Canadian food consumption into the constituent crops required to supply it cannot be translated easily into environmental impacts, since not all food Canadians eat can be produced in the country. The Canadian government, through AAFC, has set as a priority integrating sustainability concepts into agricultural practice and agri-food policy. While acknowledging rising global demand for food and arguing producers should continue trying to capture an ever-greater share, the government at the same time recognizes the uncertain long-term environmental impacts in doing so (Junkins et aI., 2005: 19; Lefebvre, 2005: 2). Finding the conceptual area of Canadian land required to supply an amount equivalent to the domestic consumption of foodstuffs adds depth to assessments of sustainability because the ability of a society to continue is Ultimately dependant on the self-sufficiency of the food supply, not only globally, but also nationally (Douglass, 1984: 6; Smit
& Smithers, 1993: 510). Restated, self-sufficiency is a measure of food security,

as has been recognized in the Canadian context for a considerable period of time (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 223; Pierce & Furuseth, 1986: 16). Measuring the ratio of the area of land under cultivation to the area required to furnish domestic demand for each major category of food is therefore an indicator of agricultural sustainability and food security. Of course, this is not to suggest that the nation should ignore the economic benefits of global trade, any comparative advantage possessed, and plant physiologies in a sudden

-2-

attempt to fulfill, for example, an ideological agenda. Sustainability strategies should not require shocking overhauls of society or force people to act against their self-interest (Robert, Daly, Hawken, & Holmberg, 1997: 80).

If sustainability essentially means not importing environmental goods and
services in excess of our own supply or exporting wastes beyond the absorptive capacity of the domestic environment, as has been well-argued (Wackernage/ & Rees, 1996: 54-55), yet the ability to fully comprehend the impact of our consumption decisions is hampered by a lack of information (Kissinger & Rees, 2009: 2314), a gauge of the environmental load posed by domestic agri-food demand could provide the conceptual bridge that influences producer and consumer behaviour. Although AAFC states "appropriate expectations" (Lefebvre, 2005: 3) of methods for tracking the environmental performance of the agricultural system include making scientific data accessible to the public and using the information to highlight the environmental impacts of the agri-food system to elicit behavioural change, their subsequent methodology focuses heavily on tracking environmental performance with respect to macroeconomic policy and strategy, and global trade (Lefebvre, 2005: 3-4; Junkins et aI., 2005: 20). There does not appear to be a clear strategy for meeting the above-noted ex pectations. The choice of data collected by AAFC to measure impacts to the ecosystems providing services for and receiving waste and bi-products from agriculture is intended to weigh environmental loading. Since Canadian agri-food

-3-

producers and processers "are being urged to maintain acceptable levels of stewardship" (Lefebvre, 2005: 2), the real effect may be to highlight problems caused by certain production practices so that domestic farmers produce crops with lower impacts while those products associated with greater impacts are grown at a distance and imported. Interpretation of the data in this way thus causes a, albeit unintended, prescriptive effect. Further, the more Canada's agrifood system becomes integrated with the global system, the more complicated analyses of food sufficiency become (Smit & Smithers, 1993: 510). The introduction of counteracting data linking domestic demand and supply can provide justification for the economic internalization of some environmental impacts and avoid the justification for substitution. In addition, domestic consumption disaggregated into domestically-producible commodities offers a source of innovation in agronomic practices like intercropping and integrated pest management by illuminating choices from lists of candidate crops (e.g. Boivin, Grimard & Olivier, 2005: 86, table 12-2). Determining domestic food selfsufficiency in this way provides a direct connection between the social and environmental parameters of agricultural sustainability. Relying on production and trade data to calculate residual domestic consumption quantities as is now the case (StatsCan, 2008a) masks the myriad sources that supply the globalized agri-food chain (Opara, 2003: 102) and thus also renders the overall blurred. environmental the sustainability of Canadian food

consumption

Measuring

environmental

impact of Canada's

-4-

agricultural production assesses its contribution to the global total, but does not suggest the fraction posed by its citizen's demand. That Canada's contribution to the global food system is produced in ways that increasingly preserve the environment and conserve natural resources is laudable, but continuing integration with that increasingly complex system at the expense of selfsufficiency may leave Canadians vulnerable in hidden ways and thus negatively impact economic sustainability (AAFC, 1997: 7; Lefebvre, 2005: 2). Assessing the lifecycles of all the imported fresh and processed foods in the Canadian diet in order to assess the ecological cost is a daunting task (Graedel & Allenby, 2003: 183-196). The rationale for augmenting supply-side assessments of the sustainability of agriculture with demand-side characterization can be explained in this way:
y

From the beginning societies have sought, as a general rule, to continually increase food production (Altieri, Letourneau & Davis, 1984: 175); this has either been to support an increasing population or has spurred and supported subsequent population growth. This trend continues today.

y

Nonetheless, as has been globally recognized for well over 25 years (Caldwell, 1984: 307), sustainability demands limits to growth in a finite world. This is even more critical to an industry heavily reliant on scarce finite resources like soil, petro-chemicals, mineral fertilizers, and fossil fuels.

-5-

~

All humans have similar, basic energy and nutrition requirements of food (Food and Agriculture Organization [FAD], 2001) and the ostensible purpose of an agri-food system is to satisfy those needs.

~

In a free-market economy a strong gauge of people's preference is consumer demand. However, under increasingly liberalized

international trade, demand is influenced by the ever-larger choices available to the Canadian consumer. The often bewildering array of origins, even of the ingredients in an individual product, may defeat attempts to educate consumers about the environmental impact of their purchasing decisions. There are thus two sides to the environmental impact of food: the sustainability of bulk production, which is relatable to large-scale assessment, intercession and guidance, and that of the consumer, whose capacity to relate to environmental effects may be nearer to arms-length and whose ability to react or create influence is therefore limited. Of course modern agri-food systems have been extenSively analyzed for their effects on the environment. In a review of the practices that have allowed agricultural production to double since about 1960, David Tilman (1999: 5995) noted that four grains, rice, corn, barley and wheat, annuals once considered comparatively rare, now occupy almost 40% of agricultural land and have "become the dominant plants on earth." He determined this came with an rise in nitrogen application by a factor of almost 7 and in phosphorus fertilization by

\

-6-

almost 3.5 times (Tilman, 1999: 5996) that has polluted terrestrial and aquatic systems and contaminated groundwater (Tilman et aI., 2002: 672). Pesticide use associated with intensive agriculture bioaccumulates and persists in the abiotic environment, while at the same time selecting for resistance amongst the pests they are designed to kill. Microbial resistance to the antibiotics used routinely in modern animal husbandry poses a risk to humans then exposed to less-treatable strains of diseases (Tilman et aI., 2002: 672). Natural land converted to agricultural use shows reduced biodiversity, although agroecosystems may still be more diverse than urban ecosystems (McRae, Smith & Gregorich, 2000: 15). In Canada, efforts to include such environmental impacts into the agriculture industry's monitoring framework began in 1993 and mimicked the driving force-state-response (DSR) model developed by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) that was adopted for

international work linking food production to the environment (FAD, 1997; McRae et aI., 2000). Once AAFC was directed to incorporate sustainable development principles and practices into its own management system and the way it oversees the wider industry, it generated guidance documents to provide a strategy to integrate environmental issues with economic and social interests, and suggested criteria under which environmental impacts might be assessed (AAFC, 1997: 1, 13). After criteria are established, related data are collected representing trends in environmental performance that respond to changes in policy, support and guidance, or behaviour; because of this responsiveness,

-7-

these data are called indicators. McRae and colleagues oversaw the initial agroecosystem indicator (AEI) development and a first series of results (2000). Subsequent work expands and further operationalizes the AEI, then reports results that supplant those of the first effort (Lefebvre, Eilers, & Chunn, 2005; Lefebvre, 2005: 6). The groundbreaking Canadian work takes the perspective of farmers and agri-food producers (McRae et aI., 2000: vii) and the "policy challenge," as they see it, is to set environmental, social and economic benefits at an "optimal and sustainable" level (McRae, et aI., 2000: 1). The term "optimal" is given no immediate context by McRae and co-workers, but it suggests an attempt to assuage producers who fear their economic rights will not be respected through the imposition of environmental monitoring and controls. To that end, there is recognition later that farmers are not directly compensated for conserving environmental benefits or taking steps to manage risks (Lefebvre, 2005: 20). Also, economic and environmental optimization occurs, for example, when fertilizer or pesticide is applied such that the greatest yield is realized with the least unintended effects (Le. nutrient run-off or pesticide overspray) (Koroluk, Piau, Grimard, Bourque & Korol, 2005: 56, 58). The second AAFC report explicitly models its definition of sustainable development after the growth-oriented one of the UN's Brundtland Commission, and states the sustainability of agriculture is a "key aspect" of any such development (Lefebvre, 2005: 2; WCED, 1987: 8).

-8-

This salutatory section will be followed immediately with a discussion of human carrying capacity and its relationship to land area, thereafter by an overview of agricultural development that illustrates the historical supply-side focus, the global distribution of land resources and advances in yield growth. More depth will be added to the discussion of the agri-environmental indicators before concluding with an introduction to the study methodology and an outline of the remaining work.

1.1 Human carrying capacity
Carrying capacity can be defined basically as the largest animal populations that can be supported by the resources of a given area without ruinous deterioration of the environment (Chambers, Simmons & Wackernagel, 2000: 46). When applied to modern humans, carrying capacity can be

interpreted as a demand on the land base and has been expressed in a variety of ways. One simple yet useful method for determining carrying capacity is per capita arable land available for grain production, since most of the world derives nutrition largely from that source (Kendall and Pimentel, 1994: 199) and this is unlikely to change in the "foreseeable future" (Cassman, 1999: 5952). Such an approach can be expanded to include a qualitative assessment of available land, for example, as determined in the Canada Lands Inventory (CLI) classification system (AAFC, 2008a) or to illustrate the unsustainability of discrete populations, for example, dense urban centres that require far more food than the adjacent

-9-

farmlands can provide (Wackernagel & Rees, 1996: 86-88). Another way to broaden this approach to is to include a greater variety of foodstuffs. Such a broad scheme fits into one of six categories of methods Cohen identified as being suitable to calculate human carrying capacity (199Sa: 343). Ultimately, a direct characterization of the relationship between crop area and people describes human carrying capacity in one of the most tangible ways since people must eat to survive. In the Canada the amount of dependable agricultural land, namely CLI classes 1, 2 and 3 lands has been in decline for some time, mostly as a result of urbanization (Hofmann, Filoso & Schofield, 2005: 10). These classes denote a range of limitations from none for the well-drained, deep soils of class 1, to some restrictions on crop choices and conservation practices for class 2, to the "moderately severe" restrictions that may tightly limit the choice of crops grown, "the timing and ease" of sowing, tillage, and harvesting, and conservation practices (AAFC, 2008a:
~lS-~17).

Figure 1.1 shows the relationship between

the supply of and demand for agricultural land in Canada for a 50-year period ending in 2001. Hofmann and colleagues noted that the excess cultivated land shown in figure 1.1 is being derived from marginal lands that suffer from

inter alia erosion,

slope problems and soil fertility deficiencies; in other words, limitations that are more than moderately severe (AAFC, 2008a: ~118-'121). This is, by their definition, unsustainable (Hofmann et aI., 2005: 9). To be clear, although Canada

- 10-

500 480
..l:I
C1I

~ - - - C- - ии D- - - -IJ и _ и Do
0

III C1I

-I:) и и

460 440 420 400 380 360 340
1951 1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981

. -...

" .....

:;:

.2

E

--a

...
c
0

C1I

C!I

III "0
(/)

c:r
C!I

:::J

:::J

J:: .....

i-=- .Available dependable agriculluralland
-t-Cultivated land
1986 1991 1996 2001

Figure 1.1: Supply of dependable agricultural land and demand for cultivated land in Canada. (Reproduced from: Hoffmann et aI., 2005: 10, figure 5). covers nearly 1 billion hectares of land and inland water (Niu & Proux, 2005: 24), the share of dependable farmland is as little as 5% and of prime class 1 land a tenth of that. Further, since over half of class 1 land is in Ontario alone, that class may be at higher risk of loss considering Ontario is experiencing most of canada's urban population growth (Government of Ontario, 2007:
~7, ~21;

Hofmann et aI., 2005: 5, table 1). Since in part climate and soil factors guide farmers' decisions as to what to plant, the loss of scarce land, soil types or nearby supporting natural ecosystems could translate into lost capacity to produce certain crops (Rostad & Padbury, 2005: 98). Therefore, ensuring the continuation of elements within the greater system ensures the maintenance of overall carrying capacity and contributes to global sustainability.

o

11

0

History is replete with examples of societies who tested the limits of their agri-environmental systems or were forced to rely on agricultural systems away from their populace. The record of possible outcomes upon reaching those situations is as interesting as it is varied and makes up the next section.

1.2 Dedication to surplus: the origin and development of agriculture.
Throughout the history of human agriculture there is evidence that maximizing production while optimizing labour has been the ultimate goal, regardless of the farmers' own needs for the products. An interaction of indeterminate origin! (Cohen, 1995b, 37) began even before humans first tended plots: some kind of semi-permanent agriculture caused population increases, which spurred agricultural need, leading to expansion and surplus, causing further population increases, spurring further need, expansion, surplus and so on. Eventually, trading and feeding imperialist armies added to and occasionally eclipsed domestic populations as the chief users of the surplus, but even colonialism (mainly, but not only, by European nations) can ultimately be ascribed to the need for more food. In modern times, seemingly altruistic notions of finally ending world hunger led to stunning leaps in productive capacity that coincided with still more dramatic leaps in population. Humans were likely already living in settlements year-round, or nearly so, when the practice of cultivating important plants, rather than gathering them,

I

In other words, a "(w)hich came first, chicken or egg?" situation (Cohen, 1995b: 36).

- 12 -

caught on some 10000 years ago (Smith, 1995: 51, 210). These early settlers already had extensive knowledge of the lifecycles of these plants and had developed successful methods and tools for collecting and processing the seeds (Smith, 1991: 14; Smith, 1995: 210), but had yet to face the population density pressures that made the effort of permanent agriculture worthwhile (Smith, 1991: 14). Although growth in human numbers most commonly caused density pressures, environmental perturbations had similar effects. In the Americas, for instance, the Altithermal period immediately following the last ice age was marked by a warming, drying climate that caused vegetation to vanish from historical areas along with the animals, including the Megafauna, that it fed. Thus a declining food supply for a constant population has a similar effect to that of a population growth rate that exceeds yield growth. The beginnings of agriculture in the New World can be traced to this time (Smith, 1991: 14-15). With the inception of settlement agriculture, humans began having some success at achieving constant food production. Early agricultural settlements were some 2 to 6 times larger than their non-agricultural contemporaries and agricultural economies were more affluent, for example, as evidenced by the larger houses. Proximate endogenously produced food also afforded early settlers the time to create an infrastructure that included food storage facilities and flood protection installations (Smith, 1995: 81).

It seems then that at least some early agrarian societies produced more
food than was required by the extant population. Within ancient agricultural

- 13-

catchments2 "the human drive to secure the greatest possible amount of food for the least possible labor [sic]" that contributed to the very domestication of plants (Helbaek, 1959: 365-366) likely also meant an early tendency for surpluses. Under these conditions population levels rose to meet and exceed food production, straining the sustainability of the system. To relate an example, the so-called Cradle of Civilization, in modern-day Iraq, rose from these first agricultural settlements (Braidwood, 1954: 41). The recounting of the end of these "Old Testament societies" traditionally blamed outside invasion, but newer evidence suggests a general collapse in soil tilth and the inability of the agricultural system to support the dependant population (Douglass, 1984: 3). In other cases production was increased to meet the needs of growing populations. In the first settlements around the Mediterranean Sea, people were clustered in river deltas. When people could no longer be fed from the deltaic farms, innovations beget terracing and other improvements, which increased yield to meet the growing demand (Semple, 1928: 62). As the Egyptian civilization gave way to the Roman Empire and more and more land was cleared of forests to make room for farmland, soil erosion compounded the problem of declining soil fertility, finally turning the North African granaries of the Roman Empire into desert and marginal land (Douglass, 1984: 3). Other places in the world had similar experiences. In ancient Sri Lanka, farmers invented a reservoir-based irrigation system that, combined with the

2 Notwithstanding obvious natural boundaries, some early nations were defined by the areas of their agricultural production, for example, Egypt in the 5 th century BCE (Semple, 1928: 66).

- 14-

vegetarian philosophy that accompanied Buddhism to the island in the

4th

century BCE, gave regular surpluses that allowed for a growing kingdom. The link between this system and its dependant population was so obvious that invaders from India attacked the water tanks in order to quell the people (Senanayake, 1984: 227). Indeed, Sri Lanka is possibly only now returning to population levels first experienced almost a thousand years ago (Senanayake, 1984: 227; United Nations Population Division, 2009). In pre-Columbian America too, Mayan centres succumbed to population pressures that badly eroded soils could no longer bear (Douglass, 1984: 3). As mentioned, evidence exists that climatic shifts, namely periods of drought, perhaps accompanied by abnormally warm or cool temperatures and lasting from a few decades to severa! centuries, contributed to the collapse of various societies by reduCing agricultural production and the availability of game and wild plants. Thus some societies grew to what were sustainable population and agricultural production levels under the given environmental conditions. When those conditions changed rapidly and radically the peoples' technical prowess was overwhelmed and the societies collapsed or were drastically reduced (Weiss & Bradley, 2001: 610). Contemporaneously with one such "forced regional abandonment" by the Anasazi peoples of their North American home in the 13th century CE as a result of an extended climate perturbation (Weiss & Bradley, 2001: 610), Old World peoples were beginning to understand the geographical extent of the Earth

- 15 -

(Osterhammel! 2005: 71). From about the 11th to the mid-13 th centuries! European populations rebounded at "unprecedented rates (Smith! 1991: 47) from losses suffered under the Roman Empire and the Dark Ages that followed (Smith! 1991: 38-42), while agricultural production "expanded greatly" as more lands were cleared for cultivation (Smith, 1991: 47). The dawn of European colonialism marked the beginning of massive imports of agricultural products that augmented the limits of local production (Pfeiffer, 2006: 6). In other words, people began to import carrying capacity, on which they became dependant for survival! rather than simply trading to add value to products through variety or rarity. In the 15th and 16th century! the voyages of European sailors were primarily exploratory ones also concerned with finding and obtaining spices. Many farm animals were slaughtered across Europe every fall owing to a consistent shortage of winter feed and the meat had to be preserved with salt and spices, the latter of which only grew in tropical countries (Parry, 1966: 32). Thus the initial journeys were dedicated to discovering and securing the origins of the important spices and mapping the most expeditious route by which to transport them home. Whenever the Europeans encountered other peoples, they found societies based on agriculture (Osterhammel, 2005: 73-74). In some instances! they found populous! long-standing centres of agricultural trade featuring products from distant lands; in others! they found relatively
ll

uninhabited lands. In both cases, when conquest was possible and desirable, the

- 16 -

colonizers forcibly seized the land and committed it to commercialized agriculture (Caldwell, 1984: 303; Osterhammel, 2005: 74). European overseas colonization was a relatively slow process, beginning with the American colonies in the early
lih

century3, then Australia in the 18th

and New Zealand in the 19 th centuries (Federico, 2005: 32). Throughout this time agriculture was economically paramount with respect to its contribution to national income, employment creation and generation of personal wealth (Cain & Hopkins, 2002: 66). The willingness of citizens to immigrate to these new lands and settle was driven by population pressures in their homelands. The migrations and the pace of land clearing for farms quickened over time, not only from Europe overseas, but also as a kind of regional colonization within Russia, Eastern Europe, South America and China, as internal populations reached critical levels and were forced to find new farmland (Federico, 2005: 32). As an example of how the rate of agricultural extensification quickened, the US began recording land area in farms in 1850 and up to that time 118 million hectares had been put under the plough. By the time the frontier was closed as the turn of the 19 th century approached, some 250 million hectares were being farmed (Federico, 2005: 32). Worldwide today there are well over 1.5 billion hectares committed to crops and cultivated trees (excluding those used for fuel, fibre and wood) and almost 3.5 billion hectares used as permanent pasture lands from the available 13 billion hectares. The remaining 50-60% of
The pace of North American migration did quicken however and Thomas Malthus (1766-1834) believed the immigration he was observing was the exponential growth that formed one of the pillars of his population theory (Seidl & Tisdell, 1999: 397).
3

- 17 -

the Earth is unusable for agriculture short of a stunning technological breakthrough or is forested (Federico, 2005: 5). That the limit of Canada's agricultural system with respect to land area has been reached was introduced on page 7; it has stabilized at about 67 million hectares for some time (Eilers & Hoffman, 2005: 43). That the limit has been reached should not be a shock, since increasing output has long been one of the "primary objective[s] of Canadian agricultural policy" (Junkins et aI., 2005: 20). Thus it can be seen that outgrowing lands, soil fertility problems, rising demands of growing populations, and effects of changing climate that can be observed in the world today have all been faced by farmers since the first seeds were sown. In sum, section 1.2 has shown that while the chief goal of agriculture has, or course, always been to provide adequate food, the means to that end has seemingly always involved wringing the maximum production from farms regardless of local or instant needs and frequently to the permanent detriment of the land. Even peoples who live within their carrying capacity can exceed their food supply when yields are affected by a changing environment. For most of the period since the Neolithic revolution the only way to increase production was to expand the cultivated area, either through conquering or clearing new land, but with all the available land now under cultivation at least the latter avenue is closed. Expanding the area under cultivation is not the only way to increase production. There have been enormous gains made in yields from the mid-1960s

- 18 \

into the present millennium through the introduction of modern, hybridized varieties (MV) of rice, wheat and corn. Relying heavily on fertilizer inputs, chemical pest control, irrigation and mechanization, these advances are collectively known as the green revolution. Growers also favoured hybrids that can be planted densely to take advantage of greater nitrogen fertilization (Duvick
& Cassman, 1999: 1624). Notably though, without nitrogen fertilization MV yields

are only moderately above those of the un-hybridized varieties (Khush, 1999: 646, 647-648). Yield growth has slowed over time (Khush, 1999: 650) and improved varieties of root and protein crops, mostly beans, have been slow to develop (Evenson & Gollin, 2003: 760). Since Canada is a net food exporter (Niu & Proux, 2005: 24), it is not the ability of the nation to feed itself through trade that is at issue here, but rather its self-sufficiency in the range of products that constitute diet as reflected in consumer demand. Scholars have noted that global per capita caloric intake has been sufficient for some time 4 , mostly due to the ample supply of grain. It is nutritional balance that now concerns researchers, something hybrid cereals and the accompanying "production paradigm" cannot address (Welch & Graham, 1999: 2). On the one hand, there is the "hidden hunger" of micronutrient (vitamin and mineral) deficiencies plaguing developing nations, while on the other there is the over-consumption of energy-rich and fatty foods causing an obesity "epidemic" in the developed world (Iyengar & Nair, 2000: 332-333).

4

Which is not to say that everyone is amply fed; wars and inequitable distribution, to give two examples, stand in the way of complete hunger prevention (Welch & Graham, 1999: 02).

- 19-

Since Canadians, like all people, require a complete balance of foods for healthful sustenance (FAO, 2001) importing nutrition, as calories, is importing carrying capacity. Reducing imported agricultural carrying capacity means indentifying the gaps in the ability to' supply domestic demand.

1.3 Connecting Canadians to their land
The AEI match "scientific knowledge and understanding with available information on resources and agricultural practice" (Eilers & Lefebvre, 200Sa: 8) and their development was set using the following approaches:
~

Policy relevance ensures the environmental impacts of concern to "governments and other stakeholders" are the focus.

~

Science-based and able to withstand the rigours of empirical analysis, though the latter may require several iterations.

~ ~ ~

Communicable to both stakeholders and the lay public. Sensitive to trends across the whole system over time. Economically practicable and reliant, where possible, on existing data.

The DSR-variant framework on which Canada's AEI is based has been explained by AAFC in this manner: и Pressure: environmental stresses that may influence aspects of agricultural production such as the selection of crops and management practices used for production.

- 20\

и

Outcome: ultimate impact of agricultural production on the health of the environment (soil, air, water,

biodiversity). и Response: use by producers of key management options which [sic] influence the impact of agriculture on the environment. (Eilers & Lefebvre, 2005a: 8; original emphasis removed). The report further recognizes that "key gaps" exist in understanding the environmental impact of the agri-food industry. Future efforts will be addressed on the supply side through integrating economic and environmental indicators to provide a broader understanding of the effects of changing agricultural policy. There will also be an attempt to capture the economic value of the positive and negative externalities of agriculture in an effort to balance environment and economy (Lefebvre, 2005: 4). The following table 1.1 shows the five categories under which Canada's agri-environmental indicators (AEI) have been developed, the AEI, and if they are operational. The government's stated policy objective of advancing farm income stability is supported by the AEI, espeCially the ones in operation now, since they are the most reflective of immediate risks to yield (Junkins et aI., 2005: 20). Seemingly, the indicators that would be of more consumer or social interest but that might tend to act against the economic interests of the agri-food sector are those still under development. Take for example the water quality indicator for

- 21 -

Table 1 l' Indicator groups, AEI and AEI in use by AAFC INDICATOR GROUP Environmental farm management INDICATOR OPERATIONAL (Y/N) Y Y Y

..

Soil quality

Water quality

Air quality

Biodiversity

Soil cover Nitrogen use efficiency . Energy use efficiency (energy_ output/energy input) Water use efficiency: irrigation N Integrated pest management N Soil erosion Water erosion Y Wind erosion Y Tillage erosion Y Soil organic carbon Y Soil salinity Y Trace elements N Nitrogen Y Phosphorus Y Pesticides N Pathogens N Greenhouse gases Y Ammonia N Particulate matter N Wildlife habitat on farmland Y Wildlife damage to cro[:ls and livestock N Invasive alien sp'-ecies N Soil biodiversity N Source: (Lefebvre, Eilers, & Chunn, 2005)

pathogens that recognizes manure storage and application poses a direct risk to the health of the surrounding population from runoff to surface waters or groundwater infiltration. Prospective responses to adverse levels of risk include increasing manure storage capacities and ensuring optimum timing for its application (Topp, van Bochove, Theriault, Dechmi & Lapin, 2005: 138, 139). Responding this way fails to recognize that intensive livestock operations frequently generate manure in excess of the capacity of the nearby land base to receive it (Carpenter et aI., 1998: 8),

- 22-

1.4 Self-sufficiency is sustainable
Utilizing the pressure-outcome-response framework to structure

agricultural environmental monitoring, Canada is developing indicators to connect environmental states to agri-food system responses. This will not necessarily lead to sustainable agricultural development, which requires the continuation of each of the environmental, social and economic components of the system. Since the social component of the system comprises the nation's citizens and their continuation requires an adequate food supply, sustainable agricultural development requires the self-sufficiency of the nation's food supply. It is hypothesized that a self-sufficiency indicator (551) connecting the ability of a nation to supply food with the demand for it posed by its citizens adds to assessments of sustainability of the national agri-food system. The goal of this work is to express the ratio between existing areas of primary food production (Le. crops) and that conceptually required to supply Canadian household consumption and show how this information can influence potential agri-food system responses and wider agricultural policy considerations. It is asserted that such an indicator can incorporate additional aspects of

sustainability into the Canadian agri-food system without necessarily impairing its interconnections with globalized trade or otherwise interfering with stated Canadian agricultural policy objectives. Chapter 2 contains a review of literature establishing the nature of sustainable agriculture and agricultural development. It also presents views on

- 23-

agri-indicators and their use in characterizing sustainability. Land-area indicators and indicators and indices of carrying capacity are also reviewed. Chapter 3 introduces the Canadian household consumption dataset for 2001 and provides the method for ~elating consumer quantities first to mass units of constituent plant and animal products, then to equivalent domestically-producible foodstuffs, and finally to land areas. Chapter 4 presents results from the analysis, discusses how Canada's current efforts to monitor agri-environmental sustainability could be augmented by consumer characterization, and offers insight into and choices for the future path of sustainable agricultural development. Finally, chapter 5 delivers some conclusions.

- 24-

2.0 Literature Review
Discussions of sustainable systems require fixed definitions, specific contexts, and defined spatial scales for any element of the system under consideration. Sustainable agricultural development approaches consider the integration of environmental, social and economical elements so that a cultural ecosystem from which food and fibre resources are extracted may continue to function. Indicators provide information about the functioning of

agroecosystems; particularly useful are indicators from which inferences about difficult-to-measure properties of the system can be made. Frameworks combine multiple indicators to provide a more complete picture of the health of a system. Many frameworks use indicators of, or are based on, land area demand, but most use production data to demonstrate the impacts of supplying the global markets. Land area demand and human carrying capacity are interrelated and can become more so as yield growth rates stabilize.

2.1 Sustainable agriculture defined
It is typical in the literature to begin discussions of sustainable
development (SO) by breaking down terms and defining the concepts from within. For example, the term sustainable (or sustainability) has been defined in countless ways. Since fundamentally sustainability "always concerns temporality and [ ... J longevity" (Costanza & Patten, 1995: 194), a lexical definition, to continue through time, is invoked with regularity, at least introductorily (Brown, Hanson, Liverman & Merideth jr., 1987: 713; Costanza & Patten, 1995: 195;

- 25-

Dixon & Fa"on, 1989: 74; Douglass, 1984: 3; Hansen, 1996: 117). Since nothing can last forever, Costanza and Patten suggest a limiting temporal criterion in which the length of time a component within a "nested hierarchy of systems" must endure to be considered sustainable is equal to or greater than the expected lifespan of the component under normal behavioural conditions (1995: 195). For example, a single farm field under a typical three-crop rotation requires a fallow period to regenerate soil fertility and may continue indefinitely under such management. However, if farmer omits the fallow period for this particular field, its fertility may decline over time, although ceteris partbus the whole farm may remain continually productive. Conway sees agricultural systems as such a hierarchical order of systems or as levels of ecological organization ascending from a single field to the watershed or regional scale, each one "nested" within the next (1985: 34). In fact, it has been suggested the hierarchy could include the entire Earth as an agroecosystem (Walter-Toews, 1996: 687). The literal view is a polar one, something is sustainable or it is not. Shearman worries literal usages lead to "self-referential" definitions arising from empirical examples that may be difficult to apply elsewhere (1990: 2). Others have found sustainability too hard to define at all, calling it instead an idealized goal because it cannot be directly measured. However, once the ideal is stated, progress toward or away from, or comparison with it can be made and an indication as to the "level and duration" of the sustainability of the system can be defined (Zinck et aI., 2004: 89). Viewing sustainability in this way,

- 26-

as a continuum between the polar extremes, is probably more realistic. In developing the ecological footprint methodology, Wackernagel and Rees, too, shied away from a clearly stated meaning, instead saying that reducing the difference between what the global ecosystem can provide and absorb and what humans demand of it in these regards moves us towards "[d]eveloping sustainability" (1996: 159-160). Although they set no explicit upper limits to the world's ecological capacity, a fact for which they have been criticized (van den Bergh & Verbruggen, 1999: 64), their assertion that a holistic response is necessary to reduce human impact on the environment is a sound one. In any case, what is definably and measurably sustainable at one scale may not be at another (Brown et aI., 1987: 717), so perhaps "sustainable" is best defined simply as "the common-sense notion that we don't want to move ahead one step only to slip back two" (Dixon & Fallon, 1989: 73). More expansive definitions for agricultural sustainability have been articulated. Conway says formerly natural ecosystems are converted into "hybrid" agroecosystems, which are co-opted to produce food and fibre for human use (1985: 34). Agroecosystem sustainability depends on ecological concepts of resilience and resistance; the former describes the ability of the system to withstand stresses and perturbations without too great a variation in yield, while the latter refers to the time it takes the system to return to its normal state (Power, 1999: 185-186). Stresses can be small and periodic, but are usually continuous, while perturbations are discrete, unusual occurrences of significant

- 27-

magnitude (Conway, 1985: 35). Tilman also takes an ecological viewpoint, noting additionally that richer species composition and higher species diversity work towards the continuation of any ecosystem (1999: 5999). Sustainable rice production in Japan can involve a "mutually adaptive
lf

set of integrated

cultivation practices, a "management syndrome/' that are less effective in maintaining yield in smaller or different groups (And ow & Hidaka, 1989: 448). At their interface, agriculture has always tested the resilience of nature (Altieri et

aI., 1984: 175).
For Brown and co-workers, sustainable agriculture is qualitatively conservative of resources like soil and water, respectful of biodiversity, and socio-economically productive (1987: 714). Zinck and colleagues hold that agricultural sustainability is a concept that "implies continuous preservation of natural ecosystems, maintaining production while minimizing inputs, and ensuring income equity for producers, their families and communities, while providing "basic food needs (for whom is not specified) (2004: 89). Here again Shearman has concerns: if a system is cast as sustainable, what aspersions wi" this cast on other existing or "conventional systems? Using "sustainable" as a modifier to an activity implies the other ways of doing things can lead in socially undesirable directions (1990: 2). There are three perspectives that have dominated investigations into sustainability for at least 20 years, since the concept was in its nascence (Shearman, 1990: 1). The economic point of view is usually predicated on
ll
ll

lf

- 28-

continued economic growth and often struggles to value non-market goods and services, such as those provided by ecosystems. The social viewpoint considers the maintenance of individual well-being, from the basic provision of shelter, food and water to attaining more advanced social rights like "security, freedom, education, employment, and recreation." The social perspective is invoked by those seeking equitable resource allocations or to define the maximum supportable number of people for a given resource pool. Finally, an ecological or environmental assessment takes into account the continuation of ecosystems, including the abiotic components and all aspects of biodiversity. Notably, there is a connection between short-term variability in the biological aspects of diversity, as opposed to the abiotic elements, and longer ecosystem sustainability. It has been observed that pest management that improves the resilience of a cultural ecosystem has possibly decreased its long-term resistance (Brown et aI., 1987:716). These three viewpoints, or variations of them, are often combined when creating holistic approaches sustainable development.

2.2 Approaches to sustainability
A sustainability concept forms the basis for an "integrating framework" for theoretical and empirical investigations (Smit & Brklacich, 1989: 411). Once the goals are defined, approaches to assessing the current level of sustainability can be taken and actions setting a trajectory towards meeting the goals can be implemented. Examples of frameworks are provided later after a review of approaches to sustainability.

- 29-

In his seminal work, Douglass (1984: 4-6) integrates traditional views and methods of agriculture with new analyses and alternative methods in an effort to give meaning to agricultural sustainability from the disparate voices arguing narrower definitions. He describes three approaches to agriculture that arise in light of growing evidence that agricultural systems are overtaxing the environment, are possibly incapable of meeting future global demand for food and are growing less connected to the farmers, their families and their communities. The first set of approaches considers agri-food systems sustainable if they are self-sufficient. This viewpoint can support the. industrialization of agriculture as the means to feed an ever-growing population in the developing world or to provide meat and other energy-rich foods for the economically more advanced nations (Douglass, 1984: 6). Ensuring food suffiCiency for a defined time period requires matching estimates of demand under dynamic socio-economic

conditions with estimates of supply under variable climatic conditions for each major food group. These are mostly economical estimations and tend to view any limits not as physical, but as opportunity cost transactions in which resource substitutions are always an option. This overlooks the fact that the fundamental resource of agriculture, the land, is fixed in amount and productively finite if mistreated, and is thus non-substitutable (Douglass, 1984: 7-10). Douglass' next group of approaches is ecological and sets sustainability as the upper level at which the earth can continually provide the resources that

- 30-

support food production and absorb the wastes that it generates. For agricultural systems that depend at least to some degree on natural and renewable sources of power, pest control and fertilization, farmers who engage in unsustainable practices risk declines in land fertility (Douglass, 1984: 11). The use of nonrenewable resources, chiefly fossil fuels and petrochemicals, temporarily boosts the productivity of the land while they are available. This may degrade the stock of renewable resources, either by polluting or structurally altering natural ecosystems irrevocably, or by supporting human population growth that, in turn, causes additional strain on space and resources (Douglass, 1984: 12-13). That environmental degradation may be masked by increasing inputs to the agri-food system or energy to mitigation efforts supports the idea that system sustainability is more prediction in a current context and verifiable only in retrospect (Costanza & Patten, 1995: 194). Conway observes this too, saying a measured decline in productivity mayor may not indicate unsustainability, but in any case, the system can collapse fast and unpredictably (1985: 34). The final group Douglass recognizes are those who raise social concerns of sustainability, expressing them as community values that encompass the entire agroecosystem, including human members. The resulting paradigm is usually called alternative agriculture because it rejects a competitive model of large-scale industrialized agriculture in favour of a cooperative, locally-focused one. This mutually-supportive model of farming extends to the protection of nature, includes social justice and intergenerational equity, and encourages a

- 31 -

decentralized power structure that leaves decision-making in the hands of the community, rather than the boardroom (Douglass, 1984: 17-19). Like Douglass (1984), Dixon and Fallon (1989) also find sustainability concepts can be pfaced in three groups: the physical accounting of a single resource, the description of physical and environmental interactions among groups of resources and ecosystems, and the accounting of broader socialenvironmental-economic interactions (73-74). Over a century ago, biologists working in forestry and fishery recognized that over-harvesting one season reduces the yield in subsequent years and conceptualized maximum sustainable yield (harvest) as the amount of growth or reproduction in excess of replacement growth or stock (Brown et aI., 1987: 714). This work was limited to the analysis of a single biophysical resource in isolation from socio-economic development, with a view to preserving the status quo (Dixon & Fallon, 1989: 74). Later, foresters altered their approach, but not the underlying principle of sustained yield, so that the forest would be harvested in a way that guided its development to even-aged stands (Brklacich, Bryant & Smit, 1991: 3). Considering a resource in isolation can mask system unsustainability (Smith & McDonald, 1998: 21), giving rise to methods for describing interactions amongst resource exploitation systems (industries) or how such resource exploitation impacts ecosystems. Accounting for interactions in this way has been useful for achieving constant production in agroecosystems. The example given

- 32-

is rubber plantations that replaced the native ecosystems in Malaysia in the early 20th century; it is noted in this case that both ecosystems are sustainable, just not when simultaneously co-located (Dixon & Fallon, 1989: 75). Like Douglass (1984: 8), Dixon and Fallon (1989: 76) identify in these "trade-offs" opportunity costs, but as the physical usefulness of productive assets against the utility of the original ecosystem, instead of in purely economic terms. The latter authors still appreciate that some valuation system needs to be applied and stress the influence resource managers have through policy- and decision-making. This suggests that ecosystems have more than economic value, which will not necessarily be recognized in a market milieu, but that could be normatively assigned worth on the basis of an intuitive intrinsic value found in nature (Shearman, 1990: 5). The last group of concepts Dixon and Fallon (1989: 76) recognize are those that describe comprehensively the environmental, social and economic interactions and impacts of resource exploitation activities. When these elements are considered together, they constitute a measure of sustainable development where the goal is not simply the physical maintenance of a resource or continuation of a production system, but the advancement of the individual and collective welfare of society. Most definitions of sustainable development include environmental, social and economical concerns (Costanza & Patten, 1995: 194). While not defined explicitly by Dixon and Fallon (1989), others have called development "directed social change" intended to harness the beneficial aspects

- 33 -

of a socio-economic system and guide them to a cooperative equilibrium (Niu l Lu

& Khan, 1993: 180). In this way, development can be conceived as the
qualitative advancement of the system, as opposed to its quantitative growth (DaIYI 1987: 323). The World Commission on Environment and Development's (WCED) springboard definition from which many later approaches to sustainable development are launched is often quoted incompletely and simply that fulfilling the needs of the present generation should not obstruct future ones from fulfilling their own. TeliinglYI it continues: The concept of sustainable development does imply limits - not absolute limits but limitations imposed by the present state of technology and social organization on environmental resources and by the ability of the biosphere to absorb the effects of human activities. But technology and social organization can be both managed and improved to make way for a new era of economic growth (WCED, 1987: 8). Truncation has arguably been necessary to make SO concepts inclusive and applicable to different sectors and interests. Indeedl Caldwell recalls that conflicting priorities between the developed and developing worlds for

environmental and economic foci l respectivelYI nearly derailed the first attempts to define ecologically sustainable development some 40 years ago (1984: 299). That limitless economic growth is desirable is highly debatable; economists who assume growth is both desirable and inevitable tend to ignore sustainability altogether (Brown et al.I 1989: 716). This concept is in fact sustainable growth, which is an oxymoron (DaIYI 1990: 2). The Commission finishes the paragraph

- 34\

appropriately to their mandate, stating the opinion that global poverty can be mostly overcome, proffering a normative statement condemning any poverty, and noting extreme negative economic conditions encourage susceptibility to "ecological and other catastrophes" (WCED, 1987: 8). An academic approach to sustainable agricultural development suggests as a goal: a system capable of fulfilling human needs for food, fibre, and related products, both now and in the future; one that conserves resources, is economically Viable, protects the environment and, to the greatest extent possible, relies on renewable rather than non-renewable resources to ensure long-term societal survival (Bavec, Mlakar, Rozman, Pazek & Bavec, 2009: 90; Rao & Rogers, 2006: 441; Reganold, Papendick & Parr, 1990: 112; Smith & McDonald, 1998: 15). The definition proposed by Agriculture and Agri-food Canada is similar but decidedly nuanced. To develop sustainably, an agri-food system need only protect those resources on which it depends, although in a manner that is "compatible with surrounding natural systems and processes" (Lefebvre, 2005: 2), While contributions to wider socio-economic conditions are mentioned, of course including the supply of safe and healthful food, protection of the socio-economic status of agri-food businesses, labourers and their families is clearly specified (Lefebvre, 2005: 2).

- 35 -

2.3 Sustainability frameworks
Sustainability frameworks are contextual guides that govern the choice of indicators and influence how the information is viewed and reported (Tomalty et aI., 2007: 9). Robert and co-workers (1997: 80-81) outline a sustainable development framework based on a theoretical model governed by prerequisites that include: i.) ii.) iii.) a rational view of the world, a definition of sustainability supported by science, a recognition that individuals should not be forced to act against their self-interest, iv.) straightforward ideas that are easily transmitted to support consensus-building, v.) vi.) ideas that generate the least opposition, a path that does not require the complete re-organization of society and offers broad options towards society's new endpoint, vii.) a potential for evolving the current economic paradigm into one adapted to existing and future scarcities, and viii.) an assumption that economy is subsumed by environment, a perspective that must be applied to all scales in the system under consideration. The last point should be stressed here, as the authors go on to say that people must understand how an individual's actions contribute to a cumulative effect

- 36-

and how changing one's own behaviour moves society collectively towards the sustainability goal. In the view of Robert and colleagues, the key to any sustainable development model is that it rests solidly on a scientific foundation. Economists struggle to internalize environmental costs and the use of "margin-based valuation" of environmental costs fails to recognize the systemic nature of some problems, the complex interrelationships in ecosystems, and that many environmental effects are not linear, but can for instance be threshold-based (Robert et aI., 1997: 80). Since the authors assert the moral basis for sustainability is the continuation of nature for its own sake (Robert et al., 1997: 79), this means economists must presuppose the biophysical conditions that ensure the survival of the biosphere are sacrosanct and build into models a suite of feedback mechanisms (indicators) that track the movement of society vis-a-vis its sustainabHity goals (Robert et aI., 1997: 80, 81, 83). A Canadian context can be illustrated by the six "key principles" of SD as promulgated for the main sectors of the economy, explicitly including agriculture and food, by the 1991 Ontario Roundtable on Environment and Economy (Lonergan, 1993: 336). First, intergenerational equity means the stock of natural and human capital must be non-declining over time and essential ecological services must remain intact. Second, environmental, social and resource depletion costs are internalized; the polluter pays principle is invoked. Third, a pro-active, rather than reactionary, stance is taken. Where structural analyses of

- 37-

the socio-economic system expose sources of pressure from individuals (consumers), businesses or institutions, action is taken to anticipate the cumulative effects and put in place preventative measures. Fourth, fully-informed decision making is Important. All stakeholders are empowered in a decentralized, consensus-based model of decision-making. Fifth, depletion of non-renewable resources should be offset by increasing technological efficiency, closing the loop for material use, and the development of finite-resource substitutes for use by future generations. Sixth, quality of development is preferred over quantitative expansion. Consumers are made aware of the impacts of their choices, while product durability, energy efficiency and "a more efficient spatial distribution of activities" and presumably their by-products is stressed for the wider socioeconomic system (Lonergan, 1993: 336-337). The AEI in use by AAFC are modelled on the driving force-state-response (DSR) framework developed in part by the OECD from original Canadian efforts (Berger & Hodge, 1998: 256; Dumanski & Pieri, 1997
~4,

#2; Smith & McRae,

2000: 2). The DSR model has been adopted by agencies of the United Nations and many nations to structure indicator development at discrete scales in a manner compatible with a hierarchical view of agroecosystems (e.g. Conway, 1985: 34). This is the "hard systems view" of agriculture, viewing

agroecosystems as repairable mechanisms, where pressures of frequently human origin are identified within a defined boundary, e.g. field or farm, and the state of the system is observed, usually with the notion that outcomes of the pressure

- 38 -

are undesirable (Walter-Toews, 1996: 686-687). The responses of various actors within the system may then be prescribed in order to effect positive change in the pressure variable, thus setting up a cycle of continuous feedback between humans and the environment (Guy & Kibert, 1998: 41). Figure 2.1 shows the Canadian variation, driving forces-outcomes-responses, and some of the functions and elements within each category as set out by Smith and McRae (2000: 2) in the initial AEI development.

Driving forces
- Socio-economic (consumer preference, markets, policies) - Environmental (soil, climate) - Technological (fertilizers, pesticides, biotechnology)

Outcomes
- Environmental (soil & water quality, biodiversity) - Social (employment, rural development) - Economic (farm income, >GDP)

Responses
- Consumer preferences (food consumption patterns) - Farmer behaViour (ll input use & farm mgmt. practices) - II government policies

Figure 2.1: Driving force-outcome-response framework framing Canada's AEI (After Smith & McRae, 2000: 2). As figure 2.1 illustrates, consumer preference is both a driver of agrienvironmental change and an appropriate target for response options. The highlighted arrow between outcomes and responses denotes the typical

- 39-

placement of indicators (Guy & Kibert, 1998: 41, figure 1). AAFC currently does not explicitly propose indicators that infer consumer preference responses to agroecosystem pressures originating from socio-economic driving forces (see table 1.1) (Lefebvre et aI., 2005).

2.4 Sustainability indicators
Providing a connection that is meaningful to citizens, policy-makers or educators between activities and their consequences is often done by means of indicators. Indicators are specific measures of environmental, social or economic health that serve as proxies for the overall state of the system, usually with the view of ensuring the system's continuing integrity and sustainability (Maclaren, 1996: 186). Although the complexity of information imparted by an indicator should coincide with the level of understanding of the intended audience, including non-scientists (van den Bergh & Verbruggen, 1999: 62), in all cases the primary usefulness of indictors is as a communication tool to "simplify a complex reality" (Smeets & Weterings, 1999: 5). To be useful they must describe key aspects of the system in question, rather than characteristics that are "superficial or isolated" (Moxey, Whitby & Lowe, 1998: 265). Further, measureable changes in the states, values or direction of movement of indicators must reflect concomitant changes in the system (Moxey et aI., 1998: 265). These criteria have been addressed since the initial development of Canada's agri-

environmental indicators (Lefebvre, 2005: 3).

- 40\

In

essence an indicator is a specific measure or statistic about a system
l

that infers a behaviour that is hard to observe directly or describes a change in

state condition l or quality of the system (GECD 1993, in Dumanski & Pieri l 1997:
l

~19; RigbYI Woodhouse, Young & Burton, 2001: 465). Hansen (1996: 134, table

5) argues that policy-makers need indicators of agricultural sustainability that: и и take the literal view of sustainability: the ability to continue through time; are objective properties of the system, rather than a series of prescriptive elements that must be realized for a system to be sustainable; и are continuous variables that allow comparisons between states or systems; и enable the description of a future state, not simply the present or past states, and incorporate measures of variability; and и classify and rank limitations (to sustainability). Indicators ideally relate environmental, social, and economic issues that may only be apparent at a local

scale to the regional or national scale at which
l

the appropriate political decisions are made (Haberll Wackernagel & Wrbka, 2004: 194; Robert et aI., 1997: 80). Their use has become increasingly prevalent in countries, notably Canada l where research into sustainable agriculture has lead to a concerted effort for their development and use (Smith & McDonald l 1998: 22). Many indicators of sustainability have been implemented to characterize certain portions of larger systems, sometimes with the intent to obscure negative practices or avoid politically unpalatable choices (Pearce 1998 1

- 41 -

in Rigby et aI., 2001: 465), but also oppositely to break complex systems into more manageable units for clearer analysis (Costanza & Patten, 1995: 195). Land quality indicators (LQI) are derived from the application of the DSR framework to measure the biophysical characteristics of land, the effects of land management practices, and the socio-economic conditions that contribute pressures and constitute the policy environment within which responses can occur (Dumanski & Pieri, 1997: '\118). With respect to LQI, the quality of land is its instant condition in relation to the expectations of it for a specific use, here agriculture. Land is not only soil, but landscape, climate, flora and fauna, surface- and groundwater, and augmentations that facilitate agriculture, like drainage works and terracing (Dumanski & Pieri, 2000: 94). When, as is frequently the case, expert, a priori identification of important system functions forms the basis for indicator development, an iterative process often occurs whereby the indicator is "molded" (sic) to conform to available data (Dumanski & Pieri, 2000: 95). The danger in this is that rather than measuring system trajectory in relation to defined sustainable development goals (the desired state), the indicators can instead become predictions about the efficacy of responses to alter the driving forces (figure 2.1) (Costanza & Patten, 1995: 194). The LQI were instead developed after "comprehensive analyses of the complex systems to be described and monitored" (Dumanski & Pieri, 2000: 95). There is a class of indicators that appraises the relationship between human demand for ecosystem goods and services and the Earth's ability to

\

- 42-

supply them, or carrying capacity (CC), as defined in the introduction on page 9. Of more interest are CC indicators related to land area availability, rather than yield from the land, which for modern agri-food systems is dynamically dependant on climate, input and pesticide availability, advances in

bioengineering and biotechnology, and the lowered resilience of monoculture agroecosystems (Plucknett & Smith, 1986: 40). Nonetheless notably, in 1986 a direct connection between land area and yield was made in attempt to ascertain CC as the "human appropriation" of photosynthetic products (Vitousek, Ehrlich, Ehrlich & Matson, 1986). Drawing together the best estimates of net primary productivity (NPP), the biomass remaining after the plant's own respiration, maintenance and reproductive needs have been met, of the surface, sub-surface and aquatic environments from available literature, the authors' calculate it at 225 petagrams of carbon (Pg 109 tonnes) (Vitousek et aI., 1986: 369, table 1). Three estimates for usage of NPP for five billion people were made. The low estimate includes only biomass directly consumed as fuel, food, timber and fibre. The intermediate estimate accounts for the productivity of all

=

agroecosystems, rather than just the consumed elements, and activities like using fire to clear land. Finally, the high estimate also includes productivity lost as a result of land use changes, like urbanization, and that lost as a consequence of agricultural mismanagement, for example to desertification and erosion; the high estimate is the one favoured by the authors (Vitousek et al., 1986: 368).

- 43 -

Acknowledging that errors are likely for global estimates such as theirs, Vitousek and colleagues nevertheless state the results "accurately reflect the magnitude" of human appropriation (1986: 372). They find, as a proportion of terrestrial land, some 40% is co-opted for human use and the remainder likely suffering considerable impact; because human use of marine ecosystems constitutes a small fraction of its NPP over a wide area, adding the aquatic appropriation lowers the fraction to about 25%. Although the methodology accounts for the crops grown and used in a single year and could thus provide insight on a smaller scale, it does not suggest the distribution of NPP usage and cannot connect domestic supply and demand for agricultural products (Vitousek et aI., 1986: 368; 372, table 4). As humans can use technology, import energy and food, and export waste and by-products, purely ecological estimations of CC useful for animal populations are inappropriate (Rees, 1996: 196). Cohen reviewed six methods acceptable for calculations of human CC, leaving aside "those that are categorical assertions without data" (1995a: 342). L) Divide the world into regions defined by the differences in their maximum supportable population densities; multiply density by regional area and sum all regions. This was done by several geographers using fixed density estimates that were not objectively derived.

- 44-

ii.)

Fit mathematical curves to historical population trends and extrapolate to future population estimates. Since the forces controlling birth and death rates have remained elusive, the rationale for fitting the curves in any particular way is suspect.

iii.)

Assume a single constraining factor and calculate maximum human population based on that limit. This lends itself to simple mathematical formulae, for example maximum population

= total

food supply/individual food needs. This method may be hard to justify because it assumes no other forces or factors will intervene. iv.) An expanded variant of iii), above, combines multiple constraining factors into a single index; for instance, land area required to provide food, fibre and fuel. The same difficulty justifying constraining factors, also in iii), applies here too. v.) Rather than an index, several independent factors are modeled as constraints. For example, the simple food equation from above can broken down into food groups, and water or input supply calculations can be introduced. From the various maxima, the smallest is chosen as the largest supportable population. vi.) Combine several independent factors into large computerized sets of difference equations. The functional relationships between human populations and limiting variables, and the interactions

- 45-

between the variables themselves are often assumed and are difficult. to quantitatively test. (Cohen, 1995a: 343-344). Methods one through five are "deterministic and static" and vulnerable to assumptions about changes in variables and dynamism in the relations between them. The stochastic model implied by method six has been applied on a regional scale and is a good candidate for global modelling if only the enormous number of variables, from climate change to epidemics to ocean temperatures, can be reconciled (Cohen, 1995a: 343). William Rees defines human carrying capacity as the maximum

environmental load that can be sustained "without progressively impairing the productivity and functional integrity of relevant ecosystems wherever the latter may be" (Rees, 1996: 203). As opposed to CC describing the maximum supportable population, he asks the proper question: what area of productive land, irrespective of geographic location, is required to support a specific population, at a given technological level and standard of living (Rees, 1996: 203)7 This methodology gave rise to an indicator of CC called the ecological footprint (EF), which was developed by Rees and his student Mathis

Wackernagel (Wackernagel & Rees, 1996: 9). The EF is a determination of the flow of material and energy in a socioeconomic system expressed as the number of hectares of land globally-averaged for bioproductivity required to support it (Erb, 2004: 247). The EF is a

- 46-

representative calculation of all the human goods derived from nature, the wastes and by-products deposited there, and the ecosystem functions impacted, simplified for data management purposes. The generalized procedure involves: и Assuming industrialized harvesting of ecosystems, namely forests and agroecosystems, is sustainable. This leads to conservative estimation since overharvesting is often the case. и Including only "basic services of nature" to start, with additions to be made as time for development permits. The original services considered are rate of renewable and non-renewable resource use, capacity for waste absorption, and urban land use change. и Considering areas for only a single use to avoid double-counting. The use for which an area is accounted is the one with the largest impact. и Using eight land categories to represent all the ecosystems on Earth. (Wackernagel & Rees, 1996: 61-62). Using aggregate national or sub-national data for production and trade for five main classes of economic activity, food, housing, transportation, consumer goods, and services, and dividing by the contained population provides estimates of individual consumption of goods and services. Dividing these statistics by yield or productivity rate leaves as a remainder the per capita area required to support this consumption. More complex industrial goods, like apparel or automobiles,

- 47-

may need step-wise disaggregation to reveal the final area of production. The sum of these individual areal requirements is the EF for a single person to which a factor can be applied scaling it up the desired level of interest, from individual through to national (Wackernagel & Rees, 1996: 63-67). The areal estimates are not straight-forward geospatial quantities; rather, they are additive portions of eight conceptual land uses "embodied" in the consumption of the product that fall into one of four general classes: L) Energy land is assigned based on the amount of forested land required to assimilate the 1t of CO2 emitted by the generation of 100 gigajoules of energy from fossil fuel sources, 1.8 hectares. ii.) Consumed land includes built-up land that is paved over, eroded lands, or those otherwise lost to bioproductive use through human activity. iii.) Currently used lands are gardens, crop lands, pasture, and managed forests that supply food and fibre needs. iv.) Limited lands are areas remaining in relatively natural states that should be preserved. (Wackernagel & Rees, 1996: 68, table 3.1; 72-73). For any given product or service, a matrix is constructed allocating the analyzed consumer items under the five general economic headings to the eight land types used. The total area determined in this way is not a fixed area of land, but that expropriated from the ecosystems around the world that supplied

- 48-

material, energy, or waste sinks to the final products (Wackernagel & Rees, 1996: 82-83, table 3.3). The real strength of this sustainability indicator is a product of its use of relatively common data, the easy calculation, and perhaps most importantly the comparability of results (Erb, 2004: 248). Discussions generated by the authors include calculating the EF for the world's population at North American standards of living and determining the EF for several countries and the world and comparing them. In 1991, the global EF was found to be 1.8ha, while that of an Indian citizen was O.4ha; an American, 5.1; and a typical Canadian, 4.3 (Wackernagel & Rees, 1996: 85, table 3.4; 88). The EF can be applied to specific industries in defined areas, and then later apportioned to multiple actors within or without the system as a way of allocating Cc. Increasingly liberalized global trade simultaneously detaches people from first-hand knowledge of the degradation their consumption causes while ironically increasing their vulnerability to the effects of those impacts. By investigating discrete sectors of the economy, an allocation of environmental loads posed by imports and exports can be made (Kissinger & Rees, 2009: 2309). Kissinger and Rees (2009: 2310) combine material flow analYSiS, a method for indentifying the types, quantifying the amounts, and tracking the progress of material and energy through a defined system, with EF analysis to study the agricultural system of the Canadian Prairies. Specifically, they want to know the share of agro-ecosystem products and services embodied in the export

- 49-

of 22 products in 6 categories, grains, legumes, oilseeds, root crops, animal feeds, and animal products, as a time series from 1989 until 2007. Further, they track the fraction of the total export footprint to each of five importing regions around the world (Kissinger & Rees, 2009: 2311; 2314, figure 4). Their method takes the following steps: identify and quantify Prairie agricultural products and the share of those for export, determine the "key inputs" used in the agri-food system, and estimate the land area required both for production and for sequestration of the C02 attributable to it. Using food availability data (Le. the apparent disappearance of food), the researchers translate processed agri-food products into their basic ingredients through US Department of Agriculture conversion factors and the FAa's technical conversion guide. They assign actual land areas based on the fraction exports represent of the total production for each commodity. Likewise for assigning a share of the energy (and then C02 land) used to supply the total water, pesticide, fertilizer inputs to the system (Kissinger & Rees, 2009: 2311; 2311, footnote 4). The study reveals the production of 22 commodities considered required the support of over 55 million bio-productive hectares of land, the total ecological footprint for the system. Of that, just over 51% was exported, averaged over the study period. Broken down, the export share of the EF ranges from 72.5% embodied as grain exports, to 39.5% for beef cattle. By region, 37% of the Prairie agricultural EF went to the US, 26% to Asia, and 11% to Latin

\

- 50-

America, with the remainder going to the EU and "other countries" (Kissinger & Rees, 2009: 2312-2313; 2313, table 2). The popularity and subsequent usage of the EF method is such that the term "footprint" has entered the vernacular, but it is not without its detractors. The method of aggregation used in the calculation, often billed as a strong point, makes it difficult for an individual or policy-maker to decide which aspect of a system is unsustainable (van den Bergh & Verbruggen, 1999: 63). The aggregated EF areas may need to be complemented with real areal requirements and the availability of that land to properly determine sustainability (Erb, 2004: 248). Additionally, related still to aggregation methods, it is hard to choose responses at the regional or national scales that are based on pressures felt at the local scale because while the EF observes ecological tenets and

thermodynamic laws, it lacks a weighting scheme for social factors (van den Bergh & Verbruggen, 1999: 64). For example, the different abundances of renewable energy supplies across Canada may not be accurately reflected if a national decision is taken to reduce fossil fuel use to reduce the country's EF. This is not trivial, since van den Bergh and Verbruggen (1999: 65) assert over 50% of developed nations' EF derives from the use of fossil fuels. An adaptation of Wackernagel and Rees' (1996) indicator relates a nation's EF to its domestic biocapacity in a time-series analysis. This. variant attempts to capture imported goods in domestic land use estimations, which is especially useful for products a country may not be able to grow or produce, by

- 51 -

incorporating "complimentary" data about actual land availability and its spatial distribution (Erb, 2004: 248). In applying his method to Austria, Erb analyzes each component of national apparent consumption by dividing country-specific yields into domestic production, imports, and exports to derive real areas that he then assigns domestically to the land classes accounted for by the EF method. Taking agriculture as an example, Erb creates a 207-country list of yields for 61 products, including 39 primary products (crops), that he assigns to Austrian pasture land and arable land (Erb, 2004: 249-250). Since the productivity of Austrian land is higher than the global average, the areal demand based on this method is lower by half than the conventional EF analysis (Erb, 2004: 253-254). Using country-specific yields also unmasks other possibly counterintuitive results, such as the declining share of per capita pasture land required to provide meat, milk, etc., in the face of a constant rate of consumption owing to yield increases. Erb asserts the simple summation of shares of land globally-averaged for productivity results in the loss of "huge amount[s] of information" contained in, say, the mix of yields within a particular nation's trading partners or the qualitative differences in soils requiring different amounts of irrigation or input use. Neither the conventional EF nor Erb's modification assesses sustainability, but in using real, spatially-assigned areas the latter method can be integrated into an indicator framework (2004: 255). Cowell and Parkinson (2003: 221-222) recently presented a method to examine the ability of only local areas to satisfy the consumption requirements of

- 52-

the United Kingdom. The authors observe that the globalization of the agri-food sector could be seen as a benefit to society by inducing wider competition and thereby lowering prices and broadening consumer choice or as a disbenefit by reducing countries' food security (self-sufficiency) and masking environmental and social harms caused by exploitative practises in places far from final consumption. By contrast, localisation, defined as domestic production, is seen as a way of at least illuminating the negative aspects of agricultural production and reducing the transportation-related impacts of importation. In part, their purpose is to assess the possibilities for local ising production, since they note there is no point to policies advocating localisation if it is infeasible. Land area is chosen as an indicator because increasing populations lead to increased competition for use of this finite resource and because consumption within these populations is generally increasing. They deem the country level appropriate because in the UK, as in Canada, agricultural policy is mostly driven by the central government. Their method uses actual data on specific food groups, rather than the grain-equivalents or estimated consumption levels of other studies, which allows "more detailed insights" into the effects of a localisation strategy and avoids criticism over data accuracy (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 224). Working with 1992 aggregate national data in mass units, Cowell and Parkinson (2003: 225) begin by determining consumption as the residual after adding production and imports and subtracting exports and changes in stock (Le.

- 53 -

the apparent disappearance of food). They apply often complex formulae to work from homogenous bulk government and industry agri-food statistics (e.g. tonnes of beef) back to the land required for food crops and for the farmland that supported the consumed animals' lifecycles. Dividing the various

consumption quantities by their respective yields leaves the area required for production (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 226-227; 234-235). For food not producible in the UK the authors propose to substitute an "average mix" of similar products without offering details as to its derivation (i.e. by the mix of current areas of production, as proposed here, or similarly by production masses) (226). They do not allow for differences in production practises, which is especially notable for localising foods like livestock under intensive production (227). The ratio of production to consumption gives Cowell and Parkinson a \\selfsufficiency index," which they use only to assess the UK's relative reliance on imports for any given food category (2003: 225; 227, table 2). Because part of their method involves calculating tonne-kilometres for energy use analysis, they use mass units for this ratio (2003: 225). Since the index is unitless only the magnitude of (in)sufficiency can be understood and not quantitative differences. The area currently under cultivation for each food category is compared with that required under a localisation policy revealing that animal products take the most area by far, requiring as much as eight times more land than the next category, cereals. In total, the UK requires between 1% and 16% more agricultural land

- 54-

than it has to supply its consumption and Cowell and Parkinson conclude that in order to meet a localisation strategy, meat consumption must be drastically reduced or plants with significantly higher yields must be substituted for those currently produced or both. They point to UK survey results showing strong preference for locally produced fruits and vegetables and growing vegetarianism and suggest consumption patterns could shift in what is for them a positive direction (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 230-231). Researchers from the Netherlands have reviewed food security studies and projections of future demand and note that most assume a constant supply of land despite the fact that arable land is being lost at the rate of 7% per decade. The green revolution has led to the juxtaposition of increasing per capita grain harvest and declining per capita arable land. The land required for food however is dependant on more than just yields and production methods, because of shifting consumer demand for different types of food. This gives rise to areal quantification based on food consumption patterns, which are observable trends in the types and combinations of foods eaten by a given population. These patterns are influenced by culture, religion, personal tastes, food availability, and habit, amongst other things, and can shift over time in the same place. Since an "affluent" diet including animal-based products may require three times the land of a vegetarian diet, the effects of shifting consumption patterns on land requirements are likely of the "same order of magnitude" as the

combined effects of rising population and changing productivity (GerbensLeenes, Nonhebel & Ivens, 2002: 47-48). Gerbens-Leenes and co-workers note that circumstances must be clearly defined for analyses of land requirements because significant differences in consumption patterns occur between nations and because the kinds and quantities of foods grown and the consequent environmental impacts are a result of a close interdependence between agri-food supply and consumer demand (2002: 48). They state the use of household consumption data ("the bottom of the food system'') represents a substantial advancement in the quality of land requirement analyses (Gerbens-Leenes et aI., 2002: 48). The method begins with 1990 household expenditure data, rather than with physical quantities, for over 100 foods commonly eaten at home by the Dutch in nine categories. Quantities are derived by applying price data directly (Le. purchase amount times physical units per unit cost) or via the results of a previous Dutch study describing the relationship between price, nutritional energy, and physical quantity. Processed foods are rendered to constituent ingredients through technical conversions and industrial recipes. For

domestically-producible crops, the inverse of the weighted average yield gives area requirement as m2/kg. For imports, the origins and amounts of products are determined and the inverse of the yields provided by the FAD are applied. Livestock products, here also excluding fish, are grouped into intensive animal production and dairy farming; animal feed statistics are used to find pasture,
\

- 56-

fodder, and roughage areas. Breaking raw milk down into its constituent carbohydrate, protein, and fat components according to fraction of nutritional energy, the area required for each is found; the area required for dairy products, for instance cheese and yoghurt, are found based on the composition of those milk constituents. The sum of the household land area requirements is multiplied by the number of households to give national area needs (Gerbens-Leenes et aI., 2002: 50-52). The results reveal Dutch household consumption is dominated by meat and dairy products and the area required to supply them represents 47% of the total household requirement, compared to 12% for fruits, vegetables, and bread. The effects of diet affluence are illustrated by noting the addition of "one mouthful (lOg)" of meat everyday by an individual increases area requirement by about 100m 2, while the same increase in potato consumption increases area by a mere 2m2 (Gerbens-Leenes et aI., 2002: 53, table 2; 54). The Netherlands government also calculates national food availability (apparent disappearance of food) and the authors apply their method to this quantity for comparison. They find congruence between their own results and governmental estimates, asserting this validates the assumptions made in the course of the work (Gerbens-Leenes et aI., 2002: 55).

- 57-

3.0 Methods
Since assessing national self-sufficiency for major food groups is the goal of this study, demand must be expressed in terms that are comparable to those of supply. The subsequent analysis is premised on the work of Cowell and Parkinson (2003), especially their reporting of the real national land areas that would be needed to supply domestic food consumption and comparison to existing areal capacity. Also like their work and that of Gerbens-Leenes and colleagues (2002) and Kissinger and Rees (2009), this study uses commonly available government, technical, and industry information (e.g. FAD, n.d.; StatsCan, 2009) to relate the original masses of primary agricultural products to their processed counterparts. However, unlike Cowell and Parkinson and studies based on the EF methodology (Erb, 2003: 247) that use the apparent consumption of food and resources as the basis, the method employed here begins with surveyed consumption (StatsCan, 2003b). Total Canadian food consumption is determinable by the following process. The 2001 Food Expenditure Survey (FES) (StatsCan, 2003b) estimates food expenditures and quantities for the over 11.5 million households (StatsCan, 2005a). These are listed as household weekly averages for 195 different broad food groups, like cuts of beef, fresh apples, and jams and preserves, which are in turn aggregations of almost 2000 individual types of food or brand names (StatsCan, 2003b). StatsCan lists these foods broadly into the following groups:

- 59=

и и и и и и и и и и и

Meat (including meat preparations) Fish and other marine products Dairy products and eggs Bakery and other cereal products Fruits and nuts (including fruit juices, jams, etc.) Vegetables (including vegetable products and juices) Condiments, spices and vinegar Sugar and sugar preparations Coffee and tea Fats and oils Other foods, non-alcoholic beverages, food materials
&

preparations The survey was administered as two, one-week diaries completed by 5,643 urban and rural households in all Provinces, as well as households in the cities of Iqaluit, Whitehorse and Yellowknife; as not all households completed both, the sample comprises 11,034 diary-weeks for a response rate of almost 98%. This is the eighteenth such survey to be completed since they began in 1953, the sixth in a row to include smaller communities and thus claim to be nationally representative. The stated "primary reason" for conducting the survey is as an economic tool to help adjust the consumer price index, but other reasons include market analysis and nutritional studies (StatsCan, 2003b: User Guide, 4). The User Guide states the samples are weighted so that the detailed
\

- 60-

food list reflects differences in "sampling and response rates among geographic areas and household types," but gives no further details (StatsCan, 2003b: User Guide, 11). There are six appendices to the survey that list statistical information like frequency counts or provide data summaries; Appendices C(ii), detailed quantities, and E, food codes, are useful here. The former contains the values transformed by the method, while the latter provides complete details of foods in all categories and is included herein as Appendix 1 (StatsCan, 2003b). Multiplying the number of households in Canada in 2001 by the average quantities consumed per week as found in the FES gives the national consumption for each foodstuff. These weekly values are then transformed into yearly amounts, which may be in metric mass or volume units, like kilograms of apples or litres of strawberries, and thus directly usable, or shown as quantities that need further transformations. For those food items reported as a number consumed, for instance the number of ears of corn eaten (StatsCan, 2003b), an equivalent measure in the appropriate metric units is found using accepted technical conversion factors. The 2001 Canadian data for field crops, fruits and vegetables, data regarding animal feed requirements and other information are obtained from governmental resources, predominantly from Statistics Canada's Canadian Socioeconomic Information Management system (CANSIM) II database (2009) and Agriculture and Agri-food Canada (AAFC), as well as the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). These quantities are often in imperial measures,

- 61 -

likely reflecting farmers' usage, and must be converted; conversion factors are utilized where required (StatsCan, 2002: 11). Some foods cannot be produced in Canada due to climatic or geophysical factors. In the case of items such as tropical fruit, a representation of Canadianproduced fruit is established and substituted (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 226); likewise for rice or other staples not appreciably produced in Canada. Aquaculture was not included in Cowell and Parkinson's study because fish farms "do not occupy terrestrial land areas" (2003: 227). However, farmed fish are fed from terrestrially-grown grains (StatsCan, 2005b), and the industry exists in all provinces and Yukon and Northwest Territories (AAFC, 2003). Therefore, the feed requirements are calculated to meet the household consumption averages (StatsCan, 2003a) with substitution made for non-farmed fish by the major farmed fish in Canada, salmon (see 3.1.2, below). Studies that refer to national production data to estimate areas dedicated to domestic food consumption or to calculate the EF of food utilize categories based on sectors of primary agricultural production, including, for example, meat, vegetables, fruit, and cereals. Because such studies begin with bulk agricultural materials they account for all end uses regardless of the degree of subsequent processing (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 225, table 1; White, 2000: 151). Studies examining environmental impact from the consumption perspective can examine prescribed diets. The life cycle assessment of the "predominantly plant-based Mediterranean diet" on which recommended nutrition guidelines for

- 62-

the US and other nations are based is an example (Duchin, 2005: 104). As the method here is applied to Canada and uses a consumer survey that is akin to a dietary estimation, only foods suggested by Canada's Food Guide (Health Canada, 2008a: 1) will be included in the study. Thus, for nutritionally nonessential items that cannot be grown in Canada, such as cocoa, tea and coffee, no substitution will be made. Likewise, no accounting will be made for other foods such as ice cream, sweets and cakes.

3.1 Reconciling quantities in the FES
The explanation of the method generally follows the numerical order of the food codes. As noted, the detailed food codes and descriptions are found as Appendix 1. The FES Appendix C(ii) reports results in an electronic spreadsheet to at least two (2) significant figures, the same number as the conversion factors and yields (StatsCan, 2003b; 2009). Although the numbers were not rounded in the model for the calculations, they are reported here rounded simply to three whole numbers; more than three significant figures is not implied.

3.1.1 Meat (including poultry)
In the FES meat is given as kilograms consumed per household for the various primal s cuts of beef, including hip, loin, rib, and chuck cuts, and of pork, including leg, lOin, belly, and shoulder cuts; lamb, mutton and other animal meats and chicken, turkey and other poultry meats are not sub-divided according

5 The

edible portion of an animal (not poultry) is prepared by cutting the eviscerated carcass in half lengthwise through the spine and subsequently each half into four or more primal cuts from which servingsized portions are prepared (Potter & Hotchkiss. 1998: 317).

- 63-

to cut (StatsCan, 2003b).

In the case of beef and pork, these cuts must be

aggregated into their equivalent whole animals to determine necessary grazing land. Farm animals slaughtered for meat are valued on the basis of the edible portion, usually called cold dressed weight or dressed carcass weight (DCW) when the meat is ready for sale; this is the fraction remaining after removal of the hide or feathers, head, blood, feet and guts (Government of Alberta, 2008). For beef Potter and Hotchkiss (1998: 331-332, figure 14.11) provide a reference for approximate yields from a dressed beef carcass. Table 3.1 reproduces their summary table showing common wholesale beef cuts and the corresponding percent share of a carcass; where it differs, the term for a cut as used in the FES is provided in brackets (Appendix 1). Table 3.1: The approximate yield of typical cuts of beef from a dressed carcass. FOREQUARTER CUTS Chuck Ribs Fore Shank (Other beef) Brisket (Other beef) Short plate (Other beef) Total YIELD
0/0*

26 9 4 5 8 52

YIELD DCW DCW HINDQUARTER (KG) (KG) % CUTS 23 81.1 91.7 Round (Hip cuts) 31.8 Sirloin (Loin cuts) 9 31.8 28.2 14.1 Short loin (Loin 8 cuts) 17.6 Flank (Other beef) 5 17.6 28.2 Offal 10.7 3 183.4 Total 169.4 48 Source: (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 331).

Also shown, in order to estimate the number of cattle accounted for in the FES, are the yield percentages applied against the average DCW for Canadian cattle for 2001: 352.8kg (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0026). The average mass yields for each cut of meat are divided into the corresponding yearly quantities of those cuts from the FES to give the number of animals that would have been

- 64-

slaughtered to provide each cut; the largest number is used. However, there are several steps taken in advance of the final result. Beef is unique in the FES as the only meat for which "ground" is a special category (Appendix 1). Potter and Hotchkiss state it is derived from every cut, but not from offal (1998: 332). Therefore, the quantity of ground beef will be distributed against the respective cuts after the yields from table 3.1 have been re-weighted to remove the 3% offal from the calculation. The offal is treated later as a stand-alone category. Several categories of prepared foods containing products made from different animals are listed in the FES; among others, these include sausages, canned meats, ready-to-eat items, and restaurant take-out foods. Where the FES category contains items made from the meat of different animals the quantity will be distributed according to the preference for each meat in the FES. Bologna is made entirely from ground beef and is added there (Potter & HotchkiSS, 1998: 327; Appendix 1). Table 3.2 shows the portions of prepared, cured and canned meats, and sausages that are made from almost 160,000 tonnes of ground beef. The total mass from table 3.2 is added to the total ground beef, which is then allocated to the cuts shown in table 3.1 after re-weighting to exclude offal. The re-weighting is shown in table 3.3 and the ground beef calculations in table 3.4.

- 65-

Table 3и2' Share of listed categories supplied by ground beef.

.

FES CATEGORY Other cured meat Uncooked sausage и Bologna I Wieners Other cooked or cured sausage Other read'i-cooked meat Other meat preparations Meat stews and hams Other canned meats C .. ) Total

MASS OF GROUND BEEF (KG) 2,500,000 25,200,000 17,900,000 20,000,000 37,800,000 32,400,000 7,490,000 8,410,000 6,940,000 159,000,000

i

I I

I
I

Table 3 3'. Ground beef allocation table

и

.
i

% (TABLE 3.1) RE-WEIGHTING CUT 23.7 23.0 Bound 9.3 9.0 Bibs 17.5 17.0 Sirloin & short loin 22.7 22.0 Foreshank, brisket, short plate, flank 26.8 26.0 Chuck . Total 97 100 Table 3 и4'. Allocation of ground beef to specific cuts. CUT RE-WEIGHTED % . Ground beef from FES Addition from table 3.2 Sub-total allocated to cuts, below Hip cuts 23.7 Rib cuts 9.3 Loin cuts 17.5 Other beef cuts 22.7 26.8 Chuck cuts
I

MASS (KG) 203,000,000 159,000,000 362,000,000 85,800,000 I 33,600,000 . 63,400,000 82,000,000 97,000,000
I

Once the weight of ground beef has been re-proportioned, it is added to the starting FES consumption for the respective cuts. This constitutes an addition of between 47% for hip cuts and 84% for chuck cuts. Despite having a lower

fraction of the DCW than chuck cuts and the lowest addition of ground beef
\

- 66-

mass, the consumption of hip cuts is still the highest and requires the slaughter of over 2.23 million cattle. The FES cuts, 2001 consumption amounts, additions, from table 3.4, mass per cut as a fraction of the 2001 DCW from table 3.1 and number of animals required to provide the total for each cut are shown in table 3.5. The bold typeface indicates how many cattle were fed to support 2001 consumption. Table 3 5' Calculation of required slaughter cattle BEEF CUT FES CONSUMPTION (KG) 95,500,000 35,800,000 23,900,000 23,900,000 MASS FROM TOTAL TABLE 3.4 CONSUMED MASS (KG) 85,800,000 33,600,000 63,400,000 82,000,000 NUMBER OF DCW MASSI ANIMALS CUT (KG) 2,240,000 181,000,000 81.1 69,400,000 87,300,000 106,000,000 31.8 60.0 77.6 2,180,000 1,450,000 1,520,000

..

Hip cuts Rib cuts i Loin cuts и Other beef cuts Chuck cuts Offal

17,900,000 11,900,000

97,000,000 0

115,000,000 11,900,000

91.7 10.6

1,250,000 1,130,000

Dairy cows must reproduce each year to perpetuate lactation. Female calves are generally kept to replenish the herd, while males are slaughtered when they reach 205-318kg live weight to be sold as veal (Ontario Veal ASSOCiation, 2003). Canadian grading regulations state the DCW of veal must be between 80-180kg (Department of Justice Canada [DOJC], 2009a). StatsCan (2009: survey 003-0026) found the 2001 average DCW for veal was 118.3kg. Unlike their parents, calves are not disaggregated into cuts in the FES (StatsCan,
- 67-

2003b) so simply dividing the veal DCW into the FES average consumption gives the number of calves required. The FES cuts, 2001 consumption weights, 2001 DCW for veal and number of animals that were fed to support this consumption (bolded) are shown in table 3.6. 6' Calculation of required slaughter calves Table 3.. MEAT FES CONSUMPTION (KG) DCW (KG) NUMBER OF ANIMALS Veal 101,000 118.3 11,900,000 Hog carcass yields are given in cold trimmed weight (CTW), the bled, eviscerated pig with the rear feet on and excess fat trimmed (for rendering, see section 3.1.7) (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0028, footnote 5). The average CTW for Canadian swine in 2001 was 83.6kg (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0028) against which the yield percentages are distributed. Approximately the same procedure is followed for pork as for beef using yield percentages obtained from Canadian Pork International [CPI], a producer, processor and exporter promoting organization. CPI and AAFC conducted a joint study in 1992 to determine yields of various cuts (CPI, n.d.) and those against the CTW the results are reported in table 3.7. Table 3.7: The yield of typical cuts of pork from a cold trimmed carcass. CUT Leg Loin Belly Shoulder Total Source: (CPI, n.d.).

I SHARE OF CARCASS (%)
27.6 24.7 23.9 23.8 100

CTW 22.6 20.8 20.1 20.1 83.6

- 68-

The FES has an "other pork" category that lists whole animals, sides and quarters that nominally follow the cuts from table 3.7; therefore, this quantity will be divided into the cuts from table 3.7 in proportion to consumer preference from the FES (StatsCan, 2003b). The 17,900 tonnes of other pork is allocated across all the pork cuts according to their fraction of the DCW shown in table 3.7. The distribution is shown in table 3.8. 8' Share of selected categories added to pork cuts Table 3.. CUT Loin cuts Shoulder cuts Belly cuts Leg cuts AMOUNT CONSUMED FROM FES (%) 73 11 8 8 MASS OF "OTHER PORK" (KG) 13,100,000 2,070,000 1,380,000 1,380,000

Pork used in sausages and prepared foods is typically from the shoulder cut (Manitoba Pork Council [MPC], 2004) and is added there. The application of the method to processed pork products follows the same process as for beef except, with the meat products and sausages apportioned to shoulder cuts according to table 3.9. Table 3.9' Share of selected categories added to pork shoulder cuts . FES CATEGORY Other cu red meat Uncooked sausage Wieners ~ cooked or cured sausage Other ready-cooked meat Other meat preparations Meat stews and hams Other canned meats C,,) Total MASS OF PORK SHOULDER (KGIи 1,050,000 10,600,000 8,400,000 15,900,000 13/600,000 3,150,000 3/530,000 2,920,000 59,200,000

.

- 69-

Ham is derived from leg cuts and bacon is distributed to loin cuts and belly cuts according to ~he consumer preference for the two (MPC, 2004). Ham is apportioned to leg cuts as shown in table 3.10. Table 3 10' Share of ham categories added to pork leg cuts FES CATEGORY . Ham (excluding cooked ham) Cooked ham II Total MASS OF PORK LEG (KG) 59,700,000 30,000,000 89,700,000
i

I
i

The weighting to apportion bacon is a simple 90:10 split between loin and belly cuts and is shown in table 3.11 Table 3 11' Share of bacon added to pork loin and belly cuts CUT Bacon (from FES) Loin cuts Belly cut

% SHARE
100 90 10

MASS OF BACON (KG) 41,800,000 37,600,000 4,180,000

Pork cuts, 2001 consumption amounts, addition of values from tables 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, and 3.11, kg per cut as a fraction of the DCW from table 3.7, and the number of animals required to provide the total for each cut are shown in table 3.12. The bold typeface indicates the number of swine that were fed to support 2001 consumption. Table 3 12' Calculation of required slaughter pigs PORK CUTS FES CONSUMPTION (KG)

. .

.
DCW MASS NUMBER OF ANIMALS

Leg cuts Loin cuts Belly cuts Shoulder cuts

MASS FROM TOTAL TABLES 3.8, CONSUMED 3.9, 3.10 & MASS (KG) 3.11 (KG) 11,900,000 91,100,000 103,000,000 113,000,000 50,700,000 164,000,000 11,900,000 5,560,000 17,500,000 17,900,000 61,300,000 79,200,000

ICUT
(KG) 22.6 20.9 20.1 20.1 4,550,000

7,860,000
861,000 3,940,000

-70 -

Lamb and mutton headline a category that includes goat, deer, buffalo, caribou, horse and rabbit meats as well as frog's legs (Appendix 1). As lamb and mutton are singled out and the distribution of other meats within the category is unknown, the StatsCan average DCW for sheep and lamb, 21.1kg, will be divided into the FES quantity to give an equivalent number of ovine animals (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0028). Not as many prepared meats and sausages start with lamb or mutton as with beef, pork or chicken in Canada. Table 3.13 lists those FES categories apportioned in addition to the 2001 consumption. Table 3.13: Share of listed categories added to lamb and mutton. FES CATEGORY MASS OF SHEEP KG 939,000 201000 1,140,000

The quantities from table 3.13 amount to nearly 10% of the 2001 Canadian consumption of ovine meat. This is shown, along with the 2001 average DCW of sheep and the number of animals slaughtered to support the total in table 3.14. The bold typeface indicates the number of sheep that were fed to support 2001 consumption. Table 3 14' Calculation of required slaughter sheep
I

DCW TOTAL FES STARTING MASS FROM (KG) CONSUMED TABLES 3.13 MASS (KG) MASS (KG) (KG) 21.1 13,000,000 Sheep 1,140,000 11,900,000 MEAT

NUMBER OF ANIMALS

620,000

- 71 -

In Canada chickens are slaughtered and mechanically processed at a rate of about 25000 broilers (meat animals) per hour (AAFC, 2008b), mainly in Ontario and Quebec where some 60% of production takes place (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0018). After being electrically stunned, killed by bleeding from the neck, scalded in hot water, and plucked of feathers, the birds are mechanically eviscerated, then cleaned and prepared for consumption whole or for further processing (Barker, Lankhaar & Stals, 2004: 94-96, 97-98). The average dressed weight for birds is not supplied directly by StatsCan, as it is for cattle and swine, but is found by dividing the individual Provinces' meat production by their respective number of birds slaughtered and taking the weighted mean as the National average. StatsCan suppresses data where it might identify the survey participants; due to this, no poultry data are available for Prince Edward Island (P.E.I.) or Newfoundland and Labrador, representing 2% of Canada's production (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0018). Table 3.15 lists the percent share from each Province of the total National production, the carcass weights, and the final DCW. The Canadian average weight of a dressed chicken was 1.53kg in 2001. Chickens are used in a variety of prepared and cooked foods that are simply allocated to whole chickens according to this meat's share of consumer preference, as shown in table 3.16. Prepared chicken products add almost 17% to the total eaten by Canadians in 2001. Chicken consumption in 2001, the addition of prepared food, the

- 72-

calculated 2001 DCW for chicken and the number of animals required to support the total (bolded) are shown in table 3.17. Table 3.15: Percent share of chicken production and average dressed weight, Provincially and Nationally, 2001 data. AREA SHARE (%4AVERAGE DRESSED WEIGHT (KG) Quebec 27 1.58 32 Ontario 1.57 5 1.41 и Manitoba 3 и Saskatchewan 1.40 9 Alberta 1.47 British Colombia 16 1.44 !'Jew Brunswick 3 1.54 3 Nova Scotia 1.52 x P.E.I. Nfld. & Labrador x 98 National 1.53 Note: x = suppressed Source: (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0018) Table 3 .16' Share of listed categories added to chickens FES CATEGORY и Other cured meat и Wieners и Other ready-cooked meat Other meat preparations Other canned meats ( ... ) Total S OF CHICKEN (KG)

2,420,000 19,400,000 31,500,000 7,270,000 6,740,000 67,300,000

Table 3 .17' Calculation of required slaughter chickens MEAT FES STARTING l"lASS (KG) TOTAL MASS CONSUMED FROM TABLE 3.16 MASS (KG) (KG)

.

.
DCW (KG) NUMBER OF ANIMALS

Chickens

400,000,000 67,300,000

467,000,000

1.53

305,000,000

Turkey production data are also suppressed for P.E.I. and Newfoundland and Labrador, but since the missing data account for less than a tenth of a percent of National production (StatsCan,

2009: survey 003-0018), the

- 73-

discrepancy can be safely ignored in this case. Using the same method as displayed in table 3.15,.the 2001 Canadian average DCW for turkeys is found to be 7.40kg (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0018). Turkeys are used in some prepared foods and the distribution of those is shown in table 3.18. Table 3 18' Share of listed categories added to turkeys. FES CATEGORY Other ready-cooked meat Other canned meats C ... ) Total MASS OF TURKEY (KG) 5,170,000 1,110,000 6,280,000

Turkey products from table 3.18 add just less than 10% to the total eaten by Canadians in 2001. Turkey consumption in 2001, the additional mass from prepared food, the calculated 2001 DCW for turkey and the number of animals required to support the total, in bold type, are shown in table 3.19. Table 3 19' Calculation of required slaughter turkeys . MEAT FES STARTING MASS (KG) DCW NUMBER OF MASS TOTAL (KG) ANIMALS FROM CONSUMED TABLE 3.18 MASS (KG) (KG) 65,700,000 6,280,000 72,000,000 7.4 9,720,000

Turkeys

There are other commercially important birds produced in Canada, including geese, ducks, ostriches, emus, rheas and small game birds, like pheasants, raised for food (AAFC, 2009a). In the FES, the consumption category for these birds also includes the offal and livers from chickens and turkeys. Together they constitute about 0.8% of poultry meat consumed in 2001 and will not be considered further.

-74 -

3.1.2 Fish and other marine products
Fish is an important part of Canadians' diet. Although in 2001 almost three times the pork, over three and a half times the chicken and well over seven times the beef were eaten (StatsCan, 2003b), fish are nonetheless important to this accounting because the global wild fish harvest has peaked, so aquaculture will be increasingly called upon to provide this food (MFC, 2003). Salmon and other ocean fish account for the vast majority of fish consumed in 2001 (StatsCan, 2003b). When farmed, salmon are fed a pelletized diet that simulates a natural one of crustaceans and fish; since salmon are the most-farmed fish in Canada (MFC, 2008c), it can be assumed their diet is represented by any generalized feed calculations. StatsCan (2005b: table 23A) has determined 3.452t of "complete grainbased rations" were required to feed 1000 farmed fish in 2001. Of that, 2.495t is in fact not grain based, but consists of minerals, fats, sweeteners, supplements and animal by-products (StatsCan, 200Sb: 9), while the remainder is made up of 0.666t wheat and 0.292t soybean meal (StatsCan, 200Sb: table 23K). As the proportions of the constituents of the non-grain based diet are unknown, and it is not possible to accurately re-integrate generically described "animal byproducts" back into whole animals in any case, this part of the analysis will be incomplete.

- 75 -

Other considerations for this category include: и Freshwater fish account for less than 5% of consumption in Canada and will be included with marine fish (StatsCan, 2003b). и The weight of canned fish, mostly salmon and tuna, and that of cured and pickled fish will be considered equivalent to live-weight fish; they account for almost 26% of consumption (StatsCan, 2003b). и Shellfish represent 18.5% of fish consumption (StatsCan, 2003b) and are ocean farmed in Canada, but since they feed naturally they make no demand on land area (AAFC, 2008c). StatsCan based feed quantity estimations on average weights for salmon of 81bs (3.6kg) and trout of Sibs (2.3kg) (2005b: 8); the higher number will be adopted since, as noted, salmon account for the preponderance of both farmed and consumed fish. Table 3.20 shows the 2001 consumption of all fresh, frozen and canned fish, the average weight of salmon and the number of thousands of farmed fish required to meet those quantities, again in bold type. Table 3 20' Calculation of required farmed fish FISH Fresh or frozen Canned Total FES STARTING MASS (KG) 90,000,000 42,000,000

.
NUIVIBER OF FARMED FISH 25,000,000 11,000,000

1301 000,000

WEIGHT OF FISH (KG) 3.6 3.6 3.6

36,000,000

- 76 -

3.1.3 Dairy products and eggs
The first post-natal nutrition all mammals receive is milk (Early, 1998: 1), an emulsion of fat globules (lipids collectively called milkfat or butterfat) interspersed with a colloidal suspension of large proteins in an aqueous solution (serum) containing minerals, enzymes, acids, lactose and vitamins (Goff, 2009a). The main source of milk in North America is bovines (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 279) and the Canadian dairy herd is predominantly the Holstein breed at over 90% (AAFC, 2009b). Dairy producers in Canada, like those in other nations with industrialized dairy industries, use common milk collection and pooling systems (Early, 1998: 11). This compensates for any variability in the composition of milk, even among cows of the same breed, owing to inter alia age, feed and season (Lane, 1998: 165; Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 279-280) and makes possible the determination of averages for lipid and protein content (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 280). Butterfat and proteins are the substrates for most dairy products derived from milk or cream. Regular beverage milk is marketed according to its fat content and is listed in the FES as fluid whole milk (homogenized), 2% butterfat, 1% butterfat and skim (Appendix 1); homogenized milk has a butterfat content of 3.25% and that of skim milk is not more than 0.5% (Dairy Producers Association of Canada, n.d.). Whole milk is mechanically separated using centrifugal cream separators that act on the density difference between the skim milk and the butterfat (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 291). Two methods exist for manufacturing milk with

- 77-

a particular fat content. The first is to simply separate the skim milk from the fat entirely and later rein~roduce the quantity of butterfat required to reach the content desired (Early, 1998: 22); the second is to control the rate of separation so that the output is not skim, but milk with the desired fat content (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 291). Both methods are used in Canada (Goff, 2009b) and in either case it is the serum that accounts for the volume. Specialty milks listed in the FES include lactose-reduced, sterilized, acidophil us bacterium-enhanced and lactose-free milks and must also be added to the total volume. Cream is listed with beverage milk in the FES and will also be added to it. Neither ice cream nor ice milk are a recommended part of nutrition and are not accounted (Health Canada, 2008a). Milk separated to make cream containing 30-35% fat forms the basis for butter-making (Potter and Hotchkiss, 1998: 369). Cream is an oil-in-water emulsion; water is said to be the continuous phase, while droplets of fat encased in protective phospholipid coats float as the discontinuous phase. Agitating the emulsion, or churning, breaks the oil droplets and causes them to adhere to one another until they begin to form larger and larger clumps of fat. The liquid must be drained and may be consumed as buttermilk, although buttermilk is more commonly produced through fermentation as yoghurt (Goff, 2009c), see below. The final product is the reversed, water-in-oil emulsion containing at least 80 0/0 fat called butter (Potter and Hotchkiss, 1998: 370).

-78 -

It is reasonable to assume that cream (milkfat) extracted from the
production of beverage milk supplies some part of butter production, but some butter manufacturers begin with whole milk and "usually" send the skim for drying into milk powder (Goff, 2009d: ~111). A complete exposition of the dairy industry to determine such specifics is beyond the scope of this work. It will therefore be assumed that butter is made from milk produced specially for that purpose, although this may lead to an estimation of the dairy herd that is higher than actually required. Potter and Hotchkiss approximate 22.8L of milk for every kilogram of butter (1998: 281, table 13.3). The volume of milk required to manufacture the butter consumed in 2001 is calculated in table 3.21. Almost 1.5 million kilolitres of whole milk was centrifuged to separate enough butterfat for this amount. Table 3.21: Calculation of milk volume required to supply butter. FES ITEM er FES STARTING VOLUME KG 65,700,000 FES COI\lVERSION FACTOR KL/KG 0.023 MILK VOLUME KL 1,500,000

Yoghurt is milk that has undergone lactic acid fermentation and is likely the oldest example of bioengineered food preservation (Jaros & Rohm, 1998: 156). Most, if not all, of the yoghurt available in Canada is made from cow's milk (Staff, 1998: 124). A review of literature does not indicate that a change in volume occurs after fermentation (Goff, 2009c; Jaros & Rohm, 1998; Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998; Staff, 1998), although Staff notes that fruit concentrate may be added ~etween 15-25% of volume (1998: 143). Yoghurt is listed in the FES in both fresh and frozen forms, but there is no other subdivision for additives like

-79 -

fruit (StatsCan, 2003b); therefore, the volume of fresh and frozen yoghurt will be considered as an equivatent volume of milk and added to its total. Cheese making uses about 35% of the world's milk production (Banks, 2007: 100). The FES lists: cheddar cheese; grated cheese, including cheddar, mozzarella, parmesan and romano; process cheese, which includes Gruyere, cheese slices and prepared cheese snacks; cottage cheese, including ricotta; and other cheese, which includes some 36 other named cheeses (Appendix 1). As previously mentioned, the protein content of milk is important to dairy manufacturers, especially as the principal substrate for cheese-making (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 300) and the standardization of milk that ensures uniformity of content allows for generalizations in the relationship between inputs and outputs. Cheese is described as what remains "after coagulation and whey separation" of milk, cream, or both (Goff, 200ge). Whey constitutes about 90 % of milk volume, as it includes the serum, and contains whey proteins (which may be recovered in the cheese) and minerals. Once considered an environmental threat, mostly due to heightened biological oxygen demand in receiving water bodies, whey products have growing value in some markets (Kelly, 2007: 163). That said, whey products are not explicitly mentioned in the FES (Appendix 1) so any Canadian consumption will be assumed as a by-product of cheese production.
Ban~s

suggests production of 1 kg of cheddar cheese requires about 10l

of milk (2007: 102). Both Emmons and colleagues (1990: 1384) and Hill (2009) use the Van Slyke and Price formula to arrive at 9.885kg and 9.945kg cheddar

- 80-

cheese yield per 100kg milk, respectively, while Potter and Hotchkiss (1998: 281) aver 10kg milk generally produces 1 kg of any cheese. Since milk has a density of about 1.03kg/L at 20░C (Goff, 2009a) 100kg milk displaces 97.1L. These numbers are compared in table 3.22. Table 3.22: Relationship between milk quantity and cheese yield. CHEESE KG 1.0 9.985 9.945 CHEESE: MI 0.10 0.10

Therefore, for all the cheeses except cottage cheese the relationship of 10L milk to produce lkg cheese will be adopted. For cottage cheese, Potter and Hotchkiss (1998:281) suggest 6.3kg, or 6.5L, milk makes lkg. The milk required to make the nearly 46,000 tonnes of cheese consumed is calculated in table 3.23. Table 3 23' Calculation of milk reqllired - to supply cheese consumption rES ITEM Cheese (except cottaqe cheese) Cottage cheese Total FES STARTING MASS (KG) 22,100,000 23,900,000 46,000,000 VOLUME OF MILK (L/KG) 10 6.5 n/a REQUIRED VOLUME OF MILK (KL) 221,000 155,000 376,000

Condensed and evaporated milk are listed together in the FES (Appendix 1) and Potter and Hotchkiss (1998: 281) suggest 2.3kg and 2.4kg milk, respectively, makes lkg of each product. The slightly higher value is used here and is converted using the milk density relationship, 1.03kg/L (Goff, 2009a), to 2.5L milk per litre of product. The starting volume of milk evaporated or

- 81 -

condensed to provide for those categories in the amounts consumed in 2001 is displayed in table 3.24. , Table 3 24' Calculation of milk required to supply evaporated milk consumption. FES ITEM FES STARTING VOLUME (KL) 23,800 RELATIONSHIP TO MILK (L:L) 2.5:1 REQUIRED VOLUME OF MILK (KL) 59,700

Evaporated and и condensed milk

Once the milk required to support the 2001 Canadian diet is known, the size of the dairy herd can be found. A "dairy year" runs from August 1 until the following July 31 so a figure must be derived from both the 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 reports. The former says an average Canadian dairy cow produced 9,152kg of milk, while in 2001-2002 the figure was 9,242 (Canadian Dairy Commission [CDC], 2001; CDC, 2002). Taking the median, 9,197kg, and using the same milk density relationship as for cheese, above (Goff, 2009a), the yield is found to be equivalent to 8,929 litres of milk per cow per annum. The totals from the tables 3.21, 3.23, and 3.24 are added to the FES quantities of liquid milk, milk specialty products, and yoghurt products to provide the total quantity of milk and dairy products consumed in 2001. This is shown, along with the average annual milk production from a single Canadian cow and the number of animals required to produce the total, in bold type, in table 3.25. Table 3 25' Calculation of total milk and the animals required for its supply FES ITEM FES STARTING VOLUME _(KL) 2,340,000 VOLUME FROM TABLES 3.21, 3.23 & 3.24 (KL) 1,940,000 TOTAL CONSUMED VOLUME (KL) 4,280,000 MILK PER COW (KL/YR) 8.929

.

NUMBER OF ANIMALS

Milk

479,000

- 82-

There is an "other dairy products" category in the FES that contains powdered and chocolate milk, buttermilk, eggnog and other beverage milks and drinkable yoghurt, alongside sour cream and various creamy spreads, such as chip dip, garlic spreads and whip cream (Appendix 1). This presents some difficulty for analysis in that accounting for the milk and yoghurt products is appropriate, but for the cream-based products would constitute double counting and there is no way to disaggregate the two. Given the available data, there does not appear to be an argument that justifies apportioning any fraction to the milk volume, while it is arguable that very little of the list are nutritionally essential foods (Health Canada, 2008a). Therefore these data are not used in the analysis.

Eggs are listed with dairy in the FES, but are largely supplied by chickens. StatsCan found the average number of eggs produced by a chicken in 2001 to be 270 (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0020). The number of eggs per chicken will be divided into the total in the FES to give the number of chickens required to support this consumption. The total eggs consumed, the average number of eggs produced by a Canadian chicken in 2001, and the number of chickens fed to supply the eggs, in bold type, are shown in table 3.26. Table 3 26' Calculation of eggs and the chickens required for their supply FES ITEM Eggs FES STARTING QUANTITY 3,300,000,000 EGGS PER CHICKEN PER YEAR 270 NUI'IIBER OF ANIMALS

12,200,000

- 83 -

3.1.4 Bakery and other cereal products
Cereal goods fall into three broad areas in the FES: baked goods, including bread, rolls and buns, and crackers; pasta products; and rice, breakfast cereals, flours and flour-based mixes. Within these broad groups there are nineteen categories comprising 280 individual foods (Appendix 1). The main constituent of most baked goods and pasta is wheat flour (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 388) and fortunately most recipes for baked goods express ingredients as a percentage of the weight of flour used (Gisslen, 1985: 5), while pasta is generally 12% moisture by weight when finished (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 388) making calculation of grain requirement relatively facile. Rice is not grown in Canada (FAO, 2009) and must be substituted for. There are several categories, like cookies, doughnuts, and other baked goods, that are almost entirely nonessential. Grinding flour evolved from a simple process for crushing seeds. Each grain has a complicated structure designed to protect the seed until germination and growth conditions are right. A hard, multi-layered outer casing, the bran, protects the nutritious interior, including the starchy endosperm that initially feeds the new plant, and the germ, which carries the genetic material (Potter & HotchkiSS, 1998: 383; 385, figure 17.1). In the earliest innovation after natural stones, original millers pounded the whole grain in a pestle-and-mortar arrangement to make whole grain flour; mechanized flour milling, grinding whole grain between two rotating circular stones, dates back perhaps 7500 years. The
\

- 84-

process for separating the darker bran from the lighter endosperm to make socalled white flour, called the gradual reduction process, developed over the last three hundred years. The modern mill begins with the break process that passes grain through a series of progressively smaller, fluted cast-iron rollers that crack and flake off the bran and the germ, each pass followed by sieving through progressively smaller screens that separates the endosperm (Catterall & Cauvain, 2007: 333-335). The endosperm fragments, called semolina, are then passed through the reduction system. This series of smooth rollers produces finished flour of different grades, in declining quality from beginning to end (Catterall & Cauvain, 2007: 345) The bran can also be ground and added to produce different types of brown flour (Catterall & Cauvain, 2007: 347), but is mostly destined for animal feed (Canadian Wheat Board, 2008). If the mill is set to make white flour, only the endosperm is used and represents between 76-78% of the mass of wheat, called the extraction rate. Blended brown flours have an extraction rate of approximately 90% and whole wheat 100% (Catterall & Cauvain, 2007: 347). Flours made from rye and other grains, while milled in the same fashion, do not have the proteins (glutens) required for breadmaking and must be blended with wheat flour; for example, light rye bread is made using 60 0/0 wheat flour and 40% rye flour (cauvain, 2007: 372, 375). The extraction rate applied will depend on the item in question; these are explained below. Bread is a standalone category in the FES with no distinction made between white or whole wheat varieties and no mention of breads made from

- 85 -

aYifl~wi'v 1.I~~Va~TY UJ;1Ai1V

PF.O?~-BTY GF

other grasses like rye or those made from lesser-known grains such as spelt, kamut or quinoa (Canadian Grain Commission [CGC], 2009; Appendix 1). However, since breads made from any of these grains will be functionally similar as food and since the 2001 Canadian average yield for both wheat and rye was identical (StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010), assuming all rye breads are made from wheat does not change the analysis of land area. Yield data for spelt, kamut and quinoa are not readily available for Canada (FAD, 2009; StatsCan, 2009), although they are all grown commercially here (CGC, 2009); it will be assumed that wheat is an acceptable substitute for these grains in bread. As mentioned, bread formulae are related to the mass of flour, so if a typical recipe can be established and a reasonable estimate of weight lost to dehydration and processing can be made, the flour used can be calculated from the mass of the finished product. Gisslen (1985: 34) addresses scaling commercial dough recipes, noting that evaporative weight loss is 10-13%, or 5065g per 500g, and later suggests adding 50g of dough for every 450g finished product, or 11% extra, to account for "baking loss" (1985: 73). Wiggins and Cauvain (2007: 171, figure 5.18), in a more detailed consideration of losses throughout a processing plant, arrive at the same figure, 11 %. Some of the loss must be dough adhering to preparation and cooking surfaces and mixing and cutting blades, but most is lost as water is evaporated during baking. Due to numerical agreement 11% total loss is accepted. Perhaps somewhat arbitrarily a loss of 10% will be accounted; this represents an attempt at realism in

- 86-

acknowledging material loss (minus 1% from 11%), while maintaining a conservative estimate by attributing most of the loss to evaporation. Further assumed is an extraction rate for flour from wheat of 90%, as for brown flour, above, because although it leads to a less conservative estimate than the extraction rate for white flour (rv77%), it is realistic. One hundred percent whole wheat flour includes the milled germ, which contains much fat and becomes rancid in storage, so is less used commercially. Also, the milled bran and germ in whole grain flour have other effects that detract from the quality of the bread and so the use of whole wheat flour is usually augmented with other flour (Gisslen, 1985: 13). To allocate all bread using white flour extraction rates would ignore easily available information that a great many bread products for sale in Canada are made from some kind of blended flour (e.g. Canada Bread Company Limited, 2005). Table 3.27 shows the commercial formulations of white and whole wheat breads if 100 units of flour are used, the application of a 10% loss of water by mass, the change in the percent share of flour, and the factor used to convert the mass of bread consumed to its equivalent grain at a 90% flour extraction rate. The masses of bread, rolls, and the like consumed in Canada in 2001 are multiplied by 0.64, determined in table 3.27, to obtain the amount of wheat required for production (StatsCan, 2003b). Before calculating the wheat required for bread and related products, the quantities from several categories must be transformed to usable units.

- 87-

Table 3.27: Comparison of contributions (by mass and percent) of ingredients in bread and calculation of conversion factor. INGREDIENT WHOLE WHEAT WHITE 100g Flour 100q 62g Water 60q 3g и Yeast 3.75q 2g Salt 2.5q 4g Sugar/ malt syru~ 3.75q 3g Non-fat milk solids 5g 4g Shortening 3.75g ield 178g 178.75g_ % flour 56 56 57 o flour (-10% waterl 58 0.64 Conversion for FES (90% 0.64 extraction; unitless) Source for masses: (Gisslen, 1985: 47; 48).
I

I

The FES category "unsweetened rolls and buns" includes scones, tea biscuits, bagels and other buns traditionally eaten for breakfast, Kaisers and other buns used for sandwiches, and dinner rolls and hamburger and hotdog buns (Appendix 1). As these are given as a number of dozen rolls consumed an equivalent mass of finished product must be determined. Rolls and buns begin with as little as 45g of dough for dinner rolls to 60g for Kaisers and 50-SSg for bagels (Gisslen, 1985: 50, 66, 68). As the numbers of each item are unknown, the mean is an inappropriate measure as it cannot be realistically weighted. Therefore the median of the range 45-60g, 52.5g per unit (also the median of the range for bagels alone) is chosen and the calculation is shown in table 3.28.

. Calculation of the mass of rolls from initial FES numerical quantity. Table 3 28'
FES ITEM Rolls FES STARTING QUANTITY 3,370,000,000 AVERAGE MASS OF DOUGH PER ROLL (T) 0.0000525 MASS OF ROLLS (T) 177,000

- 88 -

Buns and rolls are prepared using the same manufacturing processes and the same flour as bread, above, so the same derivations apply for weight loss and flour extraction rate. Tile recipes are again expressed as a percentage of the flour used and table 3.29 gives those for hard rolls, like Kaisers, soft rolls, like dinner rolls, and bagels. Table 3.29: Comparison of contributions (by mass and percent) of ingredients in various rolls and calculation of conversion factor. INGREDIENT Flour Water Yeast Salt Sugar/ malt syru~ Egg whites Shortening Butter Yield % flour % flour (-10% water) Conversion for FES (90% extraction; unitlessl SOFT ROLLS 100g 57g 3.5g 1.75 9.5 HARD ROLLS 100g 55g 3.5g 2.25g 2.25g 2.25g 2.25g 167.5g 60 62 0.69 BAGELS 100g 50g 3g 1.5g 6g (oil) 0.8g 161.0g 62 64 0.71

4.75g 4.75g 186.0g 54 55 0.62

Source for masses: (Gisslen, 1985: 44; 48; 50). The mean of the three conversion factors, 0.67, is adopted to convert the mass of buns consumed to wheat grains needed. Crackers and crisp breads follow in the FES and include soda crackers (saltines), soup crackers, Melba toast, and crisp breads with brand names like Stoned Wheat ThinsTM and TriscuipM (Appendix 1). Crackers and their ilk are made with dough that is similar to bread, though with slightly less water and with a different cooking process (Manley, 2001: 41). Crisp breads are also similar

- 89-

to regular bread, but are made with much more water, later removed (Manley, 2001: 28; 30). Again as above, formulations are made against 100 units of brown wheat flour extracted as 90% of the mass of whole grain. In the case of these products, however, the final product is dried to 5% moisture (Manley, 2001: 30). Table 3.30 shows the commercial formulations of crackers and crisp bread if 100 units of flour are used, the application of a 95% loss of water by mass, the change in the percent share of flour and the factor used to convert the mass of product consumed to its equivalent grain at a 90% flour extraction rate. Table 3.30: Comparison of contributions (by mass and percent) of ingredients in crackers and crisp breads and calculation of conversion factor. CRACKERS 100 0.15 1.62 0.89 3.7 11.82 147.68 68 84 0.93 CRISP BREAD 100 129 1.15

Soda I Non-fat milk solids . Shortenin Yield 0/0 flour % flour -95% water Conversion for FES (90% extraction; unitless
I

230.15 43 88 0.98

Source: (Manley, 2001: 30; 41). Both the mean and the median of the conversion factor are 0.955, so this number will be used. While cookies/ sweet biscuits/ doughnuts/ and other sweet goods are not essential and are not accounted here, the same cannot be said for muffins.

и90и

Muffins are made with similar ingredients and in much the same fashion as bread (Gisslen, 1985: 85) and experience the same 10% moisture loss during baking. Table 3.31 shows a typical muffin recipe and the calculation of the conversion factor. Table 3.31: Ingredients in muffins and calculation of conversion factor. INGREDIENT MUFFINS Flour 1009 I I Sugar 30q Baking powder 6q I Salt 1.25q 20g и Eggs Water 80g 30g и Shortening 267.25g Yield % flour 37 0/0 flour (-10% water) 39 Conversion for FES (90% 0.44 extraction; unitless) Source for masses: (Gisslen, 1985: 90). Muffins are also listed in the FES as number eaten and must be converted to mass before the application of the conversion factor. Gisslen (1985: 90) directs bakers to use approximately 60g of dough per muffin, which will be adopted here. Pastes of semolina and water formed into sheets and cut into dumplings called noodles have been produced nearly as long as bread, perhaps as long as 6000 years in China. In Europe evidence from ancient art and text indicates the Romans had developed pasta in 600 BCE. Production was artisanal until the Industrial Revolution brought mechanization, extruders and hydraulic presses; the first fully modernized plant, with continuous extrusion and drying producing

- 91 -

ready-to-eat pasta, began operating in 1946 (Dexter, 2004: 249-250). In the FES pasta is listed in three groups: canned pasta products; fresh or dry pasta; and dry pasta mixes (Appendix 1). The latter two are mostly dry pasta and canned pasta start with it, so a general discussion of the derivation of the wheat equivalent will be made followed by details specific to the canned product. Both Italian pasta and Asian noodles are described in all three groups; Dexter notes that while the processing steps are quite different the recipes and final moisture contents are similar (2004: 257; 264), so they are accounted for in the same fashion. Italian pasta is made from semolina, the course particles of the endosperm, rather than ground flour, and preferably obtained from high-quality wheat (Dexter, 2004: 250). Since the bran is removed completely for semolina, the extraction rate for semolina is the same as that for white flour, between 7678% or 77% (Catterall & Cauvain, 2007: 346), as will be used here. Potter and Hotchkiss (1998: 388) state simply that pasta should be dried to "about 120/0, while Dexter (2004: 257) is no more specific in his long overview of the multistage, controlled drying process in the modern plant, suggesting "approximately 12.5%." Since a higher moisture value leads arithmetically to lesser quantities of wheat required and is thus a conservative measure, 12.5% moisture will be used. The formula for pasta is 30 units of water for every 100 of semolina. Asian noodles are made not from semolina, but from a variety of flours, mostly wheat

\

- 92-

flour 6 free of bran, i.e. extracted at a rate of 77% (Dexter, 2004: 259). Table 3.32 shows the calculations determining the conversion of pasta to wheat. Table 3.32: Comparison of contributions (by mass and percent) of ingredients in pasta. INGREDIENT PASTA Flour I 100g 30g Water Salt 130q Yield % flour 77 % flour (-87.5% water) 96 onversion for FES (unitless) 1.25 Source for masses: (Dexter, 2004: 251).

I

As can be seen, whole wheat must be produced to account for the milling loss of the bran, resulting in a conversion factor of 1.25. Canned pasta includes a variety of ready-to-eat noodle types and shapes in a sauce (Appendix 1). Lopez discusses the procedure for canning spaghetti, which will be assumed here to be typical of all canned pasta. As the pasta is cooked prior to canning it is fully hydrated, weighs about 2.5 times its dry mass, and takes up from 33-50% of the volume of the package (Lopez: 1987a: 316317). Assuming the density of fully hydrated pasta is about 1kg/L, a conservative estimation of the dry weight of pasta from a can is 33% 7 2.5 = 13% of the volume given in the FES. As its constituency cannot be determined, the sauce will not be accounted for. Table 3.33 shows the steps in converting litres of canned pasta to the mass equivalent.

6

Perhaps 30-40% of all wheat flour in Southeast Asia is used for making noodles (Dexter, 2004: 258).

- 93-

Table 3 33и Calculation of mass of pasta from canned volume FES ITEM Canned pasta products FES STARTING QUANTITY (L) . 29,900,000

% DRY l"1ASS OF PASTA 13

MASS OF PASTA (KG) 3,880,000

The mass of wheat accounted for by pasta consumption, including the result from table 3.33, is determined in table 3.34. Table 3 34и Total mass of pasta FES ITEM FES STARTING QUANTITY (T) Canned pasta products 3,880 Dry or fresh pasta 149,000 Pasta mixes 35,800 Total 189,000 In table 3.35 the totals from tables 3.28 and 3.34 are listed with bread, crackers and crisp breads, their respective conversion factors, and the resulting quantities of wheat ascribed to their production; the final quantity of wheat is in bold type. Table 3 35и Calculation of wheat required for bread , rolls , crackers and pasta FES ITEM Bread Rolls Crackers and crisp breads Pasta Total QUANTITY FROM FES, CONVERSION TABLES 3.28 & 3.34 (T) FACTOR (UNITLESS) 573,000 0.64 177,000 0.67 53,500 0.995 189,000 n/a 1.25 n/a MASS OF WHEAT (T) 367,000 118,000 53,200 236,000

774,000

In the FES rice is found as white, brown, parboiled and prepared types (Appendix 1) and, as mentioned above, is not a commercially grown cereal in Canada (FAO, 2009). A substitution must therefore be made to account for the land area represented by its consumption. Beside rice, cereals also include

- 94-

wheat, rye, barley, oats and corn (GCG, 2009; Potter & Hotchkiss, 1995: 3S1). As it is reasonable to assume some substitution by grain corn in the event rice is unavailable, accounting for rice consumption is proportional to the fraction of produced amounts for wheat, rye barley, oats and corn using CANSIM II data and calculated in table 3.36 (StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010). Table 3.36: Calculation of production proportions for cereals/ 2001.

~IN arley

2001 PRODUCTION (T) % OF TOTAL 10,SOO,OOO 25.4 Corn (grain) S,390,OOO 19.6 2,690,000 Oats 6.3 Rye 22S,000 0.5 Wheat 20,600,000 4S.2 Total 42,SOO/000 100 Source: (StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010). The amount of rice consumed, given as mass units in the FES, will be converted to equivalent land areas of each above grain in proportion to the percentages found in table 3.36. While it is beyond the scope of this work to evaluate the nutritional values of foods, a straight substitution in this case is plausible, at least on the grounds of energy equivalency. Equal amounts of rice, whole wheat, and potato flours and corn meal contain between 1000kJ and 1300kJ of energy. A serving of cooked white or brown rice yields about the same energy as a slice of white or whole wheat bread or cooked barley (Health Canada/ 200Sb: 4-6). Table 3.37 shows the distribution of the 119,000 tonnes of rice consumed in 2001 as if it were Canadian-grown grains. Domesticallyproduced grain totals are in bold type.

- 95 -

Table 3 37' Calculation for rice as Canadian-grown grain GRAIN Total Barley Corn Oats Re t % OF TOTAL 100 25.4 19.6 6.3 0.5 48.2 RICE AS GRAIN (T) 119,000

30,300 23,400 7,510 636 57,600

Flour is listed as a standalone category in the FES, encompassing wheat, rice, rye, oat, corn, buckwheat, and potato flours, amongst others (Appendix 1). The task here is to find a reasonable substitute for such a disparate blend when the proportions of each are unknown. As a comprehensive analysis of the manufacturing techniques and extraction rates for all the flours listed and the subsequent calculation of a single conversion factor is beyond the scope of this work, the 90% extraction rate applied to bread flour, above, will be applied, as will the average yield for all wheat, 1900kg/ha (StatsCan, 2009: survey 0010010). The weight of all the flour consumed in 2001 is listed in table 3.38, along with the conversion factor derived from the 90% extraction rate of flour from

wheat, and the addition to the final mass of wheat, in bold type. Table 3 38' Calculation of wheat required to supply flour FES ITEM Flour FES STARTING MASS (T) 143,000 CONVERSION FACTOR (UNITLESS) 1.11 MASS OF WHEAT (T)

159,000

"Other cereal grains l l is a catch-all category of foods like natural bran, bulgur, wheat germ, couscous, hominy grits, oatmeal and corn meal (Appendix 1), again in undeterminable proportions. As these foods are cereals the proportions found in table 3.36 are applied here. Table 3.39 shows this for the

96 -

nearly 18 thousand tonnes of other milled and unmilled grains. Domesticallyproduced grain totals are in bold type. Table 3.39: Calculation for flour as Canadian-grown grain. GRAIN Total Barle Corn Oats Re Wheat AL 100 25.4 19.6 6.3 0.5 48.2 FLOUR AS GRAIN T 17,900

4,540 3,510 1,130 95 8,640

Breakfast cereals are another unknown mix of grain-based foods found in the FES (Appendix 1). Wheat, rice, corn and oats are the predominant grains and for most cereals only the endosperm are used, either mashed and reformed, or mechanically aerated or "puffed" (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 394-395). Finished breakfast cereals are dried to 3-5% moisture from the original moisture content of the grains of about 11% (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 382, table 17.2; 395) and so a conversion factor must be found by dividing the mean moisture content by the finished content before the 77% extraction rate for endosperm from grain can be applied; the calculation of this is shown in table 3.40. Table 3.40: Calculation of the average moisture content and conversion factor for breakfast cereals. GRAIN E CONTENT 11% Corn 13% Oats 11% Wheat 11.7% Mean Cereal moisture content 5% ion factor 2.34 Source: (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 382, table 17.2).

- 97-

After the converted amount is determined it is apportioned according to table 3.36 as for rice and other cereal grains, above. Breakfast cereals must undergo a two-step process to find the final demand they pose on land area. First, the moisture content is increased to its original proportion using the conversion factor from table 3.40; second, it is apportioned as for rice and other grains, above, based on table 3.36. The results are shown in tables 3.41 and 3.42, respectively, with the masses to be added to the final grains quantities in the latter table in bold type. Table 3.41: Calculation of grain required for breakfast cereal consumption. FES ITEM Breakfast cereals FES S MASS T 143,000 FES CONVERSION FACTOR UNITLESS 2.34 MASS OF NS T

Table 3 42' Calculation for breakfast cereals as Canadian-grown grain. GRAIN Total Barley Corn Oats Rye Wheat

% OF TOTAL
100 25.4 19.6 6.3 0.5 48.2

BREAKFAST CEREALS AS GRAIN (T) 335,000

85,000 65,800 21,100 1,790 162,000

The remaining cereal products are cake mixes and cereal-based snack foods that are not considered nutritional and are not accounted here (Health Canada, 2008a). The totals from tables 3.35, 3.37, 3.38, 3.39, and 3.42 are collected in table 3.84, where the final areal demand for such land is determined.

- 98 -

3.1.5 Fruit and nuts
Over 170 kinds of fresh, frozen, preserved and juiced fruits from around the world were eaten in Canada in 2001 (Appendix 1). Only five orchard fruits, five berries, both sweet and sour cherries, and melons (in small quantities) are produced commercially in Canada (FAa, 2009; StatsCan, 2009: survey 0010009). Not only must consumption of domestically-produced fruits be satisfied by 2001 Canadian fruit production, but in order to satisfy this analysis the areas required to provide substitutes for imported species must be as well. There are several fruits listed in the FES in litres, like strawberries, or as the number consumed rather than as a mass, like grapefruits and melons, and thus require conversion (StatsCan, 2003b). The United States Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Food and Nutrition Service publishes commodity fact sheets for many foods including grapefruit (USDA, 2007: 123). The USDA's National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) provides some conversions in annual statistical reports including for strawberries and watermelon (2009: vi, vii). The following table relates the number of grapefruits and litres of strawberries from the FES to equivalent mass according to the above-noted sources. Table 3.43: Calculation of per unit mass for selected fruits. FRUIT Grapefruit Strawberries UNIT 27-32 large fruit Crate (26.4' , MASS (KG) CONVERSION FACTOR 15.4-17.7 0.56kg/single fruit 16.3 0.68kg/L Source: (USDA, 2007; 123; 2009: VI)

- 99-

Grapefruit are given as a range of weights that for single fruits corresponds to 0.55-0.57kg; both the mean and the median are 0.56kg and this value is used. For strawberries the value is essentially a bulk density measurement, 0.68kg/L. Melons create an additional complication in that they have myriad harvest weights t dependant on the variety or species. Complimentary here to the USDA data for watermelons (2009: vii), a document has been prepared by Penn State University (n.d.) covering the production and marketing of cantaloupes that lists the harvest weights of 11 cultivars. The range is listed and the mean is calculated, as shown in table 3.44. As there is a significant difference in the values and there is no way to know the distribution of melon types in the FES (StatsCan, 2003b), an average weighted by Canadian production, 64% melons like cantaloupe and 36% watermelon (FAO, 2009) is calculated and also shown in table 3.44. Table 3.44: Calculation of per unit mass for melons. FRUIT CRITERION MASS (KG) MASS/MEL (KG) 2.5 11.3 - 1.6 - 4.1 2.9 1; USDA, 2009: vii)

1.8-3.2 Cantaloupe Range (11 varieties) Watermelon Single average melon 11.3 Weighted cantaloupe 2.5 64% production area Weighted watermelon 22% production area 11.3 Mean melon weight 100% production area Source: (FAO, 2009; Penn State, n.d.: 2, table

Although the accuracy of this result, 2.9kg, is somewhat questionable, an alternative applicable measure of central tendency, the median, 6.7kg, is equally unsatisfactory in that it is likely too high. Since the lower measure is more conservative, it is adopted. Melons were produced in such small quantities in
\

- 100-

2001 Canada that StatsCan does not collect data, although the FAO (2009) has estimated planted area, production and yield. The mass of fruits given in numeric quantities in the FES must be first converted and this is shown in table 3.45. Table 3.45: Calculation of the mass of fruits from initial FES numerical quantities. FES ITEM FES STARTING QUANTITY # UNLESS NOTED 155,000,000 102,000,000 47,800,000 L CONVERSION FACTOR TjUNIT 0.00056 0.00290 0.00068 MASS OF FRUIT T 86,900 294,000 32,500

After fresh fruit is accounted for, frozen fruits are analyzed in much the same manner. There is a similar mix of domestic and imported fruits, both berries and tree fruits, in an unknown distribution in the FES (Appendix 1) that will be apportioned against table 3.53, below. Although they are 85-90% water, fruits are not dehydrated prior to freezing except for some osmotic dehydration caused by the syrup or powdered sugar used mainly as preservative (De Ancos, Sanchez-Moreno, De Pascual-Teresa & Cano, 2006: 59,65). Dried fruit does occur in the FES as a single group comprising raisins and an "other dried fruit/preserves" category (Appendix 1). Drying involves the

removal of free and bound water from fruits using either natural or mechanical methods involving warm-air convection, surface conduction, infrared radiation, or (microwave) molecular excitation. Regardless of the method and process the drying effects of fruit are similar and thus may be discussed generally (Barta, 2006: 82-84). The main variety of grape used for raisin production in North America, primarily in the US, is the Thompson seedless variety and raisin-making is the
- 101 -

second most common use for grapes in the world after wine-making (Bhat, Desai

& Suleiman, 2006: 439). Grapes have an initial moisture content of around 86%
by mass and are dried to 14% moisture by mass (Bhat et aI., 2006: 442); this will be arithmetically reversed to find the starting mass. The mass of grapes is obtained by initially multiplying the mass of raisins found in the FES by 0.14 to find a mass of water. This is subtracted from the starting mass to find the mass of solids. The mass of dried solids is increased by a factor of 6.14 (0.86/0.14) to an approximate initial water content of 31,530kg, which is in turn divided into the mass of solids, giving a starting dried solids percentage of grapes, 16.3%. The divisor is increased until the result is 14% (86% mOisture). As suggested

above, different grapes are eaten fresh, used for making raisins or for beverage purposes. However, no distinction is made for grape variety in this study, so the mass is added to the total for grapes. The list of dried and preserved fruit includes both domestic and imported items, as well as items like fruit bars that are processed beyond drying and candied fruits and cherries in syrup; since over 80% of the list is simply dried fruit the entire category is analyzed as such (Appendix 1). All fruits begin, as mentioned, with a moisture content of 85-90% (De Ancos et aI., 2006: 59) and all are dried to between 12-16% (Pataki, 2006: 219). The median of both ranges, 87.5% and 14%, respectively, will be applied as for grapes, immediately above, as will the iteration process. The final mass will be apportioned to domestic fruits' land area using table 3.53. The mass of fresh fruit that went into

- 102-

the manufacture of raisins and dried fruit is shown in table 3.46. The amount to be added to the final total for grapes is in bold type. The total for dried fruit is distributed against domestic production in table 3.56, below. Table 3 46' Mass of fruit as raisins and dried fruits FES ITEM FES STARTING MASS (T) 5,970 11,900 FES STARTING MOISTURE (%) 14.0 14.0 FES STARTING DRY MASS (T) 5,130 10,300 FINAL MOISTURE CONTENT (%) 86.0 87.5 FINAL MASS OF FRUIT (T)

Raisins Dried fruit

36,
82,200

Fruit juice not from concentrate includes apple, orange and grapefruit juices and also contains an "other" category that lists the juices of 17 distinct domestic and imported fruits. Juices are either clear, like apple juice, or cloudy, like orange juice, but the process for extracting the juice is the same; clear juices additionally undergo filtration during processing (Horvath-Kerkai, 2006: 205). Commercial extraction of fruit juices in North America is done by the "squeezer-type" and "reamer-type" extractors (Hui, 2004: 367). Unfortunately, Hui (2004: 368) only gives the extraction rate for the squeezer-type, stating the average production capacity is 500L orange juice per tonne oranges, which amounts to 50% extraction by mass. The FAO value is slightly higher at 54% extraction rate for oranges, 75% for grapes, 48% for grapefruits, 33% for lemons and 72% for apples in the US, and 70% for Canadian apples (FAO, n.d.: 195, 272-273). Other literature did not provide more than qualitative statements of extraction rates (Horvath-Kerkai, 2006: 209; Pataki, 2006: 222; Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998), although Potter and Hotchkiss aver that, equipment differences

- 103 -

notwithstanding, all the elements of juice processing are common for all fruits (1998: 432). For the juices specifically named in the FES the respective FAO (n.d.) extraction rates are applied, using the Canadian value for apples, and the result added to domestic production for apples and apportioned against table 3.43 for the others. For the other juice category, the median of the range 5470%, 62%, will be used and the result apportioned according to table 3.53. Concentrated fruit juice is mostly orange juice, both as found in the FES and produced globally (Hui, 2006: 376; StatsCan, 2003b), followed by "other concentrated fruit juices." The FAO (n.d.: 272) lists the extraction rate for American orange juice concentrate as 21% and grapefruit juice concentrate at 12%. Orange juice will be assessed at 21 % and the other juice category at the median of the above range, 16.5%; both will be apportioned against table 3.53. Using the FAO (n.d.) extraction rates given in above, a conversion factor from litres of juice to tonnes of fruit is derived and applied in table 3.47. Table 3.47: Calculation of mass of fruit required to make an initial volume of fruit juice. FES ITEM Apple juice Grapefruit juice Orange juice Other juice Total (excl. apples) FES STARTING QUANTITY (L) 143,000,000 23,900,000 251,000,000 388,000,000 663,000,000 CONVERSION FACTOR (TIL) 0.0014 0.0021 0.0019 0.0016 MASS OF FRUIT

(iT

nla

201,000 50,200 476,000 621,000 1,150,000

The mass of fruit required to supply concentrated fruit juice is found is the same manner as in table 3.47 and is displayed in table 3.48. The mass of apples from table 3.47 is added directly to domestic consumption, while the total from

- 104-

the other juices in that table and the total from table 3.48 are distributed against domestic production in table 3.56. Table 3.48: Calculation of starting mass of fruit from an initial volume of concentrated fruit juice. FES ITEM Orange juice Other fruit juice Total FES STARTING QUANTITY (L) 41,800,000 71,700,000 114,000,000 CONVERSION FACTOR (T/L) 0.0048 0.0061 n/a MASS OF FRUIT (T) 201,000 437,000 638,000

Canned peaches, pineapples, mixed fruit (mostly fruit salads) and fruit cocktails, and "other fruit" are listed in the FES as volume units (StatsCan, 2003b) and so must be converted. The Canadian Agricultural Products Act regulations mandate minimum net and drained weights for five standardized can sizes making estimation of mass equivalence reasonably straight-forward. For peaches and pineapples, for each can size produced? the lowest drained weight percentage, i.e. the most conservative estimate, will be adopted. The regulations include fruit salad, which is essentially the mixed fruit category and will thus be used. These figures are found in table 3.49. Table 3.49: Canned fruits consumed and m/v ratio. CANNEOITEM Peaches Pineapple Fruits for salad

% MASS/VOLUME 60 a 53 b 61 c

Notes: a) lOfl.oz., sliced, quartered, halves; in water or syrup. b) lOfl.oz. all styles but crushed; in water. c) 2Sfl.oz. in water or syrup.

Source: (OOJC, 2009b).

7

Not all fruits are sold in every can size.

- 105 -

These ratios will be applied against their respective categories in the FES. For peaches the amount is applied directly against production area. Both pineapples and mixed fruit are apportioned according to table 3.53. For the remaining category, "other canned fruit," which includes domestic and imported kinds in an unknown distribution, an average for those domestically produced fruit for which there are canning regulations will be determined. All these values and the calculation can be found in table 3.50. The mass of other canned fruit is found by multiplying the volume by 0.54; the result is apportioned according to table 3.53. Conversion factors derived from the regulated minimum drained weights of canned fruit are shown in table 3.51 with the starting volume of the cans and the final mass of fruit. The result for peaches, in bold, is added directly to domestic consumption, while the rest are added to table 3.57. Table 3.50: Other canned fruits, m/v ratio and mean of the ratio. CANNED ITEM % MASS/VOLUME Blueberries 53a 5i) Cherries (sweet) ! Pears 61 e 57d и Plums Raspberries 50 e Strawberries 43 t Average for FES 54
i

Notes: a) b) c) d) e)

19ft.oz., in water or syrup. 28ft.oz., not pitted; in syrup or water. 10fl.oz., sliced, quartered, halves; in water or syrup. 28f1.oz., in water or syrup. 14ft.oz., in water or syrup. f) 14fl.oz., in water or syrup.

~

Source: (DOJC, 200gb)

- 106 -

Table 3.51: Mass of fruit required to provide the initial canned volume. FES ITEM FES STARTIN II--___-----+-Q~U-A-N-T...;;,.ITY------!..:::.L Peaches 11,900 Pinea Ie 17,900,000 Mixed fruit 29,900,000 Other canned fruit 23,900,000 Total 71,700,000 CONVERSION FACTOR T/L 0.00060 0.00053 0.00061 0.00054 n/a F ........ T ~I
=====n

7 170
9,490 18,200 12,900 40,600

The final two fruit categories in the FES, "jams, jellies and other preserves" and "fruit pie fillings," are similar products given in volume units that must be converted to mass (StatsCan, 2003b). Canadian standards for fruit content of jam vary by fruit and according to whether or not pectin, a gelling agent, is added B, The range is as little as 27% fruit by mass in jam with pectin added, to 35% in jams with apple or rhubarb and some other fruit, to 45% in

pectin-free jams (DOJC, 2009c). Jelly and marmalade are made with juice extracted from fruit, rather than the whole fruit itself, as is jam (Vibhakara & Bawa, 2006: 197-198). As neither the starting quantity of fruit nor the amount of jelly within the category can be accurately determined (StatsCan, 2003b), jelly and marmalade will be treated as jam. Pie fillings contain about 30% fruit by mass (Pataki, 2006: 226), Since the only products mentioned by name in the FES are low-pectin fruits (StatsCan, 2003b; Vibhakara & Bawa, 2006: 191), since pie fillings contain an amount of fruit similar to that of jam, and since the fruit by mass in pectin-added jam is the most conservative measure, it will be assumed that products in this category contain 27% fruit by mass, apportioned through

8 Pectin is found naturally in fruits; apples and citrus fruits are examples of fruits high in pectin, while peaches, berries and pineapple are examples with low amounts (Vibhakara & Bawa, 2006: 191).

- 107-

table 3.53. The results are in table 3.52 and the total is distributed to domestic production in table 3.57. Table 3.52: Mass of fruit required to manufacture the volume of jam, jelly, other preserves and fruit pie filling. FES ITEM Jams et.al. Pie fillin Total FES STARTING UANTITY L CONVERSION FACTOR TIL MASS OF FRUIT (T)

23,800,000 5 970,000 29800,0

0,00027 0.00027

na

6,430 1,61 8,04

Nuts are not commercially produced in Canada (FAO, 2009: StatsCan,

2009) and there are no obvious substitutes short of nutritional comparison,
which is beyond the scope of this work. The mix of domestic fruit that will take the place of imports is proportional to the 2001 tonnes of production for apples, apricots, blueberries, two kinds of cherries, cranberries, grapes, melons, peaches, pears, raspberries, and

strawberries (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 226; StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0009). The produced amount for the two types of cherry production is combined. The distribution is shown in table 3.53, Table 3.54 shows the distribution of equivalent masses of various domestic fruit substituting for bananas and citrus fruits, whose FES quantities are shown in the top row. Table 3.55 shows the distribution of equivalent masses of various domestic fruit substituting for other fresh fruit, other tropical fruit and frozen fruit, again with the FES quantities in the top row (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 226).

- 108 -

Table 3.53: Calculation of production proportions for fruit, 2001. FRUIT 2001 PRODUCTION (T) % OF TOTAL AREA Apples 488,000 63.0 Apricots 1,370 0.2 Blueberries 67,700 8.6 Cherries 11,100 1.4 Cranbe 34,800 4.5 Grapes 67,200 8.7 Melons 12,400 1.6 Peaches 30,500 3.9 17,500 Pears 2.3 Plums 3,630 0.5 Raspberries 14,600 1.9 Strawberries 26,200 3.4 Total 775,000 100 Source: (FAO, 2009; StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0009). Table 3.54: Masses of domestic fruits substituting for bananas and citrus fruit. FRUIT FES totals A les Blueberries Cherries Cranberries Gra es Melons Peaches Pears Plums Ras berries Strawberries

%
100 63.0 0.2 8.6 1.4 4.5 8.7 1.6 3.9

GRAPEFRUIT T 86,900

ORANGES T 233,000

LEMONS & LItvlES T 7900

1.9 3.4

5,120 16,100 31,100 5,740 14,100 8070 1,680 6,740 12,100

54,800 154 7,590 1,240 3,900 7,540 1,390 3,430 1,960 407 1,640 2940

147,000 411

20200 3,730 9,170 5,240 1,090 4,380 7,870

11300 32 1560 256 803 1,550 287 706 403 84 337 605

- 109-

Table 3.55: Masses of domestic fruits substituting for other fresh fruit, other tropical fruit and frozen fruit. FRUIT

%

FES totals Apples Apricots Blueberries Cherries Cranberries Grapes Melons Peaches Pears Plums Raspberries Strawberries

100 63.0 0.2 8.6 1.4 4.5 8.7 1.6 3.9 2.3 0.5 1.9 3.4

OTHER . FRESH FRUIT (T) 41,800

OTHER TROPICAL FRUIT (T) 77,600

FROZEN FRUIT (T) 5,970

26,300 74 3,650 598 1,880 3,620 669 1,650 941 196 786 1,410

48,900 137 6,770 1,110

1,240 3, 1,750 364 1,460 2,620

I

3,760 11 521 85 268 518 96 235 134 28 112 202

Table 3.56 displays the distribution of equivalent masses of various domestic fruit substituting for the amounts of other dried fruit, fruit juices and fruit juices from concentrate, their consumption values shown in the top row. Table 3.57 shows the distribution of equivalent masses of various domestic fruit substituting for other canned fruit and jams, jellies and preserve, with the amounts from the above tables shown in the top row (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 226). The mass totals in bold type from tables 3.45, 3.46, 3.47, 3.51, 3.54, 3.55, 3.56, and 3.57 are carried forward to table 3.85.

\

- 110-

Table 3.56: Masses of domestic fruits substituting for other dried fruit, other fruit juice and concentrated fruit juice. FRUIT FES totals Apples Apricots Blueberries Cherries Cranberries Grapes Melons Peaches Pears Plums Raspberries Strawberries

%

OTHER DRIED FRUIT (T) 100 82,200 63.0 51,747 0.2 145 8.6 7,168 1.4 1,175 4.5 3,685 8.7 7,123 1.6 1,316 3.9 3,236 2.3 1,849 0.5 385 1.9 1,545 3.4 2,775

OTHER FRUIT JUICE (T) 1,150,000

CONe. JUICE (T) 638,000

723,000 2,030 100,000 16,400 51,500 99,500 18,400 45,200 25,800 5,380 21,600 38,800

402,000 1,130 55,600 9,120 28,600 55,300 10,200 25,100 14,400 2,990 12,000 21,500

Table 3.57: Masses of domestic fruits substituting for other canned fruit and jams, jellies and preserves. FRUIT FES totals Apples Apricots Blueberries Cherries Cranberries Grapes l\1elons Peaches Pears Plums Raspberries Strawberries

%
100 63.0 0.2 8.6 1.4 4.5 8.7 1.6 3.9 2.3 0.5 1.9 3.4

OTHER CANNED FRUIT (T) 40,600

JAMS, JELLIES AND PRESERVES (T) 8,060

25,600 72 3,540 581 1,820 3,520 650 1,600 914 190 764 1,370

5,080 14 703 115 362 699 129 318 181 38 152 272

- 111 -

3.1.6 Vegetables
Canadians enjoy about 200 different fresh, frozen, dried and canned vegetables (Appendix 1). CANSIM II and AAFC provides data for 22 vegetables under cultivation in Canada in 2001 that closely match those consumed, as listed in the FES, although in the catch-all, "other" categories there are items not grown here that will be accounted for in much the same manner as imported fruit (AAFC, 2009c; StatsCan, 2003b; StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0013). Also like fruit, domestic consumption is accounted for and a representation of imported vegetables made from the FES (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 226). There are several field vegetables listed in the FES as a number consumed, rather than as mass, thus requiring conversion. StatsCan publishes the conversion factors it uses for corn, cucumbers and lettuce in annual reports (StatsCan, 2002: 10). The USDA's I\lASS also publishes conversion factors for cauliflower and celery, as for fruit, above (USDA, 2009: v). The following table relates those vegetables listed numerically in the FES to equivalent mass according to StatsCan and the NASS. Table 3.58: Calculation of per unit mass for selected fresh vegetables.
i

VEGETABLE Cauliflower Celery Corn Cucumber Lettuce

MASS MASS/SINGLE (KG) VEGETABLE (KG) Crate (24 heads) 22.7 0.95 Crate (3-4 dozen); median 42 27.2 0.65 Dozen 2.7 0.23 Dozen 5.9 0.49 Dozen 6.8 0.57 Source: (StatsCan, 2002: 10; USDA, 2009: v)

UNIT

'- 112 -

There is a range given for celery in table 3.58 of 3-4 dozen plants per crate; the median is chosen for this calculation. Lettuce is listed in the FES as iceberg lettuce, or head lettuce as in table 3.58, as well as varieties including romaine, leaf and Boston lettuce. As there is no way to disaggregate the types from the FES quantities (Appendix 1), the value given in the table is used. The conversion factors derived in table 3.58 are applied to the FES quantities (StatsCan, 2003b) in table 3.59 and the resulting mass of each, shown in bold type, is added to domestic consumption in table 3.86. Table 3.59: Calculation of the mass of vegetables from initial FES numerical quantities. FES STARTING QUANTITY # Cauliflower 47,800,000 95,500,000 Cele Corn 209,000,000 Cucumber 197,000,000 Lettuce 269,000,000 FES ITEM VERSION FACTOR UNIT/T 0.00095 0.00065 0.00023 0.00049 0.00057 MASS OF VEGETABLE T

Most of the vegetables listed in the FES are domestically produced and are accounted for directly, but some require additional or special treatment. The first category is "other leaf and stalk vegetables" and includes such things as asparagus, chard, alfalfa sprouts, Asian vegetables, and fresh herbs. Next is "other seed and gourd vegetables" and this list includes lima beans, okra, squash, zucchini, and Asian vegetables. Finally, "other root vegetables" comprises such things as sweet potatoes, water chestnuts, parsnips, horseradish, ginger and garlic (Appendix 1). These will be apportioned directly against table 3.66.

- 113 -

Frozen vegetables include corn, peas, potato products and a catch-all category called "other frozen vegetables" (Appendix 1). The FAO (n.d.: 193-195) states Canadian frozen potatoes lose 40% of their fresh weight, corn only 10%, and generic frozen vegetables 10%; these figures will be used, the last value serving for both peas and other vegetables. The weights of the first three are added to the totals for those vegetables. The results for "other vegetables" are apportioned according to the distribution in table 3.66. The initial mass of fresh vegetables that supplied the consumption of frozen vegetables in 2001 is shown in table 3.60. The bolded values are added directly to domestic consumption in table 3.85, while the total for other frozen vegetables is re-distributed in table 3.68. Table 3.60: Mass of vegetables required for frozen vegetables. ITEM Corn Peas Potatoes FES STARTING UANTITY KG 11,900,000 17,900,000 89,600,000 41,800,000 FAO CONVERSION FACTOR T/KG 0.0011 0.0011 0.0017 0.0011 MASS OF VEGETABLE T 13 100 19,700 152,000 46,

There are both dried potatoes and "other dried vegetables" in the FES; the latter includes mostly beans and yam, lotus root, onions, garlic and mushrooms in unknown proportions (Appendix 1). The FAO (n.d.: 272) states the dried mass of vegetables is 15% of fresh mass, although offers nothing for potatoes specifically. The same conversion factor will be applied to both categories, with the mass of potatoes applied directly to the total for potatoes and the other vegetables apportioned according to table 3.66. After conversion in

- 114-

table 3.61, the mass of fresh potatoes is added to domestic consumption, while the initial mass of other dried vegetables is re-distributed in table 3.68. Table 3 61' Mass of vegetables from dried potatoes and other dried vegetables FES ITEM Potatoes dried Other veg. dried FES STARTING QUANTITY (KG) 5,970,000
11

FAO CONVERSION FACTOR (T/KG) 0.0067 0.0067

MASS OF VEGETABLE (T)

40,000
80,000

noo,000

Canned vegetables, tomato juice and other vegetable juice are found in the vegetable section of the FES as volume units, i.e. litres, consumed (StatsCan, 2003b) and so must be converted. Canned products must be made with fresh vegetables (Lopez, 1987b: 103) so the yearly consumption conceptually represents a constant demand on the land, even if products may be stored for some time after canning. Canadian agricultural product regulations mandate minimum net and drained weights for five standardized can sizes making estimation of the mass equivalent reasonably straight-forward. For each item, for each can size produced 9 the lowest drained weight percentage, i.e. the most conservative estimate, will be adopted, except in the following cases or with the following assumptions. Baked beans uses the lowest net weight, rather than drained weight. Canned corn will be assumed to be kernels, rather than creamed. Drained canned tomatoes are assumed to be Canada Fancy grade 65% (the highest grade) (DO)C, 2009b). solids

9

Not all vegetables are sold in every can size.

- 115 -

Some 20 vegetables are listed as "other canned vegetables" in the FES, but not all are described in the regulation; the average drained weights (Le. except baked beans) of those that are regulated will be used. The result will be apportioned against table 3.66 (DOJC, 2009b; StatsCan, 2003b). The FAa (n.d.: 272) says US extraction of tomato juice occurs at a rate of 65% and vegetable juice generally at 60%; the latter will be used for "other juice.
1I

In Canada

tomato juice is extracted at 90% efficiency (FAO, n.d.: 194) and although this is not the most conservative chOice, it is the most realistic and will be adopted. Table 3.62 lists the consumption items from the FES (StatsCan, 2003b) and the percent mass per unit volume, both in ounces, from the regulation. Table 3.62: Canned vegetables consumed and mass/volume ratio. CANNED ITEM Green or wax beans Baked beans Other beans Corn Mushrooms Peas Tomatoes Other canned ve ASS/VO 54a 102 60 e 64 52 e 61 60 90 60

Notes: a) 14fl.oz., short cut. b) 28ft.oz., vegetarian beans (d pork and beans). c) 28fl.oz., lima beans d) 28ft.oz., whole kernel in brine. e) 28fl.oz., stems and pieces. f) 28fl.oz., peas. g) 28fl.oz., Canada Fancy Grade, 65% drained solids. h) Mean of values al c1 dl e, f, and gl above.

Source: (DOJC, 2009b; Matthews, Phillips & Augustine, 1980: 297, table 4) In table 3.63 canned vegetables are transformed from a volume measure to equivalent mass with canned, domestically-produced vegetables added
\

- 116-

directly to table 3.85 and other canned vegetables apportioned against table 3.68. Table 3.63: Mass of vegetables required to provide the initial canned volume. FES ITEM Green or wax beans Baked beans ther beans Corn Mushrooms Peas Tomatoes Other canned ING L 17,900,000 23,900,000 23,900,000 35 800,000 17,900,000 17,900,000 89,600,000 23900,000 CONVERSION FACTOR TIL 0.00054 0.0010 0.0006 0.00064 0.00052 0.00061 0.00066 0.00060 MASS OF VEGETABLE T 9,670 24,400 14 300 22 900 9,320 10,900 59,100 14,300

After determining the mass of fresh vegetables processed into juice in table 3.64, the value for tomatoes is added to the total consumed in table 3.85 and other vegetable juice is re-distributed in table 3.69. Table 3.64: Calculation of mass of vegetables required to make an initial volume of juice. FES ITEM Tomato 'uice Other ve . 'uice FES STARTING QUANTITY L 41,800,000 CONVERSION FACTOR TIL 0.0011 0.0017 MASS OF VEGETABLE T 46,000 112000

In the FES pickles include eggs, pimentos, walnuts, onions, olives, beets and different cucumber varieties (Appendix 1). The FAO (n.d.: 195) gives a 90 0/0 extraction rate for "vegetables prepared by vinegar" that will be used for this category, while other literature is silent on the matter (Nip, 2004: 53; 76, table 3.52: Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 271-274). The above-noted mix of pickled items presents a problem with respect to allocation, as it includes eggs and nuts with vegetables. As the solutions are limited without knowing the fraction of each

- 117 -

constituent, the results of this conversion will simply be apportioned against table 3.66. The transformation of pickles to a final mass is displayed in table 3.65 and the total is re-distributed in table 3.69. Table 3.65: Calculation of starting mass of vegetables from an initial volume of pickles.
I

FES ITEM Pickles

I

FES STARTING QUANTITY (L) 51,400,000

CONVERSION FACTOR (TIL) 0.0011

MASS OF VEGETABLE (T) 56,500

The proportions of domestic vegetables that will replace imports are proportional to the 2001 mix of the produced quantities of asparagus, beansgreen and wax, beans-dry, broccoli, cabbage, carrots, cauliflower, corn (sweet), cucumbers, lettuce, onions, peas, potatoes, and tomatoes (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 226; StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0013). The distribution is shown in table 3.66. Like fruit, imported vegetables and juiced, canned, frozen, pickled and dried vegetables converted in the tables above are apportioned against the distribution table, 3.66. This begins in table 3.67, which apportions the FES quantities of various "other" categories, found in the top row, to equivalent domestic consumption. These values are later compiled in table 3.85. Table 3.68 collects the totals from the tables above for other canned, other frozen and other dried vegetables and considers them as domestic consumption. The numbers in bold are then carried to table 3.85.

\

- 118-

. Calculation of production proportions for vegetables, 2001. Table 3.66'
VEGETABLE

% OF TOTAL AREA Asparagus 3,040 0.1 Beans (dry) 300,000 4.5 i Beans (green) 47,800 0.7 Beets 20,700 0.3 Broccoli 65,900 1.0 Cabbage 142,000 2.1 Carrots 332,000 5.0 i Cauliflower 46,300 0.7 Celery 35,800 0.5 306,000 Corn 4.6 75,500 Cucumbers 1.1 Lettuce 87,700 1.3 Mushrooms 86,400 1.3 192,000 2.9 Onions Parsnips 4,070 0.1 1.1 74,200 Peas n. ers 30,700 0.5 63.6 4,220,000 Potatoes 0.1 6,790 Radishes 0.1 4,170 Spinach 7.6 499,000 Tomatoes 0.8 52,800 Turnips 100 6,630,000 Total Source: (AAFC, 2009c; StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0013).

2001 PRODUCTION (T)

- 119 -

Table 3.67: Masses of domestic vegetables substituting for other leaf and stalk vegetables, other seed and gourd vegetables, and other root vegetables. VEGETABLE 2001 PLANTED AREA (%) 100 0.1 4.5 0.7 0.3 1.0 2.1 5.0 0.7 0.5 4.6 1.1 1.3 1.3 2.9 0.1 1.1 0.5 63.6 0.1 0.1 7.6 0.8 OTHER LEAF OTHER SEED & & STALK . GOURD VEG. (T) VEG. (T) 65,700 47,800

I

OTHER ROOT VEG. (T) 35,800

i

FES totals Asparagus Beans (dry) Beans (green)
~

II ot-' t-' I ...

Broccoli Cabbage Carrots и Cauliflower Celery и Corn и Cucumbers Lettuce и Mushrooms I Onions Parsnips Peas Peppers Potatoes и Radishes Spinach Tomatoes Iurnips

30 2,970 473 205 653 1,400 3,280 458 354 3,030 748 869 855 1,900 40 735 304 41,800 67 41 4,940 523

22 2,160 344 149 475 1,020 2,390 333 258 2,210 544 632 622 1,380 29 534 221 30,400 49 30 3,590 380

16 1,620 258 112 356 765 1,790 250 193 1,650 408 474 467 1,040 22 401 166 22,800 37 23 2,690 285

- 120-

Table 3.68: Masses of domestic vegetables substituting for other canned vegetables, other frozen vegetables, and other dried vegetables . и VEGETABLE 2001 PLANTED AREA (%) 100 0.1 4.5 0.7 0.3 1.0 2.1 5.0 0.7 0.5 4.6 1.1 1.3 1.3 2.9 0.1 1.1 0.5 63.6 0.1 0.1 7.6 0.8 OTHER CANNED VEG. (T) 14,300 7 OTHER FROZEN VEG. (T) 46,000 OTHER DRIED VEG. (T) 80,000

FES totals Asparagus . Beans (dry) Beans (green) Beets Broccoli Cabbage Carrots Cauliflower Celery Corn Cucumbers ttuce Mushrooms Onions Parsnips Peas Peppers Potatoes dishes Spinach Tomatoes Turnips

i

648 103 45 142 306 716 100 77 662 163 190 187 414 9 160 66 9,120 15 9 1,080 114

21 2,080 331 144 457 981 2,300 321 248 2,120 523 608 599 1,330 28 514 213 29,300 47 29 3,460 366

37 3,620 576 250 796 1,710 4,000 558 432 3,700 911 1,060 1,040 2,310 49 895 371 50,900 82 50 6,020 637

Finally, other vegetable juice and pickles and apportioned against domestic consumption in table 3.69, with the equivalent values added to total vegetable consumption in table 3.85.

- 121 -

Table 3.69: Masses of domestic vegetables substituting for other vegetable juice and pickles. VEGETABLE Total Asnaragus Beans (dry) i Beans (green) : Beets I Broccoli i Cabbage Carrots Cauliflower Celery Corn Cucumbers Lettuce : Mushrooms Onions Parsnips Peas Peppers Potatoes Radishes 2001 PLANTED AREA (%) 100 0.1 4.5 0.7 0.3 1.0 2.1 5.0 0.7 0.5 4.6 1.1 1.3 1.3 2.9 0.1 1.1 0.5 63.6 0.1 0.1 7.6 0.8 OTHER VEG. JUICE (T) 112,000 PICKLES. (T) 56,500

I~ch
Tomatoes Turnips

51 5,050 804 349 1,110 2,380 5,580 779 603 5,160 1,270 1,480 1,450 3,230 68 1,250 517 71,100 114 70 8,400 889

26 2,560 407 177 562 1,210 2,830 394 305 2,610 643 748 736 1,630 35 632 262 36,000 58 36 4,250 450

I
I

3.1.7 Margarine, fats, and oils
The final FES category to be considered comprises lard, margarine, shortening, and cooking/salad oil (Appendix 1). Lard is "meat scraps" heated in vats of water until the fat melts and floats to the surface in a process called rendering (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 365). In Canada, Federal regulations state lard must be rendered from hogs (DOJC, 2009c). The FAO (n.d.: 196) states Canadian slaughter hog yield just over 6kg fat per head, or 130,000 tonnes in 2001 (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0028). Lard represented less than 3% of fat

- 122 -

consumed as an agri-food product in Canada in 2001 (StatsCan, 2003b), which was easily produced through the above-noted yield of hogs; thus the data will not be included to avoid potential double-counting. Fats and oils are derived from plants and terrestrial and marine animals. The choice for any given use may depend on an imparted flavour, perceived health benefit, or possessed functional characteristic, but in the globalized market is more likely dependant on cost and availability. Most fats and oils can be substituted for one another (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 361, 363), so the method of comparison is straight-forward. Margarine and shortening are somewhat functionally interchangeable, which is not surprising since they are manufactured in much the same way (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 372, 374). Since shortening, like lard, only represents about 3% of fats consumed it will be combined with margarine for this analysis. Margarine is made from vegetable 011 that has been hydrogenated to raise its melting point above room temperature and is then used as the basis for a waterin-oil emulsion not unlike butter, as described above on page 72 (Potter & Hotchkiss, 1998: 371, 373). Margarine (and shortening) wi" be converted to an equivalent volume of oil, which will, in turn, be apportioned against the sources of its production. The density of Canadian-produced oils must be found to convert the mass of margarine into a volume measure that can be applied against the average. extraction rate. Table 3.70 shows the density ranges and their medians for corn,

- 123 -

soybean, and sunflower oils acceptable in Canada (DOJC, 2009c). The value for corn and sunflower, 0.921kg/L, is representative of the densities found in this table and is selected. Table 3.70: Calculation of oil density. ITEM DENSITY (KG/L) MEDIAN (KG/Lt 0.921 Corn 0.917-0.925 Soybean 0.922 0.919-0.925 Sunflower 0.921 0.918-0.923 Source: (DOJC, 2009c) Table 3.71 shows the extraction rates for Canadian-grown oil crops and the weighted mean of the rate (FAO, n.d. 193, 194), which will be used for both margarine and for the FES cooking/salad oil category. Table 3.71: Calculation of extraction rate for vegetable oil. 2001 PRODUCTION EXTRACTION RATE WEIGHTED (%) (%) RATE (%) Canola 41 13.5 33 . Corn (grain) 24.8 45 55 i Soybean 11 17 1.9 Sunflower 1 0 41 40.2 Total 100 n/a Source: (FAO, n.d.: 193, 194; StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010) OILSEED
I

I
!

The regulated minimum oil content, 80%, multiplied by the density from table 3.70, 0.921kg/L, provides the conversion factor in table 3.72. Table 3 .72' Volume of oil from inil-ial . mass of margarine and shortening FES ITEM FES STARTING QUANTITY (KG) 102,000,000 5,970,000 108,000,000 CONVERSION FACTOR (L/KG) 0.736 0.736 0.736 VOLUME OF VEGETABLE OIL (L) 59,800,000 3,520 L OOO 63,300,000

Margarine Shortening . Total fats as oils

- 124-

The total volume of oil from table 3.72 is added with the consumed volume of salad/cooking oil from the FES (StatsCan, 2003b) and the inverse of the weighted extraction rate from table 3.71 is applied. This is shown in table 3.73.

. Calculation of masses of oilseeds from oil volumes Table 3.73'
FES ITEM Total fats as oils (table 3.72), Salad or cooking oils al FES STARTING QUANTITY (L) 63,300,000 77,600,000 141,000,000 CONVERSION FACTOR (TIL) 0.0025 0.0025 0.0025 MASS OF OILSEEDS (T) 15S,OOO 194,000 352,000

The mass of oil-bearing seeds from table 3.73 is apportioned against the quantities of Canadian-produced oilseeds in proportions shown in the following table. Table 3.74: Calculation of production proportions for oilseeds, 2001. 2001 PRODUCTION (T) 0/0 OF TOTAL PRODUCE[) ITEM Canola 5,020,000 33 Corn S,390,000 55 11 Soybean 1,640,000 1 Sunflower 104,000 100 15,100,000 Total Source: (StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010) The fractions of domestically-produced canola, corn, soybean, and sunflower from table 3.74 are applied against the total amount of oil consumed from table 3.73 and shown in table 3.75. The totals, displayed in bold, are added directly to total consumption in table 3.S3 to find the cropping area.

- 125 -

Table 3.75: Masses of domestic oil crops used in the manufacture cooking/salad oil and margarine.
I

OIL CROP Total (table 3.73) Canola Corn Soybean Sunflower

%

OF TOTAL 100 33 55 11 1

OILSEEDS (Tl 352,000

117,000 195,000 38,000 2,410

3.1.8 Area for animal feed requirements
The 2001 feed requirements for animals, poultry and fish were estimated by StatsCan based on information from the actual 1999 feed used, Provincial livestock experts, feed producers, marketing boards, and the Animal Nutrition Association of Canada (StatsCan, 2005b: 73, table 23K). These coefficients were reported as tonnes per year for wheat, oats, barley, corn, dry peas, soy and canola meal, pasture, dry hay, and silage. Listed without further explanation are "other small grains," which will be interpreted as the "mixed grains" category from the CANSIM II database (StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010) and "other roughages," which will be added to hay. Mill screen is also part of the diet, but is accounted for as the by-product of flour production. Consideration must be made that the production of veal may require the feeding of an additional, maternal parent. 10 Cows and bulls are put together in the spring or early summer; if a cow becomes pregnant, it is fed over the winter until the calf is born early in the next year. If it does not, the cow will be sold for

10 As a bull services many females, its contribution to each calf is minimal (Cowell & Parkinson, 2003: 234, footnote 4).

- 126 -

slaughter (Canadian Cattlemen's Association, n.d.). It is therefore assumed that for every calf, an additional heifer was fed for one year. However, as mentioned previously, dairy cattle are impregnated to ensure lactation (Ontario Veal Association, 2003); therefore, the number of calves slaughtered for veal plus the number of replacement dairy calves is compared against the dairy cows required.

If the number of calves is less, it will be assumed all the 2001 Canadian
consumption was met from this source; this is realistic since users of a sustainable system will make use of all available materials before producing new materials. If the number of calves exceeds the number of dairy cows, area for feeding beef heifers equal to the difference will added. Some 1.07 million dairy heifers were on farms in Canada in 2001, while replacement calves numbered nearly 520,000 and the number slaughtered for consumption was calculated in table 3.6 is about 101,000 (StatsCan, 2009: survey 003-0032. Therefore, veal consumption is met by the dairy herd in excess of the required replacements. The numbers of animals fed to support Canadians in 2001 found in sections 3.1.1, 3.1.2, and 3.1.3 are compiled in the following series of tables. Table 3.76 displays barley, corn, and wheat in tonnes. The totals in bold type are added directly to domestic consumption, but the others must undergo further transformation. Oats and mixed grains are not fed to pigs, chickens, turkeys, or fish and are omitted from table 3.77, which shows the quantities that supported the other animals. Table 3.78 shows tonnes of legumes and canola, which was fed to all animals.

- 127 -

Table 3.76: Barley, corn, and wheat grown to support 2001 Canadian meat, dairy and fish consumption. WHEAT (T) ANIMAL BARLEY (T) CORN (T} NUMBER FED 382,000 78,200 2,150,000 2,240,000 i Beef cattle 48,200 101,000 8,180 1,110 I Calves 479,000 358,000 24,900 436,000 и Dair'{ cattle 16,100 3,100 620,000 Sheep_ 620 220,000 944,000 7 /860 1 000 574,000 Swine Chickens 0 125,000 1381000 . (layers) 12,200,000 i Chickens 305,000,000 91,600 428,000 214,000 и (broilers) 51,500 68,100 9,720,000 0 LTurkeys 0 21,600 I Aquaculture 36,000,000 0 3,200,000 2,020,000 1,160,000 Total nla Table 3.77: Mixed grain and oats grown to support 2001 Canadian meat, and fish consumption.
!

.
I

и
!

.

dairy

MIXED GRAIN (T) OATS (T) NUIVIBER FED ANIMAL 53,700 841,000 2,240,000 Beef cattle 101 Calves 101,000 8,380 Dairy cattle 479,000 24,900 9,570 620 3,720 Sheep 620,000 Swine 7,860,000 0 0 Total 79,300 862,000 nla Table 3.78: Legumes and canola grown to support 2001 Canadian meat, dairy and fish consumption. ANIMAL Beef cattle Calves Dairy cattle Sheep Swine Chickens - layers Chickens broilers Turkeys i Aquaculture II Total I NUMBER FED 2,240,000 101,000 479,000 620,000 7,860,000 12,200,000 305,000,000 9,720,000 36,000,000 nla CANOLA MEAL (T) 58,100 2,520 45,500 620 94,400 25,600 30,500 5,830 0 263,000 PEAS (T) 51,400 606 1,440 620 55,000 0 0 0 0 SOYBEAN MEAL (T) 130,000 . 5,450 127,000 1,240 252,000 41,500 153,000 I . 36,000 8,790 754,000 I

,

I

I 109,000

- 128 -

Peas are added directly to their consumption total for vegetables, but soybean and canola meals must be further converted to their equivalent whole masses, which are then added to domestic consumption in table 3.83. The inverse of the soybean meal extraction rate of 76% and the canola rate of 61 % provide the final values (FAO, n.d.: 194), as shown in table 3.79. Table 3.79: Calculation of mass of canola and soybeans required to supply animal feed meal. MEAL TYPE QUANTITY FROM TABLE 3.78 T 263000 754,000 CONVERSION MASS OF FACTOR SEEDS OR BEANS T UNITLESS 432,000 1.64 996,000 1.32

Canola meal bean meal

The production of soybean and canola meal is also a by-product of food oil extraction or vice versa. Since the amounts of these crops required for animal feed exceed those required for the extraction of food oil, the oil for human use is dropped from the calculation to avoid double-counting. An alternative storage method for grain involves harvesting the entire plant, cutting it finely and packing it quickly in air-tight structures to undergo anaerobic lactic acid fermentation. Fermentation lasts from three to four weeks, after which the pH of the environment is too low for microbial activity, thus preserving the feed (Tremblay, 2008: 1). This is called silage and in Canada in 2001 over 85% of cereals devoted to silage was barley (Helm & Salmon, 2002: 1). This grain is preferred because of the higher average quality of the finished product noted by producers, but other grains used include corn, oats, and triticale (a hybrid of wheat and rye) (Helm & Salmon, 2002: 1).

- 129-

According to AAFC (2009d), of some 21 million hectares of land devoted to grazing beef and dairy cattle and sheepll 6 million hectares is planted forage, or tame hay, and the rest is wild rangeland. As accurate yield data for wild plants are not readily available, the total area of pasture land will be determined by applying the yield for tame hay. Table 3.80 shows the hay and pasture forage, added directly to tame hay consumption in table 3.83, and the silage consumed by cattle and sheep. Silage requires further transformation. Table 3.80: Hay, pasture and silage required to support 2001 Canadian meat and dairy consumption. ANIMAL Beef cattle Calves Dairy cattle Sheep otal NUMBER FED 2,240,000 101,000 479,000 620,000 n/a DRY HAY (T) PASTURE (T) 2,700,000 919,000 16,400 4,950 156,000 492,000 146,000 106,000 SILAGE (T) 2,720,000 2,520 1,420,000 21,300 4,170,000

1,560,000

3,000,000

For silage, a weighted average of the 2001 produced masses for barley, corn, and oats is applied against the silage requirement to apportion the share to each grain. As silage yields are not available from StatsCan (2009), studies conducted at an Alberta research farm provide a series of yield results for these grains grown under optimum conditions that are applied against their respective shares of silage (Baron, Okine & Dick, 2000: table 1 & table 6b). Table 3.81 shows the areas and resulting percent share. Barley, corn, and oats are applied directly to table 3.83.

II

The remaining animals of concern here do not utilize pasture (StatsCan, 2005b).

- 130 -

Table 3.S1: Calculation of production proportions for silage crops, 2001. SILAGE 2001 PRODUCTION (T) % OF TOTAL PRODUCTION 10,SOO,000 Barley 55 6,OSO,000 Corn 31 2,690,000 Oats 14 19,600,000 Total 100 Source: (StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010) The area of grains required to produce the silage requirement determined in table 3.S0 is calculated in table 3.S2 and added to the total for that crop when cereals, legumes, and oilseed crops area gathered in table 3.S3. Table 3.S2: Distribution of production required for silage crops. GRAIN % OF TOTAL PRODUCTION SILAGE (T) Silage 100 4,170,000 55 2,310,000 Barley 1,290,000 31 Corn 572,000 14 Oats Source: (StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010)

3.2 Calculation of areas required to support 2001 household food consumption
The total masses of primary crops, the collection of all the bolded values from the tables in section 3.1, are found in tables 3.S3, 3.S4, and 3.S5. The final areas that support domestic consumption are found by dividing the mass totals for each crop by the 2001 Canadian yields, as found in StatsCan (2009) and FAO

(2009) resources. Table 3.S3 shows the cereals, legumes, and oilseeds grown to
support livestock production separately from those grown to supply people directly with those vegetable prodUCts. The total required area in table 3.S3 is found by summing those columns (not shown) and applying the appropriate

- 131 -

yield. The corn listed in table 3.83 is grain corn, which is accounted as animal feeds, as a source of cooking oil, for processed grain foods like breakfast cereals, and as the substitute for Qrains not grown in Canada, particularly rice. Table 3.83: Final area calculations for 2001 consumption of cereals, legumes and oilseeds. CROP TOTALS FOR ANIMAL NEEDS FROI"1 TABLES (T) 3,200,000 2,310,000 432,000 2L 020 000 1,290,000 TOTALS FOR HUMAN NEEDS FROM FES & TABLES (T) 120,000 n/a See 3.1.7 288,000 n/a CROP YIELDS (T/HA) 2.6 11.7 1.3 6.6 14.1 3.1 2.8 2.2 13.1 1.9 1.5 1.6 1.9 n/a TOTAL AREA (HA)

Barley Barley (silage) i Canola . Corn (grain 1 Corn (silage) Dry hay (and pasture) 4,540,000 n/a Mixed grains 0 79,300 Oats 29,700 862,000 Oats (silage) 572,000 n/a Rye 0 2,520 Soybean 996,000 See 3.1.7 Sunflower 2,410 0 Wheat 1,160,000 1,170,000 Total 17,500,000 1,610,000 NOTES: i) n/a - not applicable. ii) totals may not add due to rounding.

1,280,000 198,000 332,000 442,000 91,600 1,490,000 28,300 449,000
43 L700

1,330 664,000 1,560 1,230,000 6,270,000

I

For tables 3.84 and 3.85 all of the primary crops listed are produced for human consumption with the exception of peas, which includes those used for livestock. The total areas are carried forward to the following section, where the final results are presented and discussed. The corn required to support consumption determined in section 3.1.6, vegetables, is listed in table 3.85 as sweet corn.

\

- 132-

Table 3 84' Final area calculations for 2001 fruit consumption FRUIT TOTALS FROM FES & TABLES (T) CROP YIELDS (T/HA) 8.4 6.6 1.5 5.8 14.6 6.4 22.6 9.3 11.1 4.5 3.8 4.4 n/a TOTAL AREA (HA)

Apples 2,200,000 Apricots 4840 Blueberries 239,000 Cherries 39,100 Cranberries 123,000 Grapes 370,000 Melons 338,000 169,000 Peaches Pears 127,000 Plums 36,700 Raspberries 51,500 Strawberries 125,000 3,820,000 Total NOTES: i) n/a - not applicable. ii) totals may not add due to rounding.

262,000 733 159,000 6,750 8,410 57,800 15,000 18,100 11,500 8,160 13,500 28,400 589,000

- 133-

Tabl e 385 . FIna I area ca Icu IarIons f or 2001 veget abl e consump Ion. VEGETABLE TOTALS FROM CROP YIELDS REQUIRED FES & TABLES (T) (T/HA) AREA (HAl 87 Asparagus 2.4 210 33,700 Beans (dry) 59,400 1.8 7,180 Beans (green) 4.3 30,900 . Beets 77 18.6 1,430 Broccoli 15,500 8.0 124,000 Cabbage 2L 59 0 24.5 63,500 5,370 Carrots 35.4 190,000 2,960 Cauliflower 16.4 48,600 1,420 Celery 45.6 64,600 11,400 Corn (sweet) 105,000 9.2 . Cucumbers 6,830 102,000 14.9 6,340 Lettuce 25.1 159,000 Mushrooms 217.0 263 57,100 : Onions 4,680 36.0 168,000 Parsnips 19 14.6 281 Peas 4.4 32,900 145,000 12.2 5,560 Pep~ers 67,800 Potatoes 1,090,000 43,700 25.0 Radishes 6.9 1,800 12AOO Spinach 1,850 12,200 6.6 Tomatoes 5,980 313,000 52.3 Turnips 23.7 33L 500 1,410 Total 2,850,000 192,000 n/a NOTES: i) nja - not applicable. ii) totals may not add due to rounding.
!

- 134-

4.0 Results and discussion
The areas actually under cultivation in 2001 for each crop are found in StatsCan (2009) and FAO (2009) resources. The self-sufficiency indicator (SSI) is found by determining the ratio of the areas actually under cultivation for primary agricultural production in Canada to those conceptually required to fulfill the dietary demands of its citizens. This is done for the consumption pattern evinced by the 2001 food expenditure survey (FES), as determined above.

4.1 The areas of Canadian self-sufficiency
In 2001, Canada had approximately 50,000,000 hectares of land suitable to agriculture, or about 5% of the total land mass (Hoffman et aI., 2005: 4; 5, table 1; Kissinger & Rees, 2009: 2310). At that time, about 65% of that land, some 32,000,000 hectares, was under cultivation for cereals, legumes, and oilseeds (StatsCan, 2009). Table 4.1 shows the SSI results for these crops. Table 4.l' Final areas for cereals, legumes and oilseeds , 2001 CONSUMPTION AREA (HA) PRODUCTION AREA (HA) CROP Barley 1,470,000 4,700,000 Canola 332,000 3,830,000 11.5 442,000 1,290,000 2.9 Corn Hay & pasture 7,660,000 5.2 1,490,000 364,000 12.9 Mixed grains 28,300 1,910,000 4.3 449,000 Oats 181 000 137 Rye 1,330 1.6 1,080,000 664,000 Soybean 46.7 72,800 1,560 Sunflower 11,000,000 8.9 1,230,000 Wheat 32,000,000 5.3 6,100,000 Total NOTE: numbers may not add due to rounding.

.

:ill

- 135 -

Table 4.1 shows that after conceptually supplying Canadian food consumption over five times the land in question supports crops destined for other uses, mostly trade, but also building materials, biofuels, bioplastics, and other novel uses (Junkins et aI., 2005: 18). This is unsurprising since Canada is a major supplier of agricultural products to the world market, in 2001 especially as the largest exporter of oats and canola, second-largest of wheat, third of rye, and fifth of barley (FAO, 2009); exports of raw grain crops alone accounted for

15% of the value of all exports of domestic agri-food products in 2001 (Industry
Canada, 2008). Since calculation of the 551 for crops is in part a function of market forces at work within the country, with respect that conceptually required areas are extrapolated from existing producer choices, and country-specific yields, it can be more illustrative of the usage of productive lands than methods better suited to cross-country comparison. In their application of the EF to Prairie agriculture, Kissinger and Rees find 62% of cropland and about 45% of meat footprints, totalling about 28 million hectares or half of the total footprint, are exported 12

(2009: 2312-2313). However, this is not a real area and danger exists that if it is
seen that way then, for example, efforts to make Prairie agriculture more sustainable may be equally directed towards influencing Canadian consumption patterns as towards increasing the food security of those nations dependant on Canadian exports. The possibility of assigning such'" false concreteness'" to EF

12

On ;verage for the years between 1989-2007 (Kissinger & Rees, 2009: 2311).

- 136-

results has been recognized as a concern not only of the lay public and politicians, but apparently also of trained environmentalists and scholars (van den Bergh & Verbruggen, 1999: 64, single quotes in the original). Through integration with the AEI, the SSI can reveal the impacts of Canada's contributions to the global agri-food market. The implementation of AAFC's indicator set positively shows long-underway declines in risk of water, wind, and tillage soil erosion (Lobb, 2005: 103, table 13-3; Rostad & Padbury, 2005: 98, table 13-2; van Vliet, Padbury, Rees & Matin, 2005: 92, table 13-1), improvements in soil organic carbon content (McConkey, Hutchinson, Smith, Grant & Desjardins, 2005: 108; 110, table 14-1), and declines in soil salinity (Wiebe, Eilers, Eilers & Brierley, 2005: 116, table 15-1). However, there is a worrying on-going trend towards increased risk of nutrient run-off causing nitrogen contamination to ground- and surface waters, a consequence of agricultural intensification and changing producer choices (Drury et al., 2005: 72, table 9-2). The trend towards further converting summerfallow land to intensive monoculture (Eilers & Huffman, 2005: 44) and generally switching from cereal crops to legumes or row crops are economically enhancing strategies that result in soil nutrient accumulation, nonetheless both are supported by government policies and marketing efforts (Junkins et aI., 2005: 19). The oversupply of field crops, from the point of view of potential domestic requirements, revealed by the SSI in table 4.1 suggests that producers could be further influenced to adopt

- 137-

production of novel foods for domestic markets. As an instance, the intensive corn production in Ontarfo and Quebec, which together comprise over 95% of the Canadian growing area, and the increase in legumes planted in those provinces are thought greatly responsible for the dramatic increase in farms at higher risk of nitrogen run-off (Drury et aI., 2005: 72, 74; StatsCan, 2009: survey 001-0010). Since self-sufficient production can be recognized easily in table 4.1, some fraction of production could be identified as superfluous and price supports or greater marketing and promotion can be designed to encourage diversification or new crop development. For example, this could provide the impetus to bring "un-official" grains like kamut, spelt, and quinoa into the Canada Grain Act so producers can obtain the same income guarantees that traditional commercial grains enjoy (CGC, 2009:
~10).

Indeed, AAFC suggests producers should exploit the desire that more affluent peoples have for a diet that is increasingly guided by personal taste, variety, convenience, and an enhanced awareness that less intensive production practises such as organic agriculture can improve the immediate environment (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2002: 48; Junkins et aI., 2005: 18-19, 20). As diets become more affluent, consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables rises (Gerbens-Leenes et aI., 2002: 55). There is thus both reason and opportunity to increase fruit and vegetable production in an effort to achieve a sustainable agrifood system, as shown in table 4.2 and 4.3, respectively.

- 138-

Table 4.2 shows self-sufficiency in fruit can be achieved by switching just

1% ~f the 2001 total area under cultivation in Canada from some other use. The
551 reveals Canadians consumed fruit in amounts that if produced by domestically cultivatable species would require 1.1 million hectares, over 10 times the area actually under cultivation for fruit in 2001. Despite this, in 2001 there was in fact a decline in cultivated area of about 1% from the previous year, although the farm-gate value of production was LIp 7% (StatsCan, 2002:

5).
Table 4 2' Final areas for fruits, 2001

.
551

CROP CONSUMPTION AREA (HAl PRODUCTION AREAlHAJ Apples 262,000 25,800 Apricots 733 208 Blueberries 159,000 44,000 Cherries 6,750 1,930 Cranberries 8,410 2,380 Grapes 57,800 10,600 I Melons 15,000 550 Peaches 18,100 3,300 Pears 11,500 1,570 Plums 8,160 801 Raspberries 13,500 3,840 Strawberries 28,400 6,000 101,000 Total 589,000 NOTE: numbers may not add due to rounding.

0.10 0.28 0.28 0.29 0.28 0.18 0.04 и 10.18 10.14 0.10 0.28 0.21 0.17
i

There is little overt mention of whether or not AAFC's AEI are applied specifically to fruit production in Canada and considering the relatively low area under cultivation shown in table 4.2 compared to that shown in table 4.1, a focus on field crops is understandable. One goal of this work is to incorporate additional social aspects into Canada's sustainable agricultural development

- 139-

polices. An imperative to effect positive changes in society as a whole is implied by the word "development" (Daly, 1987: 323; Niu et aI., 1993: 180) and suggests another use for the 55!: linking the impact of agricultural land use change to agri-food sustainability. Canadians have historically been among the world's largest consumers of fruit and fruit juice, for instance consuming about twice as much of the latter as Americans do (Lee, Brown & Seale jr., 1992: 255). Yet if the mass of fruit consumed domestically in 2001 were re-distributed proportionately to currently produced species, not a single crop could meet the demand (table 4.2). The distribution of fruit-growing areas in 2001 was limited to four main regions in the following proportions: 30% grown in Ontario, 27% in Quebec, 21 % in British Columbia, and 12% in Nova Scotia (StatsCan, 2005: 5). There is a long-term decline in the areas devoted to fruits in Canada (AAFC, 2008b: 2-3, table 1; Krueger, 1978: 179), as urbanization continues to claim the higher-quality farm land most suitable to its cultivation (Hoffman et aI., 2005: 8). This is of particular concern in Ontario, which contains 56% of the premier agricultural land in Canada, as a high proportion of that land is in the south-western Golden Horseshoe region that is also home to most of Canada's urban lands (Hoffman et aI., 2005: 5, 7). There is here a confluence of social and environmental issues. Urban sprawl is especially contentious where some fruit is grown since those areas possess specialized conditions that do not exist elsewhere (Hoffman et aI., 2005:

- 140 -

8). However, urbanization continues apace increasing reliance on imports, the chief supplier of which is the US at about 80%, followed by nations of the Southern Hemisphere who typically supply when domestic crops are out of season (AAFC, 2007b: 9, 14). Together, this means as Canada permanently loses fruit production capacity to possibly unsustainable land use changes, there is an increasing reliance on foreign sources. As importation rises, along with the associated pollution and GHG emissions, so does the general unsustainability of the agri-food system as it becomes less self-sufficient. Table 4.3 shows that for the most part, Canada is self-sufficient in vegetable production, with production about 2.5 times total conceptual demand. Although there are several individual items that are potentially under-supplied, this methodology extrapolates producer response to market forces, not consumer demand for specific products and so should not necessarily suggest heightening production of particular items. However, as a great many vegetables are row crops that provide less surface cover, growing them at all raises the risk of erosion (Huffman et aI., 2006: 67). The SSI should be seen here as cautionary; if AEI results tend to prescribe against vegetable cultivation as a mitigation measure for certain impacts (e.g. Lobb, 2005: 106, ~5), it should be considered only until it impinges on self-sufficiency. The long-term economic costs of import-reliance can be balanced against those of other mitigation measures or research into practices that, for instance, increase soil cover like

- 141 -

intercropping. Finally, since vegetables are grown in many of the same areas as fruits, they are at similar risk to urbanization. Table 4 3'. Final areas for vegetables, 2001 . CONS. AREA (HA) PROD. AREA (HA) ,CROPS 1,630 87 Asparagus 185,000 Beans (dry) 33,700 12,100 Beans (green) 7,180 1,160 77 Beets 4,050 Broccoli 15,500 6,250 Cabbage 2,590 9,380 5,370 2,880 liflower 2,960 794 Celery 1,420 35,400 Corn (sweet) 11,400 12,800 6,830 ~cumbers 3,500 6,340 ttuce ; Mushrooms 398 263 5,420 Onions 4,680 288 Parsnips 19 17,200 Peas 32,900 Peppers 2,590 5,560 169,000 Potatoes 43,700 983 1,800 .B.adishes Spinach 11 850 646 Tomatoes 5,980 13,600 Turnips 1,410 2270 Total 192,000 487,000 NOTE: numbers may not add due to rounding. SS1 18.6 5.47 1.69 15.0 0.26 2.41 1.75 0.97 0.56 3.09 1.88 0.55 1.51 1.16 15.0 0.52 0.47 3.88 0.55 0.35 2.28 1.60 2.54
i

.

~ots

'

i

I
: :

I
i

4.2 Inclusiveness of results
The 2001 FES contains the consumption records for some 1995 different agri-food products. This analysis attempts to capture as many as realistically pOSSible, especially those conforming to the recommendations of Canada's food guide (Health Canada, 2008b). Table 4.4 shows the FES food categories, the total,S consumed and the totals accounted for by the SS1, listed according to

- 142-

whether the item is reported in volume units (millions of litres) or mass (millions of tonnes). 4' Total volumes and masses from the FES and accounted by the SSI Table 4.. FES (ML) SSI (ML) SSI (%) FES (MT) SSI (MT) SSI (0/0) . FES ITEM Meat & fish 0 99 1,700 0 1,700 Dairy 100 2,700 310 310 2,400 Cereals 30 77 30 100 1,600 1f~~ Fruit 1,100 100 1,000 1,300 1,300 96 Vegetables 710 450 64 1,800 .J:&QQj 100 Fats & oils 78 110 107 95 78 100 0, Nuts 0 42 0 0 0 Sugar 18 0 0 310 0 0 0 Coffee & tea 0 0 0 72 0 24 140 Other 2,600 600 0 0 84 Total 7,200 6,500 3,900 55 7,800 Source: (StatsCan, 2003b).

.

sft

There are a number of factors affecting the seemingly low inclusion of volume-measured foodstuffs. Mainly it is the "other" category, which accounts for about 36% of the total volume and is made up of soups that do not belong elsewhere (cream soups, turtle soup, cheddar cheese soup, etc.), infant foods and formulas, carbonated beverages, and fruit drinks (liquor mixes, lemonade, Gatorade«, etc.). The low apparent response for volume-measured vegetables is explained in that this group comprises prepared salad dressings, "other condiments," which includes vinegar, and "other sauces" (guacamole, rib and wing sauces, taco, teriyaki and soya sauces, etc.), the latter of which alone accounts for 36% of the total volume of vegetables. The cereals and dairy unaccounted for are sweetened products, such as cakes and ice cream respectively, that are not part of the analysis. Numerically, 1225 items were

- 143 -

included in the analysis, or 61%. If "non-food" items like beverages, spices, salt, herbs, jelly powders, gelatine and infant formulas are removed from the count, the share rises to 66%. In calculating the number of animals required from the mass of cuts of meat there are considerable differences in the numbers; for example, half the number of cattle is required to supply offal as hip cuts (table 3.5) and over nine times the number of swine are required to supply loin cuts as to supply the mass of belly cuts (table 3.12). This is mainly an artefact of the FES in that the ordinal rank of each cut from the survey is the same as that of the required animals before the addition of masses as determined by the method (i.e. the additional masses from prepared meat products, etc.). Accounting for the disposition of the discrepancy is beyond the scope of this work, but possible explanations include exports and pet foods.

\.

- 144-

5.0 Conclusions
Canada does not grow what it eats. There is, on first glance, a surfeit of land available to conceptually supply its citizens with food. Some foodstuffs derived from the field crops listed in table 4.1 could be consumed from domestic sources in amounts at least 50% greater than in 2001 and table 4.3 shows there was over 60% more vegetable area available than "required." The

unsustainability of the current Canadian consumption pattern is highly apparent from table 4.2, which shows over 5 times the current area would need to be brought under cultivation to meet consumption levels with domestically produced fruit. Although this only amounts to 1% of the available agricultural land, the land most suited to fruit farming is also that most at risk of loss to land use change (Hoffman et aI., 2005: 7-8) and has long be declining (Krueger, 1978: 179). This is a permanent loss of carrying capacity and represents increasing Canadian dependence on the globalized agri-food system, which is thought by many to be unsustainable. Of course, Canada's farmers should and do exploit the nation's comparative advantage for field crop production, primarily in the Prairies but also increasingly in the Central provinces, and so with good reason the initial AEI are focused on ascertaining the impacts of that production. The sustainable development definition on which AAFC bases its choice of indicators (Lefebvre, 2005: 2) specifies the natural resources that agriculture depends on as needing protection. Without including domestic demand in the decision-making process

- 145 -

the AEI results can have a prescriptive effect on cropping choices while protecting that advantage' or those resources; this, in turn, can cause Canadian consumers to become more reliant on foreign sources of food for a nutritionally complete diet. Likewise, the AEI are not likely to be influential on policies that affect land loss, namely urbanization. Recognizing consumer demand as a pressure variable highlights socially desirable outcomes, such as preserving prime land, and incorporating national agri-food self-sufficiency into the AEI broadens the options for environmental, social, and economic responses within the D5R framework used in most OECD countries, including Canada. Douglass' (1984: 07) caution that sustainability requires a delimited temporal scale within which agricultural supply and demand for a given socio-economic system are closely matched is complemented by Conway's (1985: 34) assertion that due to the hierarchical nature of

agroecosystems a response at one level in the system cannot easily predict the outcomes at another one. However, the 55I uses average household

consumption and can therefore be disaggregated to agree with intervening spatial scales. One hoped-for contribution of this study to the methodology is in using surveyed consumer preferences for food as a way to help construct more realistic assessments of agri-food system sustainability. A nationally-weighted dataset was used here, which may not be representative of some urban centres that have large, culturally distinct populations whose dietary preference is

- 146-

markedly different. However, resting the method on surveyed data is claimed as an improvement since applying re-weighted or new data is easily done if the scale or the scope of the study changes. This is unlike studies using the apparent disappearance residuals, which are derived from highly aggregated data mostly influenced by collective producer decisions and international trade conditions. Further, with respect to such top-down assessments, as the primary crops move through the processing chain they are subject to wastage or process losses; accounting all losses for the same number of final products as analyzed here is likely to be immensely complicated and introduce additional uncertainty. Nonetheless, there are several pOints in this study where uncertainty is introduced, including the following: Prepared meat products were assumed to consist solely of meat, but meat pies, for instance, have a dough crust. An exploration of the exact variability in yields of dairy products was not made; this may be important for, say, cheese made from the milk of animals other than cattle. The fate of laying hens is uncertain; reputable information about if or where layers enter the food chain was not forthcoming, although since layers amount to less than 4% of the birds required for meat (tables 3.17 & 3.21) this is not an egregious instance of double-counting in any case. There are certainly innumerable bread reCipes and it is likely that there is enough variation in ingredient proportions among them to produce a range of input quantities, rather than the single values used here. There is an assumption that 2001 yields were

- 147 -

not unusual and that there was no radical shift in production choices from past years. There are two methods by which the distributional proportions shown in tables 3.36, 3.53, 3.66, 3.74, and 3.81 could be calculated. After the final masses of foodstuffs are calculated, those crops that are not domestically grown are allocated to those that are according to the fraction of the mass of each crop that was produced in 2001. Allocating those fractions according to area provides quite different results because yields vary considerably between crops. A farmer has to devote a larger area to a low-yield crop than to higher-yielding one to obtain the same mass of both, thus area is not a reflection of market share. Thus, for example, using area leads to the conclusion that 800,000 hectares of blueberries, almost 6 times that of apples, would be required for that crop's share, while using the mass fraction suggests apples be produced in amounts 1.6 times that of blueberries. The mass of apples produced in 2001 was almost 7 times that of blueberries (StatsCan, 2002: 18, table 2), suggesting there is still a limitation with this aspect of the method. Canada is a large country and regional trading with proximate American states in many cases is more desirable than cross-country transport of similar foods. Care is taken here not to imply that self-sufficiency within an artificial border is a necessary condition of sustainability, but rather that those cases where Canada is far, or is moving away, from self-sufficiency deserve extra attention.
\

- 148 -

References Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (1997). Agriculture in harmony with nature: strategy for environmentally sustainable agriculture and agri-food development in Canada. Retrieved May 9, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.cajAAFCAACj display-afficher.do?id= 1175526032952&lang=eng Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2003). Fish and seafood. Aquaculture atlas of Canada. Retrieved May 31, 2009 from: http://www.ats.agr.gc.ca/seafood/aquaculture-e.htm Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2005). Agriculture in harmony with nature: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada ~ sustainable development strategy 20012004. Retrieved June 3, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.ca/AAFC-AAC/displayafficher.do?id= 1175526032952&lang=eng Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2007a). Changing consumer demands. Retrieved May 4, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.ca/AAFC-AAC/displayafficher.do?id= 1185451287432&lang=e#tphp Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2007b). 2002j2003 Canadian fruit situation and trends including apples, tender fruits, grapes ( Vinifera) and berries. Retrieved August 4, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.ca/AAFC-AAC/displayafficher.do?id=1184695056095&lang=eng Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2008a). Canada land inventory level-I digital data. Retrieved May 9, 2009 from: http://sis.agr.gc.ca/cansis/nsdb/clijclass.html Agriculture and Agri-Food canada, (2008b). Canada's poultry industry ... at a glance. Retrieved May 26, 2009 from: http://www.ats.agr.gc.ca/supply/3315_e.htm Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2008c). Fish and seafood fact sheets: farmed salmon. Retrieved May 31, 2009 from: http://www.ats.agr.gc.cajseafoodjfarmed_salmon-e.htm Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2009a). Poultry marketplace. Retrieved May 27, 2009 from: http://www.agr.gc.ca/poultry/index_eng.htm Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2009b). Dairy industry at a glance. Retrieved May 28, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.ca/AAFC-AAC/displayafficher .do?id= 1182522993907&lang=eng Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2009c). Crop profile for cabbage and broccoli in Canada. Retrieved June 8, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.ca/AAFCAACjdisplay-afficher.do?id=1181584838944&lang=eng

- 149-

Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (2009d). Land managers - soil and land - land management through gra~ing. Retrieved June 11, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.ca/AAFC-AAC/displayafficher.do?id= 1187188747887&lang=eng Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, (200ge). Economic and market information. Retrieved June 11, 2009 from: http://www4.agr.gc.ca/AAFC-AAC/displayafficher.do?id=1177676316971&lang=eng&menupos=1 Altieri, M.A., Letourneau, D.K. & Davis, J.R. (1984). The requirements of sustainable agroecosystems. In Douglass G.K. (Ed.), Agricultural sustainability in a changing world order (pp. 147-157). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Andow, D.A. & Hidaka, K. (1989). Experimental natural history of sustainable agriculture: syndromes of production. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 27(1-4),447-464. Bavec, M., Mlakar, S.G., Rozman, c., Pazek, K. & Bavec, F. (2009). Sustainable agriculture based on integrated and organic guidelines: understanding terms. Outlook on Agriculture, 38(1), 89-95. Banks, J.M. (2007). Cheese yield. In McSweeney, P.L.H. (Ed.), Cheese problems solved(pp.100-114). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press LLC. Barker, D., Lankhaar, J. & Stals, P. (2004). Primary processing of poultry. In Mead, G.c. (Ed.) Poultry meat processing and quality (pp. 90-107). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press LLC. Baron, V.S., Okine, E. & Dick, A.c. (2000). Optimizing yield and quality of cereal silage. Retrieved July 28, 2009 from: http://www.wcds.afns.ualberta.ca/Proceedings/2000/Chapter30.htm Barta, J. (2006). Fruit drying principles. In Hui, Y.H. (Ed.) Handbook of fruits and fruit processing (pp. 81-94). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional. Beaulieu, M.S., MacDonald, T., & ~lIineau, P. (2005). Pesticide use and pest management practices of Canadian apple growers. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Agriculture Division. Berger, A.R. & Hodges, R.A. (1998). Natural change in the environment: a challenge to the pressure-state-response concept. Social Indicators Research, 44(2), 255-265. Bhat, N.R., Desai, B.B. & Suleiman, M.K. (2006). Grapes and raisins. In Hui, Y.H. (Ed.) Handbook offruits and fruit processing (pp. 439-452). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional.
\

- 150-

Blake, D.E. (2001). Contextual effects on environmental attitudes and behavior. Environment and Behavior, 33(5), 708-725. Boivin, G., Grimard, J. & Olivier, C. (2005) Integrated pest management In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.85-87). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Braidwood, R.J. (1954). From cave to village in Iraq. Agricultural History, 28(2), 41-43. Brainard, D.C. & Bellinder, R.R. (2004). Weed suppression in a broccoli-winter rye intercropping system. Weed Science, 52(2), 281-290. Brklacich, M., Bryant, C.R. & Smit, B. (1991). Review and appraisal of concept of sustainable food production systems. Environmental Management, 15(1), 1-14. Brown, BJ., Hanson, M.E., Liverman, D.M. & Meredith Jr., R.W., (1987). Global sustainability: Toward definition. Environmental Management, 11(6), 713-719. Cain, PJ. & Hopkins, A.G. (2002). British imperialism, 1688-2000. Essex, UK: Pearson Education Limited. Caldwell, L.K. (1984). Political aspects of ecologically sustainable development. Environmental Conservation, 11(4), 299-308. Canada Bread Company Limited, (2005). About Dempster's bread. Retrieved June 3, 2009 from: http://www.dempsters.ca/Products_Breads.html Canadian Cattlemen's Association, (n.d.). About cow-calf operations. Retrieved June 3, 2009 from: http://cowcalf.cattle.ca/the-bull-factor/ Canadian Dairy Commission, (2001). The Canadian Dairy Commission annual report 2000-2001. Retrieved June 3, 2009 from: http://www.cdcccl.gc.ca/CDC/index_en.asp?caId=832 Canadian Dairy Commission, (2002). The Canadian Dairy Commission annual report 2001-2002. Retrieved June 3, 2009 from: http://www.cdcccl.gc.ca/CDCjindex_en.asp?caId=832 Canadian Grain Commission, (2009). Grains of Canada. Retrieved June 1, 2009 from: http://www.grainscanada.gc.ca/grainsc-cgrains/ogc-goc-eng.htm Canadian Pork International, (n.d.) Industry information: meat yield. Retrieved May 25, 2009 from: http://www.canadapork.com/english/pages/frmsts/page03.html

и 151 -

Canadian Wheat Board, (2008). From wheat to bread. Retrieved May 30, 2009 from: http://www.cwb.ca/public/en/library/research/popups/wheat_From_wheat.jsp Carpenter, S., Caraco, N.F., Correll, D.L., Horwath, R.W., Sharpley, A.F. & Smith, V.H. (1998). Nonpoint pollution of surface waters with phosphorus and nitrogen. Issues in Ecology, 3, 1-14. Cassman, K.G. (1999). Ecological intensification of cereal production systems: yield potential, soil quality, and preciSion agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96(11), 5952-5959. Catterall, P. & Cauvain, S.P. (2007). Flour milling. In Cauvain, S.P & Young, L.S. (Ed.s) [Electronic version]. Technology of breadmaking (pp. 333-369). Springer US. Cauvain, S.P. (2007). Other cereals in breadmaking. In Cauvain, S.P & Young, L.S. (Ed) [Electronic version]. Technology of breadmaking (pp. 371-388). Springer US. Chambers, N., Simmons, C. & Wackernagel, M. (2000). Sharing nature's interest: ecological footprints as an indicator of sustainability. London, UK: Earthscan Publications Ltd. Chambers, P.A., Guy, M., Roberts, E.S., Charlton, M.N., Kent, R., Gagnon, Grove, G., & Foster. N. (2001). Nutrients and their impact on the Canadian environment Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Environment Canada, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Health Canada and Natural Resources Canada. Cohen, J.E. (1995a). Population growth and Earth's human carrying capacity. SCience, 269(5222), 341-346. Cohen, J.E. (1995b). How many people can the earth support? New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company Inc. Coltro, L., Mourad, A.L., Kletecke, R.M., Mendonc;a, T.A. & Germer, S.P.M. (2009). AsseSSing the environmental profile of orange production in Brazil. The International Journal of Lifecycle Assessment, [on-line]. Retrieved March 25, 2009 from: http://www.springerlink.com/index/lm578136kp776x30.pdf Conway, G.R. (1985). Agroecosystem analYSis. Agricultural Administration, 20, 31-55. Costanza, R. & Patten, B.C., (1995). Defining and predicting sustainability. Ecological Economics, 15, 193-196.

c.,

- 152-

Cowell, SJ. & Parkinson, S. (2003). Localization of UK food production: an analysis using land area and energy as indicators. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 94, 221-236. Csillag, C. (2000). Turning point: environmental health in Brazil. Environmental Health Perspectives, 108(11), A504-A511. Dairy Producers Association of Canada, (n.d.). Industry statistics. Retrieved May 25, 2009 from: http://www.dpac-atlc.ca/english/processors/statistics.cfm Daly, H.E. (1987). The economic growth debate: what some economists have learned, but many have not. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 14, 323-336. Daly, H.E. (1990). Toward some operational principles of sustainable development. Ecological EconomiCS, 2, 1-6. De Ancos, B., Sanchez-Moreno, De Pascual-Teresa, S. & Cano, M.P. (2006). Fruit freezing principles. In Hui, Y.H. (Ed.) Handbook offruits and fruit processing (pp. 59-80). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional. De Jong, R., Yang, J.Y., Drury, C.F., Huffman, E., Kirkwood, V. & Yang, X.M. (2005). Nitrogen In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-en vironmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.124-130). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Department of Justice Canada, (2009a). Livestock and poultry carcass grading regulations (SOR/92-541). Retrieved May 27, 2009 from: http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/showdoc/cr/SOR-92-541/bo-ga : I_V:: boga:LVI/20090527?command=search&caller=SI&search_type=all&Shorttitle=Live stock%20Carcass%20Grading%20Regulations&day=27&month=5&year=2009&s earch_domain=cr&showall=L&statuteyear=all&lengthannual=50&length=50&pa ge=3 ' Department of Justice Canada, (2009b). Schedule IV, table lB. Retrieved June, 10, 2009 from: http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/showdoc/cr/C.R.C.c.291/sc:4/20090601/en#anchorsc:4 Department of Justice Canada, (2009c). Food and drug regulations. Retrieved June 10, 2009 from: http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/showdoc/cr/C.R.C.-c.870/boga:LB-gb:L11/20090602/en#anchorbo-ga:LB-gb:L11 Dexter, J.E. (2004). Grain, paste products: pasta and Asian noodles. In Smith, J.S. & Hui, Y.H. (Ed) Food processing-principles and applications. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Dixon, J.A. & Fallon, L.A. (1989). The concept of sustainability: origins, extensions and usefulness for policy. Society and Natural Resources, 2, 73-84.

c.,

- 153 -

Douglass, G.K. (1984). The meanings of agricultural sustainability. In Douglass G.K. (Ed.), Agricultural Sustainabl1ity in a changing world order (pp. 3-29). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Downs, P. (2008, April 23). CanGro closing will mark end of Niagara fruit-canning industry. The Record [on-line]. Retrieved July 2, 2009 from: http://news.therecord.com/Business/article/340579 Drury, C.F., Yang, J.Y., De Jong, R., Huffman, P., Kirkwood, V., Yang, X.M. & Reid, K. (2005). Nitrogen use efficiency. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.18-23). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and AgriFood Canada. Duchin, F. (2005). Sustainable consumption of food: a framework for analyzing scenarios about changes in diets. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 9(1-2), 99-114. Dumanski, J. & Pieri, C. (1997). Application of the pressure-state-response framework for the land quality indicators (LQI) programme. In Land quality indicators and their use in sustainable agriculture and rural development Retrieved May 23, 2009 from: http://www.fao.org/docrep/W4745E/w4745eOO.htm#Contents Dumanski, J., Desjardins, R.L, Tarnocai, c., Monreal, c., Gregorich, E.G. & Kirkwood, V. (1998). Possibilities for future carbon sequestration in Canadian agriculture in relation to land use changes. Climatic Change, 40, 81-103. Dumanski, J. & Pieri, C. (2000).Land quality indicators: research plan. Agriculture/ Ecosystems and Environment, 81(2), 93-102. Duvick, D.N. & Cassman, K.G. (1999). Post-Green Revolution trends in yield potential of temperate maize in the north-central United States. Crop Science, 39, 1622-1630. Dyer, J. (1982). Sustainability in the Canadian agr-food system. Canadian Farm Economics, 17(3), 23-28. Early, R. (1998). Liquid milk and cream. In Early, R., (Ed.), The Technology of Dairy Products (2 nd Ed.) (pp. 1-49). London, UK: Blackie Academic & Professional. Eilers, W. & Huffman, T. (2005). Agricultural land use change. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.42-48). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada.
\

- 154 -

Eilers, W. & Lefebvre, A. (2005a). Assessing the sustainability of agriculture. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.7-13). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Eilers, W. & Lefebvre, A. (2005b). National and regional summary. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.190-201). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada,. Emmons, D.B., Ernstrom, C.A., Lacroix, C. & Verret, P. (1990). Predictive formulas for yield of cheese from composition of milk: a review. Journal of Dairy SCience, 73(6), 1365-1394. Erb, K-H. (2004). Actual land demand of Austria 1926-2000: a variation on ecological footprint assessments. Land Use Policy, 21(3), 247-259. Evenson, R.E. & Gollin, D. (2003). Assessing the impact of the Green Revolution, 1960-2000. Science, 300(5620), 758-762. Federico, G. (2005). Feeding the world: an economic history of agriculture, 18002000. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Food and Agriculture Organization, (n.d.) Technical conversion factors for agricultural commodities. Retrieved September 21, 2008 from: http://www.fao.org/es/ess/tcf.asp Food and Agriculture Organization, (1997). Land quality indicators and their use in sustainable agriculture and rural development: table of contents - Application of the pressure-state-response framework for the land quality indicators (LQI) programme. Retrieved March 12, 2009 from: http://www.fao.org/docrep/W4745E/w4745eOO.htm#Contents Food and Agriculture Organization, (2001). Human energy requirements. Retrieved May 13, 2009 from: http://www.fao.org/docrep/007fy5686efy5686eOO.htm Food and Agriculture Organization, (2009). FAOSTAT-ProdSTAT-crops. Retrieved June 1, 2009 from: http://faostatJao.org/site/567/default.aspx#ancor Gerbens-Leenes, P.W., Nonhebel, S. & Ivens, W.P.M.F. (2002). A method to determine land requirements relating to food consumption patterns. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 90(1), 47-58. Gisslen, W. (1985). Professional baking. Toronto, ON: John Wiley & Sons. Goff, D. (2009a). Dairy chemistry and physics. Retrieved May 30, 2009 from: http://wwwJoodsci.uoguelph.ca/dairyedu/chem.htm I

- 155 -

Goff, D. (2009b). Clarification and cream separation. Retrieved May 30, 2009 from: http://www.foodscLuoguelph.ca/dairyedu/ciarification.html Goff, D. (2009c). Yoghurt. Retrieved May 30, 2009 from: http://www.foodscLuoguelph.ca/dairyedufyogurt.html Goff, D. (2009d). Butter manufacture. Retrieved July 30, 2009 from: http://www.foodsci.uoguelph.ca/dairyedu/butter.html Goff, D. (200ge). Cheese. Retrieved July 30, 2009 from: http://www.foodsci.uoguelph.ca/dairyedu/cheese.html#treatment Government of Alberta, (2008). Economics and marketing: understanding dressing percentage of slaughter cattle. Retrieved May 23, 2009 from: http://www1.agric.gov.ab.ca/$department/deptdocs.nsf/all/sis12389 Government of Manitoba, (2009). Blueberry production in Manitoba. Retrieved May 13, 2009 from: http://www.gov.mb.ca/agriculture/crops/fruit/blf01s00.htmI Government of Ontario, (2007). Population counts: Canada, Ontario and regions. Retrieved June 8, 2009 from: http://www.fin.gov.on.ca/english/economy/demographics/census/cenhi06-1.html Graedel, T.E. & Allenby, B.R. (2003) Industrial ecology (2 nd Ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education Inc. Guvenc, 1. & Yildirim, E. (2006). Increasing productivity with intercropping systems in cabbage production. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 28(4), 29-44. Guy, G.B., Kibert, c.J., (1998). Developing indicators of sustainability: US experience. Building Research and Information, 26(1), 39-45. Haberl, H., Wackernagel, M. & Wrbka, T. (2004). Land use and sustainability indicators. An introduction. Land Use Policy, 21(3), 193-198. Hansen, J.W. (1996). Is agricultural sustainability a useful concept? Agricultural Systems, 50(2), 117-143. Health Canada, (2008a). Canada's food guide: get your copy. Retrieved July 29, 2009 from: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/food-guide-aliment/ordercommander/index-eng.php# 1 Health Canada, (2008b). Nutrient value of some common foods. Retrieved August 4, 2009 from: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/nutrition/fiche-nutridata/nutrienCvalue-valeurs_nutritives-eng.php Helbaek, H. (1959). The domestication of food plants in the Old World. SCience, 130(3372), 365-372.

- 156-

Helm, J.H. & Salmon, D.F. (2002). Cereal silage options for Western Canada. Retrieved June 6, 2009 from: http://www.wcds.afns.ualberta.ca/Proceedings/ 2002/Chapter%20 19%20Hel m. htm Hill, A.R. (2009). The cheese site. Retrieved May 3D, 2009 from: http://www.foodsci.uoguelph.ca/cheese/sectione.htm#yieldefficiency Hofmann, N, Filoso, G. & Schofield, M. (2005). The loss of dependable agricultural in Canada. Retrieved July 8, 2008 from: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-celjolc-cel?catno=21-006XIE2005001&lang=eng Horvath-Kerkai, E. (2006). Manufacturing fruit beverages. In Hui, Y.H. (Ed.) Handbook offruits and fruit processing (pp. 205-216). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publislling Professional. Hui, Y.H. (2004). Fruits: orange juice production. In Smith, J.s. & Hui, Y.H. (Ed.s) Food processing - principles and applications (pp.361-390). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional. Industry Canada, (2008). Trade data online (TOO). Retrieved June 19, 2009 from: http://www.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/tdo-dcd.nsf/en/Home Iyengar, G.V. & Nair, P.P. (2000). Global outlook on nutrition and the environment: meeting the challenges of the next millennium. The Science of the Total Environment, 249(1-3), 331-346. Jaros, D. & Rohm, H. (1998). Controlling the texture of fermented dairy products: the case of yoghurt. In Smit, G. (Ed.) Dairy processing- improving quality. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press LLC. Javorek, S.K., Antonowitsch, R., Callaghan, c., Grant, M. & Weins, T. (2005). Wildlife habitat on farmland. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.158-164). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Junkins, B, Clark, H., MacGregor, RJ. & McRae, T. (2005). Driving forces affecting the environmental sustainability of agriculture. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.18-23). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Kelly, A.L. (2007). Whey processing. In McSweeney, P.L.H. (Ed.). Cheese problems solved Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press LLC. Kendall, H.W. & Pimentel, D. (1994). Constraints on the expansion of the global food supply. Ambio, 23(3), 198-205.
- 157 -

Khush, G.S. (1999). Green revolution: preparing for the 21 st century. Genome, 42, 646-655. Kissinger, M. & Rees, W.E. (2009). Footprints in the prairies: degradation and sustainability of Canadian agricultural land in a globalizing world. Ecological Economics, 68(8-9), 2309-2315. Koroluk, R. Piau, A., Grimard, J., Bourque, L. & Korol, M. (2005). Farm environmental management practices. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.49-60). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and AgriFood Canada. Krueger, R.R. (1978). Urbanization of the Niagara fruit belt. Canadian Geographer, 22(3), 179-194. Lane, R. (1998). Butter and mixed fat spreads. In Early, R., (Ed.), The Technology of dairy products (2 nd ed.) (pp. 158-197). London, UK: Blackie Academic & Professional. Lee, J-Y, Brown, M.G. & Seale jr., J.L. (1992). Demand relationships among fresh fruit and juices in Canada. Review ofAgricultural Economics, 14(2), 255-262. Lefebvre, A. (2005). Introduction. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.2-6). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (eds.), (2005). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2. Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Liebman, M. & Dyck, E. (1993). Crop rotation and intercropping strategies for weed management. Ecological Applications, 3(1), 92-122. Lobb, D. (2005). Tillage erosion. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2(pp.101-107). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Lonergan, S. (1993). Sustainable regional development. Canadian Journal of Resource Science, 16(3), 335-339. Lopez, A. (1987a). A complete course in canning and related processes. Book III - processing procedures for canned food products. Baltimore, MD: The Canning Trade Inc.

- 158 -

Lopez, A. (1987b). A complete course in canning and related processes. Book I basic information on canning. Baltimore, MD: The Canning Trade Inc. Luna, J.M. & House, G.J. (1990). Pest management in sustainable agricultural systems. In Edwards, C.A., Lal, R., Madden, P., Miller, R.H. & House, GJ. (ed.s). Sustainable agricultural systems (pp. 157-173). Boca Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press. Maclaren, V.W., (1999). Urban sustainability reporting. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62(2), 184-202. Manley, D. (2001). Biscuit, cracker and cookie recipes for the food industry. [Electronic resource.] Woodhead Publishing Retrieved June 3, 2009 from: http://knovel.com/web/portaljbrowse/display?_EXT_KNOVEL_DISPLAY_bookid= 541&VerticaIID=0 Manitoba Pork Council, (2004). Pick pork: buying guide. What are the characteristics of pork cuts? Retrieved May 25, 2009 from: http://www.pickpork.com/buying .php McConkey, B., Hutchinson, J., Smith, W., Grant, B., & Desjardins, P. (2005). Soil organic carbon. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series -report #2 (pp.108-113). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. McRae, T., Smith, C.A.S., and Gregorich, LJ. (Eds). 2000. Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: report of the agri-environmental indicator project. A summary. Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Matthews, R.F., Phillips, P.E. & Augustine, J.J. (1980). Evaluation of Florida tomatoes for juice processing. Proceedings of the Florida State Horticultural Society, 93, 296-298. Milbrath, L.W., (1984). A proposed value structure for a sustainable society. The Environmentalist, 4(2), 113-124. Moxey, A., Wl"litby, M. & Lowe, P. (1998). Agri-environmental indicators: issues and choices. Land Use Policy, 15(4), 265-269. Nepstad, D.C., Stickler, C.M. & Almeida, O.T. (2006). Globalization of the Amazon soy and beef industries: opportunities for conservation. Conservation Biology, 20(6), 1595-1603. Nip, W.-K., (2004). Fermented product manufacturing. In Smith, J.S. & Hui, Y.H. (Ed.s) Food processing - principles and applications (pp.45-78). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional.

- 159 -

Niu, N. & Proux, S. (200S). Overview of agriculture in Canada. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (f~ds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.24-3S). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Niu, W., Lu, JJ. & Khan, A.A. (1993). Spatial systems approach to sustainable development: a conceptual framework. Environmental Management, 17(2), 179186. Ontario Veal Association, (2003). What is Veal and other frequently asked questions. Retrieved May 27, 2009 from: http://www.ontarioveal.on.ca/aILabouLveal/vealquestions.html Opara, L.U. (2003). Traceability in agriculture and food supply chain: a review of basic concepts, technological implications, and future prospects. Fooel Agriculture & Environment, 1(1), 101-106. Osterhammel, J. (200S). Colonialism: a theoretical overview. (S. Frisch, Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Markus Weiner Publishers. Parry, J. H. (1996). The establishment of the European hegemony: 1425-1715. New York, NY: Harper Torch books. Pataki, G. (2006) Fruit as an ingredient in a fruit product. In Hui, Y.H. (Ed.) Handbook of fruits and fruit processing (pp. 217-230). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional. Penn State University, (n.d.). Agricultural alternatives - cantaloupe production. Retrieved May 2S, 2009 from: http://horticu Itu re.psu .edu/fi les/hort/ extension/ cantel upe. pdf pfeiffer, D.A. (2006). Eating fossil fuels. Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers. Pierce, J.T. & Furuseth, OJ., (1986). Constraints to expanded food production: a North American perspective. Natural Resources Journal, 26(Winter), lS-39. Plucknett, D.L. & Smith, NJ.H. (1986). Sustaining agricultural yields. BioScience, 36(1), 40-4S. Potter, N.N., & Hotchkiss, J.H. (1998) Food Science (Sth Ed.). New York, NY: Springer Science + Media, Inc. Power, A.G., (1999). Linking ecological sustainability and world food needs. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 1, 18S-196. Rao, N.H. & Rogers, P.P. (2006). Assessment of agricultural sustainability. Current Science, 91(4), 439-448.

- 160-

Rees, W. (1996). Revisiting carrying capacity: area-based indicators of sustainability. Population and Environment: A Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies, 17(3), 195-215. Reganold, J.P., Papendick, R.I. & Parr, J.F. (1990). Sustainable agriculture. Scientific American, 262(6), 112-120. Rigby, D., Woodhouse, P., Young, T. & Burton, M. (2001). Constructing a farm level indicator of sustainable agricultural practice. Ecological Economics, 39(3), 463-478. Robert, K-H, Daly, H., Hawken, P. & Holmberg, J. (1997). A compass for sustainable development. International Journal for Sustainable Development and Ecology, 4, 79-92. Rostad, H. & Padbury, G. (2005). Wind erosion. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agrienvironmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.97-100). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Seidl, 1. & Tisdell, C.A. (1999). Carrying capacity reconsidered: from Malthus' population theory to cultural carrying capacity. Ecological Economics, 31(3), 395408. Semple, E.c. (1928). Ancient Mediterranean agriculture: part 1. Agricultural History, 2(2), 61-98. Senanayake, R. (1984). The ecological, energetic and agronomic systems of ancient and modern Sri Lanka. In Douglass G.K. (Ed.), Agricultural sustainability in a changing world order (pp. 227-237). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Sharpley, A.N., Daniels, T., Sims, T., Lemunyon, J., Stevens, R. & Parry, R. (2003). Agricultural phosphorus and eutrophication (2 nd Ed.). US Department of Agriculture, University Park PA: Agricultural Research Service, ARS-149. Shearman, R. (1990). The meaning and ethics of sustainability. Environmental Management, 14(1), 1-8. Sheppard, S.c., Bittman, S. & Tait, J. (2005). Ammonia. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture,' agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.149-152). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Smeets, E. & Weterings, R. (1999). Environmental indicators: typology and overview. Retrieved August 29, 2008 from: http://www.ambiente.provincia.foggia.it/Aree%20tematiche/Aree%20protette%2 Oe%20paesaggio/docu menti 1/10_EnvIndic. pdf

- 161 -

Smit, B. & Brklacich, M. (1989). Sustainable development and the analysis of rural systems. Journal of Rural Studies, 5(4), 405-414. Smit, B. & Smithers, J. (1993). Sustainable agriculture: interpretations, analyses and prospects. Canadian Journal of Regional Science, 16(3), 499-524. Smith, A.K. (1991). Creating a world economy: merchant capital, colonialism and world trade, 1400-1825. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. Smith, B.D. (1995). The emergence of agriculture. New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Company. Smith, e.S. & McDonald, G.T. (2002). Assessing the sustainability of agriculture at the planning stage. Journal of Environmental Management, 52(1), 15-37. Smith, e.A.S. & McRae, T. (2000). Understanding and assessing the sustainability of agriculture. In McRae, T., Smith, e.A.S., and Gregorich, LJ. (Eds). 2000. Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: report of the agrienvironmental indicator project. A summary (pp. 2). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Staff, M.e. (1998). Cultured milk and fresh cheeses. In Early, R., (Ed.), The Technology of Dairy Products (2 nd ed.) (pp. 123-157). London, UK: Blackie Academic & Professional. Statistics Canada, (n.d.). Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, Provinces and Territories, 2001 and 1996 censuses - 100% data. Retrieved July 3, 2009 from: http:jjwww12.statcan.cajenglishjcensus01jproductsjstandardjpopdwell/TablePR.cfm Statistics Canada, (2002). Fruit and vegetable production, volume 70(2) . Retrieved June 1, 2009 from: http://dsp-psd.tpsgc.gc.ca/Collection-R/Statcan/22003-XIBj22-003-XIB-e .htm I Statistics Canada, (2003a). Sub-provincial population dynamics: the continuing urbanization of Canada. Retrieved May 4/1 2009 from: http://geodepot.statcan.ca/Diss/Highlights/Page7jPage7_e.cfm Statistics Canada, (2003b). Family food expenditure survey-2001. Retrieved May 8, 2008 from: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/dIHld/data-donnees/ftp/foodexdepalimjfoodex-depalimentaires2001-eng.htm

\

- 162-

Statistics Canada, (2005a). Profile of marital status, common-law status, families, dwellings and households, for Canada, Provinces, Territories, Census Divisions and Census Subdivisions, 2001 Census. Retrieved May 25, 2009 from: http://www12.statcan.ca/english/censusOl/products/standardjprofilesjRetrievePr ofile.cfm?Temporal=2001&PID=56146&APATH=1&RL=3&IPS=95FO487XCB2001 001 Statistics Canada, (2005b). Livestock feed requirements study. Retrieved July 11, 2008 from: http:jjdsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.cajColiectionjStatcanj23-501-Xj23-501XIE2003001.pdf Statistics Canada, (2008a). Food consumption in Canada - data sources: additional documentation. Retrieved July 8, 2008 from: http://www.statcan.ca/cgi-bin/imdb/p2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&SDDS=3475& lang=en&db=IMDB&dbg=f&adm=8&dis=2 Statistics Canada, (2008b). Food statistics in Canada. Retrieved July 8, 2008 from: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/cgibinjimdbjp2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&SDDS=3475&lang=en&db=IMDB&dbg=f &adm=8&dis=2 Statistics Canada, (2009). CANSIM II. Retrieved May 25, 2009 from: http:jjcansim2.statcan.cajcgi-winjcnsmcgi.exe?CANSIMFile=CIIjCII_1_E.HTM& RootDir=CIIj Swanton, C.J., Harker, K.N. & Anderson, R.L (1993). Crop losses due to weeds in Canada. Weed Technology, 7(2), 537-542. Theunissen, J., Booij, C.J.H., & Lotz, A.P. (1995). Effects of intercropping white cabbage with clovers on pest infestation and yield. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata, 74(1), 7-16. Thompson, P.B. & Nardone, A. (1999). Sustainable livestock production: methodological and ethical challenges. Livestock Production Science, 61(2-3), 111-119. Tilman, D. (1999). Global environmental impacts of agricultural expansion: the need for sustainable and efficient practices. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96(11), 5995-6000. Tilman, D., Cassman, K.G., Matson, P.A., Naylor, R. & Polasky, S. (2002). Agricultural sustainability and intensive production practices. Nature, 418(6898), 671-677.

- 163 -

Tomalty, R., Alexander, D., Anielski, M., Wilson, J., Jozsa, A, Haider, M., CartinArtega, F. & Casey, D. (2007). Ontario community sustainability report, 2007. Drayton Valley, AB: The Pembina Institute. Retrieved March 18, 2009 from: http://www.pembina.org/pub/l512 Topp, E., van Bochove, E., Theriault, G., Dechmi, F. & Lapin, D. (2005). Pathogens. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2(pp.138-139). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Tremblay, M. (2008). Silage storage techniques. Retrieved June 6, 2009 from: http://www.agriculture.gov.sk.ca/Default.aspx?DN=Of4adOa5-6733-4472-gell95cf79108918 United Nations Population Division, (2009). World population prospects: the 2008 revision population database. Sri Lanka, 1950-2005. Retrieved March 18, 2009 from: http://esa.un.org/unpp/index.asp United States Department of Agriculture, (2007). Food and Nutrition Service USDA commodity food fact sheet for schools & child nutrition institutions. Retrieved May 25, 2009 from: http://www.fns.usda.gov/fdd/schfacts/rpts/allfacts_bycode_veg-fruits.pdf United States Department of Agriculture, (2009). National Agricultural Statistics Service: publications - 2001 agricultural statistics. Retrieved August, 2008 from: http://www .nass. usda .gov/Pu blications/Ag_Statistics/200 l/index.asp van Bochove, E., Theriault, G., Dechmi, F. & Leclerc, M-L. (2005). Phosphorus. In Lefebvre, A, Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.131-135). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. van den Bergh, J.C.J.M. & Verbruggen, H. (1999). Spatial sustainability, trade and indicators: an evaluation of the 'ecological footprint.' Ecological Economics, 29(1),61-72. van Vliet, L.J.P., Padbury, G.A., Rees, H.W. & Matin, M.A. (2005). Water erosion. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.90-96). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Vibhakara, H.S. & Bawa, A.S. (2006) l"1anufacturing jams and jellies. In Hui, Y.H. (Ed.) Handbook offruits and fruit processing (pp. 189-204). Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Professional. Vitousek, P.M., Ehrlich, P.R., Ehrlich, AH. & Matson, P.A. (1986). Human appropriation of the products of photosynthesis. BioScience, 36(6), 368-373.

- 164 -

и

Wackernagel, M. & Rees, W. (1996). Our ecological footprint Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers. Walter-Toews, D. (1996). Ecosystem health: a framework for implementing sustainability in agriculture. BioScience, 46(9), 686-689. Weiss, H. & Bradley, R.S. (2001). What drives societal collapse? Science, 291(5504), 609-610. Welch, R.M. & Graham, R.D. (1999). A new paradigm for world agriculture: productive, sustainable, nutritious, healthful food systems. Field Crops Research, 60, 1-10. White, T. (2000). Diet and the distribution of environmental impact. Ecological Economics, 34(1), 145-153. Wiebe, S.H., Eilers, R.G., Eilers, W.O. & Brierley, J.A. (2005). Soil salinity. In Lefebvre, A., Eilers, W., & Chunn, B. (Eds.). Environmental sustainability of Canadian agriculture: agri-environmental indicator report series - report #2 (pp.114-118). Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Wiggins, C. & Cauvain, S.P. (2007). Proving, baking and cooling. In Cauvain, S.P & Young, L.S. (Ed.s) [Electronic resource]. Technologyofbreadmaking(pp. 141174). Springer US. World Commission on Environment and Development, (1987). Our common future. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Zinck, J.A., Beeroteran, J.L., Farshad, A, Moameni, A., Wokabi, S. & Van Ranst, E. (2004). Approaches to assessing sustainable agriculture. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 23(4), 87-109.

- 165 -

Appendix 1

_____ -+ __ B_e __ef hip .cuts (except shank cuts) и fresh or frozen

F004 F004 F004 F004 F004 F004 F004 F004

- -------- - - - - - - - - - - j

------~---

,-------------

----------4------~-и----

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ,-- _ _ L __ _

steaks - fresh or frozen Beef tenderloin cuts - fresh or frozen Beef cuts - fresh or frozen ---+-=~:.. Beef bone steaks - fresh or frozen F005 Baron of beef - fresh or frozen F005

F006 --F006 F006 F006

F007
short-rib roasts - fresh or frozen Beef blade cuts - fresh or frozen __ __ c _______ ___ chuck cuts - fresh or frozen -----~-----~--~-.------cross-cut rib cuts - fresh or frozen --..--- ----- ------l-------;-----.----~~~.-----+~-~~-=
~ --;~c~, ~~

>____________

i _ _ _ _ _L _________

Ste_lf!ing .!Jeef и fresl1_o~ !r:.oz~n Beef
___ ' ___ , ____
~

F009
F009 F009 F009 - fresh or frozen ...- - .----- ------Beef ground - fresh or frozen
---, ..
-~------

'- _____-_-_1=_0_09_===_ i B~if_~~~~~!i~~-: !~~~_~_()r fro~en

\

- II -

r __~~ __~F~ __ O_1_5_____~ __ +

Beef_~arca~ses and primal p.o!!~I!~~~S_~_~~Jro~z,-e,-:-n__..._~~.... _-j Beef. other (inct brisket, plate, flank, shank cuts) - fresh or frozen .--.~.~-.---~-- ---.--..-~~~~--~~.-~-.-----j }---~~---'-.~----~ -+ Beef hinds - fresh or frozen ~--~~--~~--~.-~ ~~~----.-~--..-----~~~~~----- fresh or frozen
~~~~----

roasts or frozen -'C-'-''-_ _...__. _____ Pork centre ham cuts - fresh or frozen --------и--~-------------~--i F027 Pork loin cutsи fresh or frozen ---~-:.'-:-~----~-~-: '-и------и---------и-- .. ---~--1 F027 Pork riblets - fresh or -------frozen ..
---~--~-----------------

-----------------.~-------~~--

F027

Pork back ribsи fresh or frozen

;-___~__ .~~_FO_~2_! __ .. _Ф_ Breade~Jlor~c~t~!?-=J~~~5JE}ro.?e_n___~ __~___~_~________ .____ ~ ' Pork tenderloin - fresh or frozen ,---.. F027
-~---~

F028 ._-------Ф

Pork

cutsи fresh or frozen

F028 ,__._. __F~~O __2_8.~___
F029

; Pork side spareribsи fresh

o.r~.fro~_~_z_e_n_~_~ ____ ~__ _

---.----------

.Sidepo~k(belly~ll!sl_=_tr:..~h o~fE_o~e~.n~~~ __._____ ~~________ _

~ f~k. shoulder cu~Je~~~p!~(?Cks)_:f!'e~~_()!lr_()ze~.n _______ ~...~. ~.--:~- Pork shoulder~cuts (inclUding-New yorkиorMontreal-stYle)-

F029 F029 ,. ______....__F~._O.2._9._..

: Pork butt cuts (including Boston-style) и fresh or frozen
fresh or

Porcetta (ltalial'1pork ro~.Д!) ..J!~Sh2!Jr:2z~I'1 __________...__ .~ ... _~_ , Picnic shoulder - fresh or frozen

- III -

F035~~_~ .f~~~J:~!~~sses an_~_prilT1al portions и fres~ or frozen

F035 F035 F035

~. Pork .:othe~(i~~ludi~g~_oc..~s):_!resh~~f~()~e_~_~_~

' Pork shouldersи fresh or frozen .Hog carcasses и fre~h or frozen. Pork belliesи fresh or frozen

F035_~ _~ __ Hog~sL<!es..-~ fresh ~orJroze.r!~

.... F03~__ .~ ~~. Por~~I~gs - fre~h or frozen Pork loinsи or frozen Pork hocksи fresh or frozen

--~--~~-~-~-~~--------~

.... "<leTore и

chicken - fresh or frozen

--------'--~----T_--J.----

F047 ... ... F049 F049 L_ ._ F049 F049 F049 F049 F049 ' Poultr:Y_!iy.er - fresh or frozen F061 ...-----.--+ F061 --------,._.. - fresh or frozen Ground veal- fresh or frozen ...и _--,-_. Liver from mammalsи fresh or_.frozen --.. --.--_. F074 Offal from mammalsи otherи fresh or frozen F074 Stomachs Jtrjp~e)...:fresh or trozen ~.~_.~___. _~_.~_~ ___ ~. ______~___I F074 Ox tailsи fresh or frozen F074 Tonguesи fri:sh or frozen F074 Sweetbreadsи fresh or frozen. --.-._-._" F074 ; So~p_bones____.__._ F074 Knuckles и fresh or frozen Feet - fresh or frozen ~---.--'--- ... ~-----~ ~и fresh or frozen F074 F074 Heartsи fresh or frozen F074 Marrow bones - fresh or frozen .и. ---._-_.
~ ~-~--.-----~

------------r-~---

---,-~.--~-------~--

brochettes - fresh or frozen .....chickenи fresh ..-.or frozen Breaded chicken cutlets - fresh or frozen-~----------------! Broiler chickenи fresh or frozen : Chicken wings ~!c..~pt c()()ked):.fresh orfroze~_n ______ ~~~.____~1 Turkey_: !r~s~()r frozen meat and offal from poultry_:()ther. fresh_---'--or~__._____! - fresh or frozen i Ducks - fresh or frozen Geeseи fresh or frozen - fresh or frozen
.~-~~-----

-.---~------

--~---~-~~-----~.------~---------__!

--~

--~----.~

~--

---~

--~- -.~-~ --,-~.-.----.--.

--_

r____________

-------~-+---------

__ .__

~

___ ___. . __._
~

--~-------.--~---.---~.--j

--

~.---- --.---~---~

~

- iv -

F076 r------и-----ии-,
}-------

F076 F076 F076

lamb and muttonи frozen -- fresh or --.. ---.. ; Meat (except p_Cl':lltryt: other - fresh or frozen Lamb - fresh or frozen ; Mutton - fresh or frozen Goat meat - fresh or frozen ; Venison - fresh or frozen Horse -"'-'-'--"-'~'-'---meat - fresh or frozen----.---------.----.--.-----~
--.-----.-.--.-.~~-~

'. FrQgs legs.: fresh or fr ..o .. _z_e ___ n__ .... _. __... _____._._________.__.... Caribou meat - fresh or frozen .. .. Buffalo meat - fresh or frozen
----.----"'~ ---~----.---~ ~-

-.~-------------------

Pea meal bacon t~~c~__ __ _ '-. __._. __.~_._.__._..__.. ___._._._... _. Ham (exceFlt cooked ham) _________..________ _ i ____ .~.________.._"_C_c_o ..tt~gEl rolls _____. ___________~ __________ _ , Picnic ham Uncooked ham

F082 F082

;_Bacon

meat Corned beef - brisket : Corned beef - sweet pi~kled Cured bacon rinds

.-.-.-----._- ------- .. - -_ ... C~re~ pigsf~~t (~dib!e_offal) _________._.. __ . __
-.-----~-~~-.--

-

-,--~-

"'

Je:ked meat _-:. Geiky) (~_~~ep!_c<lflned) _. _. _. _ .. ___. __ Pail salt beef
fQfk.hoc.k~J edible offal) .. (~~~ept~<l0~~dt:.pickled ; Salted pprk_.___ . _.' ____ ._. __.. ___ __ ...__ и Smo~Elc!I:>~~f~exceptpre-_c()2~~5L _______. __ .__ .____ , Sunrise Salt MeaUTM} Uncooke~ sausage Beefand pork sausage -~f1~()ke.cJ, chilled or fIo~f:)n __ Beef sausage и uncooked,~hiUed or!Io~,1n : Brea ~fastsausage_:_uf1~~!<f:)<!__ ._._.___ ~_ Country-~yl~.s(l~~(lgf:):...L'n~oo_ke, ..d _____________....__._.. ___ _ . _~glls.h.b~flgers_=__':ll1cooke_d__ ._______________ ..~. __...__... _ . . _. Farmer stylf:)~<l.u~age uncookf:)d.~...ch~led.2rJ'r()~~f1_. __ Link sa~sage - uncooked Longanisa и uncoo~ed Oktoberfest sausage - un~oo~ed Pork sausage и uncooke~.~h~~f:)~or.frozen

F091 f _____ F091

- v-

F092

.L Bologna_ ...... .
- r - - - ' - - - ...-. ......... ....... ... - ... -- .. - ..--...- .... - - - . - - .-.--.-----j

... __ JQ~~ _____ LWie!'~!~J~x_~eJl! ca!l~~~L
F093 . ! Wieners (made with chicken) и ---- -- ------T-BиBQ~i~~~иrsи - except cann'~d'"
-.--. ------. -

.--.-!.Q!~---t-~~fl~g - .. :.~~cep!.s:anned___._.. - ......................--- .. -.--~-l
;__.__F_O~~ _ _Coo.k~~l~!JI~~d.!a-':I~_~.!1!.:и.2o.tt~h~err:......._........... __ ......... _ ..____.._. ____-l

F096 i Pancetia ,'-.и-.-. . и_ . ..........F . . .O..- .9. : и. ::~~~JиLiver ch~i~(li~~~~~~ c 6....

F096 F096 _.._......_---;,........ .. F096

- cooked or cured

Beer F096_ _. __Bc.l"o:O c..d . p.~d~i!1g~?~~age.._.. ___.....___ .___ ._____._..................-----1 F096 Braunschweiger sausage ; - - - F09(=~~r~C~piZ;lla-s~u;~g~-- - '. F096 F096 F096 : F096 F096

F096 F096

._._----.
Hot italian sausage....... .

Chinese sa~sage____ -........- ......---......------.---...-.------1 , Har coil sausage .-.~~=~=EO~~~ и-=T9_o~eb~~g~:;-~~jUи::;Cl-y-t:.и-._и .... ии.._....__.__...__________~ i F096 . Genoa sausage ......- .. .. -~--~---~----~~,-~--------

-

: __ .. _ .~09_~ __..L_c;a~i~ng sausage

.. FO~? .. __ .. :J2ry .~?u!)age _ FQ9?._.. _LMast!o (T~L

.. vi ..

Cooked(boiled)!l~rn.~ ....._._ .....~.

Luncheon ham ---------Prosciutto.(ex~p~.c.a.!!~~d)_.__....

.------~----~---~

_.__~.__ ...._.

, Sliced ham
F100

F100 F100

f----.. c-c::.::..._._....... -'-

Cooked whole
~~::..~ ..~ и..

i .Б~icken nuggets

- hot --.-----------.---LB~rb~qLJecJor!oast!l5!p~~!!!:Y~!lat - hot:.._.~.__.... _ ...._...~_....._ и Chicken strip~(~2!t __ .__________ J Barbequed or roasted meats - hot .. -.-.-.-----. !

, Chicken

~-- __-=--:.=.-... -.. _~ ...:R.: :. ~ :~-;: t chick~~: h()l_(excl.uc!i~g~..b.Ole_bbqL_____ =~_~~]
_~ Luncheon '29f(ex~p!~~l2n~(jL_.___._ _ _._.__~ ____ и

Roast chicken - frozen _________... __ . _ .. __.___.____~.I

,---": . ::':~--. -~. ~~1~~~~fa~~~~fe~~~~~~1~~~~ ~1tt~~J~~i~~d~ncedand-~

. P~~PCl.c~Clg~.dL ._. _____~ __ .__ . _ ..____.____ ...._ .._ ...\ Turkey rolls - pre-cookedи frozen \ .Mea!{~~~pt~~~~~~. fr2~;---~ -----=-~=~

- ..

~-~ ~~ ~ ~:: :~~i::~~i~;::!~ ~~nedL=~~~~~~_j Pimento _____ , Scot~be.gg~ __..___._.___.____.~__.~____._~..._.__._ ..-1
ии ... ..... - .и- ии .и T ..

... ..
~~~

~.~+

.. --

~

-..

~и~и~-~---и-~---и----~-и--

.. иии.. -..и-ии1

loa.f~~~p!.c:a~~~d).:.P!ckled

smo~~cj~eef_-p!e-CQ9.ked_и ____ ~ _____и__ и_ии_и_и___
Jelli~d' ~e'~I--~~"---

иии_i
~

Spiced beef (including sliced and prepackaged) . .
...
"--'-~---

.-~.~-. _ .. --.---.-.-~

'----.-----~.---.t-~.~--~~;e;~7g~-:~~:~i~;~:~:~:~~edi=-~~==и~_=J
, Cooked pork roast
Ha~J2Cl!(e.~~ep!_

-~----_r-~-------

: Chickenи frozen . - ..cooked - ---_. C~a. syUbarbequed po~10 :..hgtil,rc()ld
~--

-----.~.~-------.~--~.-----,--

Boil:i~:~~gJT1ea.t(ex~ep~am1{~~~~p.tБa.n~ed) . .

- vii -

F100

. Barbequed or roasted poultry meat (except.cannedL и.. _.... ____. iBarbequed or roasted meats (except Jellied tongue (except canned)

F101 F101 ! Sausage meatи fresh or frozen ,.____.. :. F.c 1.. 0: :; . .c1__..__.,-tи.S"~~-~~ge Eolls - fresh .'

F101 F101 F101 F101 F101 F101 F101 F101

(except prH-cooked froze~) ___._ ...' .. ___. и fresh

F101 F101 ~_.F..1_0_1_...__._. ,.. Head chees~(c;r~to_ns l_a.ndДc;rapple (ex_cept..can.Tled) _. ___._ F101 Jamaican patty
r __.__..F __ 1_0.__ 1._... _.__..._~_.M __ e_a.t..I_o_af mi.x (beef,p()r.~,veaIJ . '-..-.__.._F ___ 10c_1 _ .. _-,_.M. ealp(l~tes Je~cepL _ . _._F_10_1.___,}~~(j!P(j!~~ (e~c_ept~_.-..'~~ ~ . . \ ..._. __........ ___.._ .._.._ f. _____ F1.O_._1__ ._ ! Beef and kidneypies_ (excep!_c:an.n.~d.L !. _ _ _ _ F .. 10 . ._1____~ __B __ ee_f..&_. kidney pie.:.hot F101 pasteД (ho!) .__ .

F101 F101

Sweet & sour sp(lr~ribs - hot Sausage rolls - hot i Sa~s.age meat - hot

- Vlll -

F108 F108 F108 F108 ~-----~~~----~ F108 F108 ~ .. --.--F108 I F108 .
r------~~~-.---

F110 f--------и-

. --Me-atand meat-preparations (exceptlnfan(fooisf:'-othercanned -.--.-.-------..- __________.____._ _ _ .___ _

Prosciutto - canned Picnic hams - canned =~:~~.--------------------------Beef_ragout ':~(ln~cL___________________. . __ .____ _ Beef stew - canned --~-------------------Irish stew - canned _______________________.. ___. ___ _ Meat ball stew - canned

F11 Ou.____J _~~,~.!::!I."~Q F110.-._----+----._. F110 F110 F110 F110 F110

F110 F110 F110 F110 F110

-----.--~-.-

...---..

~ ___ FJ1Q.._._

F110 _ _ --+-=--=.:..:.c.:., Bacon__ - ..:..:, canned ,______.__ :.....:.:..::..... _____ и______..._ ..___.._ ..._._. _____.___.___._. ___..__ _ .__. ___ .. ;_B_.eef dinne:-.rs:=--~c:a::n:.::.n:-=e.-=-d____._._.______________._____..____.. _. ___. _1 Beef fluid extract):._~~~_~ __________ _ ,.____ ._ ... ______ '-_..__ .____-r-..B .. eef has~(except inf~t food~l~canned=._.__ .. ____ Beef steak and onions - canned i Braised stea~:..~Д!:1~ ____________________ ._____ ... F110 Brawn - canned . F110 Chicken loaves_~~_~~______ ._ .._.____. __ .._. __ .. __ F110, __.____"....:..:::::.:.:::.:::..::::..:.:.:::.:.-_=:.:.::..:-=~___________._._._ - .. canned F110 -_._..,-F110 F110 и canned: ___. ___..___.______ .._____.___ .
_M _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~ _ _ _________и _ _ _ и __ и _ _ _ _ .~ _ _ ~_._~ _ _ _ _ _

;.'"~--- ~--.-.--------.----.---

-

F11 0 .._ ... __.___..'-._Chick~~-Ia-ki!:lg.:_canned __.___.___.__.__ ._ . _..__ ...._.

- ix -

: Flakes of corned beef - canned F110 F110 F110 F110 F114 F114 F114 F114 Deviled ham - canned Corned beefи -canned .. ---.-----------.------'-____________ fancy~atsJ~Qi!?I~ offallJe.xce~Unfant food~L canned Cocktail sausage~....E~_n.e_d . _______________ ----------1
-

,---------------r-----

Atlantic cod - fresh or frozen ----------: Bakata fish {codt:fresh o!fr9.z~n_______ ~~ _______ _ Gray_(;()d - fresh ()r_fr().?e_n ______ ~__ .______________.__._____, Rock cod - fresh or frozen -----~-------~-------------, --~-----~ . Flounder and sole - fresh or frozen ---,----------------------------Petrale и fresh or frozen

---------------------------1
------- ---------------

------_ .._----- - - - -

. Arrowtooth - fresh or frozen F115 F115 Pacific turbotи fresh or frozen ~------------i----F116 Haddockи fresh or frozen ~-----------~ -----------------------------------1 Salmon - fresh or frozen ~--------------~---------,------------------------------Kokanees - fresh or frozen ----~------------------------.---------! Salmon filletsи fresh or frozen ~------~=~. -----,--~-=-~ ~---------------------,----I F125 Sea fishи other - fresh or frozen ------,~--------------------------- ! F125 i Sea smelt - fresh or frozen --------------------_._-F125 : Sea bass - fresh or frozen F125 _________ Sardines (sardi_na)- fresh or frozeD_____________ _ F125 Sablefish - fresh or frozen -------------------------------"Rosefish -- fresh or frozen fish ------- ----------------"-----Shad - fresh or frozen fish
----,----,-----------------------~--

-

--

----------------------------~

F125 F125-------r F125 F125 - Shark - fresh or frozen -------------------------------.-. F125 Silverfish ,-------_.... _-,._________Б11.Д._ _ Snapper,s- fresh or frozen ___________________________ _ Ocean catfish {wolf fisht-fr.~sh or f~ozen ______________ ,. __ _ ______________ ____ ~vvordfish (br~9n.dbill) -=f~esh_o_L~2.?~n.______ ._ ~ _______ F_1.__2~______ Tilapia_ ______ __ F125 Tomcod - fresh or frozen fish --------------------.-------F125 i Tunaи fresh or frozen sea fish ;---------------------------~ F125 Tu_~~ot (Greenland halibut) _~fr~s.!l_()i.fr()zen____.___. __ F125 : Pilchardи fresh or frozen fish
~-----

!

=-_. . ----

F125 :___F __ 1_ 25 F125

и Skat~ ('fllings):_!r~~~_ 2.f!~ozen fish ----_._--__ :Fish piece (log cut) ____ _ Atlantic silverside

-----.---------------...

---~

-x-

F125 F125 F125 F125 F125 F125

; Дi~~~~_(skipr>er):!!~~b.2L!rgze.n~_ .............. Blue runner fish ... - ... ------ .. -.-.-Boccacio - fresh or frozen -_ .... __.._-- .Bream - fresh or frozen
-~--

.. Cap~ir:!.i~aj)lln)~f!.~sh or frozen fish ----.. _ .и _--_ .и.
-

--.--.----------.--

..и

-.

-

..

и Cultus codи fresh or frozen fish .. - ..и. - _... _ и.и.. ..------_ ...._._-_._-_. Milkfish._._.- -..и .... __. F125 F125 ... EulachO'l.(~.r:!.c!l~f~~N..:!!esh or frozen ._--_.. _ .. .. ~Le~i~~(ga.spar~.t...g~E~reau!}y~kLJ!.~sh.g!'.f~~z~l1lish ... ~ Flatfis.t'.:fr~_sh oБ!i:()zen fish ______________. и Groundfishи fresh or frozen . -_ .ии..._.и .::__. . _--_ .....и ..

_._--_ _

_

Hake. (Iin9)=-fr~?.t1.()!.!r_ozen __ ._...._.. .._. : li~~~u_t1lli!ches).:::.fresh or froze.n__ .. __... __ _ _ . LtlerriI19.::lБes_h._o_r.f_ro.z._en ..fi_ls_h ___._._.. ____. __. -.-.-----.----1 sandи fresh or frozen fish .. L~iD9~~(cu~us и fresh or frozen -.--.-..... ! PusHer fish Mackerelи fresh or frozen .._._--_._ ...... . F125
и Freshwater fishи fresh or frozen Char - fresh or frozen fish --. .. : Menomineeor frozen fish

_

...._ ..и.. _-

__ __ -_..и

LMo~!l.eye.J~~sl1..00rozen fish _ ..____.

F129 F129 F129

. Mulletи fresh or frozen fish
M.LJ~~~I.u_nge_(frl?~~i.n<?Dge.l!!.ngEU-_fresh ?r froz~n ____ .-............._._.
Pickerel.2l~e..!pJ~..tP~ch!.~()r~,_I!'~!I~yeL~!!e.sh or frozen

F129 F129

Powan и fresh or frozen fish .-.----..и. Redfin - fresh or frozen fish Waterbe~y __ Jr~sl1. or!~oz~T!.~sh Redhorse и fresh or frozen fish . :.s,a.LJ.ger - fresh or frozen fish ; Smeltи fresh or frozen
S.tur9e.0r:!.~}!esh or frozen ; Sucker - fresh or frozen fish ._ ...

F129 F129 F129 F129 F129 F129 F129 F129 _.

I Sun~~~(pl:l.f!lp~~~ed} ~J!.esh.0rfro}_~. __ и Trout (to9ue, touladi) - fresh orfrozen rTullibe-e (cisco. lake chub~iake herring. : frozen -'----_ ......... ..... _ ... _ .и....

_ ...... _.

_

- fresh or frozen._ ..- . ._._ ..и. _.,,--_.. , Whitefish or frozen ! Chub - fresh or frozen fish Yellow perch. fresh (jrJ!9zen fish

__

.-

- xi -

F129 .; Barbotte -fresD or frozen :-------F1-29 : Bass (black crappi~!gal!9Q.J:~~ret:fte_s~orfroze!1 __ -_ ..._....... -,,.____ X129 _ ___ f.J 29 ' Bloat (bloaterL:.!resh o_rf._r_o._z_e ...n ________ ..____._______ _ Bluegill_~ fresh:..~o:.:.r_~..~_:-.:_~~___________________________
t

I

;---___ ,F_.129 . Blues - fresh or froze::n ... _ . _.____.__ ._~. ------..-.------------------1 F129 Buffalofish or frozen .-----------и...:---- .'-.. ' ----- ---- ----..:-..:. и-ии:::.....:.:.и:-=и::----ии~----иииииииии-----------иi Bullhead - fresh or frozen fish --- ----- ----_._----_...- - - - - - - - - - _ ...._ - - j !_gor:e.g()ne и fresh_oJ:fr:o~~~_~sh .. _______. _______ ._ ... :. Buffalofish (carpsu.c~erll~~s~_~ frozen fisD ________. Laurette и fresh or frozen fish ,-_ .. _--------.-._- -- -- -. - ----- .-.
t

t.---.-..----

_____ ~ }nco~~u (c~nni~ Lfr~~t!..~r:..t~?:e_~1!~!l _____

F129 F129

. ' L~rnPr:..E!y(lame~!l_:.1~~~h or frozen _____._____. Carp_:-:fre._sD _()r:..!r()~~QJis:::h_. _______________________.____ 1
_e' __ _ _ _ _ ии

___~}5_____ :_fi~~portions in batt~r..:-_pr~-co~~.e.P fr()?ec.:.n:...____._____ ._.. _ .. 1 F135 : Fish sticks frozen F135 Lem()Q.fillets:.Pr~:~o()~e~Jr:oze:_n.__ .__________.____._____________ ..________ I и____ ._._F_1.35 _:Higb_~in_e __ r._fi __s._h_'____'--____ .______.__.._.___________.________ .___ . F140 Cured fish .. _--_.... _-.--_ .. - - .. __ . _._---_._---_.------------_.- ...... _--. -----_.. ! RagooQ~ ... _________ . _ ....______ ._.____ .___ .___. _______ , r_r-"l_ackerel:._~f!!().~~~~_~al_te.d!.s!~.ed!..~!legar cured 0Lpi.ckled ___'Б1~0 . Tullibee .:Дf!!0~e9.~~~e.~~~!ed. yine9Д!_~!e.sL~ 2!ckled .___.___ и__ JJ.4Q__ ._~JJ"9ll.~-sm.C>ked~alted'_drie.(j.!_':'i~_e.g~!:.2ur~g_~r:..p~~I~d __ . F140 . Sprats - sfTlo~ed_,_Д.alte.(j._g!ie.d'!"yin~~I~.~~ll.r~(j_()!.J~~c~l!d_.___ ._ Дablefish ~_~f!!()k!g!~a!e.s!!.c!~~e.d_'_y.i!1.egar.~ured or pickled F140 . Pollockи smoked, salted,dried! vineg,!rc~red o~ pickled fish F140 : Mudfish - smoked ._----- --'- -_._-----------._---._F140 __ . _ Turbot (greerl!and _Dalibut)~_.sfl1oked,~alted. dried orpi~kled F140 .t!.a~e_=_Дr:r!~ked!__salted~ried..!_"'~~e.g?r~~r:e_c!.0: pickled ~_._. ____ F . _140 . _ Haddoc~_:. s.fl1?~e.d~.~alted,_drieg!~i!leg~r_Sured or , Alewifeи cured or ._----_.,F140 .. F140 Goldeye - s~ok~d,Д.a~ed, (jried,--~i!!.e.ga!_cured or pi~~led F140~e'-~_~fl1Qk~c!.,.s.?J~es!и..d!ied!..:-,inegar cured o!.plckled F140 Cusk - smokecj. salted! dried. vinegar curedor pickled
, .. 0 _ ' _ - - ' _
~

~---

---

-

F140 F140

; Cod - sr:r!?~..d!_~~~~d.!_~i~cJ!_':'iI1~g9! cu!.e.9..?r:..p'ig~ed _ _. Anchovies.: slll.oked, salted,dried ..Ylnegar cured or pickled

- xii -

и Herring (kippers) - smoked, salted, dried, vinegar cured or F140 i pi~~le.d.._____._~_.___ ._... _ . __.._.. F140 . __ .Д~I_r:!l~~=--sr1l<!~d.!_s~I!~~,Er.i~d.!.yinega r cured or pickled_ Salmonи canned F143 I Tunaи canned F143 ии _____ I,________ AlbacoreииL__ __ - canned____._____ F143 Yellowfin
~ ~~~~

.__ _-.EJ~3~___ ~~!Pja..I~15-Q1orr-.!'~lIipDe~cct.-~IJ~lIe(~~2~l!{).
L~~g!~ (tun<1.:-~_ann~d ..__.___.__ .____ .__ _

F146 F146 F146 F146 _ ...__

~--I~~~'~~

.и.

!~ .. --и. '.~.L.-.~~.-,.

- canned

- canned - canned
i Shrimps and prawns

-- F149--rShr;p~ea~canned~~ez;dried--------и --

----f--.---....---....-.-.--.-.- ..-----... -....... --.

F149 ! Shrimp cocktailfrozen -.---.....-r-.-...... -.--.-.---.--.. -.---.----- .. --. ... __ ~1_49____f-~~.irJlF~~d prawn_[T1~Clt__:lrElsh or frozen ._. ___ _ ._ ~11~ _____ J.ДI!.r.!.'!lp~nd.2rClII!_0_frleat:_c.a.!]_n~Q. ___ _ F149 cooked ,-.-.~--~---------- и . ---..и---- fresh or frozen ------_._---'---_ ......
_.E14~_..._LД~ri!'lp_s._ Cl~d.pra""'_f}ДJr1.~~El~s__-..fr~sh or frozen

_ .,=-1~~ __.! Breaded shrimpД::p!~:cooked - frozen

- Xlll -

F151

F151

Shellfish - other . Marine products - alloth_er___ .. _______..____ ....._ .. _. и Scallopm.eat - fresh o.r_f_ro . _z_e.n.__.. ___._..~ ____. _. __ .. _._____..... ; Lobsters in shell - fresh or frozen
ии " _ _ _h ____ и _ _
~. _ _ ~ _

_

~_

_и

F151 _.... _ . _F ..1 . . c.1 F151
5.

и Mussels - fresh и Octopus i Oyster meat~Jresh or frozen . Oysters in the shell- fres ..h .. __ .. _____._.._ .,OV"O\.jC seafood .cc .. _._. ____.... _ ... . ~.Дfll.9~~g_oy~ters - canned Quahogs __Д.cД!lppsln shells - fresh
S~pia

. ?quid(Atiantic or и Smoked mussels - canned .._----_._---_... _._-----_.-----._._--, Calamari - shellfish

F151 >---_._.._-

Clam meatи frozen Crab meat - canned Crab meatи fresh or frozen Crabs in shellи fresh or frozen и Lobste!'J)ast~.:.~!lIl.~s! __ . ____________.________ .-.--.---i ~scДfgotД. (snails) _ ... ____ ._ ... _____._

F151 F151 .~ и F151 F151 F151 >-_ .._ .....F151
~--.--.

. ,.

---,-~-

Lobster meat - fresh Lobster meat - frozen Cuttlefish(shelifish) Turtle meat . . . . . . . . ----,.---.. Caviar slAbstitutes (from roe of other fish, except sturgeon)canned Eel liver ----Fish roe Fish
--~ --'--"-'-'-.~ ~----.~-.-,,----.-'"

и _ _ .'<._.... _ . __ .... _ и.

F151 -------F151 F151

__ pompano Seal meat

\.

- xiv -

F156
F156

i--,-----":'--'-=-::'------l-":":='-

Reworked butter

F167 ----------t--------------.
F167 F167 F167 F167 F167

F168
-- - -----.

cheese

F168

---.----.---.---t----.---~.-

I Gruyere process cheese ._"-- __
w ии

__ X16~_______L~pra~_ {;~~J?~~i~~~()s..ol} F168 Process cheese spread

- xv-

F169

.... : Cottage cheese (c!eam~d 0E~()!~!~.a.'.l1e_dL ..
. Ricotta cheese ._ ....c_...
c~_._.

__

.~

_____ .. __ _

Cheeseи other
~ R.0.rn~.Il_~<:.h.eese. (except grated) . ________ _

F175 F175 Oka cheese Parmesan cheese .:..._--" ии _._ .... __ ___._._..и.. ии Provolone cheese F175 cheese F175 . Samsoe cheese F175 Skim milk cheese F175
.:......~._._:...:., _~

-',~.

__

2.~

ии" ..и ~_ L - ._ _ _ _ . _... ~_.

~

_...

.._ .. _

f---и~-ии----и---ии-и-и'и-ии--'и--'-и'-~'--и--------ии

...............--.----.-- ...... --.-.-

~-..--....F ..._1..7 ..5._...__... : Colby _~b~~~_________~_~_ ....._. _._

.. _._ .... _ .

F175 F175 F175 F175 F ...175 F175 F175 F175 F175 Edam cheese _ F175 ..--_._--......._..и.и.. _._---_._-_.... .. _ .._--_....и... ' Elbo cheese _ ..._ ...F175 :.....:.c_ F175._ .... - '-'.. cheese <--..__... ."-........ _------_._._--_... _ ......._ .. F175 : Feta cheese F175 и Ficello cr,eese : .. -...... -.------_._i _____
- _.... -._.-!~.--.--.

..и.. _..

_

_.

F175 F175 -....... F175

.G~rg()l1z()laGhe. e ..s ..e._.. _...._ ... _ ..._.. _ ...... .

Gouda cheese .-.-...... __ .__ .....и. .и Boursault cheese . . и _._ .................... '--ии _J ии.ииии __ ииии __ ии.и. " _ ' .ии.
!

_._.

F175 PhiladelE~ia cre.a!!lc:.~ees~lTML __ ...__ ...... _ ... _. __ . ... ..... . _...F_~I'L ....... ...... i. (,;C~o:n~~d~~e~n~s.le~cd~(o)!r ~yJ3~~~!.<!!m!!!i.~1 k~ ___._ ._. _ ..... _ .... __ .__....__ Condensed skim milk F177 : Condensed whole ....... milk _-.Evall()r.a!~d.P9.~Iy..~kimmed.._m __.il.k._..__ . _.. _ ... F177 F177
Eva[l()~a!t;clS~ITlJT!i!L

. Evallo.r.ated ...w_._h ... o ..I.e ...m ....iI ...k .... __.._.... __ .... __.

-- XVI --

-~-~-

..

~__________Fc __1:_7:_B:

F178 F178 F178

Ice cream and ice milk (500 ml or more portions, except n()y~lt_1esL_____ __"__ _____ _ cream and ice milk (less than 500 ml except noy~lt_i~st _____._. __ _ ' Ice milk - 500 ml or more
_t~Cl!l?QQ_rI'!I)

-------- ..

-'-"'~--~

--~--.-----.--

F179 F179 F179 F179 F179 F179 F179 -----------

, Ice cream cakes

Numaid

fJ!._~____1Hyt!y_~u_ddies

l ____ f1 B~ ___ L~O}~~_Y29urtJI~s~!h_a~_50~ _mIU~ns!l!C!Lng_
F181
!

Frozenyogu~(500 ml or Eggs_______ _

F186 F186
F1B7

Dairy productsи other
Unsp~~i~~~_c_~eese

._____Б1~L ___ ~_S~imJl1il~J~o: ~w:.:d::e_r: ________ _
,__ F187 F187 F187 F187 F187 F187

r------

F187-----F187 F187 F187 F187

Processed sour cream Omelette pack Nacho cheese d i p _ _____________ ;~!!~~~p!.~a~jbutter b~;~)~ -- ----~.-------

--

----"~-- .. ---.----~--

: Milk sherbetsи frozen (500 ml and .. .-----.--------_._: Goats milk
-.,
-.~~-

~ 9.~lc spread

F187 F187 F187

Butt~~!!!i1~ powder : Garlic butter . Chip_ dip~ и_~airy.~ase ' Chocolate drink, fluid, milk base ______________ _

- xvii -

F187 Chocolate malted milk F187-r Dairy spreads with he;bs ----.. F187 ' Devon cream - canned fresh --- -. .- - ---_._- -_. --" - ...--- .. F187 1 Drinkable yogurt ... ... ---_ ... _--_. __._.--~---+~-. -.---~----~"',-

--~-------.----

.. ---

--

----.---~----~-.--.--"-----

..

----

~--+

--~---

F187 F187 F187 F187 F187

.___ ;__~gg!!Og.~il_k_ . _._.____..____..... , Buttermilk fluid
i

T-Will~Y DipPJ'l~(T!0_)___ .___ .__._

Minigo

_ .. _E19_L ____ J English muffins_ __
F193 Dinner buns and rolls ---.-...-.-------..-.. -.----F193 Croissants ----F193 Brioches ,._____.__ . .:..:.._.c..::....______ _______.__________ _ F193 ____ ~agels F193 --.---.-.--,--------~-~------- --------F193
~-.~--.~------.--~------~

_______ l _____ J _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

- XVlll -

F195

F195 F195 F195
F197

F197 F197 F197 F197 F197 F197 F197

---

"--~

--

..... -

;- ~~~~-~----

F197 F197 F197 ; Graham wafer crumbs __ .. _c____.. _ ,F_~1_9:_7:__ ._.___ -+~..:.:.. .,
~--.--

--.

Coconut cookies Coated biscuits :_ _ ____ ._ ___'_._::..c.c ... Chocolate cookies F197 B~I~'purchase of biscuits F197 F197 biscuits , __... __ .__ __ Arrowroot ..:..::_:.c:.c Graham wafer p~e shells. _'yvheels(TM) . Ore()Cookie Crumbs(TM) Oreo cooki~J)ie shells (TM) ___ . _
~_:...:...:..:..

I

~~

.:.~:_:._._._~

L_:.~:

- xix -

F198 F198 F199

- --------1--

' Doughnuts ._--- -Fritters (des~ert}____ _ __ J~ast-raised sweet g()()~~ (including fruit

. Butterhorns F199 : Chelsea buns ,---_._---------- +------F199 ! Cinnamon buns Coffee cakes Danish pastries _ Б.1~~ _____ LEaster buns
--------.-~.--- --~-"_ _ _ _ , ии _ _ _ _ _ _ ---: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ , . __
4~

_ _ " __ и _ . . _

... _____ ___________.___________.-1

r----Б!~----l ~~:~i~~f~~~cake-S,Squaиres-a-nd otherpastries-(excepi--j
F201 F201 frozen and meat Fruit and nut bread .

,.. _______Fc..2~01 F201

Persians Napgleons Nanaimo bars(freshl__ : Jam tarts ---------_._---._---

,..

_F. _2_0 __ 1 . -.----.. ----1,- .Crea,fll pies F201 Cream s!ice F201 . Custarqpies Custard siices -------~~-- .. -~-~~~Bismarck

Pop_:r..a,rt~(IM) : Ros~..~_arie VaniHaJTM) Muffins F - - -.. --и-------->--: Bran muffins : Corn meal muffins N_. _____ . F202 : Muffins - store P9ckaged fresh._
~

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ и __ и _ _

~_ _ _ _ _и

_ _ и _ _ _ _ _< _ _ _ ~ _ _ _ _

\

- xx-

r-'~-и--и

F205 F205 F205

.----...-- --и------~----и--4

-.--- ..

~--.--

-.----.--~

..

~

..

-

...

~~

F205 F205 F205 F205

._,,~-i._

Rice cakes ----,---.-.... -..... -, Fruit and nut roll - canned Pizza shells - frozen .и..::c=

------- ... --...

-------------~------.-

..... -.----.-----.------.----1

F205

biscuits) Ice cream cones and wafers ---.- ... _-,~--

~-_-f205---_-,I.-Matz2..~(yn!.eavened br.ead) and matzo ~_..Б205____~~~..r:~gl!~S--- ..,. __~____~~_____ .__!

F205 F205 F205 F211 F211 F211

' Oat cakes

.-.---..- .. - - - иии-------ии-----иииi

- xxi -

F212 __.. __ .._+_P..asta. fresh~! ~ry
, Pastina . .-=--_._.._._.----,-...

F212 F212 F212

- fresh o.~_d.ry pasta ... ____ _

;_..___... __ F._2_1_2_.___ +__ P_as.t._a shap~sJb()....,~,.!'~~~!_eJ2~~sJ______ .._________ ... 1 Cannelloni - fresh or pasta ...______.________ _._..___ ., Pasta fresh -_._-_. ._----=-----._- _._--+_........._.._-- .._ ...-- --- ..-.- ._.- -..- -..---- _._._ ... _. _._ .. _-' Vermicelli - fresh or

F215
F215 F221

mixes

,_.._...- ------ -_.. _

.....

mix _. .. _Fried .. _ .. _ . -rice . - .. . , Instant rice Parboiled rice

... --.--.-....

~.-

rice Wild rice mix .....и

: Rice-A-Roni {TM). ___ .__ . ___ . _._._ .._ ...__ ..... , .Minute I3Lc.e(TMJ __ ....._ .._ ...._ .._. __ .... _.

- XXll -

F226 F226 F226 F226 F226 F226 F226 F226

winter wheat fiour
--

fiour

F226 F226 F232 F232 F232 F232 F232 F232

i Wheat

--------- F232 ---------- ----,-- ---

F232 ,----->-- _____ cc_

F232_ F232 ,_______ F_236 F236

Buckwheat __и____________ .____meal .

Corn -----------meal ------.~-------------------------.----.----i

---~.--~---~~

Bulgur Breakfast cereal (except _infa:... n:.:t_..:.::..:__==1___________________ --1 Puffed rice VV'h~~1na_k~s_ (~.!e~~f~s!

F236 F236

Shredded wheat cereal : Puffed wheat -- .. _-_._--.---.-._-----Corn fiakes Instant oatmeal - Cream of wheat _Instant rolled oats:._________________________.. ______ .__________________ _

- xxiii -

crust mix F23I __~jБ'uddiQg cak~~rTli~es F237 : Quick bread---.-.-----.-.. mixes i--------------- -F237 Roll mix --------.--.-.. ._._-----~ ---------.-~-

F237

Pie "----..и

-----~.-

-. -.-

-~---

~~--.--- -:----~--+-----'-.--,<.---.--------------------------------------------------------!

mix _____ [~~_______+_Sp9Dge puddillgJ!lix_~~____._.____ _ ~____ E~3L ______lJ3.~9wnie~(~!~ared_fiour__ ~i~L ____.. _____ . F237 Muffin mix ~~-~~~----.--------------

F237

.

!-----~---

F237 F237

F238

-------~-.--+-----.

mixes Cereal-based snack foods

j.----Ц---~-.

, ,
r
N'_"

F238 F238 F238 __ =-c_'-_ _ _i--P __ re.p~red P9P_corn Jex~ept candied F238 F238 F238 F238 F238 F238 F238 F238 F238

F238 F238 F238 -------;-F238 ~_~~gel 9Qip~JTMJ ______._ F238 PitapuffsCT~L _________ _ F238 : Cheetos Twisties
\

F239

F239 _______1 '_ C_.__e_r~al p~oducts и o!~e!.._.

. Nuts and Bolts

- xxiv-

F243 F243

Applesи fresh

Crab appl_~s - fresh Bananas a_n~p~a!!~ins и fresh , Gr~r~r_uj~_':.fres_h:c. _______ ~_ Grapes. fresh_____ ~ _______~ _________ _ Bulk ~1l!~b~S~ ()!grape __s ________ ~__ . Lemons and limesи fresh ... .. i Melonsи fresh Hone},~~l!1elons - fresh . Muskmelon.~s,~-__f~r~=e:::sh_:..__________________________________ _ Watermelonsи fresh Cantaloup~s__ --,f~re::_s::_:.:h ___________________ _ Oranges and other citrus fruitи fresh _ JJgl~~it - fr~s.h ____________________ _ LBerga n1()ts.. ______________________ _ ' Citronsи fresh
---,,~-~ ~-~----.---~"-

F249 f- ______ F_249 ,_______.c:F_.c:2c50 F250 ,______ F2_50 F250

-~---.-----

F250 F250 S~-"'iI!e()!a!lR~_____________________ _ F250 T~geLo.s___ __ ,_________ F,2_5 _0 ___ , _;I~!lg~rines c--____ F2 ___ 51 Peaches and nectarines . fre.~I'l. _________,____________________. __ F252 и fresh - --------,---- -------,---------F253 F253
f---------

- xxv-

F256 Tropical fruit "other ..:~resh F256 fruit - fresh '----и-----------.---------.----------~-1 F256 fruit - fresh ---.и.и.-------.-.----..--- .. F256 F256 ......._ - - - : ---..- - - - - ---_.-

------~

F256 F256 ......_... F ...256 F256

Pineapp.les, .."._f,r:.ec.sc:h.: __._.____... __.__.___ .....- ..--.-------.-...--1 Persimmons - fresh
Passi2Q}!~it - tropicalfr~i~: fresh .... _ ............__ ._.... _______.. ______--;

,... -'-.'..-'." _и..~и?~~-._=I~.~jin-. f.r._e....s . :. h_....._. _.. __._..........__......_.......___......_......... __..____..__.____
!

F256 F256 F256

Chinese

.-j

fruitи fresh F256 F256

Avocados" fresh

F262 ,.............._...:...--=-=-=-_._-------,,_=-:==--=-:.: .:'::.'::-.":::'::: -.---.------ .. F262 F262 , Gooseberriesи fresh F262
F266 F266
....

-

...

---... -.----

' Fruit" frczen ........-- ---. . Blueberriesи frozen

_F.2_6 ....6 ________ ~_~_"_~.9.bananas (frozen. banana) F266 Rhubarbи frozen __.___ f26~_____ i Rasp~~~r~esи fr~z.en . __ . F266 :pufr1p_kin - frozen - frozen Pears - frozen ._ ..- ..... .;.-... Cherries" frozen F266 _ . _. _.. .:i\pplesи frozen - frozen ._ .... _...... =._'--.. _._. . Jи_.Strawberries ___ ..... _ _ _ и__ и___ и _ _ ии F266 Peaches - frozen
и .. _ ии _ ии. _c ии: ..

- xxvi -

F272

: Pr.~~e.~~~..~ __~.____ ~ __.. _ ....__...

i Fruit (exce-picanne'dFother - dried, dehydrated or other

. Raisinsи dried

........ ......_., . rv1aras~~jr1.Q~l1~r~i~~.~~Eg uid. p!es~r'!Д~i~~ {exce pt

Bananas - dried or rl"hvrlr!~f,,11 .,.. _........._-.. - ..и ....__ . .:..... Ap~c,~t~ drie::..;d=---_ Dates - dried F281 и Apple juice (except ,_.. _- - ..Б.~Д.L . _._.JДw.-'.e-'e.t.~..:.:..j F282 i Grapefruit juice (except rnl'llrtHlfr:.!t"rll :'.-иии.ии_и_и-_-Б:и~_~i==-]_q~~9~~i~;и~~~;PLc0J1~e~~~~t~~~.ии~ии-и----------I
~и-->и-"~'-и-и~T-ии~-~----.~---."--~~.,.

.

F286 . __ .. LБ:!ui!jl:l.~~~(~xc.ep~.c~n~.ent~'!t~.~l::..o!h.er._....__.__. _.... ____ ., ... _.._...... _._.. +_P.i_n_e_apel~~ice (exc~p!.. .. _ Unfermented{E:.xБEp.L._.r ..~.n.!и.,,",,11\ __. _.._.~и._ - j F286 . Blended fruit julc~tiexcepL

.. Б?~~_ .._J~re 0..': na~~@lElP_ayajuice (~xc~P~ ___ .___ ._ F286 ___ l~-"S!.b~~ryjuices J~x~tlP~~~Б~r1.t~a~ed).
Pure or natural citrus fruitlyiceJ~xcept.. .. _.__._ ___
~.f~~~n.a_tu!aLap~~oJ jlJic~.c~~~~__.
--,.-_...

Prune nectar . ....- .. .. - ... ии-иииии------ии----1 Lime jLJic:e..{except..co~centratedL. L~rI]011 juice{~xce2!.con_~~!r?_te9l ..... .
--.-.-.-~--.-

GrДPe.~~cJ~ :.{e.~c:~p!.c:o~cenJrate~l.

for wine "",..,,,.o.\,,,n . -..

__

.

F286 ........_._,._Ble.n~ed ~rang~ anqg!?p~f~itjuice F286 nectar
~._._~28Д__._.E?~~~orljIlJ~j~i~J~c:~~_-............ -.. .. F286 i Cranberry juic~texc:ep~concentrate9L________....___...__--' , .. ии-иF286ии--и15.~li.~.iJи~i~~lTML____... _ ...._

- xxvii -

F288 ___;'____C_,_oncentrated orange juice F292 Concentrated fruit juice - other ,-' -,-------~----+-----,_______ F2_92_CQr1~l~!t:a!ld ~I~!l_d_ed fruitj~i~~ - fr~zen F292 F292 1--- .... ____ .=-"____ ._'-'--'_-"'-Jrr F292 concentrates - fresh or frozen F292 ,-----------i------.-,------------.----------Conc~ntrated. grapefruit juice- frozen ,. -lejuic~_c9_n_clntrates - frozen ,___ F2~~ __ ~r,Grap~iui~~.c:()ncentrates - fresh or frozen i F292 , Tropical Sun (TM) _. -. . - - - ... -F295 и canned
-~-----.--t_----'!~---m'~_~~~.-_7.-~'---,~.-----~~

-~.

-~-------

,--------------~-~----

F298 F298

fruit cocktail - canned

F298 af'l.~grClP~J!':l!Lpieces -_c_Cln.ned F302 F302 Strawberries - canned ____.___F302 -'-___._.-+-_c __ _
c. _____

F_3_02 ___.___ + l'il~pberr~~cCl_~!"'~d_ F302 PUll1p~~r1_(excep_t p!~_filling)-canned ____ _ F302 F302 F302 F302 -------- --------,-----,,-F302

Cranberriesи canned ~ ______________ C!:a~apples canned Prunes - canned Cherriesи canned Blueberriesи canned F302-----------_.,----Blackberries - canned F302 ApQGots -_canned F302 _ _<?_~(lp~![uit - canned Snax (TM)
~----'-~'---+

- XXVlll -

F304 F304
F305

Jellies - canned

F305 F305 F305 F305 F305 F305
F311

- canned

F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311 F311

- xxix -

F312_._.__.+-. c.
F312~_._.~_t-_

.

peanuts (except s~lt~d)j~~t~~~ith~~ish~i!~i=~=~_~l
peanuts.~____

>--_._.._F.-'-31_.2._. __+_...-....~~L

roasted

(nuts witho~~~~ells! ____._~ -~-.- . _____. ________.____.. __ _

--1

F313
f ___.. ~ _ _

Salted shelle(Ln~!~_.()!t:!.e!J.I!l!t~!JJ!b()u!sl!ellsL__ .__.~_~_ F3 ___1_3.______.__t_Shelied nuts (except salted)-.o~~e.f.tnut~.!Vit~<!ut shell~) __.______. F313 - salted withou!.~b~~?L _______ _ F313
___ .__
~~~c_~=_~

~

____

.~_~~

or roasted walnuts - salted _____ __ ..____.__.__ or roasted filberts - salted
._~ ~

.~~

.

~~

__.__

F313 F313 F313 F313 F313 F313 r----F313 F313 F313 F313 F313 F313 F313------_.!-_ .. F313 F313 F313 F313 F313

- xxx-

; Green or wax beansи fresh fresh -_._.. Broccoliи ------ .. - Cabbage~fresh : Carrotsи -fresh - -------.. -,--_.Cauliflowerи fresh
__
---------~

<~.~~~

______

_

'W. ________

.~

-~-.

-"~.---

~

.---~-- -"---~-

I

Ce'ery:_f~esh

!-~~--,

F325 F326
F326 F326 Bulk purc~ase o:.:..f.=:cu~_c,.:::u_m::.:.::'b~e~_~rs~ ________________________ ~_________ Lettuceи fresh
----i

---------- - -------- ----------------------------- -----------!

~---------F327

F327 F327 >------------' ~ _________ F_3c_2 __7___

)------------------

F328 F329
F329

Iceberg lettuce : Leaf lettuce Mixed lettucelradicchio ----"---- --: Romaine lettuc~e____________________________________________ _ : Mu~~!()~msи fresh _____________________ _ Onionsи fresh Shallotsи fr_e::.:s: h_:______________ _ Scallions - fresh Peppers:.fres_hc_____________________________________ _ . Pimentosи fresh -._--_ ..и Potatoesи fresh Radishesи fresh
1
'---

F333 F334
F334

F335

Turnlp~~~..cJ -'"ll!~~ag~~_____________________ _
~.'3pJp'e_s -':vv~i~_turnips2

,_ Swedish turnip~: fresh

- xxxi -

F344

~

Leaf and stalk v.e_g~t'!!!~~и otherи fresh

. Fiddleheads - fresh
-~~-~-~'-------"-------~----~-'-'~'--

: Marjoram - fresh Water cress - fresh

cane ! Swiss chard - fresh Endives - fresh .. и Beet -- fresh .-'-------,_._._---------Asparagus - fres0___.______. . . __________ _________
----~----------------------.---.----~--.----~---.-. --~.-.-.------~-.-.~

~

,________F_344 F344

------l-

F344 F344 F344 F344 F344 F344 F344 F345 F345 F345

._" ~f~_I!~_sp~9..u...t~..:fr,E:sh ______________ __ Brussels sprl?..uts - fre~_h_____________________ . __ . __ .________-1 _ .. _.: AJ:uguJ~_~B.<:>~~~!~..?l.~d ______,________ _ Dill- fresh Basil- fresh _13~an sprouts - fresh __. __. _____. __. _. Chicory _~..fresh _ ... _fhj.n~s_e._~a..Q_b.~ge.__ _ ____ .,_______ ,.___. ____ : Choi sam ----_._._--_.._------_ .. _-: Cilantro - fresh

. Artichokes - fresh (excep!..J~~LJsalem_a.r.ti~~l?..~~st__ _: See~_~n_~ 9.()_1I~dy~getables - other - fresh . Lima beans - fresh Okra - fresh -------- .. --

F345 .. ._... Д9LJa.sh - fresh F345 Vegetab.l!;,mar!<?~? - fresh ______ ___ F345 ________ lSa1l9J:<<?ng ____________ _ F345 Zucchini .. --.--. .. - fresh ..F345 ...... :__Eggfll..?nt ~.fres~ ____ .____ . ________ .__ .. __.. _. F345 __ ,Green peas - fresh F345 China egg "p@fj! ___ _ F345 Bitter melon F345 '_~~illial~~_!!~~b(e.ggpI9~_tL__________ . F345 Gumbo - fresh -------.._ ..
"--

__

- xxxii --

F346 F346 F346

Root vegetables и o~her и fresh Jerusalem artichokes Water chestnuts - fresh Taro root
~--

-~'---'~'~~--~----.----~-~-'-

~ ~--~~-----~-

--~ ~~-----~-----.-~----~-.--~--~- ~~~~-.

:. S~~eJp_o..t~Jo..~~_~l'ldJ~l!ls.::1~~h or chille~____._
~~\I\I~~t p~atoes
P<>,'cmi,,,,, -

fresh

и frozen ~~~~.----.-.-----.~-~~~~~-----

___ J_y'~getables - othe~~:r_-.-,f:r-=:oz:::.e::-"n_____"~_________ ~.___,,, - frozen i Zucchini - breaded or batt::::e_.'.:re::d._._ ..___ .. ~~ ______ ~ ..__ _ __ ,Б:36L____ ~_SRinach-=_~p~~~~ ____________ .___~ _._ F363 QnJ.on ril'lgs.(il'l~Cl_tterl.:p~~-..co~ed fro~ell______ _ F363 ; Mushrooms - breaded or battered F363 Lima beans - frozen _._Fiddleheads и frozen .. .и.. Cauliflower - frozen F363 --_._-----_._------_._-: Carrotsи frozen ~~~~---.--------.---------,------~-.----, F363 i Brussels ~routs - frozen ... ,- --~ ----~~~--- -T- , - - - - - :.-::-'----------~----------~--,--- ----- ~-~--~ .. ~----__j F363 . Broccoliи frozen и frozen F363
-.-.-.-------~---~,-

~-

"

---~,--'"

------------.~.--.-----.--

--~~----------

- XXXlll -

..

,"

-.
.

F366

I"

i

Potato productsи dried
~_~_ ~-~-~

__

~

Potatoes augr.a!ir:': drie~Je!_cept

Hash brown potatoes: dried
,_~..._._........, "__ '__"_"" Sca Ilop~c!eotatoes и dried .... '_" __ '_'_'~~._' ___"_ _'___' ____'___
I

и dried

F367 F367 F367 Lotus rootи dried !----......:.:-=.- _ .."'--'-'-F367 Lentils - dried

__ ~~ДL______ .;S:b.9.pe~d onions ~ dried .. __ .__...._______.___ .__ ... _____._____.......___ ...,
F367 . Chick p.~Cl~:dri~d_ ._ F367 F367 ..___ ._.~и_. _M . . _u_.s~r<?<?.r!l~.: .c!rle:d_ (e~~ept F371 : Green or wax beansи canned F372 i Baked beansи canned F373 . Faba beansи canned F373 F373 .-_ ... ,._....... Refried beans - canned . F373 F373 F373 F373 F373 F373 .. F373 F373
--~~-----

~-.~--.---

r--

\

- xxxiv-

i_

F376 F377

Corn - canned Mushrooms and truffles - canned __.__.__
~=CC.::.

.---- --.~-... ---~- .-.и.. -----

--.--.---.--.~

!

Peas - canned

F379

Tomatoes. (i~luEing J>.~t~J.::.~~l!n~~___ _ : Tomato и canned , Tomato sauceи canned ~,,~~--------------и---и------------i Stewed/crushed/diced/whole tomatoesи canned
----.---~.-

F388____ j_Y.~getablesj e~cep_tinfant .. _. _ - other - c:..::-a::::.n~ne=-=d,--_._.___. __._., _____ E.388 Potat?f?sJe~~Ept infant и canned

Vine leaves - canned l
S~~~tpq1atoe_s,--.и_c .:__a:.n ...n_e,.d,__ ._. __._.__._. __ _. _____ Squash и

F388_--W'2ir:lБl..ch (~.<:EplLn!a_~t!S>?d~t:_9~~~ed:___. ___.___ ..________.__l F388 : Redpepper~~a.0~~<L.._____ _ Pimentosи canned F388 Bamboo shootsи canned F388 Sauerkrautи canned F388 _J~~9~pEQ!a~t.foodsL:.canned F388 Peas and.cai!0l~J~~Бep_t_i.nfa!l.t[()()g~ L:.g~n~~Q. F388 - canned -_.._ .. _ .. - -_._.__ .... _ ..... _-_ ...F388 .. --.-' Beetsи canned ...---_. -_.. -.--_..__.__ .._---Carrots - canned -'-=---------_........_Green p~ppers и canned
~.-

-=. .

F388 ~acedoi~~J!1J~ed !~_getabJ..l~ 1 ~~~~J!1@Q!_~O"()Q_sJ--=-9anned F388 . ...... Mixed vegetables (except foods} - canned -_._ .... _ _---,_ ..._------_ .... ......_infant .... _. __ . . . . . -._.----- .. _.-_.F388 i Okra canned ... _----._. ._-----.
.

__

_

F390

l.TC>_Il).alo j~iБ~:_~!"-"_!d______.. _._._
y'egetable juice и othe.r.~canned G~rr()tiuJce и canned : Mixer:ly~getable Juiceи carln.ed

F394 F394. ____L Beefamato - cafl!1~c!...(I~L_ .... F394

- xxxv-

t--F396 _~ Pickles (including OIi"eS)~~=~~==-~-_=_=~~--=-=_-_:- ,i i____fl_~~ ____ ~-I:Lf1]~Q-tQ~: pJcl<~~_________ , L __Б}~_~ ______ -lvyal~uts . ~. pic~led ____________________---J
i
!---~--.-- ---.--.~

__

F396 ..

;- Peppers - pickled - - "._- .. _ ... _-_ .. _. __ .... _ ..,,---.---..

------~--.----------

..---.--.---

I
._-j

l~~=~~{l~:~=_~~_jи%~~~~Si~;~cU~~~!~~~~~-ti~~~~~~==_~~~=_=_=-===_-:__-=: и.-~~j
i--------H~:---- --- -i-~~~~~~oc~~~e~~k-Ied----.
i---F396 F_396
f - -_ _

------i -Mixed pickles -----------------------~_=_-~_~1
- L~~~g-o~pi~kl~~-=-. .. -

.

.---------1
___и -

r-- F396-------:-Dill pickl~~- --~_

~ --~~~!---r~~~q!~~ki:(r~~piC~l~-s
F396_~~=~-gQ~kt~iIO-~i~~S---- _________________________-

I

: ~:f-~f~~~~~c~~1Ied -=~=-- -_~.:-~
L _ ==fiQ~_~~~_'-S9Ya_S~~~e-___===~====~=_=__=_=_ ______--.II , F405 Steak sauce
__ ____________________________ r_______ F4Q~ _____ ,-?~afoS'-d ~aLJ~e_. .. _. ___ ~ l---- F4g5_____ :_Spag~etti sau~~.'>:"it~ m~~!_______ .____________ j : F405 ; Spaghetti sauce with mushrooms J , F405 Spaghetti sauce
_---J4Q.~----- __ :Spareribsauce._______________________________________

r-- ~~::--i--~~~;~-~~~~-----------~~~--------=~====_=и

!~=~~~- '~~~fff.;i;e~~-------~--- ------ .-1:
F405 и Sauce mixes
_ .. -

L- F40~ ___~_?!ir_f!Y_~~u~~_____
- - -- _.-

"------.----~-

i

-----_._----------

-------~

__J

- ------------------------ ---'-----~----.-------.-

-.--.-~-

-_._._-_. __ ..- ----.-.----- - -- - --- --I

.___ f4_0? _____ : ~eppersteakrTli! ______________ ~___ , F405 Teriyaki sauce

I

--------]

и-~J4Q5_~ -~ ~ _B~!-p~q~e s~~~~=_=~-_==~==~~=__=_==~=_~~-- J
: F405 Pizza sauce i :---------.. -----~.---- - - - --~- -------------------и----~-иl i F405 Oyster sauce i
[--F405-------;~i~~h~~~~--s~~;_----------------и-----1 ~--F405-----'-Mi;t~~uc~----------'-----------------l

F405 F405 ,________ F __ 4.05

Meat gravy-(~;~~pt-~~~~-~d)~dried 1 .- ------------------------------------I __ Ho~ey garlic sauc~_____ ___________________1 . Hollandaise sauce _________________ .________ _________ J Guacamole

- xxxvi -

F405

-.-----~+--.

i Chili sauce Bearnaise sauce Plum sauce Salsa sauce
lH.pSa~~elI~L_

F405 F405

1Velotine (I~) .__ . ______ .____ _
Stea~Д~~c~m~lL

and salad d~e.s_sings '.' ___ ..._____.______________._____. ___ _ c. _______+ __Thousand islands qressing .__
calo~ie ?ressing~

M~'~nnn~i'.o

E!~nch sJFes~i~g __ _ Blue cheese dressing

Ve()et~lble sancj!,ic~ sp!ea~s_

_.......__._______._.___ ._____..___ ,

.C.=_=__. __ ._._.+ Sp~ci.~ltyVi'!~gars - other F408 _____ , Rice wine vinegar ,-..._---_..F408 __.- ! Prepared mustard F40L ___ Б>r~J.l~~e9.~()r_seradish relis::h.~ ________ . __ .__ ..___._______._____.__ . __~ F408 ____ r._P.r_epflred horseradish F408 Pickle relish F408 ' Mustard sauce
Horseradish mustard ----, Chutneyrelish ___:..._-=--=-._-._и_ . _-~~1Bals;;;'ic vinegar.
-'<"'--- - -,-

i

l____ ~~08

C:l1().!'.c.h~w reli~h ____ _

- XXXVll -

F410 F410 F410

: Herbs and_ spic;e.~ __"' _'___"'"_______"__ '_____" Peppe!_" __ "_ - dried , Eaprika Mustard - dried ___________________"________________ Pimento - dried Sesame seeds Mace and
j

,_"____ ,_~_=_:._"_""_""' ,. Oregano
~-.

__

.c-~~,-----"-"".-.--

_~9!j~rarn_=_
,-----'

F410 F410

i______ :_..'_~:._"" _______ :

Saffron

,__'" __"'-"":_,'",:,_'" __ "'__"'_; Savoyry__ F410 Grape ~ar(j~nl'БrTl~'"_______,____~_________________ j , __ ..____F41 0 F410 _Spic __e_"m,,"i_x_t"u_r_e,s _" ,_'""_""._" __. _________________ "_._"',,,"___._" __"'" '" ----"--1

F410 F410 F410

" -'""-""C--'-"--"'-'""

F410

, ____t4}O_____,~c:el~ryF410 F410 F410 F410 F410 F410 F410 F410 F410 '---'---"F410 F410 F410 F410 F410 F410
c---"--'---"-

: Horseradish root - dried i Chili , Cinnamon , Garam mas ala
i

Celery Row ___de __r._"",_ ,_ '" ___,_________ "'_____,_ "__,____

---"----"---------"-"-----"------,-,--

--"

Fennel- dried Dill

"------- -------"'-------------------'--'"--'""--'-'-'-"--1

Coriander , Cloves

----

--.--~---.-.-

...

-~

.и.и..

-.-----~--.

Goberg _Lemon e.epfJ~~(~~)_ ""___ "_,. " '" , :, Keen's G~oundMustard (T~L___________

,_____ "'_. _________ "_"

- xxxviii -

F423 .... _._---+.-'= F423 F423 ........

-.+~----,

...-

F427

F427
F428 _ .'--____ -1- и ..:..='"'.._

F428
F430 Chocolate confectionsи other .. . .... - ...---t--._ ............... - - .. --.-_._-_._
l _ ....Б.~~_ .-----l.!=~~t~L~99.s~ocolate-Q()~E}!~d ......_..

F430

i Chocolate-coated fruits .

__

...

_._.

chocolates

F439._~~~=Ig~!!E2ii!"~~9~~ti~(~~и~;,~9i~i~trn.a?). ......_._...... _. _ ... . __f 43.Q. ___ U~.tl..()~()J~~ebQllow gQQ~~...__
_~

F430

Boxed chocolates

F430 : I Bulk chocolates --.. _._....-F430 i Chocolate-covered nuts ____.. _.... .. _ _ и. F430 ... _ ..._.+.F430
~~~_. ~~~~c=~ ~.=~=~

- XXXIX -

F431
._~._Fi~

. Sugar candy

L__ __ . Dietetic candy (sugarlessl .......... _. __ ..._ .... _...... __... ___ ........__...... __...,

F431 F431 f-.. --.--и F431
!. __.. ___ ..

F~_4:31

F431

F431
..

-

...и.- ..

_-_.........

--.~

... .

F431
F431~ummie wO.!Il1~JI!_'1L

________ _
.._....... ______.. -.-.-.--1

F431 F431

__ ._~~alici~~~(I!_'1l ..__ .. _____ . ___
:_~~!~_s'!.v.~Д.cr~2
_:_GlJsher~JTMl

~._...._._F43_1_._ ~ Satin mi,x-,-.'-' ,:,c_ ..___ .. __. _______ ._

.. _~ __ ~ ________ _

..C?anong~~e\!Js (I~) ,..___ ....... __ .._.. _.......,.. F _ruit.r:ollupДJI~) ._ .. ___._ .

F431
F43 ..:1.__ ...... , _~'-. :..... '.:.... '- .. _._.~ __..___________.__ ..... _____ .

F431

\

- xl-

F434

F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434

chocolate

F434 F434 F434 F434 F434 F434
F435 и other

F435 F435 F435

~-----~------ -~-- ~-- ~-.. -~---- ..- --~---~--~~~-----------.-----J

- xli -

F440

De-caffeinaled coffee

F442 F442 F442 F442
IT~eia~.s_l}J~~i~ul~~~~. __.____ ~. ____________________ ..~

Green lea ____._______ _______ Black lea
c~~~== ~

~

_________

~_"

F449 F449 F449 F449

- xlii -

Formula milk Good Start (TM) F475
1Isomil(T~L_~

f~75 ______ L~~!9_S~~JrM) ..
F475 Prosobee(TM) .. F475_____J~J!!lilaБ(T~L_ . F475-------"-'" : Enfalac (TM) -- -,-,

-_ . . . . _... -- .-...------.

--~.--.-~--~

,

,--~.--~.-~

--

- xliii -

r~~~---F477-----TDi;~;rs-:p~r~~~~k;d-f~~~~~

;--- ---F477---

F477 Veg~t;la~-d-i~ners_~~Б~e.-c:.~;~k~d fro_z.__e __ n_~----------------1 F477 Tortellini dinners_:. pr~-co(lked frozen __ F477 TV dinners frozen ~-~----- --------~.----------~ F477 Shellfish dinners frozen --------~~-----------~ f-----F477 Fish with_vegetable~_and ~a~c.~s - ore-'COOIKea F477 Entrees - frozen F477 Chinese food_gi~Qe!s...:"pre_~Eookedfrozen___'___________---i F477 and frozen F480 cake~,_squares and .othe~pastrl~_s. __ -_.__ . ___~ F480 ----+--~-------'F480 F480 F480 F480 F480 F484 F48.'!4 .___. .__ :_~~':"'<:l~:E:-'-~_:_pfie-coIDKea F48 ____4 ___.__+..:.c..:.._..c...:__.:..__ F490 ~ .. - - - - '-------i--'--1

f
1-

Dinners:pri~cip'ally of meat - pre--cooked frozen

nr"""I!lr~~t_i.t'\n<:...:_p.r:.e-cooked

froze n

F490 cas.s_e~(lI~~_:p!e-coo~egJ~ozen F490 Smoked meatballs - frozen -.- .-- ---.--.-------t----------- и.... - - - - - . - - .... -.-.--._..- ... --.-..--.-------.-.-.-.._oj F490 I. Souvlaki -Jlre-cooked frozen __f490 .___ljpringi~Is.:.p;~o~ke~.~ozen ~ ___ F4?O _ _ . ~ort~llini.:pre-C(l(lkeq froze ..n ..________ ._._. ________. ---J

._._.__f.1~_.____IBu!Ii~os...:.pre.~cookedJrozen

:---и---------rW~I~h

F490i Vegetable preparations - pre-cooked frozen r;rebit -pr~~c~~ked f~ozen . -ииииииииии---ии-и-ии-------и-----1

___.___ ._:.. :._. __..__;...Pizza pops Submarine sandwiches - frozen .,------_ .. Corned beef hash.~ pr~-.<::(lokedfroz.e.~ __ ._ ,__ ._ .. F490 ____ ~aR~ge r~s..: Rr.e-cooked frozeQ _______ .~_. ___ .________-1 f_ _ _ _ F_4 .._90. Cheeseb~ge.r:.s.:pre-cooked frozen
-

Chinese food dishes - pre-co(lked frozen._._ .. __ . . Pizza pies -- pre-cooked frozen E99i(lI.ls_= pr.e~c(l(lked frozen F490

- xliv -

F491 F491 F491 ---._----+----F491 F491 F491 F491 F491 Rice starch --'-"--.._-- .__ ._.__.---. F491 rennet F491 Potato starch F491 F491 F491 F491 F491 F491 F491 F491 F491 F491

in blocks and cakes -_._--------

__.___~F4:..::9.:..1___... _-+-':__:.__ . __ " F491 _~ ________ " ~9~ger ______. _______. ____._______________ F491 Artificial sweeteners ~--------------. ------. --------------------.--------------------------Arrowroot - dried ___Б~~L ____ :__tJ.~gr-colour F491 As()a_rt.af!!eJ!~L F491 CertoJTM)_____

- xlv -

F499. __...._ .... -l.~airy pro~uct substitutes F499 Cream substitutes _.' --._._-_ ... Milk substitutes .-.-.-- - ._..., .._- --

-~-----.------

....Б~99

Whipp'~(jcream su~stitutes

____E~~____L~~_g~~!pJr~)
r----------..l--

и

F499 I Coffee Rich (TM) ........- - .. ------.-----~-----~-----__I F499 F499 -------.-----+_. __._._. F499 F499 F500 F500 .--.-.--... F500 non-alcoholic cocktail mixes Almond extract Vanilla extract Flavouring powders_and

---.~.

;----

F501

, Fruit-fl.Д''{.<?lJr~~ps!''vI,I(j_~!~_ . Powdered cocktail mixes---~--. --~.~

_~БД01 __ .. _L.~I~_ctr~l}'te_~ep~~e~~D!ps>.w __ de __ rs_---,- __._,, _________'-___' L ._ _ _----'

.__ ._EEQl __ .. _i.Д.atolade_ (T~)~ powdered
F501 F501 F501 Kool-aid (1M) i Quench (TML ' TangjI~) _
i

__ .__ ._~_Food season ings (ex~~p! ~~i_~~sL'?l!t_in_cl':1.~l!lgt~~~_~.__ F502 Monosodium glutamate

_~_ea.Дoning
,---

salt

F502 : Onion salt -_. __ ._--------_._-,-~<:;.~Ierysalt

F502 F502 F502 -_' F502 F502 F502 F502 F502

__

'_-,-

I

Meat improver - ------- - - _.-- ,--.-..

_~.Д~~.k~'n

__

.---

--"'.'--_._-------_._---------;

bak_e.(TM) __ Taco Joe seasoning (TM) _______ _
Ox~cubes (T~)

' Mrs:Dash (TM) и Insta bake

- xlvi -

F502

- canned

f--. _ _ ~.-=.-,--,-.___ ._... _._._P: ..crep~~~_cl_cl~~~~'!!P~\y.cl~!S
!-__ ._ _ _ _.c--' __ .. ___.

_________ .___. _ . _~_.__ _

~f_~~~rEf)owd.e,.cr ..s,.______._______________..__ .__ .

F504 F504 -_._---_.... ;

..

_._-_._..__ ........-

F505 Potato-based snack foods i-------'---"--'-=--.--... -- ;.-.:.-., F505 -_..._--_.. n"t~,t",." .. dried

F505 F505 F505-_..__ ..:-_.и. _---_.-

F506

F506 F506 F506 F506 -.--.--_. __.... -'--_ __.. F506
..

r-______F . .;.:.5. 0. c.6.,_. ___ ,

---.--.. -..

F506 F506
F507

F507

F507 F507 ;...-----F507
:___ .__=-F5, 18

F518 F518 i----.. - ..-.-. ;... ._. . ._ ... _:F 518 F518 ,. __ ._...F ...518 ;.___... F.5 . _1.8___ F518 >-----.:... F518 ,_...-----

or cann~L~~her__. __ ._Qther spreads.pastesiln.9_.lJl!tt_e!~JI!~::~J __ . __ . ._~},II other}()().<!pr_e.R~~~~~n.~(n.e.s.L __._______ _i~<:)t:gg rOlls _______ ._____ ..______ .. _ . Sandwiche.~(i!lcl.~~.lJm~r.in!?~L_ __... _.__ __ _ ... Potato Hot

;___...~~1.!_. ___J:~r:tY.!raЦpf sa...n ..cdc.w . c.i_cc.h-'-e;..::.s_.._.____...____.__ .. _._ .... ___-.-.-...-1
_~l'ot piz~ ___ .. ____ ._____ .__.___ ._ : Hot fried rice :_--_....- - ....,.. _... Hot mein .. ,. __ ._._chow ..._._.. __ . :.:.c ..___ ._. ___________ .____ ...__. __. ____ .......... :. Hot chop_suey . Hot chile con carn:.e:._........._____......._________. _ .

.. xlvii ..

F518 Hot cabbage rolls ;-.-----...-F..5--1--8' --.---- L80t 2as_tCl_di~be.?_
!

r---,
~

______ ..____l_._ .... _ ______ .. _ ... _ -_ .... __._ .. _.. _._. _________ . ____ ... _____ .____ .__.___. __ _

F518 : Tabouli F51S- --I Vegetable sal~d--- --------------.----- -.- --

L-_f_~.__I__~_tewp~~~ _____________._________.________ .. _. __ .

__ ~---E-~~----f--~a-car-~Qi sCllad _ .. __ _ ________ ..__________._..___ .____._ ... ____ _. l____....f_~1~ ____.__ _'_E!:~it ~ala~~_fre_sh___.______________.______ .._. __ ._._.__ ._.. i F518 i Cole slaw in package ~r---F518----lC-a~~~r ~~I~d mi~ - fr~~h------------ии----и--и--ии ---.. -.-

~ _ _:

H~~~~~~u~_E~~~==~~~=~.~и~_~===~~=~==~~_~~~

r-[ .!
I

~~~~--и=j-f:f~;~:~~~fr~i~=~-===~-~--~~-=~= ===-==~~~. ~~_ .[ F518 1Fried bean ball ..__.. ________________.__
F518 F518
JБri.~d_!:~~jRr~p.ar~~) __ i~sh .Q~anne<L(~~_~~~.bQ!)______ _ I Hats-n-hams
I

F5J_8~--.-l_~~~n~ClI~d~_~~-==~_~~=~=__ -=~=~==.~==~_==~=~~~_ ~~~~~

:_ _ F~1~___1I<nish_~~___fres~ ____________.___ .___._ ____.__ ._" _ __ .:.- и.~I ; F518 I Pakoras I r---F5"1-8--'-j Pa;t;-;~-d~;~~~;~f~~;;;-------------и---и----- - -'---1

i--F5-18-~~--T!S!~b-~;иf~~Sиh----~====-=~==-~=~~=~=~=~~:--~~

~

F518-=-=rБ~~i~~!~~~i~~~~~_n~ni<L__ ~==~=~=~=~~-=~~~-:_-_~~-~.-. _-=~~

~---~~~~-----f-~~~:~~~~~~cf:;:~;;~~~r~dJr~~~~.- и------------и--и-----1

~~H;;~~:;::~:repar~(~x:t~o:: can~ed) __
I
r~---I

F518 --.---.-t.---.---.-----.. ! Baked beans, fresh (except hot) , ---.-- - -.---------- --.. ----.-------------- .-.------------ _.- - _. -_. .. ииии_-1 i F518 Dried dinners r --t--.. -- -.... "--"-' .-- "-"- -. --------------.-.--..--.--.--- - ... --. - -- .--. iI I F518 : Basket Snack r---и---.,-----и---и--и--и---------и-и-----и-----и--иии----l I F518 I Cabbage rolls - canned , [=Б51 L~~и=~L99_bb;9~!~II~~-!~~~~=~_~_ .~~_.______ .__ ~=~==~=~---.... -.- J i F518 i Canacella I F518 T Dehydrated ~ii~~ers -I :- _~~l?=.~j-Ehili~~~_c~~i~;~n~~____._._________________ ._ F518 ~ Chili con carne (except hot) . .. i 'и--и--F51S--и --и~и-Ch~P s~ey - fr~sh or c~~~ed - ---.-.. ---..-.. ------.-. --- . .. !
I

..-1
--1
'1

r-'-

---- -- --..

--"- ..--.----------...- - - - ... -..... - . - ... -----

,_.___ Б_~1~ _. __ .__ l_ДДIrl10~ ..mousse ~fr_es_h______.__ _______ .._______
,
~'- - - - - - - - - - -

, _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .-J... __

l_ ~~~i-~_~=j:-~~i~~~~~e:~-~=-:~-=_:~~=-=\

F518 F518 F518 F518

"---1

: Chow mein -fresh or canned Carne Assaba , Lemon cheese i Hazelnut butter
!
-.----- -- -

I
~

- - - - - . - - - . - - . - . - - - - - - - -_ _ _ " _ _ _ . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - _____

-

---

------------------------------

-

--1

:
1

__=_-

-_._-- __.~=_~=--=~---.J

~___ .__ X5~_8_.___ . ..и. Red bean paste_. _. _..________.__. __...__ ._____ .
~ __.__~~_~8. ___ ._.~

l______ Б~1 ~.___.. :__~~a.n.~t.b.utte~.Cl~.c!J.~.ly _________.___________ ...
Nut butter~ (exceRtpe<l.nut)_. _____ ._ ,._ . ______________._ .__ . _..

- xlviii -

,
~aple butte~

____________________.._._. _.__ _

: Alm9_n~ Pf-l~t~. ___. ______._______ ._______._____.______ _ , Hummus , Lemon butter
-,

-.--~--~--.--.--~.-~--~-------------------.-

--

._HalvaJ1J~esame _se_e_d_"_____'-__.__.__

--------------------------------------

: Caramel .; Apple ~~~r__________________________________ _

, Nacho cheese mix . ------------- ._-_._---------------_.- -----.-Burrito kit -----------------------frozen_.--._-------_._-----

F518 F518

' Fruit and nut mixtures ....,----_._----_.,-----_._--.--Mountain mix
,---.
--~-~.------~.-----.---~--~---~---

F518

: C~_El~s.e~_c!~.c:~~r~,pi1c~aged tQg_e~El!___ . _____________ , Magicpantry~n!r~~..sJ~_~~p~_pa.~ta)JI~L _______ _ ___ _ Magi~pan1rycabbage!()II~Etv1L ____ . ____ _ , Major Gourme,t (TML,__________ _ ' Marmite JTM) ________ ,

F518 F518 F518 F518 F518

и Bacon Bits
Kikkoma~rrli.x_ (TM)

- xlix -

- 1-

