Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Office of the Provost and Vice President Academic Documents 1-29-2010 Office of the Provost and Vice President Academic

Academic Restructuring at Ryerson University: White Paper
Ryerson University. Provost's Academic Structures Commission

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/provost_docs Recommended Citation
Ryerson University. Provost's Academic Structures Commission, "Academic Restructuring at Ryerson University: White Paper" (2010). Office of the Provost and Vice President Academic Documents. Paper 3. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/provost_docs/3

This Other is brought to you for free and open access by the Office of the Provost and Vice President Academic at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Office of the Provost and Vice President Academic Documents by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Academic Restructuring at  Ryerson University: White Paper 
Provost's Academic Structures Commission  January 29, 2010

CONTENTS 

Contents 

...................................................................................       2  .................................................................       3 

Commission Members  Preface 

...................................................................................       5 

Background  ...................................................................................       7  Why Change?  ..........................................................................       8  Types of Change  ..........................................................................       8  Restructuring Considerations  ........................................................       9  Ryerson Exceptionalism and the Tripartite Model  .............................     12  The Existing Faculty Structure  ........................................................     14 

Suggested Modifications/Additions  ........................................................     18  The Considerations and existing/possible Faculties  .............................     18  The Near Future  ..........................................................................     20  Observations on Built Environment, and Law  ......................................     22  Observations on SGS and G. Raymond Chang School of Continuing Education..     23  Summary of Suggestions  .................................................................     26

2 

COMMISSION MEMBERS  Faculty Members: 
Sandeep Kumar Agrawal  MPl Program Director and Professor, School of Urban and Regional Planning  Mehru Ali  Professor, School of Early Childhood Education  Robert Burley  Professor, School of Image Arts  David Checkland  Professor, Department of Philosophy  Michelle Dionne  Professor, Department of Psychology  Gervan Fearon  Dean, The G. Raymond Chang School of Continuing Education 
1  Abby Goodrum  Velma Rogers Graham Research Chair and Professor, School of Journalism 

Murtaza Haider  Professor, Ted Rogers School of  Management (Retail Management)  Darrick Heyd  Professor and Chair, Department of Chemistry and Biology  Don Kinder  Senior Librarian, Reference and Instruction 
2  Sri Krishnan  Professor and Chair, Department of Electrical Engineering  3  Rena Mendelson  Professor, School of Nutrition 

Paul Missios  Professor and Chair, Department of Economics  Annick Mitchell  Professor and Chair, School of Interior Design 
1  2 

Subsequently also Associate Dean, Research, FC&D  Subsequently Associate Dean Research, Development, and Graduate Programs, FEAS  3  A member of Board of Governors

3 

Kendra Schank Smith  Professor and Chair, Department of Architectural Science  Jim Tiessen  MBA Program Director and Professor, Ted Rogers School of Management  Nancy Walton  Professor and Associate Director, Daphne Cockwell School of Nursing 
4  Mehmet Zeytinoglu  Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering 

Undergraduate Students: 
Hamed Basseri  Medical Physics  Andrew West  Politics and Governance 
5  Natasha Williams  Ted Rogers School of Business Management 

Graduate Students: 
Asif Sharif  Doctoral student, Mechanical Engineering  Angela Joosse  Doctoral student, Communication and Culture 

Alumnus: 
Chris Nguyen  Ted Rogers School of Information Technology Management '05 

Chair: 
Maurice Yeates  Dean, School of Graduate Studies 

Commission Administrator: 
Farheen Rashid  Graduate Programs Officer, School of Graduate Studies 

4  5 

Appointed Interim ViceProvost Academic, September 2009.  Withdrew due to pressure from other commitments.

4 

PREFACE  On May 6, 2009 the Provost announced the establishment of an Academic  Structures Commission to prepare a Report for him on possible reorganization of some  parts of the University. The Commission arises from Recommendation 16 in Shaping  Our Future: Academic Plan for 2008/13, which was approved by Senate (May, 2008). In  the consultations which guided the formation of the plan, it was argued that the academic  structure be revisited to ensure the University responds effectively to internal and  external pressures arising from recent and expected growth and change.  The mandate of the Provost's Academic Structures Commission (PASC) is to  prepare a Report on possible reorganizations within the context of current and anticipated  6  teaching and research developments, following an extensive consultation process  . The  Commission is to explore a range of possibilities with respect to restructuring existing  Faculties and establishing new ones. Since becoming a university in 1993, Ryerson has  grown in undergraduate student numbers and programs, established a graduate school,  and placed greater emphasis on scholarly, research and creative activity. This has  7  occurred within the framework of a long established fiveFaculty structure (Figure 1)  .  Figure 1 Growth in student population (FTEs) 1973 to 2009 (Source: UPO) 
35000 

Students (Grad + UG FTEs) 

30000  25000  20000  15000  10000  5000 
1968_4 Divisions:  Arts Business  Technology  Health Sciences  1977_CE  1982_5 Divisions  are Faculties  1970_5 Divisions:  Arts Applied Arts  Business Technology  Community Services 

2005/11 Reaching  Higher I  2003/7  Double Cohort  1993_University  Status_RU  2000_SGS 

0  1960 

1970 

1980 

1990 

2000 

2010 

2020 

Year (Nov 1 count) 

6 

A critique of the rationale and process for this exercise is in: N. Thomlinson, "Restructuring if Necessary  Not Necessarily Restructuring", Jan 5, 2010, 19pp.  7  The Commission is indebted to Don Kinder and his colleagues in the Archives of the RU Library for the  Ryerson Timeline summarized in Appendix A of the Discussion Paper.

5 

Consultative Schedule  Given the Report is to be submitted to the Provost by the end of January, 2010,  the Commission established a tight schedule of meetings (17 two hour meetings), written  reports, and universitywide consultations:  1. Create a generic email address (pwg@ryerson.ca) by end of May, 2009.  2. By the end of June, 2009, hold two Town Halls to explain the process, respond to  questions and concerns, and receive suggestions. These were held May 29 (91 in  attendance) and June 26 (41 in attendance).  3. Prepare a Discussion Paper to be transmitted to the university community by the end  of September (transmitted electronically via `infoline' and Campus News, Sept 22, 23  and 29). http://www.ryerson.ca/provost/planning/documents/  4. Convene a Town Hall at which Commission members welcomed input on the  Discussion Paper and the topic in general (held on Oct 2, 45 in attendance).  5. By the end of November prepare a Green Paper containing the Commission's  preliminary restructuring scenarios, and transmit to the university community.  http://www.ryerson.ca/provost/planning/documents/  6. Hold a Town Hall to present and discuss the Green Paper (held December 18 102 in  attendance).  7. Prepare a Final Report by the end of January, 2010.  8. Present to Provost, Senate, and Board for discussion.  Interleaved within this schedule have been meetings with other groups in response  to invitations from them. For example: Arts Chairs Cttee.(Oct. 14) Psychology (Nov.  17) FCS Chairs Cttee.(Nov. 24) RFA Reps. Council (Dec. 8) Chairs/Directors/Deans  (Dec. 10 70 in attendance) RFA Council of Chairs, (Dec 14) and, Arts (Jan. 14 42 in  attendance). Also, more than 50 written submissions have been received, most with  respect to the Green Paper. At the request of the RFA, the deadline for written  submissions was extended to Jan. 14, 2010.  In the Town Halls, and other local group discussions, it has been clarified that the  last step in the Commission's advisory process, following the contextual Discussion  Paper and `scenarios' Green Paper, involves this White Paper which provides a  8  summary of the Commission's deliberations  , and suggests to the Provost some possible  alternatives. It is the Provost, following normal consultative University procedures, who  will decide the timing and format of any changes that may occur. Such changes will  require Senate and Board approval.  The Commission takes the existing Department structure as the building blocks of  Faculties. It is, therefore, assumed that Departments as they are currently constructed will  still exist (unless subgroups within Departments suggest change, which would need to be  addressed within a Faculty), and departmentally based programs, whether they be single  discipline or locally multidiscipline, remain the norm. 

8 

And hence includes material from the Discussion Paper and `scenarios' Green Paper.

6 

BACKGROUND  Although every university undertakes an academic restructuring exercise at one time or  9  another, "... few recent studies address the formal structure of academic organizations"  .  There are, therefore, few blueprints to follow, and none that can be found which really  analyze outcomes. It is important to note that most universities appear to undertake such  an exercise incrementally, through partial restructuring, and more frequently than  10  Ryerson  . It is also important to recognize that, while there is no general relationship  between size of institution and number of Faculties, Ryerson does have few Faculties  compared with other universities (Figure 2).  Figure 2.  Selected Comparator Universities: Number of Faculties and Headcount (as of  early June, 2009). Source: Discussion Paper, p.15. 
20  18  GMU  16  14  SAS  DAL  VIC  CIN  COL  ORE  MCG  SHE  WAT  UNW  CALG  MON  YU  ILL  NYU 

BOS 

# Faculties 

12  10  8  6  4  2  0  0  NEW 

ROC  CLE  CALT  MCM  GUE  RU 

CON 

10,000 

20,000 

30,000 

40,000 

50,000 

60,000 

Headcount (UG+G) 
The PASC restructuring exercise is focusing on the number, and departmental  11  12  composition, of Faculties at the university  . Ideally, academic Departments  (or `costing  units') are the organizational places in which disciplines (and faculty members devoted to  them) and programs are located. Faculties are agglomerations of congruent departments 
9 

Gumport, P.J. and Snydman (2002) "The Formal Organization of Knowledge: An Analysis of Academic  Structure" The Journal of Higher Education, 73, 3, p. 375.  10  Snowdon, K. (2009) "Academic Organization: Considerations" (unpublished paper prepared for PASC)  and presentation to the Commission, Sept. 3, 2009. The Discussion Paper includes some sample vignettes.  11  Gumport, P.J. (2000) "Academic Restructuring: Organizational Change and Institutional Imperatives"  Higher Education: The International Journal of Higher Education and Educational Planning, 39, 6771.  12  At Ryerson, half are Departments, and half are Schools. For the sake of simplicity all are `Departments'  in this paper.

7 

designed to pursue and advance the interests of the group within the context of university  objectives as a whole.  Why Change? 
13  Gumport and Snydman  argue that universities may undertake Faculty  restructuring for two main reasons: 

·  "... structural dimensions of academic organizations shape what counts as  knowledge" (p376). This `legitimation of knowledge' argument is important because  the plethora of funding, accreditation, public and private sector employment  situations, foundations, and so forth, often define their purview and interest in the  context of accepted knowledge entities, and the relative importance that universities  and society appear to attach to them.  ·  "... modifying the academic structure enables universities to reconcile competing  imperatives for stability and change" (p377). Imperatives for change invariably relate  to the external environment, as reflected in the desire to have a structure which  demonstrates that a university relates to the needs of the `real world'. On the other  hand, stability is invariably an internal imperative (crystallized in the observation `if  it ain't broke, don't fix it'). Universities have always attempted to reconcile "...  14  accumulated heritage versus modern imperatives"  . In this reconciliation, they have  realized that change in academic structures is one way in which they are able to  undertake, and flag, their actual or intended responses to internal/external  expectations. 

Types of Change  The general types of restructuring that may occur include: ·  agglomeration ­ as with the University of Calgary (2009), a large university with  more than 22,000 students, where its "...Board of Governors voted to unify the  Faculties of Communication and Culture, Fine Arts, Humanities, and Social Sciences  into a single Faculty. Concentrating efforts on one administrative structure will  facilitate an improved and seamless university experience for arts and social sciences  students. This includes ... simplifying processes for transferability between  undergraduate programs ... promoting multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary  research ... at the graduate and undergraduate levels ... [and] strengthening the  financial foundation and flexibility for arts and social sciences education. ... The new 

13  14 

Gumport, P.J. and Snydman (2002), op. cit., pp. 376  377.  Kerr, C. (1987) "A Critical Age in the University World: Accumulated Heritage Versus Modern  Imperatives", European Journal of Education, 22 (2), 183193.

8 

structure will bring the U of C in line with other G13 universities, the majority of  15  which have two or fewer arts and social sciencetype faculties"  . ·  bifurcation ­ as with Mount Allison University (1992), a small university with less  16  than 4,000 students  . In this example Mt. A. split its Faculty of Arts and Science into  three smaller Faculties of Science, Social Science, and Arts. The purpose of the  division was to create smaller units which could work more effectively to generate  crossdepartment curricular integration and enhance quality in times of fiscal  exigencies. ·  spawn ­ in which a Department in a Faculty is of sufficient scale, and is essentially  independent in terms of curriculum and its required administrative structure. For  example, a program in law may commence life within an existing Faculty, but given  the profession's particular curricular, funding base, and administrative needs it may  17  soon warrant spawning as a separate Faculty  . ·  umbrella ­ where a Faculty is created to facilitate curriculum development, research,  and emphasize the university's role in an important area of concern that `slips  between the cracks' in its current Faculty structure. For example: "...SFUs newest  faculty, the Faculty of Environment ...encompasses the School of Resource and  Environmental Management, the Department of Geography, the Environmental  Science program, the Centre for Sustainable Community Development and the  Graduate Certificate in Development Studies...The university has a tremendous pool  of talented people who deal with environmental issues, who have traditionally been  scattered across diverse faculties, but now campus members will be collaborating  18  under the umbrella of this new Faculty...".  The Faculty offers undergraduate and  graduate programs.  Restructuring Considerations at Ryerson  With this information in mind, the Commission developed a number of  considerations that it, and the university community at large, may think about when  reviewing the various options. In the Town Halls, and other venues, the following were  generally regarded as useful matters to consider in such deliberations:  Congruency or "Fit": A Faculty should include departments that are as congruent as  possible.  This does not imply sameness.  Rather, it requires some shared assumptions  and/or practices among Departments regarding things such as: prerequisites and  important student skills pedagogic structures and methods current and possible future  teaching and research and necessary facilities.  There may or may not be any particular  one (or set) of these shared by all departments in a Faculty overlapping threads of such  assumptions and practices generally suffice. 
15 

Please note that this University of Calgary News Release `Four in One', June 25, 2009, has been heavily  edited in this Paper.  16  A statement from the then President of Mt. Allison included in an appendix to: Wilfrid Laurier  University: Report of the Advisory Committee on Academic Restructuring (1993).  17  Levin, A. "Comments on the Academic Structures Commission Green Paper", 2pp. Dec. 22/09. Avner  critically assesses the issue of needed Faculty size.  18  Simon Fraser University, Media Release, March 31, 2009.

9 

While such "fit" is not always clearly in favor of locating a department uniquely  in a particular Faculty, it is also often the case that `fit' with respect to the organization  of teaching and `fit' with respect to research synergies may well pull in different  directions.  Which of these counts more in organizing Faculties may be an open  question, the answer to which will be complex, but may involve such considerations as  which possible organization is more inherently flexible in adapting to future changes.  Legitimacy: Following from the congruency principle, a Faculty should adequately  represent through its leadership and designation its current and possible future foci of  teaching and inquiry. Does the Faculty name and structure adequately reflect the  congruent departments therein? Clarity is required.  Quality of Programs: Given Ryerson's unique concentration in professional and  quasiprofessional areas, this consideration addresses the quality issue particularly in  context of general Provincial standards (through OCGS and UPRAC), but also various  professional bodies (particularly those with regulatory obligations covered by  Provincial or Federal statute). The `tests' are whether the Faculty would be able to  focus properly on maintaining and enhancing quality among its constituent parts.  Strategic Opportunities: Given increasing Governmental `shaping' (primarily through  fiscal means) of postsecondary education and research, it is becoming increasingly  important that what a university does be highly visible to the external (and internal)  community. The `test' question in this case is whether a Department is in a Faculty  which reveals adequately the true import of what it is doing, thereby increasing the  possibility of emphasizing its immediate relevance to new opportunities as they arise.  Administrative and Operational Efficiency: This is in many ways linked to  congruence and size of Faculty. It is easier for Chairs and Deans to do their jobs if  Faculties are of reasonable size, and Departments are intellectually congruent. Huge  Faculties (such as traditional Faculties of Arts & Science) are invariably subdivided for  administrative purposes into congruent groups, with many Associate and Assistant  Deans. The `tests', therefore, are whether a Faculty is too big (perhaps 8 Departments,  ±4, would be about right), or too disparate or, on the other hand, include sufficient  RFA+CUPE instruction resources to warrant necessary Facultybased support services.  Financial Viability: The important issue is that all Faculties implement modes of  operation, particularly on the instructional side, that encourage financial efficiency and  flexibility. The `test' question in this case, therefore, becomes whether a new or  restructured Faculty would be more likely to add to financial efficiency and academic  flexibility, and not impoverish those existing. At Ryerson, a good part of increased  financial efficiency can be achieved by reorganizing academic programs through some  form of common first and (perhaps) second year courses.  Growth Opportunities: While the potential for another phase of growth in student  numbers at both the undergraduate and graduate levels is on the horizon, any Faculty  restructuring that may be proposed is not predicated upon it. Furthermore, opportunities

10 

of various kinds occur that are not associated with significant growth. Faculties and  Departments organized to take advantage of such situations in a financially viable  manner will be in a favorable position. The general `test' question would be whether  any Faculty restructuring leaves Ryerson as a whole better positioned to take advantage  of a variety of opportunities that may arise.  Interdisciplinary/MultiDisciplinary Activities: Ryerson is not the only university in  which faculty members and students appear to want more interdisciplinary programs.  Equally, all universities find them difficult to design, implement, and manage in a  Department based environment. There are few real interdisciplinary programs at the  undergraduate level at Ryerson. The three highly successful interdisciplinary programs  at the graduate level provide clear economic incentives for cooperation. Would  Faculties consisting of more congruent disciplines foster greater withinFaculty  interdisciplinary work? Should a Faculty of Interdisciplinary Studies be established to  develop crossFaculty interdisciplinary work at the undergraduate level?  SingleDiscipline Professional Faculties: One of the reasons some `traditional'  universities have many Faculties is that singlediscipline professional areas (such as  Social Work), particularly those subject to Provincial regulations (such as Education or  Nursing), are often designated as Faculties. Questions related to separate Faculty status  include: is a singlediscipline area too `large' to be included with other much smaller  Departments in a Faculty and, does such a Department's professional obligations  require sufficiently different administrative and/or pedagogic structures?  Acceptability: Previous decisions at Ryerson concerning Faculty restructuring have not  involved as much community involvement as the current exercise. Any suggested  changes will need to have a level of acceptance to those involved. Unfortunately, as has  been emphasized, whatever restructuring happens there will be knockon effects. One  or more Departments may be asked to make a Faculty location decision that it might  prefer not to contemplate.  An underlying current through many of the Town Halls has been unease among  individuals about change that affects their Faculty. This is to be expected. After all,  Ryerson's fiveFaculty structure has been in existence for four decades (Figure 1), having  been established during the midpoint of its `polytechnic era' (19481993), and has been  a cornerstone of the institution's tradition of innovative, accountable, and responsible  administration. With such a long and resilient legacy, it is clear that change in the Faculty  structure of the University should occur only when clearly warranted.

11 

Ryerson Exceptionalism and the Tripartite Model  Although comparisons with other universities have to be made, it must be kept in mind  that Ryerson has emerged from a trade school/polytechnic not a traditional `university'  format, and its current Faculty and curriculum structure reflects this. Ryerson is different  from other universities in that it based on professional (as with engineering or nursing)  and quasiprofessional (as with disability studies or retail management) education. A  familiar description is that it is an `insideout university'. 
19  The conceptual model for the traditional university is a set of core disciplines  ,  which may be located in one or more Faculties (humanities, science, social science),  around which professionallyoriented Faculties, such as business, medicine, law,  engineering, and so forth may be arrayed. These professional activities, supposedly,  relate to various elements of basic education (and research) provided by the core  disciplines. While most students are admitted to pursue a particular undergraduate  degree, general program requirements rooted in part in the core disciplines provide some  flexibility with respect to program transfer. 

Ryerson, on the other hand, has a group of professional and quasiprofessional  disciplines or activities at its core. Students enter the university with the intention of  pursuing a particular professional degree program, and there is little opportunity for  change in program. The elements of the core disciplines necessary for each program are  either provided within the professional program itself or through the contracting of  courses from elsewhere in the University. The fundamental point is that once a student  20  commences an intentional program, the student either completes or withdraws  .  To ensure some breadth in knowledge, which is required by all professional  programs,  a curricular device known as the `tripartite model' was implemented in  21  1977  . This requires that students in professional programs include in their curriculum  not only courses vital to practice, but also a certain number of professionally related  (defined by the program, usually five) and liberal studies courses (six, but five in  Engineering). The liberal studies courses are traditionally provided from the social  science or humanities Departments in the Faculty of Arts (there are as many as 250 on the  books), though other Faculties may contribute to this suite of courses. None of these  liberal studies courses provide access to other programs. During the current decade, the 

19 

Such as: history, chemistry, political studies, physics, economics, language and literature (the major  languages), biology, geography, mathematics, philosophy, sociology, and so forth.  20  Few actually withdraw.  21  Currie, R.F., B. Cameron, and M. Zeytinoglu (2005) Curriculum Review Report: Ryerson University,  May 24, 2005, p.5.  The outcome of the Currie at al. report with respect to radical change in the tripartite  model was, in general, that "... the community is not yet there" (Aspevig, E. (2007) "Tripartite Curriculum  Review", p.1).

12 

Faculty of Arts has instituted a number of its own undergraduate degree programs, and  22  has more in the internal approval process  .  This curricular legacy underlies an important concern raised during the first three  Town Halls, and in comments received by the Commission. A vigorous debate occurred  around a claim that the tripartite structure is an impediment to curricular and  administrative change. Though it is not within the mandate of the Commission to address  the tripartite issue per se, it does suggest that the tripartite structure be reexamined  23  internally  in the light of: (i) the evident rapid change in the role of Departments in the  Faculty of Arts from being `service providers' to the rest of the University to having their  own disciplinary and multidisciplinary undergraduate and graduate programs (ii) the  desire in some undergraduate programs for inclusion of a larger number of elective  possibilities, which may be utilized by some students for the creation of `minors' and,  (iii) program innovations being planned or in process that should result in greater choice  24  and flexibility, and the possibility of more electives open to a wider clientele  . 

22 

Such as the `common platform' in Arts and Contemporary Studies, which leads to English, French,  History, Philosophy and Psychology options. The first departmentallybased program in the Faculty was in  Applied Geography in 1973.  An LoI for a departmentally based program in English has been circulated.  23  The Currie et al. (2005) review was basically an external review.  24  For example: Levine, I. Proposed School of Creative Industries, Oct 14, 2009, pp7 and, Ball, A.  Proposal Summary: Experiential Media Institute (XMi), Nov 12, 2009, pp5.

13 

THE EXISTING FACULTY STRUCTURE  Although Departments are construed as the building blocks of Faculties, they are  not immutable. For example, the TRSM is currently undergoing departmentalization, and  some of the indicators of size (such as FFTEs) are not currently available for all  Departments within the Faculty. The easiest and most comprehensive indicator to use as a  25  measure of size is RFA+CUPE  instructors by Department because this reflects both  undergraduate and graduate teaching and supervision, and includes the first phase in the  departmentalization of TRSM (Figure 3). As the discussion proceeds, undergraduate  Figure 3. Departments by RFA+CUPE Size 
Nursing  Electrical Engineering  Image Arts  Mech. and Ind. Eng.  Architectural Science  Politics  Psychology  Social Work  Journalism  Information Tech. Mgmt.  Business Management  Chemistry and Biology  Early Childhood Ed  Radio and Television  Sociology  Fashion  English  Theatre  Philosophy  Professional Comm  Geographic Analysis  Economics  Aerospace Engineering  Interior Design  Civil Engineering  Mathematics  History  Nutrition  Computer Science  Physics  Hosp and Tourism Mgmt.  Occ. and Public Health  French/Spanish  Entrepreneurship  Human Resources  Child and Youth Care  Marketing  Chemical Engineering  Urban and Reg. Planning  Graphic Comm. Mgmt.  Finance  Retail Mgmt.  Criminal Justice  Law  (Corporate)  Global Mgmnt  Midw ifery  Accounting  Disability Studies  Health Services Mgmt.  0  10 

Median = 18.3  #RFA+CUPE=958 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

# RFA + CUPE (CUPE conv: 15 or 16 ACHs = 1 RFA) 

25 

It will be recalled from the Discussion Paper (pp 1824) that the RFA+CUPE measure is derived from:  UPO (2008) Decision Support Indicators and Data (Ryerson University: University Planning Office,  December, 2008), Table of "RFA and CUPE Counts" p. 2.11. The following formula is used by UPO with  respect to CUPE resources: 1FTE = 15 ACH over two semesters for sessional CUPE instructors and 16  ACHs over two semesters for PT.

14 

FFTEs and graduate headcounts (domestic + visa) are also included for illustrative  26  purposes  .  With the departmentalization of TRSM the existing structure now exhibits  Faculties with similar numbers of Departments, though the aggregate number of  instructors in each Faculty is quite varied (Table 1). Within each of these Faculties  Table 1. The Existing Faculty Structure, 2008/9 
Departments  RFA+CUPE  FFTEs by Program  FFTEs by Department  Graduate Headcount  FEAS  FCS  10  10  232.3  191.4  3925.0  3628.1  3589.7  2868.2  1012  316  TRSM  10  147.7  5253.2  4415.2  191  Arts  10  205.7  1977.7  4360.1  328  FCAD  Total  8  48  181.3  958.4  3366.3  18150.3  2917.1  18150.3  241  2088 

are clusters of Departments which generally have more in common with each other in  terms of congruency than those in other clusters. For example: ·  The Faculty of Arts involves Departments in the social sciences and humanities  (Figure 4), which in some universities are separate Faculties.  Figure 4.  Faculty of Arts: Department Sizes (2007/8) 

Psychology  29.2 

English  22.2 

French  13.2  History  17.1  Philosophy  20.2 

Sociology  24.8 

Politics  31.5 

Crim  Geog  Just  Analysis  Economics  8.6  19.6  19.3 

Office of the  Dean2.0 

·  FEAS includes Departments in engineering and science ­ clusters that are often in  separate Faculties in other institutions. Architectural Science, includes foci in  building science and project planning (construction) as well as architecture. 
26 

FFTE (Fiscal FullTime Equivalent) undergraduate data from UPO, 2008/9, SAS files, three terms, totals  (ie. domestic+visa). Graduate headcount, also domestic+visa, is for Nov 1 2009. ComCult, EnSciMan, and  I&SS headcounts distributed pro rata among contributing departments based on courses taught.

15 

Figure 5. Faculty of Engineering, Architecture, and Science: Department Sizes (2007/8) 
Chem.&  Biology,  26.0  Comp.  Sc.,  15.6 

Math,  18.3  Physics,  14.3 

Mech & Ind.  Eng, 35.7 

Electrical Eng.,  41.6 

Architectural  Scince  31.6 

Civ. Eng.  Chem  Eng,  18.7  11.4 

Aerosp  Eng.,  19.1 

Office of the  Dean, 4.6 

·  FCS includes Nursing and health related Departments and, four that appear little  related (Social Work, ECE, Urban & Regional Planning, and Child and Youth  27  Care)  . Nursing is onethird of FCS in teaching resources and enrolment.  Figure 6.  Faculty of Community Services: Department Sizes (2007/8) 
Nutrition  16.4  Occ&PH  13.3 

Nursing, 67.8 

Social  Work  28.4  Midw ifery  7.5  Health Sc  Mngmt, 3.1  Disability  St 5.8  ECE  25.9  C&Y  Care  11.8 

U&R Pl  11.4  Office of the  Dean, 4.6 

27 

George, U. Memo to PASC (Dec 12, 2009, 3pp) argues that each Department in FCS is characterized by  strong community connections. She proposes a Faculty of Health & Community Studies.

16 

·  In TRSM the clustering is around Business Management (including retail, and  hospitality and tourism management), and Information Technology Management. As  may be seen in Figure 7, the Departmentalization process is occurring with respect to  Business Management. In this context, it is argued that "... considerations should be  given to the facilitation of ongoing internal restructuring that strengthens an existing  Faculty, thereby allowing it to better achieve its goals and full teaching, program, and  28  research potential"  .  Figure 7. TRSM Departmentalization (as of September, 2008) 
Hosp &  Tourism.,  13.7 

Law   8 

Market  Hosp &  11.7  Tour, 13.7

ITM, 26.6  Business  Mgmt., 98.4  Ret Mgmt.,  9.0 

HR 12.8 

ITM, 26.6 

Global  Mgmt., 9  Finance, 11  Ret Mgmt., 9 

Entrep. 13 
Off ice of  the Dean,  6.0 

Bus Mgmt.,  25.6  Of fice of  the Dean, 6 

Acc, 7.3 

·  FC&D includes three "... distinct and interrelated..." areas within the Faculty:  29  "communication, design, and visual and performing arts"  . These areas have been  clustered according to this paradigm in Figure 8.  Figure 8. Faculty of Communication and Design: Department Sizes (2007/8). 
Prof Comm,  19.6  Radio&TV,  25.1  Image Arts,  36.1 

Journalism,  27.3  Theatre, 20.3  GCM,  11.1  Int Design,  18.8  Fashion, 23  Off ice of  the  Dean, 3 

28  29 

K. Jones, addendum to Nov 25, 2009 letter to the Commission.  Doz, D. (2009) "FCAD: Repositioning Paper" draft, 2pp, October 14, 2009.

17

SUGGESTED MODIFICATIONS/ADDITIONS  A cursory listing of the number of Faculties compared with university headcount suggests  that Ryerson has relatively few compared with other institutions (Figure 2, p6). Indeed, it  is suggested eight Faculties is not unusual for a University of our current size, and even  more if Ryerson were to be at 33,000 student headcount. There are, quite naturally,  30  concerns about increasing administrative costs  . It is envisaged that the aggregate  Faculty administrative cost share of total University income will not increase even if the  number of Faculties increases.  The Considerations and Existing and Hypothetical Faculties  The Commission has used the information provided in its papers, the Town Halls, and  written submissions to crystallize its aggregate opinion on the match of the considerations  with each of the existing and array of hypothetical Faculties in the Green Paper (listed in  Table 2). It should be emphasized that, as with the University at large, there is a wide  array of opinions on the Commission concerning the strength of the matches.  Table 2. List of Existing, and Hypothetical, Faculties in the Green Paper (details in  Appendix A).  Existing  Engineering, Architecture & Science  Arts  Community Services  Ted Rogers School of Management  Communication & Design  Hypothetical  Arts & Science  Engineering & Architecture  Science  Engineering  Built & Physical Environment  Health & Behavioral Science  Nursing  Design  Media & Communication  Professional Social Sciences  Humanities  Interdisciplinary Studies 

30 

Letter dated Jan 13, 2010, from A. Saloojee, a/President RFA, Jan 13, 2010.

18 

On the basis of this extensive array of information, the Commission suggests a  Faculty structure which: ·  includes a Faculty of Science, involving Chemistry & Biology, Physics, Computer  31  Science, and Mathematics   ·  involves a Faculty which includes Health. A Faculty of Health and Behavioral  Science was suggested in the Green Paper. Subsequent discussions and written  comments indicate little appetite for the specific disciplinary complement proposed.  The Commission is, therefore suggesting, a Faculty of Health & Community  32  Studies   ·  forms a Faculty of Engineering & Architectural Science until such time as a distinct  Faculty of Engineering can be established ·  maintains the current Faculty of Arts, which fits well the considerations outlined  33  above   ·  recognizes, through the establishment of a Faculty of Nursing, that its size  overwhelms any Faculty in which it may be housed, and all nursing programs of  34  nearly similar size in other universities have single discipline Faculties   ·  maintains the current FC&D.  However, Commission members do see a possible  Faculty of Media & Communication (but are not, in general, persuaded by the  suggested complement of a Faculty of Design in the Green Paper) ·  could embrace a Faculty of the Built and Physical Environment, but not necessarily as  outlined in the Green Paper and, 35  ·  maintains the current TRSM, but transfers to it Health Services Management  from  FCS to support new management program developments in that area.  It must be repeated that any new suggested Faculties are just that ­ suggested ­ and even  if followed would, in some cases, take a few years to implement.  The Commission is of the view that: FEAS be restructured as suggested and  distinct Faculties of Arts and Science, Professional Social Sciences, Humanities, and  36  Interdisciplinary Studies  , not be pursued.  There is much concern about what to do with interdisciplinary studies programs,  which can be well organized within Faculties, but less well managed if more than one  Faculty is involved. The Commission is not suggesting establishment of a distinct Faculty  at this time, but recommends that strenuous efforts continue to be made to mitigate the 
31 

As argued in: Evans, C S. Ferrando, N. George, P. Goldman, D. Heyd and A. Sadeghian (2008) "A Faculty of  Science at Ryerson University". 
32  33 

George, U. Memo to PASC (Dec 12, 2009, 3pp) proposes a Faculty of Health & Community Studies.  Cassidy, C. "Note to the Commission on Academic Restructuring", 2pp,  December 24, 2009 Gillin,  C.T. memorandum in response to the Green Paper, 2pp, December 27, 2009 and, Kraay, K.J.  memorandum in response to the Green Paper, 3pp, December 28, 2009, with respect to the ACS program.  34  Daphne Cockwell School of Nursing Submission to PASC, November, 2009, 5pp.  35  Isaac, W. and J. Pringle Health Services Management: Recommendations for Academic Restructuring,  Oct 15, 2009. 3pp. HSM currently involves 3 RFA+CUPE (see Fig. 3).  36  P. Albanese, in `memorandum in response to the Green Paper', 2pp, December 31, 2009, argues, for  example, that crossFaculty collaboration in the current Faculty context can be quite successful.

19 

difficulties arising with respect to interdisciplinary programs described in the Discussion  37  Paper, Green Paper, Town Halls, and in written submissions to the Commission  .  38  Similar efforts should be made with respect to Interprofessional programs  .  University Research Centres/Institutes, may be a good way of addressing many  elements of the goals of interdisciplinary endeavor without Faculty restructuring  (particularly in an incubator role). The Commission suggests that more consideration be  given to the creation of such structures in interdisciplinary, and targeted research areas.  It should also be noted that some social science oriented Departments located  elsewhere in the University have expressed an interest in joining the suite of social  39  science Departments in the Faculty of Arts  . A procedure for addressing such issues  should be developed at the Provostial level. 

The Near Future  There are, therefore, some possible changes to the existing Faculty structure that could  occur in the near future.  I.  The argument for a Faculty of Science is based on the congruency of the  Departments and programs involved the efficiencies to be realized in the administration  of similar units and, the enhanced legitimacy gained from the clarity of the Faculty  name. However, the separation of these Departments from FEAS raises issues  concerning: whether its current and potential future size is sufficient to warrant Faculty  status and, assuring the quality of science teaching in Engineering education.  Table 3. Including a Science Faculty. 
Departments  RFA+CUPE  FFTEs by Program  FFTEs by Department  Grad Headcount  Science  Eng+Arch  4  6  74.2  158.1  1138.2  2786.8  1929.6  1660.1  146  866  FCS  10  191.4  3628.1  2868.2  316  TRSM  Arts  10  10  147.7  205.7  5253.2  1977.7  4415.2  4360.1  191  328  FCAD  8  181.3  3366.3  2917.1  241 

With respect to these issues, it may be observed that: many universities have  40  Faculties with four or less Departments it is a research and graduate `growth area'    and, there should be every incentive for science to maintain and enhance the quality of its  contributions to education in Engineering for that is its major `market'. 
37 

For example: memorandum in response to the Green Paper with respect to ENSCIMAN from M. Bardecki and R.  Pushchak, Jan 13, 2010, 2pp.  "Response to Green Paper by the Executive Committee of the MA Program in  Immigration and Settlement Studies, Ryerson University", Jan. 13, 2010, 4pp. 
38  39 

C. Hart: memo from the RU Interprofessional Steering Committee, Jan 13, 2010.  M. Panitch, memorandum concerning Disability Studies, Dec. 18, 2009 C. Stuart, memorandum  concerning C&YC, Jan. 12, 2010 J. Sandys, memorandum concerning Social Work, Jan. 13, 2010 and, R.  Langford, memorandum concerning  ECE, Jan. 13, 2010.  40  Conference Board of Canada (2009) How Canada Performs (www.conferenceboard.ca/HCP/). Argues  that Canada  "... needs to produce more Ph.D.s and graduates in disciplines that support innovation".

20 

Thus, the Commission endorses the request for the establishment of a Faculty of Science  at Ryerson University.  II.  Singlediscipline Faculties are common in all large universities, though none exist  as yet at Ryerson. The reasons in this particular case for a singlediscipline Faculty of  Nursing have to do with its size and extensive administrative structure, and adherence to  the norms in other universities. The Department is large relative to other Departments in  FCS so that separating it from FCS could well prove to be a positive action from the  perspective of providing `space' for all Departments to grow and pursue new  opportunities. Administrative structures are already in place in Nursing to ensure a  smooth transition to a Faculty.  Most, if not all, large Universities across Canada have singlediscipline Faculties  of Nursing. While there are many places in which nursing is located in Health Sciences or  Health Faculties, these are smaller colleges and universities. Certainly the practice in  41  large universities is to have a standalone Faculty of Nursing  . A Faculty would  consolidate Ryerson's leading presence in Canada in nursing, enhance its profile, and be  a significant marketing feature.  If a Faculty of Nursing were established it would have an instructional  complement similar to that of a Faculty of Science, though its undergraduate FFTEs by  program are somewhat less (Table 4). However, it is highly likely that Ryerson will be  pressed to expand its undergraduate and graduate nursing enrolment. Graduate enrolment  in Nursing is currently similar to that of the proposed Faculty of Science.  Table 4. Possible Faculty Structure Including a Faculty of Nursing. 
Departments  RFA+CUPE  FFTEs by Program  FFTEs by Department  Graduate Headcount  Science  Eng+Arch  FCS  4  6  9  74.2  158.1  123.6  1138.2  2786.8  2787.9  1929.6  1660.1  2162.1  146  866  167  TRSM  10  147.7  5253.2  4415.2  191  Arts  FCAD  Nurs.  1  10  8  67.8   205.7  181.3  840.2   1977.7  3366.3  4360.1  2917.1  706.1  149  328  241 

There has been much debate in the Commission, Town Halls, and other meetings  concerning whether a Faculty of Nursing would preclude the development of a Faculty  that would include other aspects of `health'. The Commission has concluded that it would  not, as there are other aspects of `health' currently in place and gestation.  In consequence, it is suggested that a Faculty of Nursing be established. 
42  III.  With about 10.1% of the nation's GDP associated with health care  , many  universities which do not have Faculties of Medicine wish to identify the programs they  do have in `health'. Health is defined in the Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion as "... 

41  42 

All nursing schools in Canada are listed at: http://www.casn.ca/en  Health Care in Canada, 2009: A Decade in Review (Canadian Institute for Health Information), p. 47.

21 

a resource for every day life, not the objective of living. Health is a positive concept  43  emphasizing social and personal resources, as well as physical capacities"  . The  paradigm of `health' is therefore broad, embracing multiple communities.  The University is far stronger today in health activities at both the undergraduate  and graduate levels, and in research, than it was forty years ago. A Faculty of Health &  Community Studies could include existing Departments ­ Midwifery, Nutrition,  Occupational and Public Health, Disability Studies, Social Work, Child & Youth Care,  Early Childhood Education, and Urban & Regional Planning (Table 5). It is the  Commission's view that `health and community studies' holds great promise for the  44  development of new programs and Departmental expansion  . Apart from this  programmatic focus, there is also the University's responsibility to help meet society's  health employment and research needs.  Table 5. Possible Faculty Structure Including Health & Community Studies 
Departments  RFA+CUPE  FFTEs by Program  FFTEs by Department  Graduate Headcount  Science  Eng+Arch  H&CS  4  6  8  74.2  158.1  120.5  1138.2  2786.8  2787.9  1929.6  1660.1  2162.1  146  866  167  TRSM  11  150.8  5253.2  4415.2  191  Arts  FCAD  Nurs.  1  10  8  67.8  205.7  181.3  1977.7  3366.3  840.2  4360.1  2917.1  706.1  149  328  241 

It is, therefore, suggested that FCS be renamed as a Faculty of Health and  45  Community Studies  .  Observations on the Built Environment and Law.  I.  Architectural Science has indicated that it would like to be a Faculty, and also  46  invites "... other related disciplines ... to join us in this endeavor"  . Urban & Regional  Planning appears to be favorably disposed to relocation under certain circumstances  47  relating in particular to Faculty governance  . Other possible constituents suggested in  48  Scenario 4 of the Green Paper (Appendix A) prefer to remain where they are  .  In many universities, architecture and planning are often in the same Faculty. For  example: U of Manitoba, where the Faculty of Architecture includes departments of  architecture, environmental design, city planning, interior design, and landscape arch.  U  of NSW, where a Faculty of Built Environment includes architecture, planning, 
43  44 

Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion, Nov. 21, 1986, WHO/HPR/HEP/95.1 p.1  Although the Commission is not mandated to suggest new programs, it is of the view that an  undergraduate concentration in Health Studies would be an important development for the University.  Other suggestions are: Food Studies and, Health Intervention and the Life Course. Graduate programs  might be developed in Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, and Global Food Security.  45  Given the need to emphasize teaching and research, the word `studies' is preferred.  46  Extract from a motion received from Architectural Science Departmental Council, dated Jan. 7, 2010.  47  M. Kosny, Comments from SURP on Green Paper, Jan. 19, 2010  D. Amborski, memo re: SURP, Jan  13, 2010 R. Keeble, memo concerning Urban & Regional Planning, Jan 13, 2010  NM Lister, memo  concerning SURP, Jan 14, 2010  48  S. Wang, Report on Meeting of Council of Department of Geography, Jan. 14, 2010.

22 

sustainable development U of Melbourne ­ Faculty of Architecture & Planning UC  Berkeley, where a Faculty of Environmental Design includes architecture, city &  regional planning, landscape architecture & environmental planning, and urban design.  It may, therefore, be possible to provide a `Faculty face' for the University's  emphasis on its role as a `city builder', and its wellknown engagement with  urban/environment issues, through a Faculty named as either `Built and Physical  Environment' or `Architecture & Planning'. These programs by their very nature are  professionally oriented and interdisciplinary, and their placement in the same Faculty  would undoubtedly be synergistic and lead to growth and enhanced research  opportunities.  It is suggested that the possibility of a Faculty of the Built & Physical  Environment, or Architecture & Planning be explored.  Table 6. The Sizes of Faculties with B&PE (or Architecture&Planning) Included 
Sc  Departments  RFA+CUPE  FFTEs by Program  FFTEs by Dept.  Grad. Headcount  4  74.2  1138.2  1929.6  146  Eng  5  126.5  2255.6  1190.1  784  H&CS  TRSM  Arts  7  11  10  109.1  150.8  205.7  2479.5  5253.2  1977.7  1946  4415.2  4360.1  116  191  328  FCAD  Nurs.  B&PE  8  1  2  181.3  67.8  43  3366.3  840.2  839.6  2917.1  706.1  686.1  241  149  133 

II.  If a significant program in law were developed, there would undoubtedly be a  case for a Faculty of Law, given that standalone Faculties of Law are the norm North  America wide. A plan for the eventual development of such a program is envisaged by  The Law Working Group, a first step in that direction being the recently established  49  Ryerson University Law Center  .  Observations on SGS and the G. Raymond Chang School of Continuing Education.  SGS and the Chang School are operations which have leadership at the decanal  level, but do not have Faculty responsibilities, ie. they are not loci of faculty (RFA)  appointments.  I.  Since the year 2000 when SGS was implemented, it has facilitated Ryerson's  transformation from a primarily undergraduate university. SGS central coordination has  provided mentorship to new and emerging graduate programs and the University is one  among few to have surpassed its MTCU graduate enrolment targets. Currently, Ryerson  offers 37 graduate programs including those awaiting approval by the Board of  Governors. Of this total, 4 programs are interdisciplinary and 33 are departmentally  based. 
49 

The eventual development of such a program is envisaged in: The Law Working Group (2009) Law at  Ryerson: Submission to the Provost's Academic Structures Commission, pp6 Ryerson University Law  Center, established by Senate, Oct. 6, 2009 also, A. Levin, letter providing summary of comments made at  Dec. 1 meeting of Senate, Dec. 22, 2009.

23 

For academic units in the latter group, graduate program delivery and research  activities carried out by their graduate students are integral to their daytoday operations.  Yet, SGS remains the academic home of these graduate programs and students as it has  both administrative and operational responsibility in the delivery of graduate programs.  Other universities have addressed these matters by assigning program delivery and  financing thereof to Departments and mainly administrative and coordinating  50  responsibilities to SGS  .  The university administration may want to revisit the role of SGS in the delivery  of graduate programs, and investigate whether alternate administrative structures can  51  bring further efficiencies and enhance the graduate student experience  .  II.  The G. Raymond Chang School of Continuing Education is committed to serving  adult and continuing education learners in conjunction with the five Faculties through a  collaborative model for program development and delivery. The Chang School works  with each Faculty to provide certificates, courses, workshops and seminars in flexible  formats, including parttime, evening, spring / summer, offsite and online.  This collaborative model is highly effective at facilitating the development of  quality programs that meet societal need and student demand. Last year, there were  67,788 enrollments in over 1,100 courses across a full range of academic programming.  The School administers over 200 distance education courses, and 77 certificate programs.  The School also serves as a catalyst and incubator for the development of new  programs, which have resulted in a number of degree programs that are now part of the  Faculties. These include Midwifery (2002), Retail Management (1998), and Health  Services Management (1994). Additionally, the Chang School has worked with the  Faculties to establish a number of interdisciplinary certificates such as those in Non  Profit and Voluntary Sector Management, and Neuroscience.  However, the PASC process has made clear that while the collaborative model  works well when program developments/innovations relate to distinct academic  disciplines within a specific Faculty, for interdisciplinary (and interprofessional) and  52  emerging academic areas the collaborative model does not work as well  . This is  because the academic home for these initiatives may be unclear, and approval and  implementation processes become challenging. 
50 

Such responsibilities include but are not limited to: administration of oral examinations, doctoral thesis  defenses development and administration of policies and procedures related to graduate studies  administration of graduate admissions and general recruitment (particularly through the GAC)  administration of Universitybased and external graduate scholarships graduate faculty (SGS)  membership curriculum and calendar development enhancing opportunities for professional skills  development for graduate students new program development and approval management of quantitative  and qualitative information pertaining to programs and students degree audit and convocation  and  maintaining central communication tools such as the SGS website.  51  SGS has a data survey of the functions of Graduate Schools of comparable size in Canada.  52  This particular matter, among other important observations, is raised in: N. Thomlinson, "Restructuring if  Necessary Not Necessarily Restructuring", Jan 5, 2010, 1516.

24 

Furthermore, students enrolled in certificate programs through the Chang School  are increasingly asking  "where does this lead?"  These students are often using the  Chang School courses and certificates as a gateway to postsecondary education either to  retool, or reorient, their skill set to gain benefits in the job market or their engagement  within society.  There needs to be more parttime degree (e.g., evening, weekends and  summer) programs, and a much clearer link between these and certificate programs. This  implies a need for much greater cooperation between the Faculties and the Chang School.  It is suggested that a strengthening of the collaborative model between the Chang  School and the Faculties is required to facilitate the maintenance and development of  certificates that meet the university's commitment to lifelong learning, accessibility, and  adult learners.  Additionally, it is suggested that the collaborative model be strengthened  to facilitate: (i) the further development of certificates in interdisciplinary (and inter  professional) studies and, (ii) the linkage between certificate programs and parttime  degree level education.

25 

SUMMARY OF SUGGESTIONS  The Commission is aware the economic signs are discouraging, and that Faculty  restructuring must be approached carefully. There are few `lubricants' to facilitate the  implementation of new ideas, particularly those with respect to administrative  arrangements. It is for this reason that the predominant underlying view across the  campus is one of caution with respect to restructuring, crystallized in the colloquialism  "if it ain't broke, don't fix it'.  Nevertheless, and with financial feasibility and acceptability firmly in mind, the  Commission:  endorses the request for the establishment of a Faculty of Science, including Chemistry &  Biology, Physics, Computer Science, and Mathematics (p. 20)  supports the request from Nursing that it be established as a Faculty (p. 21)  recommends that FCS be renamed as Faculty of Health and Community Studies (p.22)  endorses transferring Health Services Management from FCS to TRSM to support a new  health services management program (p.19)  envisages a Faculty of Engineering & Architectural Science until such time as a distinct  Faculty of Engineering can be established (pp.2021)  supports the possible development of a Faculty of the Built & Physical Environment (or  Architecture & Planning) (pp. 2223)  notes that if a significant program in law were developed, there would be a case for a  Faculty of Law (p.23)  suggests the role of SGS in the delivery of  programs be reviewed (pp.2324) and,  encourages discussion of ways in which the collaborative model between the Chang  School and the Faculties may be strengthened (pp. 2425).  The Commission also suggests that: (i) the tripartite model be reexamined  internally (pp. 1213) (ii) the establishment of Research Centres/Institutes to meet some  of the goals of interdisciplinary endeavor be encouraged (p. 20) (iii) a procedure for  addressing requests for the transfer of Departments from one Faculty to another be  available at the Provostial level (p. 20) and, (iv) the importance of facilitating internal  Faculty restructuring not be overlooked (p.17).  These are all matters that are quite `doable', or can be addressed, within the next  few years. Although the suggested restructurings are quite modest, they may be seen at  some future date to have been a first step in what had become an ongoing process of well  considered change.

26 

Appendix A
Existing Faculty Structure Arts Criminal Justice Economics English French/Spanish Geography History Philosophy Politics Psychology Sociology FCS Child and Youth Care Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nursing Nutrition Occ. and Public Health Social Work Urban and Reg. Planning FEAS Aerospace Engineering Architectural Science Chemical Engineering Chemistry and Biology Civil Engineering Computer Science Electrical Engineering Mathematics Mech. and Ind. Eng. Physics TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt. FC&D Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Image Arts Interior Design Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre Scenario 2: Arts&Science Arts & Science Criminal Justice Economics English French/Spanish Geography History Philosophy Politics Psychology Sociology Chemistry and Biology Computer Science Mathematics Physics FCS Child and Youth Care Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nursing Nutrition Occ. and Public Health Social Work Urban and Reg. Planning Eng & Arch Aerospace Engineering Architectural Science Chemical Engineering Civil Engineering Electrical Engineering Mech. and Ind. Eng. TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt. FC&D Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Image Arts Interior Design Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre Scenario 3: Science Science Chemistry and Biology Computer Science Mathematics Physics Arts Criminal Justice Economics English French/Spanish Geography History Philosophy Politics Psychology Sociology Eng & Arch Aerospace Engineering Architectural Science Chemical Engineering Civil Engineering Electrical Engineering Mech. and Ind. Eng. FCS Child and Youth Care Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nursing Nutrition Occ. and Public Health Social Work Urban and Reg. Planning TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt. FC&D Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Image Arts Interior Design Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre Scenario 4: City Builder B&PE Architectural Science Geography Urban and Reg. Planning Interior Design TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt. Science Chemistry and Biology Computer Science Mathematics Physics C&D Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Image Arts Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre SS&H Criminal Justice Economics English French/Spanish History Philosophy Politics Psychology Sociology CS Child and Youth Care Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nursing Nutrition Occ. and Public Health Social Work Engineering Aerospace Engineering Chemical Engineering Electrical Engineering Mech. and Ind. Eng. Civil Engineering Scenario 5: Health&Behav Health & Behavioral Sc Psychology Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nursing Nutrition Occ. and Public Health B&PE Architectural Science Urban and Reg. Planning Interior Design Geography C&D Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Image Arts Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre SS&H Criminal Justice Economics English French/Spanish History Philosophy Politics Sociology CS Child and Youth Care Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Social Work Engineering Aerospace Engineering Chemical Engineering Electrical Engineering Mech. and Ind. Eng. Civil Engineering TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt. Science Chemistry and Biology Computer Science Mathematics Physics Scenario 6: Single Disc. Nursing Nursing Science Chemistry and Biology Computer Science Mathematics Physics Arts Criminal Justice Economics English French/Spanish Geography History Philosophy Politics Psychology Sociology Eng & Arch Aerospace Engineering Architectural Science Chemical Engineering Civil Engineering Electrical Engineering Mech. and Ind. Eng. FCS Child and Youth Care Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nutrition Occ. and Public Health Social Work Urban and Reg. Planning TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt. FC&D Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Image Arts Interior Design Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre Scenario 7: Design/M&C Design Architectural Science Urban and Reg. Planning Interior Design Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Media & Communication Image Arts Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre SS&H Geography Criminal Justice Economics English French/Spanish History Philosophy Politics Sociology CS Child and Youth Care Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Social Work Engineering Aerospace Engineering Chemical Engineering Electrical Engineering Mech. and Ind. Eng. Civil Engineering TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt. Science Chemistry and Biology Computer Science Mathematics Physics Health & Behavioral Sc Psychology Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nursing Nutrition Occ. and Public Health Scenario 8: Prof Soc Sc Prof Soc Sc Child and Youth Care Criminal Justice Disability Studies Early Childhood Ed Economics Geography Politics Social Work Sociology Humanities English French/Spanish History Philosophy Media & Communication Image Arts Journalism Professional Comm Radio and Television Theatre Design Architectural Science Urban and Reg. Planning Interior Design Fashion Graphic Comm. Mgmt. Health & Behavioral Sc Health Services Mgmt. Midwifery Nursing Nutrition Occ. and Public Health Psychology Science Chemistry and Biology Computer Science Mathematics Physics Engineering Aerospace Engineering Chemical Engineering Civil Engineering Electrical Engineering Mech. and Ind. Eng. TRSM Accounting Entrepreneurship Finance Global Mgmnt Hosp and Tourism Mgmt. Human Resources Information Tech. Mgmt. Law (Business) Marketing Retail Mgmt.


