Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Economics Publications and Research Economics

10-1-2009

Major Provisions of Labour Contracts and their Theoretical Coherence
Louis N. Christofides
University of Cyprus

Amy Cheng Peng
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/economics Part of the Economics Commons Recommended Citation
Christofides, Louis N. and Peng, Amy Cheng, "Major Provisions of Labour Contracts and their Theoretical Coherence" (2009). Economics Publications and Research. Paper 22. http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/economics/22

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Economics at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Economics Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

MAJOR PROVISIONS OF LABOUR CONTRACTS AND THEIR THEORETICAL COHERENCE
LOUIS N. CHRISTOFIDES AMY CHEN PENG

CESIFO WORKING PAPER NO. 1700
CATEGORY 4: LABOUR MARKETS APRIL 2006
PRESENTED AT CESIFO AREA CONFERENCE ON MACRO, MONEY & INTERNATIONAL FINANCE, FEBRUARY 2006

An electronic version of the paper may be downloaded · from the SSRN website: www.SSRN.com · from the RePEc website: www.RePEc.org · from the CESifo website: www.CESifo-group.de
T T

CESifo Working Paper No. 1700

MAJOR PROVISIONS OF LABOUR CONTRACTS AND THEIR THEORETICAL COHERENCE
Abstract
Theoretical work on indexation and contract duration suggests no role for the expected rate of inflation in equations explaining these variables. Yet, stand-alone or two-equation studies of indexation and contract duration often report that this variable is statistically significant. We study a wider econometric system which includes, in addition, non-contingent wage adjustment. This third, jointly dependent, variable and its nominal anchor (the expected rate of inflation) play a role in the duration and indexation decisions and offer a context within which earlier findings can be understood. In this three-equation system, the wage equation accommodates complex mechanisms through which price inflation feeds into wage adjustment both within and across contracts. The elasticity of indexation is modelled as a latent variable, supporting consideration of both the incidence and the intensity of indexation and linking consistently with the wage equation. In our results, the expected rate of inflation has no role in the duration equation and only a minor one in the elasticity of indexation equation. These findings are more consistent with received theory but they also suggest that more complex models involving all three variables and the sequence of contracts signed by a bargaining pair are needed. JEL Code: E31, J41, J50. Keywords: contracts, duration, indexation, wage adjustment, simultaneity.

Louis N. Christofides Department of Economics University of Cyprus Kallipoleos 75 P.O. Box 20537 1678 Nicosia Cyprus louis.christofides@ucy.ac.cy

Amy Chen Peng Ryerson University Department of Economics Toronto, Ontario Canada apeng@ryerson.ca

October 9, 2005 We thank M. Legault, Human Resources Development Canada, for the data and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council for financial support. The paper was presented at the 2004 Canadian Economic Association Meetings in Toronto and the 2005World Congress of SOLE and EALE in San Francisco. Helpful comments from participants and G. Akerlof are acknowledged.

1

Introduction

Provisions of labour contracts such as their duration and the contingent and non-contingent wage adjustments that they entail are important economic outcomes in themselves and have significant macroeconomic implications. Long term contracts freeze the terms on which agents interact and make it possible for the authorities to affect macroeconomic performance through unanticipated actions. Complete compensation against inflation perpetuates the real wage rate structure and may lead to inefficiencies and costly quantity adjustments. Compensation against inflation can be achieved through indexation but, the data suggest, it is more likely to happen through noncontingent wage increases. Non-contingent increases reflect current expectations of future inflation but they also embody uncompensated inflation from the earlier contract, thus providing a propagation mechanism that stretches out the economy's response to shocks. The length of this propagation mechanism may itself be increased by inflation uncertainty. While much can be gleaned from the very complete data that describe formal and legally binding union contracts, the provisions of these agreements may also shed light on behaviour in the rest of the economy. Our current understanding of what shapes the provisions of union contracts dates back to theoretical and empirical work carried out during the high-inflation period of the 1970s and the 1980s.1 This literature suggests
1

For theoretical contributions see Blinder (1977), Azariadis (1978), Card (1983, 1986),

Dye (1985), Danziger (1988), Ehrenberg, Danziger and San (1983, 1984), Gray (1976, 1978), and Shavell (1976). Concern with contingent wage adjustment produced empirical studies that deal with the measurement, intensity but, typically, incidence of indexation clauses (Wilton (1980), Estenson (1981), Card (1983, 1986), Cousineau, Lacroix and Bilodeau (1983), and Ehrenberg, Danziger and San (1983, 1984)). Another literature considers how to integrate Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) clauses into wage-change

1

that contractual provisions such as duration and indexation are interconnected, that non-contingent wage adjustment is an important dimension of labour contracts and that the inflation environment (expected inflation and inflation uncertainty), the state of the product and labour markets (real uncertainty, productivity shocks and unemployment), contractual costs, and bargaining pair-specific variables (attitudes to risk and how firm and other incomes move with inflation) all influence these provisions. Two important, outstanding, issues concern (i) the theoretically surprising role2 found in many empirical studies3 for the expected rate of inflation
equations (Mitchell (1980), Kaufman and Woglom (1984), Vroman (1984), Hendricks and Kahn (1983, 1985, 1986), Christofides (1987), and Prescott and Wilton (1992)). The literature dealing with contract duration includes (Christofides and Wilton (1983), Vroman (1989), Wallace and Blanco (1991), Murphy (1992, 2000), Davis and Kanago (1997), Kanago (1998), Barcena-Ruiz and Campo (2000), Wallace (2001), and Rich and Tracy (2004)). Attempts to explore the simultaneities involved have been partial, studying contract duration, indexation, and wage adjustment in various pairs (Prescott and Wilton (1992), Bils (1990), and Christofides and Peng (forthcoming)) and typically looking at the incidence, rather than the intensity, of indexation. Two studies that have addressed all three issues are Christofides (1990) and Murphy (2000). Based on a smaller sample, the former concludes in favour of a causal structure, where contract duration and indexation are determined first, feeding into non-contingent wage adjustment at a later stage. Murphy (2000) studies a simultaneous context where the study of indexation is confined to incidence and the wage equation is linear. 2 Ehrenberg, Danziger and San (1984, Table 1, row 7) and Gray (1978, note 3, 3) note that the expected rate of inflation plays no role in the canonical models. 3 Cousineau, Lacroix and Bilodeau (1983), examining contract duration and COLA incidence, report a significantly negative coefficient for expected inflation in the duration equation and a significantly positive coefficient in the COLA incidence equation. Using various proxies, Rich and Tracy (2004, Table 5) report significant coefficients for most of their expected inflation proxies which are negative in the duration equation and positive in the COLA incidence equation. The same pattern is also found in Christofides and Peng

2

in contract duration and indexation equations and (ii) the related, we argue, fact that all studies stop short of a fully simultaneous treatment of contract duration, the elasticity of indexation, and non-contingent wage adjustment. Since duration and indexation are negotiated at the same time as non-contingent wage adjustment, it is possible that the role assumed by expected inflation in empirical studies reflects the fact that non-contingent wage adjustment has not typically been taken into account.4 To fully explore a possible role for the expected rate of inflation in shaping the duration and indexation decisions it is necessary to spell out and simultaneously estimate the missing wage equation. With these challenges in mind, we examine a long (1976-2000) history of Canadian collective bargaining agreements in an econometric context where (i) full simultaneity involving duration, indexation and non-contingent wage adjustment is possible, (ii) indexation is modeled as a censored variable (allowing examination of both the incidence and the intensity of indexation), (iii) the wage equation nests Phillips and Wage Curve behaviour, is consistent with the possibility that current and/or past contracts may be indexed, and accounts for the history of expected future and uncompensated past inflation, and (iv) contingent, non-contingent, and total wage adjustment are modelled endogenously, in the context of a unified framework. The database used derives largely from electronic records maintained by the ministry (Human Resources Development Canada or HRDC) responsi(forthcoming). A number of other authors also control for the expected inflation rate in duration and indexation equations. 4 For instance, contingent and non-contingent wage adjustments are natural substitutes and the expected real non-contingent wage adjustment should enter a structural indexation equation with a negative sign - implying, as in footnote 3, a positive sign for expected inflation.

3

ble for these legally binding agreements, thereby ensuring continuity and accuracy. Continuity is essential to devising an appropriate framework for modelling how price inflation feeds into wage inflation. In a world where the distribution of anticipated inflation is not degenerate at the expected rate, uncertainty about future inflation can be dealt with ex post by taking uncompensated inflation into account in a subsequent contract. This notion differentiates intra-contract non-contingent compensation and contingent compensation through a COLA clause from inter-contract non-contingent wage adjustment for uncompensated past inflation. However, uncertainty about future inflation also affects contract duration and indexation. Theory suggests that greater inflation uncertainty should shrink the length of contracts and intensify indexation. It may also stretch out compensation against inflation by strengthening the ex post mechanism described above, a possibility that we examine. Future inflation is modelled using recursive GARCH procedures, ensuring that both expected inflation and inflation uncertainty are generated in an internally consistent manner. The same procedures can be used to generate real uncertainty, a variable whose influence on contract duration has been stressed by Danziger (1988). The model is used to analyse total (including COLA-generated) wage change as well as contract duration and indexation. An assumed disinflation, of the type experienced during the recessions of the early 1990s, produces changes in contractual provisions which are very similar to the actual ones. However, the transmission mechanism is through the impact of expected inflation on non-contingent wage adjustment and thence to contract duration and indexation. A general-to-particular modeling strategy suggests that expected inflation per se is no longer needed in the contract duration

4

equation, while its influence in the indexation equation is muted. While our results are more consistent with received theory, they also serve an inductive role in that they call for more complete theoretical models of how major provisions of labour contracts are shaped. Since the evidence, here and elsewhere, that uncompensated inflation from the previous contract affects non-contingent wage adjustment is very strong, theoretical efforts should take into account the long-term relationships that exist in the labour market.5 Section 2 deals with specification and econometric issues. Section 3 discusses the contract data as well as information that has been appended from other sources. Section 4 presents the empirical results and section 5 provides a summary of our findings.

2
2.1

Econometric Specification
Uncertain Inflation, Intra and Inter-Contract Compensation

In general, actual inflation will differ from what is anticipated. In a context where consecutive bargaining between pairs occurs, it is natural for uncompensated inflation to appear as an issue in subsequent negotiations, leading to inter-contract compensation against inflation. Since this uncompensated inflation mechanism serves a purpose similar to that of a COLA clause, it is necessary to take both into account when specifying a general wage adjust5

In the sample we examine, a large number of continuous contract histories exist and

the maximum number of consecutive contracts signed by the same bargaining pair is 18.

5

ment equation.6 Consider the equation W NCt = c + (1 - t ) t +  [(Pt-1 - t-1 )Lt-1 /Lt ] -  [t-1 (Pt-1 -  t-1 )Lt-1 /Lt ] + · · · (1)

where the subscript t indicates the current and t - 1 the previous contract. W NCt is the non-contingent wage adjustment over the current contract at annual rates, t is the elasticity of indexation7 , Pt and  t are actual and expected inflation respectively at annual rates, L indicates the length of a contract, and c, ,  and  are constant parameters. Discussion of other relevant variables is postponed. On the right hand side (RHS) of equation (1), non-contingent wage adjustment is composed of three parts: (i) A portion (1 - t ) t of expected inflation  t is not captured by the elasticity of indexation in the current COLA clause, unless indexation is complete (t = 1) in which case this term drops out. The amount  (0    1) times (1 - t ) t is built into non-contingent wage adjustment. If no COLA clause exists in the current contract (t = 0), this term becomes the standard expectational one  t . This term captures intra-contract non-contingent wage adjustment. (ii) The expression (Pt-1 -  t-1 ) represents uncompensated inflation from the previous contract, or inter-contract non-contingent wage adjustment. In
6

Other authors have included various functions of the actual and expected inflation rate

in wage equations - see Turnovsky (1972), Auld et al (1979), Riddell (1979), Kaufman and Woglom (1984), Vroman (1984), Hendicks and Kahn (1985, 1986), and Christofides (1987). The uncompensated inflation mechanism allows the bargaining pair to avoid potentially costly arguments and implementation mistakes over inflation pass-through, given that past wrongs can be put right at future negotiations. This mechanism may be particularly useful at times of more uncertain inflation. We return to this point below. 7 This is defined as the percentage change in the nominal wage rate divided by the percentage change in the consumer price index, both appropriately annualised - see the data section.

6

the event that the duration of the contract changes, the term Lt-1 /Lt appropriately annualizes this uncompensated inflation, otherwise it drops out. The amount  (0    1) times the first term in square brackets may be built into the current contract as `catch-up' for uncompensated past-contract inflation. If  = 1, as is assumed in the standard version of the expectationsaugmented Phillips Curve, then uncompensated inflation over the previous contract (Pt-1 -  t-1 ) is equal to unexpected inflation (Pt-1 -  t-1 ). (iii) In the event that the previous contract included a COLA clause (t-1 > 0), a portion t-1 times uncompensated inflation would have been captured by the indexation provisions in the previous contract. Thus, term (ii) above overcompensates and an amount  (0    1) times the second square bracket must be subtracted. If t-1 = 0, this term drops out. Equation (1) can be further simplified to

W NCt = c + (1 - t ) t +  {(1 - t-1 )[(Pt-1 - t-1 )Lt-1 /Lt ]}...

(2)

if  = . Prior testing suggested that this constraint can be accepted and further estimation is based on equation (2). If t = t-1 = 1, all response to inflation occurs through the indexation clause and W NCt equals c. If t = t-1 = 0, equation (2) collapses to c plus intra ( t ) and inter ( (Pt-1 -  t-1 )Lt-1 /Lt ) contract non-contingent adjustment. Equation (2) can deal with any pattern of indexation provisions in the current and past contracts and there is no need to analyze indexed and nonindexed contracts separately, as was done in some earlier studies. In particular, there is no need to single out for special treatment wage agreements whose indexation status or contract duration changes between contracts.

7

2.2

Contract Duration and Indexation

Equation (2) can be estimated using non-linear ordinary least squares, provided t and Lt are exogenous. However, since contract duration, indexation and non-contingent wage adjustment are all determined during the negotiation process, exogeneity cannot be assumed and a simultaneous structure must be allowed for. Here, duration is measured as the continuous variable Lt and indexation arrangements are captured by the elasticity of indexation t . Thus a threevariable system is considered consisting of equation (2) and:

0 Lt =  1·  t +  1 W NCt + X1t  1 + u1 0  t =  2· Lt +  2 W NCt + X2t  2 + u2

(3) (4)

where the actual value of the elasticity of indexation is related to its latent value  t by ½   t = t 0 if  t > 0 otherwise (5)

Since one of the endogenous variables,  t , is a latent variable and equation (2) is non-linear, the system cannot be readily estimated in a single step. However, the Tobit model in equations (4) and (5) can be linearized and the Full Information Maximum Likelihood (FIML) method can be applied to the three-equation system. The linearized form of equations (4) and (5) is given (Maddala 1983, 222) by
0 t =  2 t Lt +  2 t W NCt + t X2 t  2 +  2 t + u3 ,

(6)

where t and t are the standard normal density and distribution functions, respectively, and these expressions are evaluated at the values of the 8

variables for the individual observations t. Equations (2), (3), and (6) could be estimated by Maximum Likelihood if t and t were known. Estimates of bt , c with  t as explanatory variables in a modified version of equation (6) b c c c 0 t =  2 ( t Lt ) +  2 (t W NCt ) + (t X2t ) 2 +  2 t + u4 . bt and c  t can be obtained from a Probit equation, and t , t can be replaced (7)

The variables in the Probit equation are as in equation (4), the coefficients being normalized by the standard deviation of u2 , which cannot be separately identified. The system consisting of equations (2), (3) and (7) can be estimated by FIML, iterating until parameter estimates, including parameter estimates in the initial Probit equation, converge. The latent nature of the elasticity variable, simultaneity, as well as the non-linear wage structure are all taken into account. While the X1 and X2 variables are discussed below, it is important to note that both equations condition on the expected rate of inflation and the nominal anchor that it provides. Without this anchor, the level of inflation and hence W NC would have implications for the elasticity of indexation and contract duration. More discussion of this issue appears in section 3.2.

2.3

Further Aspects of Wage Adjustment

Extant macroeconometric and microeconometric evidence shows a negative relationship between nominal wage adjustment and the unemployment rate, the Phillips Curve. However, many theoretical models and some empirical evidence support a Wage Curve, describing a negative relationship between the level of the real wage and the rate of unemployment.8 A nesting equation
8

See Blanchflower and Oswald (1994, 2005).

9

includes the real wage from the previous contract and current productivity on the RHS of equation (2).9 Another aspect of our wage adjustment model is the distinction between the non-contingent wage change described in equation (2), the contingent wage change W Ct = t Pt which is determined endogenously given t in equation (7), and the total wage change W Tt which is the sum of the two. The model is capable of addressing all three concepts. The discussion so far has focussed on the specification of the main variables and their interdependence, abstracting from other important forces that operate on wage adjustment, contract duration and the elasticity of indexation. These are discussed below.

3
3.1

Data and Sources
The HRDC Data Base

The contract data used for this study is constructed from electronic records provided by HRDC. The database contains information on 11885 contracts agreed upon between 1976 and 2000. In order to take into account lagged effects, only observations where at least one prior agreement has been negotiated are considered, leaving 9646 observations covering the period 1977-2000. For these, any variable available for the current contract is also available for the previous contract and is denoted by a p prefix. The HRDC data contains information on a number of variables, including
9

This is spelled out in Blanchard and Katz (1999) in a time series context. Their

equation (6) can be re-written in the form just suggested by dropping the implied coefficient constraints. A Phillips Curve would not involve the lagged real wage in the nominal wage adjustment equation while a Wage Curve would. See also Farès (2002).

10

the three main variables under study. Descriptive statistics are presented in Table 1. On average, total wage adjustment is about 4.8% with a standard deviation of 4.2 percentage points. Non-contingent wage adjustment counts for over 90% of total wage change with a mean of 4.45% and a standard deviation of 4.06 percentage points. Duration is defined as the difference between the effective and expiry dates of the contract10 , and is shown to have a mean of 25.63 months with a standard deviation of 11.5 months. The COLA provisions in contracts are diverse and complex but they generally describe how the base wage rate changes as some price index evolves. The variable Elasticity, t , is defined as the percentage change in the base wage rate due to the COLA clause divided by the percentage change in the CPI, both over the life of the contract.11 When the agreement does not contain a COLA
10

An important literature deals with `holdout', i.e. the gap that exists between the

previous contract's expiry date and the current contract's settlement date. Crampton and Tracy (1992, 1994) and Gu and Kuhn (1998) consider the information-gathering significance (this relates to the ability of the firm to pay and to details of the settlements reached by other bargaining pairs) of this period for the bargaining process. Danziger and Newman (2005) examine optimal holdout in the context of a macroeconomic perspective. The definition of contract duration used here is the same as that of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The negotiating process for all but 756 of the 9646 contracts in our sample began before the expiry date. Where holdout exists (8078 contracts), the effective date specified in the new contract was equal to the previous expiry date in 6962 out of the 8078 contracts, thereby maintaining an uninterrupted sequence of agreements. As Rich and Tracy (2004) note, timing issues may arise if additional information (e.g. the expected inflation rate) that we assign according to the effective date does not conform with what agents had in mind at the time of settlement. Agents may have considered values at the start of negotiations, values on settlement, or something in-between such as the effective date used here. We do not have information that would reliably discriminate among these possibilities. This issue is less likely to be important in the context of the quarterly data used here. 11 An ex ante elasticity of indexation is not available in this data. Note that the term

11

clause, t = 0. As Table 1 shows, the unconditional mean value of Elasticity is 0.075 with a standard deviation of 0.257. Conditional on Elasticity>0, this value for the 1256 contracts involved is 0.579 with a standard deviation of 0.462. A related variable Cola equals unity when the contract contains a formal COLA clause, even when it was not activated,12 and is equal to zero otherwise. Its mean value is 0.192, indicating that less than 20% of the contracts contain a COLA clause. Figure 1 shows average values of Duration, Elasticity and W NCt over the contracts that became effective in each of the years in the sample. W NCt was as high as 13% in 1981, and it decreased to less than 3% in the 1990s. Duration, on the right scale of Figure 1, more than doubled from 18 months in 1978 to 38 months in 1998. Elasticity was quite volatile; it increased dramatically during 1990-1991, decreased continually till 1998 and increased substantially in 1999. The substantial variance in these variables makes their study of interest but it also ensures that, where they appear as explanatory variables, they have sufficient variation to make them statistically useful.

3.2

Other variables in the Three Equations

A number of variables were attached to the HRDC database and appear in some, or all three, equations. Exclusion restrictions are suggested by the underlying theory, they have been checked statistically, and they are discussed below. An important variable is the regional unemployment rate,
contingent wage change refers to COLA-induced wage adjustments because the only contingency built into contracts is with respect to inflation. 12 There are 1854 contracts for which Cola=1 and, for these contracts, the mean value of Elasticity is 0.393 with a standard deviation of 0.467. The mean for this group is lower than that in the 1256 contracts since the latter includes only contracts for which the indexation trigger was exceeded and the COLA clause generated a positive wage adjustment.

12

Rurate, prevailing at the time the contract became effective. This rate varies cross-sectionally and over time. For instance, in 1988, the unemployment rate was 5.0% in Ontario and 12.4% in the Atlantic region; the variation over time is exemplified by the increase in Ontario's unemployment rate to 10.9% in 1992. Figure 2 shows W Tt , Rurate, and actual and expected inflation, averaged over the contracts of each year, in the period 1977-2000. The unemployment rate fluctuates around a mean of 9.36 over the whole period, with cyclical changes which are contrary to the changes in price inflation and wage adjustment. This variable appears in all three equations as it signals bargaining strength and is central to both Phillips and Wage Curve ideas. The price inflation variables are discussed below. A variable in the HRDC data base is the nominal base wage rate profile in effect over the contract. Given this and price information that was appended, it is possible to construct the average nominal and real wage rates prevailing over a contract. In this paper, the previous real wage, which is exogenous to the current contract, is used in the nesting wage equation referred to earlier - in the sensitivity analysis below, we test whether the real wage rate should also enter the duration and indexation equations. As Table 1 shows, the Pnomwage is, on average, $13.308 with a standard deviation of $5.469 over the 9646 contracts. The previous real wage, Prealwage, has a higher mean as it is deflated by a CPI which has a base of 100 rather late in the sample (in 1992). Another variable in the nesting wage equation that has an important role in the wage determination process is a measure of productivity shocks. The variable Prodshock, defined as the the deviation of the natural logarithm of real GDP from its trend, is also attached to the database using the previous contract value to avoid possible endogeneity. General productivity shocks have not been an explicit concern of the literature on indexation and

13

contract duration; we exclude Prodshock from these equations but test for this exclusion in our sensitivity analysis. In addition, a number of other variables, particularly changes in public policies, have been suggested as determinants of nominal wage change. Until the second quarter of 1978, the Anti Inflation Board (AIB) controlled wages in the both the private and public sectors. Auld et al (1979) found that, ceteris paribus, this program reduced wage inflation. Beginning in 1982, a number of provinces attempted in a variety of ways to control wage growth in their own public sector. During the 1990s, more determined efforts were made to do likewise in both the provincial and federal public sectors. Three dummy variables, 7control, 8provcontr and 9pubcontr are used to flag these programs respectively.13 The duration and indexation equations also include the logarithm of the number of employees in the previous contract (Plemployee): large and probably more sophisticated bargaining units are more likely to seek long and indexed contracts and firms may be more willing to spread out the cost of indexation over a larger number of employees and a longer time period. There is no direct theoretical influence on wage behaviour, other than possible bargaining power effects, but we test for this exclusion in our sensitivity analysis. All three equations include region (Atlantic, Quebec, Ontario which is
13

The detailed information on the 1990s programs, required to set up 9pubcontr, was

obtained from Swimmer (2000). We attempt to capture the influence of provincial controls programs by setting 8provcontr=1 for provincial settlements that became effective in 1982. The AIB remained in effect until the second quarter of 1978 (inclusive) and all settlements up to the end of that quarter would have been subject to its scrutiny. In our sensitivity analysis, we test whether the controls programs are important in the contract duration and indexation equations.

14

the omitted category, Prairie, British Columbia and Territories) and industry (Construction, Transportation, Communications, Utilities, Trade, Education, Health, Services, Other and Manufacturing as the omitted category) effects - see Table 1. These variables control for demand and supply elasticities which figure prominently in theoretical discussions. They also account for unobservables that may influence bargaining outcomes, thereby allowing the variables that we are particularly interested in to have a clearer statistical role. Information on industry and region is available in the HRDC records. Each of the duration and indexation equations, includes as regressors the remaining two jointly determined variables (e.g. W NCt and t in the case of duration) and conditions on the expected rate of inflation. Doing so provides a nominal anchor in all equations of the system and allows us to consider whether duration and indexation are sensitive to the nominal or the expected real values of non-contingent wage change. Following the generalto-particular route, we can check what role, if any, must be accorded to the expected rate of inflation per se, as distinct from the expected real values that it defines. The equations also include the previous-contract own value of duration or the elasticity of indexation. These values capture slow adjustment and pairspecific factors that may influence the two decisions but on which no information is available. The duration and indexation equations include nominal and real uncertainty, variables stressed by the theoretical discussions mentioned above and the construction of which merits special attention; we test for the exclusion of these variables from the wage equation.

15

3.3

Future Inflation, Nominal and Real Uncertainty

Many previous researchers used survey data or sliding-regression techniques to generate proxies for expected inflation and inflation uncertainty. Survey measures are widely used in US studies, e.g. Vroman (1989), Kanago (1998), and Rich and Tracy (2004). However, good quality survey data are not available in Canada14 and sliding regression techniques have been superceded by modern time series methods. A recursive AR(6) regression model15 with a GARCH(1,1) error process provided the best fit. xt =  0 +  1 xt-1 +  2 xt-2 +  3 xt-3 +  4 xt-4 +  5 xt-5 +  6 xt-6 + t , where t |t-1  N (0, ht ) and ht =  + 2 t-1 + ht-1 , was used to describe x={the inflation rate, rate of growth of real GDP}, where the inflation rate is given by 100 ln(CP It /CP It-4 )16 and the rate of growth of real GDP17 is defined analogously. As a by-product of GARCH estimation, a proxy of expected inflation is constructed from the forecast values of xt one quarter ahead. Expected inflation, Expinf, is assigned to each contract according to its effective date. The implied error
14

GARCH-based proxies were preferable to Conference Board in Canada survey data

on conceptual and statistical grounds. 15 That is, new quarterly observations are added to the sample one at a time as history unfolds and the model is re-estimated. This assumes that agents have the latest (but no future) information set at hand and that they use it to estimate the most recent GARCH structure for their predictions. 16 Quarterly data availalble over 1946Q1-2000Q3 (1992=100) were used for the inflation process. CPI is CANSIM I Series P10000 and CANSIM II Series v735739. In a benchmark study, Crawford and Kasumovish (1996) review different ARCH/GARCH models for the Canadian CPI inflation series; their results show that a relatively simple fixed parameter GARCH model, such as the one used here, can capture the characteristics of Canadian inflation well. 17 Real GDP is Cansim series D15721. A linear filter is used on the natural logrithm of real GDP to construct the Productivity variable (the deviation of ln real GDP from trend) included in the wage equation.

16

variance ht is time dependent and proxies nominal (Nomuncert) and real (Realuncert) uncertainty when based on the inflation and real GDP growth equations respectively. Note that the variables Pt and Pt-1 in equation (2) are derived from the same CPI series using the dates of the relevant contract and are expressed at annual rates. In Figure 2, actual inflation Pt , expected inflation  t , and total wage adjustment W Tt show exactly the same trend: All series decline from over 10% in the late 1970s and early 1980s to about 3% after 1990 and move against the regional unemployment rate. In Figure 3, the variable Nomuncert has a general tendency to decline but one that is interrupted by the major recessions of the early 1980s and 1990s. During these periods but especially during the early 1990s, the dramatic stepdown of inflation generated substantial increases in nominal uncertainty. These breaks in the secular decline of nominal uncertainty may not be generally appreciated and have important implications for this study which are examined below. It should be noted that Expinf and Nomuncert are negatively correlated18 , suggesting that the former does not proxy the latter. In the case of Realuncert, this variable is stationary with substantial spikes during the early 1980s and 1990s, as well as smaller spikes in 1985 and 1987.
18

A simple regression produces Nomuncert=0.428(159.6)-0.018(-35.5)Expinf with an R

Squared of 0.12. Note that the terms nominal and inflation uncertainty are used interchangeably.

17

4
4.1

Empirical Results
General Findings From Single Equations

We begin by reporting single equation results. Since these are similar to but dominated by the FIML results19 , we confine them to the Appendix Tables A1 and A2 and discuss them only in this paragraph. In Table A1, estimates of equation (2) are based on non-linear least squares, those of the elasticity equations (4) and (5) on Tobit, and those of the duration equation (3) on Ordinary Least Squares (OLS). Appendix Table A2, presents the coefficients for the Tobit estimates in column 1, the marginal effects (F (¯ z ) · coef ficient) in column 2, and the McDonald and Moffitt (1980) decomposition of the marginal effects. The latter are broken down into the impact of a change in the variable xi on (i) the Elasticity above zero, Elasticity  /xi , weighted by the probability, F (¯ z ), of being above zero (this is denoted as the Intensity Effect in column 3), and on (ii) the probability of being above the limit, F (¯ z )/xi weighted by the expected value of the latent elasticity E (Elasticity  ) (this is denoted as the Incidence Effect in column 4). The variable z ¯ is the standardized mean value of the argument. The figures in columns 3 and 4, Table A2, add up to the complete marginal effect in column 2, Table A2. Columns 5 and 6, Table A2, give Elasticity  /xi (the Elasticity* Effect) and F (¯ z )/xi (the Probability Effect) respectively.20 Table A2 shows that, relative to the coefficients, the marginal effects are muted. Also, while the Elasticity and Probability Effects are relatively close in size, their weights in
19

In the case of the Tobit results, it is the marginal effects, in Appendix Table A2,

column 2, that should be compared to those in Table 2 below, given that equation (7) contains variables that have been multiplied by the distribution function t . 20 Note that F (¯ z ) = 0.0915, f (¯ z ) = 0.1644, E (Elasticity ) = 0.0294 and E (Elasticity ) = 0.321.

18

the McDonald and Moffitt (1980) decomposition are not. Since the probability of indexation is considerably lower than the conditional expectation, i.e. F (¯ z ) < E (Elasticity ), the impact of changes in variables on the weighted probability of indexation (column 4, Table A2) is larger than their weighted impact on the degree of indexation (column 3, Table A2). For instance, Pelasticity, the variable with the largest marginal effect of 0.0933, has an Incidence Effect of 0.0779 and an Intensity Effect of 0.0153 - allowing for rounding. Leaving the difficulty of generating an elasticity variable aside, these results suggest that it is easier to model the incidence than the intensity of indexation. Before proceeding to consider the FIML results, it is important to confirm that a fully simultaneous treatment of the three equations is appropriate. Various exclusion restrictions have been noted in the discussion above and are addressed further below. Based on theoretical considerations and earlier studies, t and Lt are integral to equation (2). Attention is focused on equations (3) and (7). Whether W NCt also belongs to these equations is considered by conducting modified Hausman tests (1978).21 These suggest that full simultaneity cannot be rejected at the 1% level.

4.2

The Simultaneous System

Table 2 presents results on contract duration (columns 1 and 2), the elasticity of indexation (columns 3 and 4) and non-contingent wage adjustment (columns 5 and 6). We begin with the wage equation. W NCt reflects strongly the current and previous-contract inflationary environment, captured by the coefficients  and  . The estimate of  is 0.931 and it is significantly different from both zero and unity. Compensation against inflation is, however,
21

See also Maddala (1988, 434-441).

19

spread over two consecutive contracts and the estimate of  is 0.087, a coefficient which is significantly different form zero at the 1% level. Rurate has a coefficient that is significantly different from zero at the 1% level. While these results are fully consistent with a Phillips Curve, it should be noted that significant Wage Curve elements are also present. The previous real wage rate has the expected sign and is significantly different from zero at the 1% level. To the extent that the variable Prodshock is correlated with a productivity level variable such as output per capita, it, too, is consistent with the Wage Curve specified in Blanchard and Katz (1999). The wage control variables for the two most rigorous control programs (the AIB and the provincial and federal programs of the 1990s) are negative and statistically significant at the 1% level. Most of the industry coefficients are negative except those on Natural Resources and Construction; the lowest wage adjustments are found in Utilities and Services. The Atlantic provinces have the highest and the Prairie provinces have the lowest wage adjustments. The first four columns of Table 2 deal with contract duration and indexation. Previous-contract values of Duration and Elasticity are included in their respective equations. These variables help capture pair-specific fixed effects which are difficult or impossible to measure, e.g., risk aversion. Both have the expected signs and are significant at the 1% level. Plemployee was included in both equations in order to proxy worker sophistication but this is only significant in the indexation equation. It suggests that the elasticity of indexation is higher in large bargaining units. Region and industry fixed effects were included as proxies for labor demand and supply elasticities in local markets and are often significant. The longest and most highly indexed contracts are in Manufacturing (the omitted industry), particularly in Quebec. The regional unemployment rate suggests shorter and less in-

20

dexed contracts when it is high. The positive interaction between duration and indexation suggested by Gray (1978) and Ehrenberg, Danziger and San (1983, 231) and others is very strongly present in the results of Table 2. This is particularly noteworthy, given that W NCt contains the uncompensated inflation mechanism which acts as a substitute for indexation. Inspired by the theoretical literature, earlier empirical studies of contract duration and indexation also focus on the role of nominal and real uncertainty. Nominal uncertainty is expected to shorten contracts and strengthen indexation provisions and these are the results found. Real uncertainty may also shorten contracts and weaken indexation. Its coefficient is negative and significant in both equations. The presence of W NCt in the duration equation renders Expinf insignificant. The secular doubling of contract duration, evident in Figure 1, remains tied to the inflationary environment. However, the influence of inflation in the duration equation is now mostly through its impact on W NCt , not through Expinf directly (coefficients of -0.814 and -0.109 respectively, in Table 2, column 1). This is a feature of the simultaneous model - see the stand-alone equations in the Appendix Table A1, where W NCt has a smaller absolute coefficient than Expinf (-0.337 and -0.550 respectively, Table A1, column 1). Thus, consideration of the duration equation in a simultaneous system strips Expinf of any direct role in that equation. The general decline in Nomuncert, except during the early 1990s, tends to increase contract duration. As seen in Figure 1, the elasticity of indexation tends to decline through time but it does not have the strong and consistent secular trend that contract duration does. In view of the substitutability between real expected non-contingent wage adjustment and indexation, W NCt should enter the indexation equation with a negative and Expinf with a positive coefficient.

21

This is in fact the case and, indeed, the coefficients are so close in absolute value that they suggest imposing the implied constraint. When this is done, the coefficient (coeff/se) on (W NCt - Expinf ) is -0.018 (-72.99). However, this constraint cannot be accepted statistically and a small role for Expinf in the indexation equation remains.22 The trend decline in nominal uncertainty influences the elasticity of indexation in the right direction but this force is interrupted by the inflation regime changes of the early 1990s which created substantial inflation uncertainty. In summary, the model produces theoretically coherent results. On the outstanding empirical issue mentioned in the introduction, it suggests that the elasticity of indexation depends negatively on the real expected noncontingent wage adjustment, with a small role left over for expected inflation itself. The duration equation affords no role for expected inflation once noncontingent wage adjustment is taken into account.

4.3

Total Wage Adjustment

The results in Table 2 provide a complete analysis of wage adjustment in all contracts regardless of whether they contain indexation provisions and regardless of whether these provisions change between contracts. The capacity of the model to address all these aspects of wage adjustment is important. Since total wage adjustment consists of the sum of W NCt and W Ct = t Pt , the predicted total wage adjustment W Tt is obtained from the predicted values of W NCt , t , and t (in place of Pt ). Details of the relationship between actual and predicted values for W Ct , W NCt and W Tt are presented in Figure 4. The 9646 actual values and the predicted values are averaged by year and
22

When Expinf is added to the indexation equation, along with (W N Ct - Expinf ), its

coefficient (coeff/se) is 0.0069 (20.47). In these analyses, other coefficients are not affected.

22

plotted against time.23 The bottom two series, in Figure 4, present actual and predicted W Ct . Since this is determined by the product  b t  t , the figure

is largely shaped by expected inflation. The height of the graph reflects the small values of the elasticity of indexation. The predictions track the actual

data well, capturing the secular decreasing trend. Figure 4 provides similar information for W NCt . The time variation in this figure is largely influenced by Expinf in equation (2) which caries a near-unity coefficient. The graph is also influenced by the uncompensated inflation term, regional unemployment, productivity and the controls variables. The predicted values trace the actual series well. The combined predictions for W Tt appear in the top two lines of Figure 4. Clearly, non-contingent wage adjustment has the dominant impact on total wage adjustment. The model provides a number of channels through which prices feed into wages, i.e. intra-contract contingent adjustment, intra-contract noncontingent adjustment which depends on the coefficient  and expected inflation, and inter-contract compensation for uncompensated past inflation which depends on the coefficient . A fully anticipated, constant, rate of inflation would elicit a non-contingent wage adjustment equal to  +  -  = 0.937. This, along with the average contingent adjustment (the average value from Table 1, of  = 0.075) produces a full pass-through to wages. It should be noted that this pass-through stretches over two contracts and may be modified in an uncertain environment. When the wage equation allows for Nomuncert to influence the estimated values of  and , we find that  decreases and  increases with inflation uncertainty.24 Thus, in a more
23

The time variation in these figures is produced by all RHS variables, including the

pattern of settlements by industry and region which may not be constant over time. The statements that follow presume an otherwise neutral pattern of industry and region effects. 24 Writing out  and  as 0 + 1 N omuncert and  0 +  1 N omuncert, we obtain

23

uncertain environment, not only will the elasticity of indexation increase but agents will tend to decrease intra-contract and increase inter-contract noncontingent wage adjustment. Thus, the ex ante non-contingent compensation against inflation will be reduced in favour of contingent payments which do not occur until inflation has materialised and ex post coverage of uncompensated inflation which does not occur until the next contract. The response to inflation shocks is, therefore, stretched out.

4.4

Simulating the Impact of Disinflation

To further study the interrelationships among the three key provisions of labor market contracts, we simulate how declining inflation affects duration, indexation, and non-contingent wage adjustment. Since inflation declined from an average of 9.14% during the high inflation period to an average of 1.64% during the low inflation period, the linear combination of the respective averages 9.14(1 - t) + 1.64t, where t = 0, 0.05, 0.1, ...0.9, 0.95, 1 is used to describe the expected inflation path. Equations (2), (3) and (7) are used to solve for non-contingent wage adjustment, duration and indexation for each inflation value. Since, for present purposes, only time-dependent variables are important25 , Manufacturing and Ontario (the omitted classes) are considered. The starting values of the relevant RHS variables are taken from their means in the high inflation period. Then the three equations are solved simultaneously. The estimates of Duration, Elasticity and W NCt are used to update Pdur, Pelasticity, and Prealwage. Inflation information is updated accordingly, and the system is solved again to derive a new set of Duration,
0 = 0.89(139.08), 1 = -0.034(-14.5),  0 = 0.125(10.78), and  1 = 0.075(2.97). The remaining coefficients in the wage equation are not afffected. 25 We set nominal and real uncertainties at their mean.

24

Elasticity, and W NCt values. The predictions of Duration, Elasticity and W NCt are consistent with the raw data. As inflation decreases from its average in the high inflation period to its average in the low inflation period, predicted duration increases from 20.8 to 30.8 months. The actual averages in the two subsamples were 20.9 and 29.3 respectively. Predicted elasticity decreases by 0.02, which is close to the change of the subsample means. Similarly, predicted non-contingent wage adjustment changes from 9.77% to 2.55% while the subsample means changed from 10.51% in the high inflation period to 1.67% in the low inflation period. The linear form of the simulated inflation function carries through to Lt , t and W NCt but, since t is a Tobit and W NCt is nonlinear, their predictions contain non-linearities. A graph is available on request.

4.5

Sensitivity Analysis

We have checked a number of the exclusion restrictions in Table 2 in order to see if our main results are affected. First, we added the previous real wage in the duration and indexation equations on the grounds that, in the risksharing paradigm, this may proxy risk aversion and enter all equations. This variable was not significant in either case and our results were unchanged. Controls have been thought to influence contract provisions other than the one toward which they were explicitly directed (i.e. wage adjustment). When all three control variables are included in all equations they are insignificant with two exceptions. The variables 9pubcontrol and 7control have a coefficient of -2.128 (-3.45) in the duration equation and 0.033 (3.01) in the indexation equation respectively. The remaining results are not affected. The inclusion of Prodshock in the duration and indexation equations produced a small, significant, coefficient in the duration equation of -0.034 25

(-2.17) and an insignificant coefficient in the elasticity equation. If the professionalism and sophistication that may come with a larger bargaining unit increases interest in indexation, as our results suggest, this may also influence the wage bargain. Including Plemployee in the wage equation as well produced an insignificant coefficient and left our results unchanged. Adding the uncertainty variables in the wage equation resulted in coefficients which were not significantly different from zero in either equation. The selective inclusion of variables in the few instances where significance was achieved was of no real consequence for the arguments presented here.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we consider the determinants of key provisions of wage contracts such as their duration, their degree of indexation and hence contingent wage adjustment, and their non-contingent and total wage adjustment. We examine a period (1976-2000) long enough to encompass periods of high and low inflation and transitions between inflation regimes that are associated with heightened nominal and real uncertainty. A large number (9646) of contracts are investigated. A particular concern is the theoretically unexpected presence of expected inflation in the contract duration and indexation equations found in many earlier studies. Our more complete model has implications for this conundrum because it justifies the inclusion of non-contingent wage adjustment and the expected rate of inflation in the duration and indexation equations. Using general-to-particular methods, it is then possible to comment on the role of these variables. The inflation variables, constructed in an internally consistent manner

26

from recursive GARCH procedures, have a critical role to play in this model. Expected inflation continues to have a negative coefficient but it is not significant in the duration equation. The correctly predicted doubling of contract duration comes from the endogenously declining non-contingent wage adjustment. In the elasticity equation, real expected non-contingent wage change has a major role to play, though a small (relative to earlier studies) role remains for the expected rate of inflation. Inflation uncertainty affects contract duration negatively and indexation positively. Real uncertainty reduces both duration and indexation. Contract duration and indexation are substantially interrelated, with more heavily indexed contracts being long and long contracts more likely to be strongly indexed. It would be surprising if, in light of earlier work based on both micro and aggregate data, unemployment did not influence non-contingent wage adjustment. Yet, elements found in Wage Curve specifications and in the Blanchard and Katz (1999) nesting equation are also present. In particular, the previous-contract real wage has a negative and statistically significant coefficient in the wage equation. The deviation of the natural logarithm of real GDP from a linear trend, which proxies productivity shocks, has a positive and significant coefficient in the wage equation. This equation describes non-contingent wage adjustment well, taking into account current and past indexation provisions, expected inflation, and uncompensated inflation left over from the previous contract. This latter finding provides a propagation mechanism for inflation shocks that entails long lags, given that the average contract duration is over two years. Some evidence was provided that greater inflation uncertainty would reduce the amount of expected inflation built into the current non-contingent adjustment, shifting inflation pass-through into the future through the uncompensated inflation mechanism. Thus, the prop-

27

agation mechanism becomes longer during more uncertain inflation times. Our results are more consistent with the theoretical ideas referred to in footnote 1 than those of earlier empirical studies, where all three variables and their interactions were not modelled as a system. While we build on received theory, our study offers some inductive messages to the deduction/induction cycle. To begin with, more complete mechanisms linking contingent and noncontingent wage adjustment, particularly as the latter may emanate from uncompensated past-contract experience, are needed. Hints that the elasticity of indexation may, under certain circumstances, depend on expected inflation appear in Ehrenberg, Danziger and San (1983, 224) and this possibility needs to be explored further. Finally, the fact that inflation appears to feed into wage adjustment in a complex manner, which is itself influenced by the inflation environment, should be of interest to macroeconomists and students of propagation mechanisms generally. Of course, our inductive messages need to be checked in a number of ways. The recursive GARCH process generating the all-important inflation variables could, in the context of countries where such information is available, be replaced by good survey data. Data from other countries might also be useful if their inflation and contractual provisions differ.

28

References
[1] Amemiya, T. (1979) "The estimation of a simultaneous-equation Tobit model", International Economic Review, 20, 169-181. [2] Auld, D. A. L., L. N. Christofides, R. Swidinsky, and D. A. Wilton (1979) "The impact of the Anti-Inflation Board on Negotiated Wage Settlements", Canadian Journal of Economics, 12, 195-213. [3] Azariadis, C. (1978) "Escalator Clauses and the Allocation of Cyclical Risks", Journal of Economic Theory, 18, 119-155. [4] Barcena-Ruiz, J. C. and M. L. Campo (2000) "Short-term and long-term labor contracts", Labour Economics, 7, 249-260. [5] Bils, M. (1990) Indexation and contract length in unionized US manufacturing, The Hoover Institution, Stanford University WPE-90-18. [6] Blanchard, O.J. and L. Katz (1999) "Wage dynamics: reconciling theory and evidence", American Economic Review, 89, no. 2, 69-74. [7] Blanchflower, D. and A. Oswald (1994) The wage curve, Cambridge, MIT Press. [8] Blanchflower, D. and A. Oswald (2005) "The Wage Curve Reloaded", National Bureau of Economic Research, Discussion Paper 11338. [9] Blinder, A. S. (1977) "Indexing the Economy Through Financial Intermediation", in K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer (eds) Stabilization of the Domestic and International Economy, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 5, 69-105.

29

[10] Card, D. (1983) "Cost of living escalators in major union contracts", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 37, 34-48. [11] Card, D. (1986) "An empirical model of wage indexation provisions in union contracts", Journal of Political Economy, 94, S144-S173. [12] Christofides, L. N. and D. A. Wilton (1983) "The determinants of contract length: an empirical analysis based on Canadian micro data", Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 309-319. [13] Christofides, L.N. (1987) "Wage adjustment in contracts containing Cost-of-Living Allowance Clauses", The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXIX, no.3, 531-536. [14] Christofides, L.N. (1990) "The interaction between indexation, contract duration and non-contingent wage adjustment", Economica, 59, 395 409. [15] Christofides, L.N. and A. C. Peng (forthcoming) "Contract duration and indexation in a period of real and nominal uncertainty", Labour Economics. [16] Cousineau, J., R. Lacroix and D. Bilodeau (1983) "The determination of escalator clauses in collective agreements", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 65, 196-202. [17] Crampton, P.C. and J. S. Tracy (1992) "Strikes and holdouts in wage bargaining: Theory and data", American Economic Review, 82, 100121. [18] Crampton, P.C. and J. S. Tracy (1994) "The determinants of U.S. labor disputes", Journal of Labor Economics, 12, 180-209. 30

[19] Crawford, A. and M. Kasumovich (1996) "Does inflation uncertainty vary with the level of inflation?", Bank of Canada WP 96-9. [20] Danziger, L. (1988) "Real shocks, efficient risk sharing and the duration of labor contracts", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, 435-440. [21] Danziger, L. and S. Newman (2005) "Delays in renewal of labor contracts: Theory and evidence", Journal of Labor Economics, 23, No. 2, 341-371. [22] Davis, G. and B. Kanago (1997) "Contract duration, inflation uncertainty and the welfare effects of inflation", Journal of Macroeconomics, 19 (2), 237-251. [23] Dye, R. A. (1985) "Optimal length of labor contracts", International Economic Review, 26, 251-270. [24] Ehrenberg, R. G., L. Danziger and G. San (1983) "Cost-of-living adjustment clauses in union contracts: a summary of results", Journal of Labor Economics, 1, 215-245. [25] Ehrenberg, R. G., L. Danziger and G. San (1984) "Cost-of-living adjustment clauses in union contracts" in R. G. Ehrenberg (ed) Research in Labor Economics (Greenwich CT, JAI Press), 1-63. [26] Estenson, D. (1981) "Relative price variability and indexed labor agreements", Industrial Relations, 20, 871-884. [27] Farès, J. (2002) "Does micro evidence support the Wage Phillips curve in Canada?" Bank of Canada Working paper 2002-4. [28] Gray, J. A. (1976) "Wage indexation: a macroeconomic approach", Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, 221-235. 31

[29] Gray, J. A. (1978) "On indexation and contract length", Journal of Political Economy, 86, 1-18. [30] Gu, W. and P. Kuhn (1998) "A theory of holdout in wage bargaining", American Economic Review, 88, No. 3, 428-449. [31] Hausman, J. A. (1978) "Specification tests in econometrics", Econometrica, 46 1251-1271. [32] Hendricks, W. E. and L. E. Kahn (1983) "Cost-of-living clauses in union contracts: determinants and effects", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 36, 447-460. [33] Hendricks, W. E. and L. E. Kahn (1985) Wage indexation in the United States: Cola or uncola? Cambridge MA, Ballinger. [34] Hendricks, W. E. and L. E. Kahn (1986) "Wage indexation and compensating wage differentials", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 67, 484-492. [35] Kanago, B. (1998) "The relation between contract duration and inflation uncertainty: further evidence", Journal of Macroeconomics, 20, 811-819. [36] Kaufman, R.T. and G. Woglom (1984) "The effect of expectations on union wages", American Economic Review, 74, 418-432. [37] Maddala, G. S. (1983) Limited-depended and qualitative variables in econometrics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. [38] Maddala, G. S. (1988) Introduction to Econometrics, New York, Macmillan.

32

[39] McDonald, J. F. and R. A. Moffitt (1980) "The Uses of Tobit Analysis", The Review of Economics and Statistics, LSII, 318-321. [40] Mitchell, D. J. B. (1980) Unions, wages and inflation, Washington D.C., The Brookings Institution. [41] Murphy, K. J. (1992) "Determinants of contract duration in collective bargaining agreements", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45 (2), 352-365. [42] Murphy, K. J. (2000) "What effect does uncertainty have on the length of labor contracts?" Labor Economics, 7, 181-201. [43] Prescott, D. and D. A. Wilton (1992) "The determinants of wage changes in indexed and nonindexed contracts: a switching model", Journal of Labor Economics, 10 (3), 331-355. [44] Rich, R. and J. Tracy (2004) "Uncertainty and Labor Contract Duration", Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 270-287. [45] Riddell, W.C. (1979) "The empirical foundations of the Phillips curve: evidence from Canadian wage contract data", Econometrica, 47, 1-25. [46] Shavell, S. (1976) "Sharing the risks of deferred payment", Journal of Political Economy, 84, 161-168. [47] Swimmer, G. (2000) Public-sector labor relations in an era of restraint and restructuring, Don Mills, Ontario, Oxford University Press. [48] Turnovsky, S. (1972) "The expectations hypothesis and aggregate wage equation: empirical evidence for Canada", Economica, 39, 1-17.

33

[49] Vroman, W. (1984) "Wage contract settlements in US manufacturing", Review of Economics and Statistics, 65, 661-665. [50] Vroman, S. B. (1989) "Inflation uncertainty and contract duration", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 71 (4), 677-681. [51] Wallace, F. H. (2001) "The effects of shock size and type on laborcontract duration", Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 658-681. [52] Wallace, F. H. and H. Blanco (1991) "The effects of real and nominal shocks on union-firm contract duration", Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 316-380. [53] Wilton, D. A. (1980) "An analysis of Canadian wage contracts with cost of living allowance clauses", Economic Council of Canada, Ottawa, Discussion Paper 165.

34

6

Data Appendix
Duration: Difference between expiry and effective date (rounded to the

The following variables were drawn from the HRDC database:

nearest whole month). Cola: A dummy variable which equals 1 if the contract contains any one of four COLA clause types. Elasticity: The percentage change of COLA wage adjustment divided by the percentage change in the CPI, over the duration of the contract - at annual rates. W NCt : Non-COLA wage change as a percentage - at annual rates. W Ct : COLA wage change as a percentage - at annual rates. W Tt : Total wage change as a percentage - at annual rates. Pelasticity: Elasticity for the previous contract. Prealwage: The nominal wage rate divided by the CPI at the end of previous agreement. Industry: Dummy variables generated using the Statistics Canada 1970 Standard Industrial Classification code - Manufacturing is the omitted class. Region: Atlantic refers to Newfoundland, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick; Prairies refers to Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta: Territories refers to Yukon and North West Territories. Ontario is the omitted class. Plemployee: The natural logarithm of the number of employees in the previous contract. The following variables are generated from the GARCH processes: Expinf: Expected inflation generated, from a recursive GARCH (1,1) process describing the inflation rate. It is the average inflation rate forecast one quarter ahead and at the end of the current contract. It is assigned 35

according to the effective date of the contract. Based on the All Items Consumer Price Index (Statistics Canada P100000 and CANSIM II Series v735739 with 1992=100). Nomuncert: Inflation uncertainty generated as the one quarter ahead forecast of the conditional variance from a recursive GARCH (1,1) process describing the inflation rate. Assigned according to the effective date. Realuncert: Real uncertainty generated as the one quarter ahead forecast of the conditional variance from a recursive GARCH (1,1) process describing the growth rate of real GDP (Statistics Canada D15721, with 1992=100). Assigned according to the effective date. Additional variables that were appended Rurate: The regional, quarterly, unemployment rate matched by province at settlement date - source Statistics Canada. Prodshock: Productivity shock measured as the deviation of ln real GDP from a linear trend (Statistics Canada D15721). 7control: Dummy variables that equals unity if the effective date of the contract was in 1978 quarter 1 or 2 or earlier; otherwise equal to zero. 8provcontrol: Dummy variable that equals unity if a relevant provincial contract started during 1982; otherwise equal to zero. 9pubcontrol: Dummy variable that equals unity if a contract fell under federal or provincial controls during the early 1990s - see Swimmer (2000); otherwise equal to zero.

36

Table 1 Summary Statistics (NO. of Observations = 9646)
Variable WNCt WCt WNCWCt Duration Cola Elasticity E| E>0 Pcola Pelasticity Pdur Pnomwage Prealwage Plemployee Rurate Pgdp Pdurneg Expinf Nomuncert Realuncert Natres Manuf Constr Transp Commun Utils Trade Educat Health Services Others Mari Que Ont Prarie BC Terri Mprov 7control 8pubcontr 9pubcontr Description Non-COLA wage change as a percentage COLA wage change as a percentage Total wage change as a percentage contract length in month =1, if a contract contains COLA clause the intensity of indextion conditional elasticity =1, if previous contract contains COLA clause the intensity of indextion for previous contract contract duration for previous contract nominal wage in previous contract real wage in previous contract natural logarithm of employee in previous contract quarterly regional unemployment rate detrended real GDP in previous contract negotiation duration in previous contract expected inflation estimated from GARCH nominal uncertainty from recursive GARCH real uncertainty from recursive GARCH dummy variable for natural resource dummy variable for manufacture dummy variable for construction dummy variable for transportation dummy variable for communication dummy variable for untilty dummy variable for trade dummy variable for education dummy variable for health care dummy variable for service dummy variable for other sector dummy variable for Maritime provinces dummy variable for Qubec dummy variable for Ontario dummy variable for Prarie provinces dummy variabe for British Columbia dummy variable for territories dummy variable for muti-provinces dummy variable for wage control in the 70s dummy variable for wage control in the 80s dummy variable for wage control in the 90s Mean
4.451 0.346 4.798 25.629 0.192 0.075 0.579 0.206 0.085 23.892 13.308 15.711 7.064 9.361 -4.420 7.716 4.446 0.350 1.167 0.027 0.195 0.051 0.082 0.036 0.028 0.042 0.251 0.085 0.032 0.171 0.071 0.150 0.365 0.170 0.115 0.005 0.124 0.003 0.004 0.030

Std Dev
4.059 1.277 4.205 11.499 0.394 0.257 0.462 0.404 0.269 9.906 5.470 4.801 0.959 2.762 18.468 5.632 3.053 0.158 1.175 0.163 0.396 0.220 0.274 0.186 0.165 0.200 0.434 0.278 0.176 0.377 0.257 0.358 0.481 0.376 0.319 0.069 0.330 0.005 0.065 0.175

Table 2 Estimation Results for Simultaneous Equations: Duration, Elasticity and Non-Contingent Wage Adjustment Variable Duration coeff/se Elasticity ceoff/se WNC coeff/se Intercept 33.374 33.410 -0.086 -7.700 4.841 32.890 Duration 0.004 16.960 Elasticity 1.724 2.610 WNC -0.814 -7.870 -0.015 -42.830  0.931 143.090  0.087 9.100 Expinf -0.109 -0.950 0.022 78.170 Rurate -0.992 -14.570 -0.005 -11.210 -0.334 -28.220 Pdur/Pelas. 0.328 29.370 0.241 239.480 Prealwage -0.054 -8.900 Natres -0.528 -0.850 -0.006 -1.670 0.082 0.660 Constr -2.128 -3.560 -0.073 -13.510 0.401 2.950 Transp -1.297 -2.890 -0.047 -13.770 -0.328 -2.940 Commun -2.470 -4.410 -0.047 -9.160 -0.273 -2.220 Utils -3.815 -5.940 -0.050 -8.450 -0.586 -3.590 Trade -0.552 -0.980 -0.088 -18.260 -0.358 -2.990 Educat -6.828 -17.560 -0.059 -20.510 -0.416 -5.350 Health -3.894 -8.540 -0.064 -18.770 -0.099 -1.100 Services -2.048 -2.740 -0.080 -13.930 -0.687 -4.270 Others -4.775 -11.380 -0.070 -20.380 -0.377 -4.230 Atlantic 9.221 17.390 -0.005 -1.170 1.427 12.440 Quebec 6.400 17.030 0.022 7.180 0.861 10.040 Prairie 0.121 0.360 -0.019 -7.160 -0.733 -10.960 BC 4.182 11.440 -0.023 -8.180 0.456 6.210 Terri 2.501 1.340 0.014 1.010 0.325 0.850 Mprov 2.025 4.700 -0.021 -6.510 0.181 1.840 Plemployee -0.035 -0.310 0.007 9.520 Nomuncert -1.690 -2.440 0.010 1.970 Realuncert -0.331 -2.710 -0.007 -12.600 Prodshock 0.026 19.960 7control -2.134 -6.7 8provcontrol 0.766 1.97 9pubcontrol -0.812 -4.46

Figure 1 Actual Duration (Right Scale), Elasticity and Non-Contigent Wage Adjustment (Left Scale)

0.25

40

0.2

32

0.15

24

0.1

16

0.05

8

0 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 WNC 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 Elasticity Duration

0

Figure 2 Unemployment Rate, Actual and Expected Inflation and Wage Adjustment

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999

Wage adjustment

Unemployment rate

Actual inflation

Expected inflation

Figure 3 Resursive GARCH Estimation of Nominal and Real Uncertainty

Real 8

Nominal 0.8

6

0.6

4

0.4

2

0.2

0 1977

0 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999

Nominal

10 Real

1

Figure 4 Actual and Predicted Value of Contingent, Non-Contingent and Total Wage Adjustment
14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 Total Wage Ajustment Predicted WNC Predicted Total Wage Adjustment WC WNC Predicted WC

Appendix Table A1 Single Equation Estimates for Duration, Indexation and Nominal Wage Adjustment
Variable Intercept Duration Elasticity WNC   Expinf Urate Pdur/Pelas Prealwage Natres Constr Transp Commun Utils Trade Educat Health Services Other Atlantic Que Prairie BC Terri Mprov Lpemploye Nomuncert Realuncert Prodshock 7control 8provcontr 9pubcontr Duration coefficient
31.494 2.666 -0.337

(OLS) coeff/se
30.700 6.280 -7.610

Elasticity coefficient
-1.376 0.015 -0.100

(Tobit) coeff/se
-10.220 12.180 -16.830

WNC (Nonlinear OLS) coefficient coeff/se
4.996 35.340

0.899 0.127 -0.550 -0.815 0.325 -0.421 -2.068 -1.144 -2.451 -3.585 -0.487 -6.643 -3.954 -1.904 -4.651 8.373 6.007 0.426 3.930 2.488 1.918 -0.016 -1.936 -0.392 -9.210 -13.900 28.950 -0.670 -4.150 -2.550 -4.150 -5.670 -0.910 -20.580 -9.360 -3.200 -13.120 15.910 16.230 1.450 11.020 1.760 4.970 -0.140 -2.820 -4.350 0.142 -0.064 1.019 -0.027 -0.342 -0.139 -0.178 -0.215 -0.504 -0.333 -0.391 -0.540 -0.391 0.108 0.234 -0.094 -0.110 0.168 -0.152 0.067 0.148 -0.044 20.120 -7.580 28.620 -0.057 -0.440 -4.800 -2.520 -2.320 -2.740 -6.260 -8.460 -6.840 -5.280 -8.400 1.430 4.890 -2.280 -2.100 0.960 -2.650 4.550 1.480 -4.140 0.027 -2.147 0.689 -0.946 0.089 0.419 -0.320 -0.267 -0.574 -0.335 -0.390 -0.092 -0.678 -0.328 1.445 0.860 -0.733 0.474 0.337 0.195 -0.337

150.250 14.110 -29.220 -9.490 0.760 3.200 -2.980 -2.220 -3.590 -3.040 -5.490 -1.120 -5.210 -3.930 12.990 10.420 -11.090 6.670 0.960 2.050

21.050 -6.610 1.830 -5.580

Appendix Table A2 Decomposition of Tobit Results for Elasticity
Marginal Coefficient Effect Intercept Duration WNC Expinf Rurate Pelasticity Natres Constr Transp Commun Utils Trade Educat Health Services Other Atlantic Que Prairie BC Terri Mprov Lpemploye Nomuncert Realuncert F (z)a f (z )b E(Elasticity)
E(Elasticity*)
a b c

Intensity Effect
-0.0207 0.0002 -0.0015 0.0021 -0.001 0.0153 -0.0004 -0.0051 -0.0021 -0.0027 -0.0032 -0.0076 -0.005 -0.0059 -0.0081 -0.0059 0.0016 0.0035 -0.0014 -0.0017 0.0025 -0.0023 0.001 0.0022 -0.0007

Incidence Effect
-0.1053 0.0012 -0.0076 0.0109 -0.0049 0.0779 -0.0021 -0.0261 -0.0106 -0.0136 -0.0165 -0.0385 -0.0255 -0.0299 -0.0413 -0.0299 0.0083 0.0179 -0.0072 -0.0084 0.0129 -0.0117 0.0051 0.0113 -0.0033

Elasticity Effect
-0.2263 0.0025 -0.0164 0.0233 -0.0106 0.1675 -0.0045 -0.0562 -0.0229 -0.0293 -0.0354 -0.0828 -0.0547 -0.0643 -0.0887 -0.0642 0.0178 0.0385 -0.0154 -0.0181 0.0276 -0.0251 0.0109 0.0244 -0.0072

Probability Effect
-0.328 0.0037 -0.0238 0.0338 -0.0153 0.2428 -0.0065 -0.0814 -0.0332 -0.0424 -0.0513 -0.12 -0.0793 -0.0932 -0.1286 -0.093 0.0258 0.0558 -0.0223 -0.0262 0.0401 -0.0363 0.0158 0.0353 -0.0104

-1.3764 0.0154 -0.0997 0.1419 -0.0644 1.0191 -0.0272 -0.3417 -0.1392 -0.1781 -0.2153 -0.5035 -0.3329 -0.3912 -0.5397 -0.3905 0.1084 0.2343 -0.0935 -0.1101 0.1681 -0.1524 0.0665 0.1483 -0.0436 0.0915 0.1644
c

-0.126 0.0014 -0.0091 0.013 -0.0059 0.0933 -0.0025 -0.0313 -0.0127 -0.0163 -0.0197 -0.0461 -0.0305 -0.0358 -0.0494 -0.0357 0.0099 0.0214 -0.0086 -0.0101 0.0154 -0.0139 0.0061 0.0136 -0.004

0.0294 0.321

^ / F is the cumulative standard normal density function evaluated at z = x  ^ f is the standard normal probability density function.
Mean of estimated unconditional elasticity; E(Elasticity*) is the mean of the conditional variable.

CESifo Working Paper Series
(for full list see www.cesifo-group.de)
T T

___________________________________________________________________________ 1637 Alfons J. Weichenrieder and Oliver Busch, Artificial Time Inconsistency as a Remedy for the Race to the Bottom, December 2005 1638 Aleksander Berentsen and Christopher Waller, Optimal Stabilization Policy with Flexible Prices, December 2005 1639 Panu Poutvaara and Mikael Priks, Violent Groups and Police Tactics: Should Tear Gas Make Crime Preventers Cry?, December 2005 1640 Yin-Wong Cheung and Kon S. Lai, A Reappraisal of the Border Effect on Relative Price Volatility, January 2006 1641 Stefan Bach, Giacomo Corneo and Viktor Steiner, Top Incomes and Top Taxes in Germany, January 2006 1642 Johann K. Brunner and Susanne Pech, Optimum Taxation of Life Annuities, January 2006 1643 Naércio Aquino Menezes Filho, Marc-Andreas Muendler and Garey Ramey, The Structure of Worker Compensation in Brazil, with a Comparison to France and the United States, January 2006 1644 Konstantinos Angelopoulos, Apostolis Philippopoulos and Vanghelis Vassilatos, RentSeeking Competition from State Coffers: A Calibrated DSGE Model of the Euro Area, January 2006 1645 Burkhard Heer and Bernd Suessmuth, The Savings-Inflation Puzzle, January 2006 1646 J. Stephen Ferris, Soo-Bin Park and Stanley L. Winer, Political Competition and Convergence to Fundamentals: With Application to the Political Business Cycle and the Size of Government, January 2006 1647 Yu-Fu Chen, Michael Funke and Kadri Männasoo, Extracting Leading Indicators of Bank Fragility from Market Prices ­ Estonia Focus, January 2006 1648 Panu Poutvaara, On Human Capital Formation with Exit Options: Comment and New Results, January 2006 1649 Anders Forslund, Nils Gottfries and Andreas Westermark, Real and Nominal Wage Adjustment in Open Economies, January 2006 1650 M. Hashem Pesaran, Davide Pettenuzzo and Allan G. Timmermann, Learning, Structural Instability and Present Value Calculations, January 2006

1651 Markku Lanne and Helmut Luetkepohl, Structural Vector Autoregressions with Nonnormal Residuals, January 2006 1652 Helge Berger, Jakob de Haan and Jan-Egbert Sturm, Does Money Matter in the ECB Strategy? New Evidence Based on ECB Communication, January 2006 1653 Axel Dreher and Friedrich Schneider, Corruption and the Shadow Economy: An Empirical Analysis, January 2006 1654 Stefan Brandauer and Florian Englmaier, A Model of Strategic Delegation in Contests between Groups, January 2006 1655 Jan Zápal and Ondej Schneider, What are their Words Worth? Political Plans and Economic Pains of Fiscal Consolidations in New EU Member States, January 2006 1656 Thiess Buettner, Sebastian Hauptmeier and Robert Schwager, Efficient Revenue Sharing and Upper Level Governments: Theory and Application to Germany, January 2006 1657 Daniel Haile, Abdolkarim Sadrieh and Harrie A. A. Verbon, Cross-Racial Envy and Underinvestment in South Africa, February 2006 1658 Frode Meland and Odd Rune Straume, Outsourcing in Contests, February 2006 1659 M. Hashem Pesaran and Ron Smith, Macroeconometric Modelling with a Global Perspective, February 2006 1660 Alexander F. Wagner and Friedrich Schneider, Satisfaction with Democracy and the Environment in Western Europe ­ a Panel Analysis, February 2006 1661 Ben J. Heijdra and Jenny E. Ligthart, Fiscal Policy, Monopolistic Competition, and Finite Lives, February 2006 1662 Ludger Woessmann, Public-Private Partnership and Schooling Outcomes across Countries, February 2006 1663 Topi Miettinen and Panu Poutvaara, Political Parties and Network Formation, February 2006 1664 Alessandro Cigno and Annalisa Luporini, Optimal Policy Towards Families with Different Amounts of Social Capital, in the Presence of Asymmetric Information and Stochastic Fertility, February 2006 1665 Samuel Muehlemann and Stefan C. Wolter, Regional Effects on Employer Provided Training: Evidence from Apprenticeship Training in Switzerland, February 2006 1666 Laszlo Goerke, Bureaucratic Corruption and Profit Tax Evasion, February 2006 1667 Ivo J. M. Arnold and Jan J. G. Lemmen, Inflation Expectations and Inflation Uncertainty in the Eurozone: Evidence from Survey Data, February 2006

1668 Hans Gersbach and Hans Haller, Voice and Bargaining Power, February 2006 1669 Françoise Forges and Frédéric Koessler, Long Persuasion Games, February 2006 1670 Florian Englmaier and Markus Reisinger, Information, Coordination, and the Industrialization of Countries, February 2006 1671 Hendrik Hakenes and Andreas Irmen, Something out of Nothing? Neoclassical Growth and the `Trivial' Steady State, February 2006 1672 Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini, Democracy and Development: The Devil in the Details, February 2006 1673 Michael Rauber and Heinrich W. Ursprung, Evaluation of Researchers: A Life Cycle Analysis of German Academic Economists, February 2006 1674 Ernesto Reuben and Frans van Winden, Reciprocity and Emotions when Reciprocators Know each other, February 2006 1675 Assar Lindbeck and Mats Persson, A Model of Income Insurance and Social Norms, February 2006 1676 Horst Raff, Michael Ryan and Frank Staehler, Asset Ownership and Foreign-Market Entry, February 2006 1677 Miguel Portela, Rob Alessie and Coen Teulings, Measurement Error in Education and Growth Regressions, February 2006 1678 Andreas Haufler, Alexander Klemm and Guttorm Schjelderup, Globalisation and the Mix of Wage and Profit Taxes, February 2006 1679 Kurt R. Brekke and Lars Sørgard, Public versus Private Health Care in a National Health Service, March 2006 1680 Dominik Grafenhofer, Christian Jaag, Christian Keuschnigg and Mirela Keuschnigg, Probabilistic Aging, March 2006 1681 Wladimir Raymond, Pierre Mohnen, Franz Palm and Sybrand Schim van der Loeff, Persistence of Innovation in Dutch Manufacturing: Is it Spurious?, March 2006 1682 Andrea Colciago, V. Anton Muscatelli, Tiziano Ropele and Patrizio Tirelli, The Role of Fiscal Policy in a Monetary Union: Are National Automatic Stabilizers Effective?, March 2006 1683 Mario Jametti and Thomas von Ungern-Sternberg, Risk Selection in Natural Disaster Insurance ­ the Case of France, March 2006 1684 Ken Sennewald and Klaus Waelde, "Itô's Lemma" and the Bellman Equation for Poisson Processes: An Applied View, March 2006

1685 Ernesto Reuben and Frans van Winden, Negative Reciprocity and the Interaction of Emotions and Fairness Norms, March 2006 1686 Françoise Forges, The Ex Ante Incentive Compatible Core in Exchange Economies with and without Indivisibilities, March 2006 1687 Assar Lindbeck, Mårten Palme and Mats Persson, Job Security and Work Absence: Evidence from a Natural Experiment, March 2006 1688 Sebastian Buhai and Coen Teulings, Tenure Profiles and Efficient Separation in a Stochastic Productivity Model, March 2006 1689 Gebhard Kirchgaessner and Silika Prohl, Sustainability of Swiss Fiscal Policy, March 2006 1690 A. Lans Bovenberg and Peter Birch Sørensen, Optimal Taxation and Social Insurance in a Lifetime Perspective, March 2006 1691 Moritz Schularick and Thomas M. Steger, Does Financial Integration Spur Economic Growth? New Evidence from the First Era of Financial Globalization, March 2006 1692 Burkhard Heer and Alfred Maussner, Business Cycle Dynamics of a New Keynesian Overlapping Generations Model with Progressive Income Taxation, March 2006 1693 Jarko Fidrmuc and Iikka Korhonen, Meta-Analysis of the Business Cycle Correlation between the Euro Area and the CEECs, March 2006 1694 Steffen Henzel and Timo Wollmershaeuser, The New Keynesian Phillips Curve and the Role of Expectations: Evidence from the Ifo World Economic Survey, March 2006 1695 Yin-Wong Cheung, An Empirical Model of Daily Highs and Lows, March 2006 1696 Scott Alan Carson, African-American and White Living Standards in the 19th Century American South: A Biological Comparison, March 2006 1697 Helge Berger, Optimal Central Bank Design: Benchmarks for the ECB, March 2006 1698 Vjollca Sadiraj, Jan Tuinstra and Frans van Winden, On the Size of the Winning Set in the Presence of Interest Groups, April 2006 1699 Martin Gassebner, Michael Lamla and Jan-Egbert Sturm, Economic, Demographic and Political Determinants of Pollution Reassessed: A Sensitivity Analysis, April 2006 1700 Louis N. Christofides and Amy Chen Peng, Major Provisions of Labour Contracts and their Theoretical Coherence, April 2006


