THE FORGOTTEN WOMEN: AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF BABY BOOMERS' ATTITUDES TOWARDS FASHION MAGAZINES

by Danielle DesRosiers Bachelor of Arts in Psychology and Gerontology, Lakehead University, May 2011 A master's research paper presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Fashion

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2013 © Danielle DesRosiers 2013

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MRP

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research

Signature: I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

Signature:

            ii  

ABSTRACT The Forgotten Women: An Exploratory Study of Baby Boomer's Attitudes Towards Fashion Magazines Master of Arts in Fashion, 2013 Danielle DesRosiers, Ryerson University An exploratory study of female baby boomers' perceptions of fashion magazines was conducted using in depth interviews. This research acknowledges that fashion tends to focus on a youthful demographic, and fashion assumes this older demographic will conform to the youthful ideals that are displayed. Fashion magazines are therefore faced with the challenge of how to attract older female readers while still portraying a fashionable image. By taking a qualitative approach that focuses on verbal descriptions and human emotion, this research will help explain the perceptions and attitudes felt by female baby boomers. Participants indicated diversity, going green, embracing sexuality, clothedness, and body size, influenced their reading of fashion magazines. This research advances knowledge by revealing the central themes that influence baby boomer women's responses to fashion magazines. It advises fashion editors to re-consider their current casting and editorial practices in order to attract baby boomer women.

                       

  

iii  

Acknowledgements This master's research project would not have been possible without the guidance and support of Professor Ben Barry. As a supervisor, his encouraging and positive attitude was vital to my success. I cannot thank him enough for his time, insight, and patience. I am also grateful to the faculty at Ryerson University's School of Fashion for illuminating the fascinating and exciting area of fashion studies. Thank-you to everyone who participated in the interview portion of this study, your honesty and openness was greatly appreciated. To my family and friends, thank-you for your endless patience and support.                                                                                           iv  

Table  of  Contents      Chapter  One:  Introduction.......................................................................................................  1  -  5      Background  of  the  Problem.........................................................................................  2  -  4      Statement  of  the  Problem.............................................................................................  4  -  4      Purpose  of  the  Study....................................................................................................  4  -  5      Chapter  Two:  Literature  Review..........................................................................................  6  -  18      Body  Size.......................................................................................................................  6  -  8      Age...............................................................................................................................  9  -  11      Clothedness...............................................................................................................11  -  13      Style/Clothing...........................................................................................................13  -  15      Sexualization............................................................................................................  15  -  17      Research  Questions  and  Preliminary  Conceptual  Model.....................................  17  -  18      Chapter  Three:  Methodology..............................................................................................  19  -  25      Research  Design.......................................................................................................  19  -  20      Experimental  Stimuli  ..............................................................................................  21  -  22      Sample/Sampling  Procedures.................................................................................  22  -  23      Data  Collection  and  Analysis...................................................................................  23  -  24      Validity  ......................................................................................................................25  -  25      Chapter  Four:  Analysis/Findings  .......................................................................................  26  -  37      Theme  One:  Age.......................................................................................................  26  -  28      Theme  Two:  Clothedness........................................................................................  28  -  29      Theme  Three:  Body  Size..........................................................................................  29  -  31      Theme  Four:  Sexualization.....................................................................................  31  -  32      Theme  Five:  Clothing/Style....................................................................................  32  -  34      Emerging  Theme:  Diversity....................................................................................  34  -  35      Emerging  Theme:  Embracing  a  Mature  Sexuality.................................................35  -  36      Emerging  Theme:  Go  Green....................................................................................36  -  37      Chapter  Five:  Discussion.....................................................................................................  38  -  46      Implications  for  Theory..........................................................................................  38  -  42      Implications  for  Practice..........................................................................................  42  -  43      Limitations  and  Implications  for  Future  Research................................................  43  -  45      Conclusion  ...............................................................................................................  45  -  46      Appendix..............................................................................................................................  47  -  56      References  ...........................................................................................................................  57  -  59     

  

v  

Chapter One: Introduction The fashion industry has forgotten a large percentage of the female demographic, specifically excluding baby boomer women in its content and portrayal, opting to display a youthful image instead. "Older adults are typically not used as models and spokespersons in ads featured in mainstream media" (Kozar 2012) unless used for goods and services related to health care and finance (Chowdhary 2000). An effort has been exhibited to include a wider age demographic in fashion magazines; for example, Vogue magazine distributes an "age issue" once a year. While this may be seen as a step towards older female empowerment, critics have described it otherwise. Ruth La Ferla (2001) from the Pittsburgh Post spoke out regarding the issue; "To make an issue of age is to draw attention to the fact that you have for so long underrepresented it." (p. C5) The age difference between the models shown in magazines and the editors who are writing the pages is vastly different and suggest insincerity, fashion magazines are not necessarily including age but rather drawing more negative attention to it than ever (La Ferla 2001). As women born between the years 1946 to 1964 continue to age, they continue to seek out items of fashion that correspond with their likes and dislikes as an aging women. Although there are advertisements and marketing techniques geared towards the aging women, they usually demonstrate a way to stay young or look young. Few embrace the aging female and present them with age appropriate attire. Fashion magazines can play a pivotal roll in fashion, they present the trends, influence those who read them, and generally set the bar for the fashion industry. The perceptions and feelings of baby boomer women who read such fashion

  

1

magazines have rarely, if ever, been assessed. Overlooking this large demographic is not in the best interest of any industry, especially the fashion industry. Fashion is a multi-billion dollar industry, one that thrives on youth and its culture. However, as the majority population ages fashion may suffer as it does not properly address an older demographic. By looking specifically at the opinions and views of advertisements displayed in fashion magazines, key insights into what baby boomer women want can be discovered and therefore marketing techniques can be improved. Background of the Problem According to Mathur and Moschis (2007), the baby boomer demographic is the most resilient generation in history and they are refusing to grow older. They are pushing the limit of "middle age" to extend indefinitely and this is demonstrated by their efforts to stay young and to keep healthy. They do not consider themselves "old" or "mature" but rather young at heart. As female baby boomers reach the age of late forties and early fifties, the use of cosmetic surgery procedures has increased and their desire to stay fit heightens. The number one cosmetic procedure completed by baby boomer women is a face lift, in the 1980s, the average facelift candidate was 60; today, she's 50 (Lifestyle Monitor 2008). The pressure set out by the fashion industry and fashion magazines corresponds with this obsession to stay young at all costs, the standard put fourth by the industry forces baby boomer women to conform. The shift to a younger consumer driven market is represented not only in print but also in the clothing itself, the material and portrayal the designers are providing. As an example, Nora Ephron (senior female author and film director) was quoted as saying: "You feel there has been an act of genuine hostility toward you by the designer when they stop making something you're able to wear. It's like they don't want you to have it" (Horyn 2007).

  

2

This preoccupation with staying young has caused an upsurge in exercise and diet and the desire for women to change their lifestyle and improve their overall health (2007). Their life expectancy has increased by more than 30 years because of it, and they are leading more established careers for longer periods of time, while contributing more significantly to household finances (Borland & Akram 2007). Partially because of the decrease in retiree health benefits and pension plans, baby boomer women are forced to stay working longer and can accumulate more wealth, savings, social security, and employer-sponsored pension wealth (Johnson, Mermin, & Steuerle 2006). By working longer, economic growth and government revenue is increased, but more importantly, individuals will have higher financial security, as the number of years they must depend on retirement wealth is less. (Johnson, Mermin, & Steuerle 2006). The importance of this age demographic however, does not only depend on retirement plans and exercise regimens; it has been well noted by creative strategist Chuck Nyren who has extensively studied this growing demographic. In his book titled Advertising to Baby Boomers, he describes how this booming market should be addressed and their spending power should not be over looked. According to Nyren (2005), "Boomers are at the peak of their earning power and have more disposable income than other age groups" (p. 4). More specifically, boomer women have spent over two trillion dollars per year and are not tied to any particular brands. They are very vulnerable to the influence of retailers, and therefore businesses could advance greatly by connecting with the Boomer market (Lifestyle Monitor 2008). Typically these women are finally being released of the worry of providing for their children, they no longer have to save their money to pay for tuition fees and rent for their young adult children. Their children are at the stage of providing for themselves; therefore, baby boomer women can spend their money as they wish. Four out of ten women say they will buy something if they like it

  

3

regardless if it is on sale or not (Lifestyle Monitor 2008), yet fashion and cosmetic companies are failing to put fourth a marketing effort towards this demographic. Statement of the Problem Fashion continues to be a youth obsessed market, leaving little room for those who are aging. It often overlooks the fact that older women are capable of dressing fashionably and looking beautiful as they grow older (Twigg 2007). Despite the statistics that indicate the level of spending power possessed by baby boomers, especially women, the fashion industry assumes that older women will conform to the ideal displayed in advertisements (Lewis, Medvedev & Seponski 2011). Fashion magazines are therefore faced with the challenge of how to attract older female readers while still portraying a fashionable image. Past research focuses on content analyses of specific fashion magazines and how they market to different age groups. Few studies have asked women themselves how they feel about the appeals of fashion magazines. Research needs to investigate the studies of older women towards fashion magazines. It is critical to examine the consumer motivations of baby boomers because they are the fastest growing demographic and possess the largest disposable income (Wolf & Snyder 2003). Purpose of the Study My research objective is to conduct an exploratory study using in-depth interviews with female baby boomers to uncover their opinions on fashion magazines. Specifically, I will address what themes appeal to older women in fashion magazines, and what strategies fashion magazines can undertake to represent them. My objective is explored within five sections. Firstly, I will examine existing research to discover themes that have been found to appeal to older women. Guided by this literature, I will develop my interview questions and a preliminary model. Next, I will present my methodology and findings. I will conclude with an examination

  

4

of my findings and the implications resulting from those findings that should direct future research.                                                                                                                                  5

Chapter Two: Literature Review There are many studies that address the portrayal of older women in fashion magazines and each study focuses on a different aspect of that portrayal. To guide my study of what magazine appeals attract female baby boomers, I have identified five themes from past research. These themes will comprise the framework of this study and will help to develop questions used during the interview process. The five themes that I have identified include: 1) body size; 2) age; 3) clothedness; 4) sexualization; and 5) style/clothing. These themes have emerged from past studies, as areas that researchers believe are important to older women when they read fashion magazines. While these studies make important contributions to our understanding of advertising to baby boomers, they fail to investigate the attitudes of older consumers themselves. It is important to note that these themes are preliminary and will be refined during my research. In the following sub-sections, I explain the five themes in my framework by providing a review of relevant literature on the topic of older women and magazines. Body Size Many studies have looked at body size and image and how it relates to the portrayal of women in fashion magazines. It would first be useful to identify how these texts define body image and size in order to properly explain how women view themselves and their bodies in relation to advertising in fashion magazines. Borland and Ackram (2007) acknowledge the fact that body image is very multifaceted, and can consist of many different factors that affect how a woman perceives herself and her body. Factors such as the media, peers, family, and negative stereotypes help construct unrealistic body image ideals that women compares themselves to and in turn create their own negative perceptions of themselves (ibid). To be more specific, body image directly consists of

  

6

perceptual, affective, and cognitive components that construct a woman's body. This can often be physical as the thin-ideal is so heavily portrayed in society, women often compare themselves to these "role models" but to often cannot measure up to the standards they provide. Borland and Akram define body size dissatisfaction as a feeling, regarding it as "the concept of body image that relates predominately to the quantitative assessment of different body parts" (p. 313). Bedford and Johnson (2006) specifically define body image as "the internal representation of your own outer appearance-your own unique perception of yourself" (p. 42). They relate the body as an integral aspect of one-self, stating that the perception one has of oneself can have a direct influence on their life, which includes thoughts, feelings, and behavior. Both studies look at body image as an internalization of oneself that also is created by the environment surrounding that individual. Body image should be seen as dual sided, created by oneself through the help of the environment in which they live, Bedford and Johnson say that body image occurs through a life-long process, one that is ever changing and ever evolving whether negative or positive (Bedford and Johnson 2006). This holds true as the ideal female body is ever changing and evolving, what was once considered attractive a decade ago, no longer holds true. Bedford and Johnson also define body image dissatisfaction but define it as the inconsistency between how one looks and how one wishes they looked. Their research shows that most North American women have body image dissatisfaction and that their feelings may be in relation to Western Society's tendency to equate thinness and youthfulness with attractiveness (ibid). This notion leave older women, specifically the demographic of baby boomers with little choice but to have a negative body image regarding themselves as it becomes harder and harder for them to live up to Western Society's cultural ideals.

  

7

Aging and the act of physically growing older is not normally embraced and accepted in society, and especially not in fashion. The fashion industry has openly acknowledged, and therefore is openly criticized for, promoting the "thin ideal" and using role models that are visibly to thin (Borland & Akram 2007). The perception in past research studies has been that baby boomer women are not attracted to this "thin ideal" and are deterred from buying fashion magazines that openly promote it. Most studies in the past have looked at the number of advertisements representing the thin ideal and compared that with how many advertisements represent age and aging. By completing a quantitative study to gather conclusions regarding women's perceptions of body size and fashion magazines, researchers have failed to take into account the women themselves. Borland and Akram address this by specifically looking at the assumption that women are discouraged from fashion magazines, by using a qualitative technique that utilized triadic sorting and laddering interviews to uncover women's perceptions with recent advert. They compared a group of older women's perceptions of model size with a group of younger women's perceptions to uncover if the current fashion magazine standards are relevant and appropriate for both ages. Their results indicated that older women were aware that the average sized model in fashion magazines is an unrealistic ideal whereas younger women believed this model type was attainable (Borland & Akram 2007). The authors revealed that older women were not as negatively affected by images of thin models as were younger women; moreover, older women tended to associate the thin ideal with an image that is not relevant to their lives (Borland & Akram 2007). With regards to my own research, I would be interested in exploring if this image discourages them from buying specific fashion magazines or if, as this study suggests, it does not affect their response to such magazines.

  

8

Age Age is a hotly debated topic, no one wants to admit to aging but the fact is that everyone grows older (Borland & Akram 2007). The world's population as a whole continues to rise, and the population is getting older. The average life expectancy is increasing, and this is especially the case for women. Women's life expectancy statistics show that they are living an average of five years longer than their male counterparts (Lewis et al. 2011). It is expected that the age ratio will only continue to grow, and that proportion will likely increase in the future. Even though the population continues to grow and a large part of this population is a demographic that is between the ages of 50 and 65, society tends to presents an ageist attitude towards the process of growing older and the media only perpetuates it further. The fashion industry is a major factor in ageist social practices, fashion magazines tend to underrepresent the female baby boomer cohort and assume that these women will conform to the "ideal women" that is typically shown (Lewis et al. 2011). The "ideal women" is typically one that appears ageless, as aging is seen as a negative characteristic in the fashion world (Dittmar & Howard 2004). Past research has looked at the negative association that comes with age, concluding that women "loose their social value" just by growing older (Hatch 2005 p. 19). It has been discovered that the normal signs of the aging process, which includes wrinkles, greying of the hair, and loss of muscle tone (Lewis et al), are viewed as negative and stressful signs of degeneration (Borland and Akram 2007). The connection of youthfulness with beauty does not bode well with older women, aging is seen to reduce physical attractiveness and capability (Dittmar & Howard 2004) but this mentality is not viewed equally for both sexes. Howard and Dittmar discuss the double standard that occurs with aging, explaining that men and women are not viewed equally with regard to aging. "Social cultural constructions of

  

9

femininity place considerable value on physical attractiveness and youth, and aging moves women away from these cultural ideas" (Dittmar & Howard p. 316). The same standards do not hold up for men, youthfulness is not associated as commonly for men as it is for women. Men tend to be more associated with their profession and skill level rather then physical qualities associated with age (Dittmar & Howard 2004). It is highly debated in research whether societal pressures and media bombardment cause women to become dissatisfied with themselves or not. Research has formed two sides; the first being that women are vulnerable to these societal messages (Marshall et al. 2012), and the second being that as women age they become more comfortable with their bodies as their self-concept changes and grows more stable (Klein and Klein 2000) (Garner 1997). Research on the satisfaction or dissatisfaction of older women is important as it can help future research distinguish whether women are attracted to current social standards used in magazines. Age is often explored in magazines as a preventative process, the industry attempts to sell women on staying "youthful" and defying aging through the use of creams and cosmetic surgery (Lewis et al 2011). It is assumed that baby boomer women do not look to fashion magazines for advice, but a growing number or researchers are beginning to indicate that the many female baby boomers do (Lewis et al 2011). Past research tends to use a visual content analysis method, Lewis and colleagues looked at eight fashion magazines and found that the fashion industry focuses its promotional efforts on the youth, scarcely representing women over forty, and of those represented women they were mainly used for a "anti-aging campaigns" or cosmetic enhancements (Lewis et al 2011 p. 101). Zhang and colleagues (2006) looked at a number or research programs that examine the portrayal of older adults in advertising. They review this aging demographic and it's growth, believing

  

10

that the size of the population further demonstrates its power. As this demographic continues to grow an increased concern for their well-being grows as well, they found that research looking at baby boomer women and their representation in print and media is becoming more common (Zhang et al. 2006). Through their studies they have found the negative aspects associated with age, especially in the media, and the common association of frail, fragile, and incompetent with baby boomers. Their research ultimately found that the demographic, namely older women are under-represented in the media (Zhang et al. 2006). Through my own research, I want to specifically ask older women if the current standard of under-representing their age demographic in fashion magazines is appealing to older women. Do they want to be sold on staying young? Or do they want to embrace their age and see women who are similar to themselves in fashion magazines? Clothedness Clothedness is defined through research as the amount of a model's body that is covered or exposed by clothing (Bessenoff & Del Priore 2007). Women's bodies are often found in fashion print and media to be typically thinner, younger, and are seen to display less clothing than other models in different medias. It is thought by researchers that the scarcely clothed models often seen in magazines and on television act as a solidifier of contemporary beauty standards. Social comparison theory justifies this account as individuals are likely to compare themselves to the models they see, and as they age and their bodies change it will become harder and harder to live up to the standard put fourth, which can negatively affect them (ibid). It is no surprise that nudity and scantily clad women are seen in advertisements, this tactic has frequently been used in advertisements as a way to attract individuals to the advertisement, using the shock value to its advantage (ibid). Research has been done that looks at the interaction between the

  

11

viewer and the amount of clothing on a model in fashion magazines, they specifically look at the reaction of older women. Two studies specifically address this in regards to fashion magazines. In a study by Bessenoff and Del Priore (2007), magazines advertisements were analyzed to examine the extent to which they depict women clothed. A coding system was used to look for three themes; age, body size, and clothedness. Their results showed that across a variety of magazines, models who were younger wore less clothing compared to models who were older (Bessenoff & Del Priore 2007). In the rare instances that older women's bodies were shown, they were generally larger and more often fully clothed than that of their youthful counterparts (Bessenoff & Del Priore 2007). The study also found that the models shown in magazines that targeted a younger demographic wore less clothing. Bessenoff and Del Priore discuss the findings as they relate to objectification theory, stating that as the greater sexual objectification of women becomes more prominent, especially in this form of media, showing the bodies of older women will become less prominent. The bodies of older women tend to be shown covered up in fashion magazines, which goes on to suggest that society as a whole does not find age appealing (Bessenoff & Del Priore 2007). It was found that older women have less relevant comparisons (i.e. models) than a younger demographic, Bessenoff and Del Prioer discussed that this may lead them to compare themselves to others that are more like them, which would mean they are generally larger and dress more conservatively than the models seen in magazines. Dens, De Pelsmacher and Janssens (2009) also explored the impact of reveling clothing on a model's body on older women's self-esteem. Their belief being that models with little clothes on would have a negative effect on the individual's self-esteem compared to the effect of models that have more clothes on (Dens, De Pelsmacher & Janssens 2009). Through their

  

12

research they found that the more exposure an individual has to magazine advertisements the more likely they are to experience negative feelings associated with depression, weight concerns, and body dissatisfaction. Eating disorders and altered consumption behavior are also associated with the thin-ideal displayed in advertisements, the less clothing displayed on a model the more heavily depicted that thin-ideal is shown (Dens, De Pelsmacher & Janssens 2009). To complete their study they showed 125 women typical advertisements from various fashion magazines that depicted male and female models in various forms of dress. Their results indicated that these ads reinforced the objectification of women and led them to be dissatisfied with their own bodies, nudity being the main driver for this dissatisfaction; both male and females elicited this response (Dens, De Pelsmacher & Janssens 2009). When exposed to an advertisement one time, there was little effect to self-esteem. Dianoux and Linhard (2008) discuss this in their study, stating that women often have negative views towards advertisements that use "sexy" female models, which can effect cognitive processing. By comprehending the message displayed in the advertisements as negative, and the use of nudity and sexual appeal is viewed as unappealing, they are more likely to remember that advertisement (Dianoux & Linhard 2008). Whether they are more likely to purchase a product form the magazine is debatable. In my own research, I will address this issue of clothedness with baby boomer women and examine if there is the same negative effect when models that are their age wear little clothing in fashion magazine editorials. I hope to discuss whether they find the use of nudity appealing and whether they would be more or less likely to buy such magazines when this tactic is used. It is my hypothesis that as women age, the use of scantily clad women will have less appeal to them but will also not necessarily deter them from purchasing. Style/Clothing

  

13

Clothing is often an experience; it is central to how other people perceive each other and especially so in regards to age. Clothes and the way older women present themselves are understood within a culture (Twigg, 2007). Studies show that older women look to fashion magazines to find clothes that fit their personality and lifestyle, clothes that are comfortable and age appropriate for specific occasions they encounter in their life (Lewis, Medvedev, and Seponski, 2011). Yet fashion and age within magazines do not always fit together and are usually thought of as unrelated (Twigg, 2007). Studies show that older women are persistent in their search for clothing to fit their lifestyle and refuse to adopt the older more "frumpy" style that their parents are accustomed to (Twigg, 2007). Robinson, Gustafson, and Popovich (2008) examined the negative and potentially harmful stereotypes of older women portrayed in magazine advertisements, which can include their clothing and sense of style. Their research focused on the perceptions of both younger and older people and used Q-methodology to sort through forty advertisements that showed a negative image of an older woman (Gustafson and Popovich 2008). To elicit the feelings and perceptions of their participants they did interviews as well. The study found the stereotype of older women, which may include their dress, style, attitude, demeanor, and stature, was viewed negatively by both younger and older participants (Gustafson and Popovich 2008). Regardless of whether a stereotype was used, the older participants liked the advertisements that showed them happy, clever, and having a sense of humor, the best (Gustafson and Popovich 2008). Researchers believe that the clothing or style of the individual is not necessarily the focus, that older individuals would prefer to see an active yet physically attractive individual that does not necessarily include fashionable clothing (Gustafson and Popovich 2008).

  

14

Researcher, Julia Twigg, extensively reviews past literature that focuses on aging and clothing. Her summation of past literature concludes that "clothes are central to the ways older bodies are experienced, presented and understood within culture, so that dress forms a significant, though neglected, element in the constitution and experience of old age" (Twigg 2007 p. 285). She draws on a range of literature that traces how clothing and age has largely been neglected till this time. There is very little empirical or theoretical work that focuses on the topic of age and clothing directly, this is especially so in fashion literature (Twigg 2007). The choices of older women regarding clothing are rarely if ever explored, the general assumption being that fashion is for the young (Twigg 2007) giving the impression that the clothing choices of older women are not relevant or of any interest to the studies of fashion (Twigg 2007). Twigg expands upon this in her review, stating that aging tends to impose "a false mark over the self, impending the individual's ability to be and to express who they really are" (Twigg p. 298). She argues that clothing acts as the interface between the body and the social world, which leads one to wonder how media, including fashion magazines, views the body (Twigg 2007). How does the imagery shown in fashion magazines get interpreted by older women, or does it at all? Research has not been done that specifically addresses the appeals of baby boomer women regarding style and clothing in fashion magazines. What styles or fashion choices appeal to older women in these fashion magazines? Would they look to fashion magazines for style advice if it were geared towards them? In my research I hope to unveil what types of clothing and styles appeal to the older women and where they find that style. Sexualization Sexualization in magazines is found to be a negative influence on women and how they view themselves (Bessenoff & Del Priore 2007). Studies have shown that ads conveying models

  

15

in an overtly sexual position, both male and female, have resulted in women having an increased awareness of their own bodies and their concerns about it. It is believed by advertisers that "sex sells," especially in regards to magazine advertisements. The media tends to show women as "sex symbols" even in magazines targeted towards women (Nelson & Paek 2005). Sex in advertising is employed for many different reasons, and has been studied extensively over the years by a multitude of researchers, most coming to the conclusion that sex is used as a method to draw attention to the product being advertised (Reichert 2002). Common forms of sexual content displayed in magazines can include but are not limited to: dress, nudity, suggestive behavior, interaction with props or other individuals, innuendo, setting, camera effects, and physical attractiveness (Reichart 2002). Nelson & Paek (2005) discovered that "numerous studies within recent years have actually shown an increase in sexism, sexuality, and objectification in contemporary advertising" (Nelson & Paek p. 371). In their study they reviewed what factors in magazines could explain the increase in sexualized advertisements. The specifically looked at the cultural values, political/economic systems, and advertising elements in magazines that are delivered through advertisements, their research found the cultural values and political systems of the audience targeted to specific magazines has an impact on the way sexuality is presented in it's advertisements (Nelson & Paek 2005). Western culture has become more accepting of sexual norms displayed in fashion magazines and therefore tends to display women more sexually in advertisements (Nelson & Paek 2005). In a study conducted by Stankiewicz and Rosselli (2008) the sexualization of women was discussed and reviewed in print advertising. Specifically, they looked at women as sex objects and victims in the top selling magazines in North America by employing a content analysis of

  

16

these magazines (Stankiewicz & Rosselli 2008). Advertisements of 58 different magazines were reviewed; magazines ranged from men's, women's, business, teen, special interest, and news magazines (Stankiewicz & Rosselli 2008). The advertisements were scanned for any signs of sexualization, which can include body position, facial expression, clothing type, and interaction with others in the advertisements was reviewed (Stankiewicz & Rosselli 2008). The study predicted that half of these advertisements would convey women as sex objects; their hypothesis was confirmed in their findings, it was found that 51% of advertisements in these magazines featured women as sex objects (Stankiewicz & Rosselli 2008). In magazines specifically addressing women and fashion, women were seen as sex objects in 63% of the advertisements. Such magazines were Elle, Glamour, Harper's Bazaar, In Style, Marie Claire, and Vogue (Stankiewicz & Rosselli 2008). A study by Reichert et al. (1999) previously found similar results, indicating that women's fashion magazines show an increase in the amount of women represented as sexual objects. The study conducted a content analysis of women's magazines between the years of 1983 to 1993 (Reichert 1999). A study by Firth et al (2005), found through a review of past research, that over time, the sexual elements of women have become more visually represented in fashion magazines, and shows no signs of stopping. For the purpose of my own research, it would be interesting to know if sexualizing models appeal to older women or if it discourages them from reading fashion magazines. The Research Questions and Preliminary Conceptual Model The following literature review reaffirms the notion that baby boomer women are dissatisfied with the advertisements and content that is displayed to them in fashion magazines. By completing the literature review I have discovered a number of flaws in past research, the

  

17

main problem being that most studies complete a content analysis of marketing techniques used towards baby boomers. Few studies have completed an extensive interview process that seeks to discover what appeals and what does not appeal to these women. These studies also do not look at what magazines can specifically do to attract an older female reader. My primary objective is to conduct an exploratory study using in depth interviews with female baby boomers to uncover their opinions on fashion magazines. Specifically, I will address what themes appeal to older women in fashion magazines, and what strategies fashion magazines can undertake to represent them. To meet this objective, I began by framing this study using the themes uncovered in the literature. The five themes identified above will guide my research questions but will remain open to modification as I collect data as new themes may emerge. To do this I focused on three specific research questions when conducting this study: R1. What appeals to female baby boomers in fashion magazines? R2. What does not appeal to female baby boomers in fashion magazines? R3. What can fashion magazines do to better represent this demographic?

                                               

  

18

      Research Design

Chapter Three: Methodology

Previous research conducted on older consumers has either explored their body image or employed a content analysis on the number of older models in fashion magazines; therefore, research has failed to explore how women themselves respond to fashion magazines. Keeping this in mind, I have selected a qualitative approach to elicit the feelings and emotions of women themselves to such appeals (Miles and Huberman 1994). I have developed a preliminary coding framework to guide the interview questions and analysis of this study (ibid). This has been completed by exploring past research on older women via an extensive literature review. From this review, I have developed a framework of key themes that will guide my study, as outlined in the above section. By taking a qualitative approach that focuses on verbal descriptions and human emotion my research will help explain the perceptions and attitudes felt by female baby boomers (Jackson & Verberg 2007). A qualitative method was the best choice for my research as it ensured flexibility when gathering data, which gave confidence to the findings since each set of data (each interview) could be properly understood before progressing to the next set of data (the next interview) (Miles & Huberman 1994). Qualitative data is also the best method to choose when emphasizing the "lived experience" as it places emphasis on the individuals "perceptions, assumption, prejudgments, presuppositions and connections to the social world" (Miles & Huberman, 1994, p. 10), which is important when gathering the opinions of female baby boomers in this study. Grounded theory will guide the theoretical framework of this study and will help to build theory in an area that has little to no previous research. This exploratory study uses systematic methodology from the social sciences that generates theory from data (Miles &

  

19

Huberman 1994). Grounded theory is appropriate for this study as it is based on the concept of theory formation, which allows themes to naturally occur throughout the research process (Weingand 1993). Since a hypothesis is not used, there is no need to prove the theory right or wrong, but rather past research will formulate and shape the direction of research causing "new themes to emerge and fuse into theory" (ibid. p. 19). Theory will be formulated based on conceptual ideas uncovered through previous research (Miles & Huberman 1994). The goal of the study is to discover participants' concerns when viewing fashion magazines and how magazines can address them. A case study comparison using in depth interviews will be conducted with all individuals that fit the requirements to participate. This method will be used, as it will provide the best collection of the participants' perceptions (Jackson & Verberg 2007). The interview process will take between 30 to 60 minutes and will consist of two phases. The first phase will include experimental stimuli in the form of magazine advertisements that will be accompanied by openended questions that stimulate conversation and ideas. The second phase will include semistructured interview questions based on the themes uncovered through my research; the questions will be based on my framework, but I will be open to changing and revising them as new themes emerge and other change based on the data. An interview approach that asks direct questions to participants will be used, as it will "create analytically focused discourse that provides insights into specified research questions" (Gibson & Brown 2009, p. 87). The iterative nature of this data works best with semi-structured questions as it allows flexibility and sensitivity when developing and asking the questions (Gibson & Brown 2009). This study was reviewed and approved by the Research Ethics Board of Ryerson University for a one-year period. (Refer to Appendix 5)

  

20

Experimental Stimuli An important element of my research design is to expose participants to experimental stimuli to stimulate discussion. I will be using three different magazines, two of which will be top fashion magazines (Vogue and Marie Claire), and one will be geared towards a baby boomer audience (Oprah Magazine). Each magazine was specifically chosen based on content, readership, and advertisements to adequately display three different genres of fashion magazines and the different content within each.    Marie Claire has the youngest audience of the three magazines with a target age of 25-34

years old, its median age being 34. Marie Claire began in 1988 and markets itself as a "media destination that combines provocative features with outstanding fashion and beauty, to inspire women who want to think smart and look amazing" (Marie Claire 2012). This magazine was chosen as it is suited and targeted at a younger demographic, it is meant to be a fashion and beauty destination for young adults who are affluent and career driven (Marie Claire 2012). This magazine was assumed to be the least directed to female Baby Boomers. Vogue was chosen, as it is the most unanimously associated with fashion, it is one of the most well known and oldest fashion magazines in the world. The median reader age is 40 years old and 85% have some college education or more (Vogue Media Kit 2013). Founded in 1892, Vogue has prided itself on setting the standard in fashion for over 100 years (Vogue USA 2013). Vogue magazine was chosen as the second source of experimental stimuli as it targets adult women and directly showcases articles and advertisements about fashion. O magazine was introduced in 2000 by television talk show host Oprah Winfrey; the median age of readership is 46.9 years old and is 88% female (Oprah Media Kit 2013). The magazine is Oprah's "unique vision on health and fitness; relationships and self-discovery;

  

21

beauty and fashion; home design; and food news" (O The Oprah Magazine 2009).   This   magazine  was  chosen  as  it  had  the  oldest  target  audience  age  and  it  covers  a  wide  range  of   topics,  not  all  are  fashion  related.    This  magazine  was  thought  to  have  the  greatest  appeal  to   female  Baby  Boomers.   Specific advertisements will not be selected from magazines, the intention being that participants will indicate specific advertisements on their own and explain what appeals to them and what does not appeal to them in the advertisement. Participants will be able to flip through the magazines during the interview process, and can refer to them for examples to help illustrate their beliefs. Participants may also feel more comfortable having something to look through and refer to while completing the interview as they can focus their attention on the advertisements, causing them to feel more relaxed. Sample/ Sampling Procedures Most qualitative research uses purposive sampling that selects participants who have experienced the situation of interest (Jackson & Verberg 2007). For the interest of this study, the purposive sample is to attract older women, specifically baby boomers, who have or do read magazines and have some knowledge of fashion. Participants will be collected using a snowball technique in order to attract individuals of this specific population. After each interview the respondent will be asked if they know someone who might be appropriate for the study. The goal of the sampling is to have enough women participate until theoretical saturation is achieved. Theoretical saturation being the conclusion that no additional interviews are needed as all categories of research have been reviewed and are thought of as being achieved (Miles & Huberman 1994).

  

22

Based on ease and convenience participants will be selected from Toronto and Thunder Bay as I will have the easiest access to these locations. I will conduct in depth interviews with each woman and the data will be collected only in person, as this will give the most accurate depiction of each woman's opinions and emotions (Gibson & Brown 2009). The in person method will also be the most effective way to present the participants with the experimental stimuli used in this study. An email snowball technique was also used to acquire participants; this was done through an email to the School of Fashion students and faculty at Ryerson University. The email asked if any women, or if anyone knew any women, that would be interested in participating in a study regarding female baby boomers and fashion magazines. Interested parties were asked to contact me via email. The population to be used in this study is individuals that were born between the years of 1946 and 1964, ages 47 to 65 that can be categorized as generation baby boomers. Baby boomers being defined as the group of individuals born between those specific years that grew up at a specific point in time. In the case of this study, only female baby boomers will be included. In total, ten female baby boomers where used as participants for this study, the demographic statistics can be viewed when referring to Appendix 2. Data Collection and Analysis I personally conducted all interviews with each participant using a semi-structured format. Participants were asked to complete a consent form and a demographic survey upon arrival (Refer to Appendix 7). The experimental stimuli was then presented; participants had roughly ten minutes to browse through the three magazines and they were given no direction as to what they were specifically looking for. This unstructured method was used as it would allow the participant's emotions and appeals to come out as the participant will not be influenced by

  

23

the questions or variables under investigation (Miles & Huberman 1994). The second phase of the interview involved semi-structured questions that were based on the concepts and themes explored in the literature (Refer to Appendix 6). Participants were allowed to keep the experimental stimuli in front of them and could refer to or use as an example to illustrate their opinions when necessary. When interviewing the participants, it was important to be conscious of my social identity and body language in order to give as little influence on their opinions as possible. I acknowledged that my age was significantly younger than that of my participants, by acknowledging this and stating my social identity as being in a position of learning I hoped to put my participants at ease and help elicit their true feelings. Each participant was audio recorded and later transcribed, participants were able to opt out of an audio-recorded session if they felt uncomfortable. Notes were also written down throughout the interview. Once the data was transcribed, I began to code it (Refer to Appendix 1). A coding system was used where labels were put on data to summarize and index it. This initial coding developed through the five categories found in past literature those themes being: age, body size, style/clothing, sexualization, and clothedness: out of these themes new themes emerged that were not uncovered in the literature. In total 8 themes were found. I then reviewed all the descriptions, pulling out important quotes and wording into smaller and more meaningful themes. Throughout the coding processes, I organized, compressed and assembled the information and refined these themes as I reduced the codes and developed links. It is important to note that conclusions were developed from the beginning of the analysis and then refined as the analysis progressed.

  

24

Validity I acknowledge the problem of external validity associated with this sample. The study was limited to women who agreed to participate, and either personally saw one of the emails or was informed by someone who had seen them. As such, the ability to generalize from my findings is limited because probability techniques were not used to select a random sample. Despite this limitation, the multiple cases of diverse women minimize idiosyncrasies in the findings and improve representativeness. Moreover, by having each participant complete a demographic survey that asked questions regarding age, ethnicity, education level, and location, a stratified sample was achieved to help minimize self-selection bias. This study is deemed to be one of minimal risk to participants and the probability and extent of harm or discomfort anticipated in this research will not be greater than any ordinarily encountered in daily life.                                                                     

25

Chapter Four: Analysis/Findings Overall participants indicated that the content of magazines, specifically addressing the five themes identified in past research, did not indicate their buying habits. Participant's answers suggested that they were not deterred or swayed to purchase fashion magazine or the products within fashion magazines by the content displayed for example; model body size, age, clothing/style, amount of clothing, or the amount of sexualization. My analysis uncovered that participants had very specific opinions on each theme regarding what they liked and what they did not like but did not necessarily associate these likes and dislikes with whether they would purchase fashion magazines or not. First, it was found that participants thought models were generally too young and not reflective of the average buyer. Second, participants believed the amount of clothing displayed on models was indicative of the season of the designer's vision, and therefore did not influence them. Third, participants viewed model size as unrealistic and generally unattainable. Fourth, the participants felt sexualization was a marketing tactic that posed no issue to them unless it was displayed by younger models. Lastly, the women felt that the clothing displayed in magazines was too expensive and served only as inspiration to their current wardrobe. New themes emerged that were not previously uncovered in past literature, these themes focused on embracing sexuality, the initiative to go green, and diversity. In the following section, I describe my overall findings and the details of each theme. Quotations from participants will be used and referenced by stating the age and ethnicity in parenthesis. Theme One: Age My research indicated that participants found models to be, on average; too young and they thought there was little to no diversity when displaying age in fashion magazines. They believed that fashion magazines are generally geared to a younger demographic, and therefore

  

26

the participants said it was hard for them to relate to the content within them. This supports past research that has found baby boomer women to be aware of the amount of younger models displayed in fashion magazines and the conclusion that older women are not negatively affected by this depiction (Borland & Akram 2007). A participant (45-50, aboriginal, married) commented on this specifically: "They aren't geared to me they are geared to whatever the designer wants. Usually fifteen years olds." Another participant (51-55, white, married) indicated a similar response: "Nobody ever looks like me, or even close to me. I don't ever relate to the models in the magazines." Many of the participants had a similar view of age in magazines, viewing it as an unrealistic portrayal of the general public. Most indicated that age and the aging process was rarely if ever seen. What my research purposely aimed to uncover was whether this was a determent or whether baby boomer women would be more or less likely to buy because of it. Participants stated that the age of models displayed does not impact their buying habits, some even explaining further that they would prefer magazines that did not market to specifically their age. One participant (45-50, white, married) remarks on this theme: "I don't know if I want to read a magazine that's constantly got my age bracket, that's not adverse in itself, you want diversity in what your reading, yes its nice to see an older person in magazines but yes its nice to see a younger person as well". Bringing light to the fact that most research in the past noticed a gap in fashion magazines and the tendency to leave out aging or maturing women while focusing on a younger generation. The participants of my study stated that they liked reading about younger women, and had no issue with the amount of young models that were displayed. Participants commented that they

  

27

thought magazines were improving their strategies, and that some magazines did try to include their demographic. A participant (51-55, white, divorced) said "I see the signs of natural aging and I think its great, a lot of magazines are doing a great job, they are taking women who are healthy, the women who's aging and looking after themselves and using whatever is available naturally to be her best." Others suggested that seeing women embracing themselves and their age would be a better way to attract them to fashion magazines, a general consensus was to be honest with aging and to not let the main focus be about `anti-aging'. Participant (56-60, white, married) explained, "I would love to see women in all of their splendor and just owning what they have." Theme Two: Clothedness Participants initially were confused on the question of clothedness and its classification, the consensus being that the amount of clothing on models depends on the season. One participant remarked (51-55, white, married) "I think it depends on the season, winter has a lot of clothing, summer has a lot less", which was the average interpretation held by most of the participants. This alone demonstrated how little participants noticed the amount of clothing on models. By asking more specific question regarding clothedness, such as "has clothing on models increased or decreased over the last decade?" participants were better able to address the question. My analysis discovered that the amount of clothing on a model has little affect on their choice in reading the magazine. Participants indicated that this was not something they noticed in magazines and felt indifferent towards it if they did notice it. Past research speculated that the amount of clothing was directly related to how women perceive themselves, theorizing that women had less self-esteem after looking at fashion magazines with nudity or scantily clad women in them. Dens, De Pelsmacher and Janssens (2009) discovered in their own research that

  

28

ads reinforced the objectification of women and led them to be dissatisfied with their own bodies, nudity being the main driver for this dissatisfaction. Through my research it became apparent that baby boomer women were impartial to the amount of clothing displayed on models. Participant (51-55, white, divorced) stated; "I don't typically notice how much clothing they are wearing. Not my main concern." Furthermore, participants indicated that as long as the ad and the clothing looked great they did not mind seeing a scantily clad model displayed. Participant (51-55, white, separated) remarked: "It doesn't really make a difference to me, present the goods in the best fashion, then its fine". Participant (56-60, white, married) reaffirmed this by saying "If a woman feels comfortable enough to show what she's got, go for it! I would actually like to see that. I would probably buy more magazines with that, and say hey there's a woman who owns it". This goes against past research that believed baby boomer women would feel worse about themselves after seeing women advertised this way, and that they would be less likely to buy magazines that displayed this (Bessenoff & Del Priore 2007). A number of the participants did have an issue with underage models being displayed with little clothing on, but stated that this is another issue in and of itself. All of the participants expressed that the idea of clothedness, or how much clothing a model is wearing, has little influence on their buying habits and that nudity is simply a part of the fashion industry. Theme Three: Body Size Overall, participants felt that the average model in fashion magazines is unrealistic in both size and shape; they believed that few women in the world could be this shape or become this shape. Participants indicated that model size in fashion magazines is not representative of the population, or of the demographic that buys and reads these magazines. Participant (51-55,

  

29

white, divorced) stated it simply by saying: "My opinion on model size is that it is unrealistic and therefore not very appealing." Past research believed that all baby boomer women have body image dissatisfaction and that their feelings may be in relation to Western Society's tendency to equate thinness and youthfulness with attractiveness (Bedford and Johnson 2006). My analysis shows that the body size displayed in fashion magazines has little impact on the participant's body image, most of the participants indicated that they were comfortable with how they looked and felt, and that a magazine advertisement alone would not change their perception of themselves and their bodies. Participant (45-50, white, married) commented "When I am looking at a magazine I don't consciously look at it and say she's to skinny or to heavy and I don't pick it up for any reason based on body size." Participant (51-55, white, divorced) was similar in her opinion, stating "I am realistic about my body size, magazines do not influence me." Many participants expressed interest in seeing women that were closer to their age in fashion magazines, most just wanted to see someone that they could relate to. Participant (45-50, afro Canadian/ black, married) commented: "I'd probably be more likely to buy with an average size women on the cover, I find more magazines that do have an average women on the cover have more substance inside as well". All of the participants agreed that showcasing women that are more representative of the average populations body size would be likely to sell magazines, participant (51-55, white, divorced) indicated that "Someone who is targeting me in magazines, they need to have me in the magazine not the young skinny girl, before it was always small size, young girls, and that just does not appeal to me." Participant (51-55, white, married) reaffirmed this when she stated, "I

  

30

want to see one or two sizes smaller than my size in magazines, women looking good, something to aspire to!" Many of the participants acknowledged that the industry was beginning to change, many noticed that there was an effort being made to not only display extremely thin models in advertisements and that models of different sizes were slowly beginning to be displayed. Theme Four: Sexualization When commenting on the idea of sexualization in fashion magazines, most participants acknowledged that this does occur and that it can involve models, products, and articles. Most participants felt that this type of advertising was usually geared towards a younger twentysomething audience, and the models portraying this were typically young as well. Participants did not like when younger girls were targeted or portrayed in a sexual manner, they believed it was inappropriate for younger viewers. Participant (45- 50, aboriginal, married) suggested "I think this is okay if it is geared towards an older age, like myself, but not okay for young girls." Participants indicated that they did not like younger viewers seeing the sexualization of models, products, and articles, and found the tactic distracting if anything. A participant (51-55, white, separated) explained "I think they can be a distraction, you stop looking at the product and you look more at the model." Though participants believed sexualization was distracting they still believed that it would not deter them from buying the magazine. Participant (56-60, white, married) commented "It will not effect my decision on buying any kind of product or magazine, it wont sway me to buy it wont sway me to not buy it." Furthermore, participants believed that this tactic has always been around and will continue to be used as a marketing tactic, participant (51-55, white, divorced) remarked, "It still exists, it will always exist, and it has existed since the beginning of time." Past research supports this theory; Nelson and Paek (2005) discovered that "studies within recent years have actually shown

  

31

an increase in sexism, sexuality, and objectification in contemporary advertising" (p. 371). Most indicated that it is used as a way to grab the reader's attention and many admitted to spending extra time looking at advertisements that used this tactic, even if they found the ad unappealing. Participant (51-55, white, separated) expressed this by saying "I guess I am already looking at the ad longer than an average ad, so they do have my attention. Whatever holds your eye to it, right? I wouldn't necessarily buy the product because of it", which reaffirms past research that has found Western culture to be more accepting of sexual norms displayed in fashion magazines and therefore tends to display women more sexually in advertisements (p. 379). All participants stated that the use of sexualization in fashion magazines would not deter them from purchasing the magazine itself or the products displayed within it. Theme Five: Clothing/Style Overall participants decidedly felt that the clothing and style portrayed in fashion magazines was focused on the clothes and style that is on trend at a present time, what is fashionable at a specific moment or season and how it is expressed in a stylistic way that is meant to entice readers to buy. Participant (56-60, white, married) liked this approach and commented, "I like perusing through them to see what's current and what's coming out. Some years it's great, and some years you go what the heck are they doing. It's interesting to me to see what the trends are." Participants valued seeing the trends in this tactile form, many liked to see what a younger demographic viewed as stylish or in fashion. Participant (45-50, white, married) remarked, "I love reading through magazines and looking at what's happening, what designers are doing what looks good on bodies. The fact that they are putting it on a body that looks good is going to make the clothes look even better."

  

32

Although participants liked seeing the clothing and style presented in fashion magazines, they were disappointed and discouraged that most clothing found in fashion magazines is out of their price range. Participant (56-60, white, married) remarked "I wouldn't buy the specific shirt shown, because usually they are way over priced. Would you buy a shirt that's 1200 dollars? Really?" Participant (51-55, white, married) had a similar opinion: "I want to see clothes in all money ranges. Maybe I would buy a shirt out of a magazine if it were in my budget, but most of the time it isn't." Furthermore, the participants felt that the clothing generally depicted was not applicable to real life; they felt that real women do not and could not wear this type of clothing in real life. Participant (51-55, white, married) expressed; "Fashion magazines have a lot to show, I don't necessarily think they are applicable to real life. I always think would that translate? A lot of them are not so practical, but they are fun to see." It was expressed that fashion magazines displayed clothing that is only worn on the runway and is not applicable to real lives, especially not to their lives. Most participants indicated that the clothing and style displayed in magazines was there for inspiration and that they would never buy the clothing displayed but would, instead, be more likely to try to look for something similar and cheaper elsewhere. Participant (45-50, aboriginal, married) remarked "I like to get ideas and inspirations from magazines, not necessarily the literal outfit or item of clothing." Participant (45-50, afro Canadian/black, married) had a similar opinion, she states "Not likely to buy from magazines, I might copy an element of, and say okay this is a cute little skirt I like that pattern maybe I'll go find something like that." Participants found the style advice and suggestions to be humorous, articles that demonstrated style types for different age ranges almost always offered advice that the

  

33

participants would never use. Participant (51-55, white, separated) said, "Sometimes I'm just curious to see what they think about me. People my age, who's writing this? How can they decide what I should wear in my fifties?" Participants indicated that they did not like seeing clothing and styles slotted into separate age brackets that indicated what women at different ages should or should not wear. Participant (51-55, white, married) indicated that this was a deterrent to her, she remarked; "I just hate how you find magazines showing a leopard print, and they tell you how to wear it in your 20's, 30's, 40's, and 50's, and the 50 year olds are the ones in sweaters with a leopard scarf and the 20 year olds get the leopard print dress. What if I want to wear a leopard dress, I don't think I should be deterred from wearing it if I want to and I feel good wearing it." Most participants indicated this as well, most indicated that they would be more likely to buy magazines if they showcased different price ranges, especially designers and brands that were affordable. Participant (56-60, white, divorced) remarked, "I like to see clothes that are often affordable to me, and easy to find in stores and some styles that can be worn in real life and not just on runways." Emerging Theme: Diversity Participants indicated that they did not necessarily want fashion magazines to change, as they understood their purpose, rather they wanted magazines to include more diversity in all shapes and forms and to embrace aging instead of being afraid of it. Participant (56-60, white, married) remarked, "Get women my age, close to my age, maybe even older. Participant (45-50, afro Canadian/black, married) said, "Reality is they need a broader spectrum of models, what is wrong, what are they afraid of? My question: Here's what a real women looks like, why can't

  

34

they accept that? Use all different sizes of models." Participants felt that including a more diverse range of models; baby boomer women would be more likely to purchase fashion magazines. Participant (45-50, afro Canadian/black, married) stated "If you appeal to me you sit back and show me things that look like me, well, I think most women would be running to the store sooner to buy something that they know will look good." Some participant's felt that magazines were already trying to accomplish this, participant (51-55, white, divorced) said, "there is a better representation happening now if you're looking at the right magazines". Overall, participants said they would purchase more magazines and products within magazines if diversity were a main element. "There are a lot of women with bigger bottoms, bigger breasts, hour glass figures. I would like to see more my size, my height, more plus size. I'd be more likely to buy if they showed that. How many women can be six feet tall and a size two? Not a lot" said one of the participants (56-60, white, married). Participants, however, did not indicate that the lack of diversity deterred them from buying; rather, they indicated that it would be a nice element to add, not only for themselves but for younger women as well. Participants expressed that showcasing diversity and all ages would be beneficial for young women to see, and would help them embrace age in the future rather than fight it. New Theme: Embracing a Mature Sexuality When discussing the theme of sexualization, a new theme emerged; embracing a mature form of sexuality. Participants said they would find ideas or concepts regarding sexuality to be appealing in magazines and they hoped that fashion magazines could embrace a mature sexuality more often. Participant (51-55, white, divorced) said " It would be nice to see women my own age embracing sexuality, that type of thing. We shouldn't shy away from it." Past research had found the opposite of this; researchers believed that sexualization in magazines deterred female readers

  

35

and negatively influenced their view of themselves (Bessenoff & Del Priore 2007). Research has also found that the amount of sexual advertising has increased over the years, Reichert et al. (1999) previously indicating that women's fashion magazines show an increase in the amount of women represented as sexual objects. My analysis found that women liked seeing this and were interested in seeing more of it. Participant (45-50, aboriginal, married) expressed this saying, "In some cases I want to see more sex in magazines, "older sex". Tips and tricks for aging women. Why can't we be sexy too! Older women are left out of the equation. I would be proud of older sexualized women." When asked if baby boomer women were depicted as sexual beings in fashion magazines, participants indicated that it was rarely seen, but they wished it were. Participant (56-60, white, married) remarked. "Show some over fifty. We are still sexy, and we still have sex! It's never shown in magazines!" The women gave examples of what they would like to see in magazines, these included sex tips and tricks, articles on dressing sexier, embracing age and the body, articles that talked about menopause, and older-sexy models in advertisements. Participant (56-60, white, married) remarked "If I see a model wearing a sexy dress, I'm probably going say where can I get that. First thing I think about is that in my size?" They often mentioned that fashion magazines portray baby boomer women as unsexy; they found this unappealing and gave them little hope for the future. Emerging Theme: Go Green The subject of eco-friendly behaviors occurred throughout many of the interviews done with participants. When asked to express any concerns or opinions they had regarding fashion magazines, possibly what they want to see more of or less of, participants brought up the idea of magazines going `green'. Participants acknowledged that the fashion industry is large and the

  

36

amount of magazines that circulate each month is extensive, many questioned what happens after these magazines are read? Participant (51-55, white, separated) acknowledged that "they are very expensive, and being kind of a green society and all, I hate the fact that you throw them out. Once you look at it, it's done, it's garbage and I hate that part about it." Participants did indicate that they liked the tactile aspect of fashion magazines, and expressed that they would rather read a magazine in their hands than read it on an electronic device. The topic of eco-friendly production also came out in the regard of trending clothing; participants thought that fashion magazines perpetuated the appeal of buying new clothing whenever a new style, designer, or brand comes out. A participant (51-55, white, divorced) remarked "I really think that too much emphasis is placed on clothing, changing clothing each season, etc. This isn't environmentally friendly or fiscally sensible. I have clothes that have served me well for twenty years and I don't see the need to buy new clothes until the old ones have worn out!"                                                                     

37

Chapter Five: Discussion Implications for Theory This study aims to uncover the appeals and opinions of female baby boomers towards fashion magazines, the main purpose being to resolve past gaps in the literature that do not directly access baby boomers appeals through interviews, but rather complete a quantitative analysis instead. This research specifically asks participants what the appeals of fashion magazines are and whether the five themes; body size, age, clothedness, style/clothing, and sexualization, have an effect on those appeals. Overall, my research discovered that women had a positive evaluation of fashion magazines, and the themes identified in past literature did have an influence on their overall view of fashion magazines, however, not such an influence that it indicated their buying habits. The analysis found that female baby boomers did not see these themes as appeals or deterrents to buy magazines or the products within them. It was also discovered that female baby boomers liked reading fashion magazines and believed that the literature served a purpose in fashion. Their opinions were shaped by the five themes found in past literature, as well as by three emerging themes found, this is illustrated in figure nine (Refer to Appendix, Figure Nine). The first theme addressed in my study that was found to impact the participant's opinion on the appeal of fashion magazines was age. Participants indicated that the age displayed in fashion magazines was for the most part, too young. Magazines that showed a wider variety of age in its pictorials and articles were generally viewed more positive for both content and for advertisement purposes. In contrast, however, participants indicated that the age of models displayed in fashion magazines did not have a direct effect on their buying habits, but they did believe that the ages shown was not reflective of the consumers who buy or have the money to

  

38

buy the magazine and products within it. These findings suggest that marketing to baby boomer women may not be as simple as included the demographic in advertisements, but rather showcasing a wider variety of all ages. Participants also discussed the topic of photo altering and anti-aging campaigns, many believed that the industry is trying to improve and embrace the effects of aging; while others indicated they did not notice an improvement. These findings suggest that women are interested in looking and feeling good as they age (Klein and Klein 2000), and fashion magazines have yet to harness a balance of enhancement and embracement of age. Past research indicated that female baby boomers would feel negatively about their age after viewing fashion magazines (Lewis et al. 2011), however, this was not a concluding result of my research. The second theme, clothedness, was found to have little influence on the participant's opinion and appeals of fashion magazines. Participants viewed the amount of clothing on models to have little to do with their opinion of fashion magazines, and believed they had never previously thought of or noticed this aspect of magazines. Most thought that this theme had to do with the seasonal changes, and the amount of clothing was expected to decrease when the magazines were displaying a style to be worn in the warmer months. Participants only had an issue with this if young models were displayed in the nude, or scantily clad. Past research concluded that female baby boomers would develop self-esteem issues with themselves after seeing fashion models with little clothing on, my research indicates that these women have developed an appreciation for themselves and their bodies as they age (Dens, De Pelsmacher and Janssens 2009). Most of the women stated that a fashion magazine and the advertisements within would have little affect on how she felt about herself. Furthermore, research suggests that

  

39

this issue would be more readily seen in a younger demographic as opposed to baby boomers (Bessenoff and Del Priore 2007). The third theme found to impact the participant's opinion on the appeals of fashion magazines was body size. It was found that body size in fashion magazines was generally unrealistic and not representative of the population that reads them. This affirms past research that reviews body image and body dissatisfaction in the media, bringing note to the fact that most North American women have body image dissatisfaction and that their feelings may be in relation to Western Society's tendency to equate thinness and youthfulness with attractiveness (Borland and Ackram 2007). However, my research shows that women did not compare themselves to the images presented to them in fashion magazines but rather indicated that it would "be nice" to see a wider variety of body size, one that is closer to the average women. Past research found that female baby boomers avoided magazines that showcased the thin ideal, my research goes beyond this as my analysis shows women do not openly avoid it but rather still purchase these magazines with the hope for more diversity in the future (Bedford and Johnson 2006). These findings show that there is a crossroads seen with fashion magazines, one that portrays the thin ideal but does not display the average body type that is representative of women, which was indicated by my participants to be more attractive. The fourth theme, sexualization, was found to have little impact on the participant's opinion of fashion magazines, participants indicated that sex in fashion sells and always will, therefore they did not notice it nor did it influence their buying habits. These findings contribute to the ideology that sex has become mainstream in society, so much so that it goes almost unrecognized to viewers, participants had no reaction to some of the sexually styled advertisements in the visual stimuli presented (Reichert 2002). Furthermore, participants

  

40

indicated that they would prefer the topic and visual of sex to be included more often in magazines. Embracing sexuality was an emerging theme from the research, representing the need for "mature sex", which is the sexualization for a mature audience such as female baby boomers. All participants indicated that displaying this would appeal to them more, and they would be more likely to buy magazines on a regular basis. The fifth theme found to impact the participant's opinion on the appeals of fashion magazines was clothing/style. This theme was previously not explored in past literature, literature was done that discussed this theme but the appeals and opinions female baby boomers had regarding it was never approached. My study therefore contributes new and valuable information regarding the appeals and opinions women have toward the style and clothing that is displayed in fashion magazines. Participants indicated that the clothing shown was very expensive and out of the price range of the majority of the viewers reading it. The women also indicated that the clothing and style displayed was intended for the runway, and served them as inspiration that they could use when selecting clothing for their own wardrobes. These findings indicate that female baby boomers are attracted to fashion magazines, as it is a place to discover inspiration and to see what the trends are. Past research discussed the idea of the clothing and style displayed in magazines, concluding that most fashion magazines displayed clothing for a younger demographic (Gustafson and Popovich 2008). My research reveals that these women like seeing what a younger demographic is wearing, but they preferred if the magazine showed clothing that was also in their budget. Many participants indicated that magazines were not eco-friendly, expressing that this was a deterrent when buying magazines. They did not like the aspect of throwing out the magazine once done reading it. Past research does not look at the green initiative put forth by

  

41

fashion magazines; this research contributes to new findings that indicate the appeals of an ecofriendly fashion magazine. The idea of diversity was a theme that emerged from my research repeatedly. Participants used the word diversity often, and indicated that there is a large gap in the current fashion magazines that are available. Diversity related to all aspects of the models and articles presented in these fashion magazines, including but not limited to; age, body size, ethnicity, and height. Participants however did indicate that diversity is slowly starting to be incorporated into fashion magazines. Implications for Practice The current practices used in fashion magazines and the fashion industry may appear profitable as it is a multi-billion dollar industry, but my research suggests flaws with the current practice. Studies have long shown the neglect of an older demographic in fashion magazines and a change that is needed to include one of the highest spending demographics. Current practices are typically appealing to a younger generation, and it was assumed this did not have the same appeal to female baby boomers. The women in my study acknowledged the lack of their age demographic in fashion magazines and generally associated a more positive opinion of the magazines that did include a more diverse range of ages. The industry would incur monetary benefit from including this demographic, and to do so they need to listen to the opinions of such. While my study suggests women have a more positive opinion of magazines that displayed more diverse ages, the women in my study also suggested that they did not have a negative opinion of the magazines that did not. The main appeal reflected was to convey a more honest portrayal of females in general, not just a specific age or body type. Advertisers would

  

42

benefit from including models in different sizes, ages, and ethnicities, but women insisted that they still enjoyed reading what was popular with younger females. Given the choice, the women in my study did suggest a more positive evaluation of brands that featured endorsers who physically reflected them over endorsers who do not. These women suggested portraying individuals who not only looked good but felt good ­ those that could embrace who they are. While the idea of suggesting models that reflect the average reader may not be appealing to the fashion industry, it is currently an untapped market that has huge potential, especially in regard to fashion magazines. The women in my study indicated that young thin models have their place in fashion and they accept that, but also indicated how many more women would buy magazines if they saw someone similar to themselves on the cover or someone that was closer to them. What these women wanted most was an individual they could look up to and have potential to look like. These women are educated and realistic with their bodies, and are frustrated with the current portrayal of the unattainable body. My findings also suggest that marketers would benefit from positioning brands and products differently, specifically those that are targeted at female baby boomers. Research suggests promoting and embracing age is more appealing than trying to cover it up. These women are interested in buying products and reading articles that are not focused on the idea of looking younger but rather those that emphasize health and fitness (Refer to Appendix 4). Limitations and Implications for Future Research The research used the technique of in depth interview to uncover the opinions and appeals of female baby boomers; future research can explore the use of focus groups to uncover these appeals. Focus groups could illuminate and uncover new attitudes felt by these women as a group context, in which participants can contribute to, and reflect upon can promote different

  

43

feelings than a personal interview can. Future research could use both techniques using a multimethod approach to illicit the feelings of these women, this method could also be useful as it would allow for a larger amount of participants to be interviewed. Focus groups have the capacity of interviewing more than one individual; therefore more individuals can be interviewed in less time. This study followed an exploratory qualitative approach and therefore the findings are suggestive, more information in way of a larger sample may produce different results. It is suggested that a larger sample that is more diverse and stratified be used in future studies. A quantitative method with a more random sample could also be employed in future studies to establish more generality. Although an attempt was made to collect data from a wide distribution of female baby boomer consumers from two diverse areas in Ontario (Thunder Bay and the Toronto area), ultimately the sample represented one ethnic group. Additionally, the sample consisted mostly of younger female baby boomers, 45-50, rather than the 55-60 year old age range. To establish a more diverse sample, participants in future studies can be selected outside of a developed economy, the opinions from these participants can be largely different than what was found in this study. The ideals of fashion and beauty within fashion magazines are different in other parts of the world, and therefore the opinions of female baby boomers would be different. Furthermore, to explore these variables in future studies; data should be collected from more diverse samples, which can include women of different backgrounds, income levels, and ethnic groups. The five themes found in past literature was the result of an extensive literature review, despite this, new themes emerged from the research, therefore other themes should be explored

  

44

in future research as the five themes identified are not the only contributor's to the opinions of female baby boomers. Conclusion This study used qualitative methods to examine the opinions and perceptions of baby boomer women to fashion magazines. By uncovering the perceptions of women that read and buy fashion magazines, it was expected that marketers would benefit from such research as key issues and appeals would be uncovered during the interview process. By exploring the key themes found in past literature and uncovering new themes through research, a core group of themes emerged; these were the areas that were found to be appealing or unappealing to baby boomer women when purchasing and reading fashion magazines. An implication of my research for fashion magazines is to directly address and accommodate this demographic by closing the gap that currently exists in fashion between women's aspirations and magazine representations. It was identified through my research that women did not necessarily want their age to be the main focus of magazines but rather they wanted a wider variety of content through the advertisements and the articles. Women indicated that they liked reading fashion magazines to see what is popular and on trend. They specifically indicated that they would not like a magazine that was only targeting women of their age; they do not want to only see one age group or one body size. They also indicated that they noticed the industry was making some improvements; many gave specific examples of advertisements or magazines in fashion that included women closer to their age. By including more diversity in the content of fashion magazines by selecting models that reflect a range of sizes, heights, ages, and skin colors these magazines would encourage a larger group of women to buy and read their magazines. Baby boomer women have indicated that they

  

45

love fashion and they want to be engaged by fashion within these magazines. These consumers are indicating that they are no longer satisfied with the ideal woman that is typically displayed and given the choice, these women indicated that they would be more content with brands and advertisements that featured models who embraced a diversity of ages and shapes over models who were typically thin and young. My research demonstrates the industry's need for change. In the present study, I have taken the first step at examining fashion magazines from a female baby boomer's perspective. This approach can continue to shed light on the shifting field of fashion; however, in order to fully examine the opinions and appeals of female baby boomers towards fashion magazines as it evolves. Further research is required to understand the attitudes of women in all their diversity.

  

46

Appendix Appendix 1

  

47

Appendix 2

Age  
4.5   4   3.5   3   2.5   2   1.5   1   0.5   0   45-50   51-55   56-60   61-65   Participants  

6   5   4   3   2   1   0  

Level  of  Education  

Participants  

  

48

Marital  Status  
7   6   5   4   3   2   1   0   Single,  Never   Married   Married   Seperated   Divorced   Widowed   Participants  

Employement  Status  
6   5   4   3   2   1   0  

Participants  

  

49

City  of  Residence    
6   5   4   3   2   1   0   Toronto   Thunder  Bay   Other   Participants  

Ethnicity  
9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1   0  

Participants  

  

50

Appendix 3 Conceptual Framework Preliminary Framework: Factors Influencing Female Baby Boomers' Responses to Fashion Magazines

  

51

Appendix 4 Revised Conceptual Framework Positive and Negative Factors Influencing Female Baby Boomers Responses to Fashion Magazines

WOMEN&
Age& E Young&models& E An>Eaging&campaigns& E Photo&shop& Clothedness& E Designer's&vision& E Art& E Seasonal& EcoEFriendly& Body&Size& E Unrealis>c&images& E Thin&models& E Clothes&made&for&one&size&

Sexualiza>on& Style/Clothing& E Monetary&value& E Made&for&the&runway& Embrace&Sexuality&

Diversity&

RESPONSE&
      Positive responses in blue font Negative responses in red font

  

52

Appendix 5

  

53

Appendix 6 Interview Questions 1. Do you read fashion magazines? Which ones? How often? Do you subscribe to any of them? Thesis Related Questions (Themes) Age: 1. How do you feel about the age range of models in fashion magazines? Follow up questions/themes: - airbrushing vs. signs of aging? - amount of anti-aging campaigns there are? - do they want to see women their own age in advertisements? - what role does photoshop play when it comes to aging in magazines? Clothedness: 2. Do you feel that models are adequately clothed in fashion magazines? why or why not? Follow up questions/themes: - has clothing decreased or increased in advertisements over the years? - are they discouraged when models have little clothing on? - do they notice at all? Body Size: 3. What is your opinion on model size in fashion magazines? Realistic? Appealing? Follow up questions/themes: - are they more likely to buy when average sized models are displayed? - do they want to see models who are a similar size to themselves? - are they discouraged with model size in magazines? Sexualization: 4. What is your opinion on the sexualization of products and models in fashion magazines? Does the adage "sex sells" still exist? Follow up questions/themes - does sexualization deter them from buying items in advertisements - are older models displayed in a sexual nature? - are they affected by the sexualization of models?

  

54

Style/Clothing: 5. How do you feel about the style or clothing displayed in fashion magazines? Follow up questions/themes: - which magazines do they most often find their style in? - are the likely to buy clothes from ads in fashion magazines? - do they seek advice/style tips from fashion magazines?       Appendix 7 Demographic Survey 1. What age range do you fit in? 45 - 50 years old 51 - 55 years old 56 - 60 years old 61 - 65 years old 2. What is the highest level of education you have completed? Less than High School High School/GED College Diploma 3 Year University Degree 4 Year University Degree Masters Degree Doctorate Degree Professional Degree 3. What is your current marital status? Single, never married Married Separated Divorced Widowed 4. What is your current employment status? Employed for wages Self-employed Out of work, looking for work Out of work, not currently looking for work Homemaker Student Retired

  

55

5. What city do you currently reside in? Toronto Thunder Bay Other 6. What is your ethnicity? White/Caucasian Afro Canadian/ Caribbean/ Black East Asian South Asian Aboriginal Other

  

56

Works Cited WGSN. "Baby Boomers: The Prime Target Market?" Lifestyle Monitor. WGSN The Magazine. November 12, 2008. Web. WGSN. December 8, 2011. Bedford, J. L., & Johnson, C. S. (2006). Societal Influences on Body Image Dissatisfaction in Younger and Older Women. Journal of Women and Aging, 18, 41. Bessenoff, G. R., & Del Priore, R. E. (2007). Women, Weight, and Age: Social Comparison to Magazine Images Across the Lifespan. Sex Roles, 56, 215­222. Borland, H., & Akram, S. (2007). Age is no Barrier to Wanting to Look Good: Women on Body Image, Age and Advertising. Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal, 10, 310-333. Callahan, S. (2001) "Will Publishers Green Light Eco-Friendly Practices?" Folio: the Magazine for Magazine Management July 2001: 84. Business Insights: Essentials. Chowdhary, U. (2000). Correlates of Apparel Significance Among Older Men and Women. Journal of Consumer Studies and Home Economics, 24, 150-159. Crane, D. (2000). Fashion and its Social Agendas: Class, Gender, and Identity in Clothing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Dens, N., De Pelsmacher, P. & Janssens, W. (2009). Effects of Scarcely Dressed Models in Advertising on Body Esteem for Belgian Men and Women. Sex Roles, 60, 366-378. Dianoux, C. & Linhart, Z. (2009). The Effectiveness of Female Nudity in Advertising in Three European Countries. International Marketing Review, 27, 562-578. Dittmar, H. & Howard, S. (2004). Thin-ideal Internalization and Social Comparison Tendency as Moderators of Media Models' Impact on Women's Body-focused Anxiety. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 23, 768-791. Firth, K., Shaw, P., & Cheng, H. (2005). The Construction of Beauty: A Cross-Cultural Analysis of Women's Magazine Advertising. Journal of Communication, 56-70. Garner, D. M. (1997). The Body Image Survey Results. Psychology Today, 30, 30-48. Gibson, W. & Brown, A. (2009). Working with Qualitative Data. Sage Publications Inc.: Thousand Oaks California. Hatch, L. R. (2005). Gender and Ageism. Generations, 29, 19-24.

  

57

Horyn, C. (2009, September 11). High Fashion Faces a Redefining Moment. The New York Times. Retrieved online April 11, 2013 from: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/11/style/11fashion/html. Jackson, W., & Verberg, N. (2007). Methods: Doing Social Research. Pearson Education Canada. Johnson, R. W., Mermin, G., & Steuerle, C. E. (2006). Work Impediments at Older Ages. The Retirement Project: Discussion Paper Series, 6(2), 1-35. Keshaven, M. (2012). It's Garbage In and Fashion Out With Firm's 'Upcycled' Apparel. San Diego Business Journal, 33, 51. Kozar, J. M. (2012). Effects of Model Age on Adult Female Consumers' Purchase Intentions and Attitudes for an Age-Specific Product, Clothing. International Journal of Marketing Studies, 4(2) 22- 29. Lewis, D. C., Medvedec, K., & Seponski, D. M. (2011). Awakening to the Desires of Older Women: Deconstructing Ageism within Fashion Magazines. Journal of Aging Studies, 25, 101-109. Marie Claire: Think Smart, Look Amazing. (2012). In ICP Media. Retrieved March 7, 2013, from http://www.ipcmedia.com/marieclaire Marshall, C., Lengyel, C., & Utioh, A. (2012). Body Dissatisfaction Among Middle-aged and Older Women. Canadian Journal of Dietetic Practice and Research, 73, 241-247. Mathur, A., & Moschis, G. P. (2007). Baby Boomers and Their Parents: Surprise Findings About Their Lifestyles, Mindsets, and Well-Beings. Ithaca, NY: Paramount Market Publishing Inc. Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Source Book, Thousand Oaks: Sage. Nelson, R., & Paek, H. J. (2005). Cross-Cultural Differences in Sexual Advertising Content in a Transnational Women's Magazine. Sex Roles, 53, 371- 383. Nyren, C. (2005). Advertising to Baby Boomers. Ithaca, NY: Paramount Market Publishing Inc. O The Oprah Magazine. (2009). In Hearst Corporation. Retrieved March 7, 2013, from http://www.hearst.com/magazines/o-the-oprah-magazine.php Oprah Media Kit. (2013). In Madden Media. Retrieved March 7, 2013, from http://www.maddenmedia.com/advertising/Oprah_MediaKit/pdfs/Oprah_MediaKit.pdf

  

58

Peters, C., Shelton, J. A., & Thomas, J. B. (2010). Self-concept and the Fashion Behavior of Women Over 50. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 15(3) 291- 305. Reichert, T. (2002). Sex in Advertising Research: A review of Content, Effects, and Functions of Sexual Information in Consumer Advertising. Annual Review of Sex Research, 13, 241273. Robinson, T., Gustafson, B., & Popovich, M. (2008). Perceptions of Negative Stereotypes of Older People in Magazine Advertisements: Comparing the Perceptions of Older adults and College Students. Aging & Society, 28, 233-251. Stankiewicz, J.M., & Rosselli, F. (2008). Women as Sex Objects and Victims in Print Advertisements. Sex Roles, 58, 579-589. Stephens, D., Hill, R. & Hanson, C. (1994). The Beauty Myth and Female Consumers: The Controversial Role of Advertising. The Journal of Consumer Affairs, 28, 137-154. Twigg, J. (2007). Clothing, age and the body: a critical review. Aging & Society, 27, 285-305. Vogue Media Kit. (2013). In Conde Nast. Retrieved March 7, 2013, from http://www.condenast.com/brands/vogue/media-kit Vogue USA. (2013). In Fashion Model Directory. Retrieved March 7, 2012, from http://www.fashionmodeldirectory.com/magazines/vogue-usa/ Weingand, D. E. (1993). Grounded Theory and Qualitative Methodology. IFLA Journal, 19(1). Wolfe, D. B., & Snyder, R. (2003). Ageless Marketing. Chicago, IL: Kaplan Publishing.

  

59


