Unsprawl: The Future of GTA Suburbs

1

Unsprawl: The Future of GTA Suburbs
By Kelvin Lo

Albert C. Smith, Thesis Supervisor Kendra Schank Smith, Thesis 2nd reader

A thesis submi ed in par al fulfillment of the requirements for Degree of Master of Architecture

RYERSON UNIVERSITY Toronto, Ontario September 2014

Thesis Statement
With GTA ci es expanding, many people escape from the urban conges on and high living standard by migra ng to suburbia where the affordable living can be easily achieved. Majority of the suburbs does not have the op mal popula on density to have a public transportaon system as developed as the city of Toronto. Typical suburbs do not have enough popula on to u lize a public transporta on system that is as developed as the city of Toronto. Therefore, the GTA suburban lifestyle is mainly supported by automobiles, highway infrastructure, and cheap energy source. However, these suburban GTA ci es popula ons have been growing rapidly over the past ten year, which lead to an overloaded and congested infrastructure. As a result, it is necessary for these suburban ci es to adapt and transform itself from a suburban to an urban form. This thesis will focus on the city of Markham, and has chosen this par cular city as the thesis proposal tes ng ground. An edge city like Markham is o en lack of iden ty due to previous homogeneous unrestrained growth of suburban development. The lack of considera on of suburban urban fabric o en results in vast landscape of undis nguishable architecture with confusing orienta on. Therefore, during the process of transforma on to an edge city, how can we use architecture to aid the representa on of these suburban GTA ci es such as Markham and reinvent a dis nct iden ty?

Abstract
This thesis will inves gate the possibili es to capitalize the opportunity of the transforma on process and propose an architectural response to aid Markham to reinvent a dis nct iden ty. Therefore, this essay will be separated into two parts. Part One will examine the background informa on such as, philosophical concepts, precedents, academic ar cles and opinions. Part Two will synthesize the research informa on from Part One and generate an architectural response. Addi onally, it will analyze the best possible site loca on for this architectural response proposal.

PART 1: THESIS & RESEARCH 1.0 Sprawl 1.1 Mariemont Example 1.2 Problem of Sprawl 1.3 Placelessness 1.4 Generic City 2.0 GTA Suburbs 2.1 Markham History 2.2 Diversity & Ethics 2.3 Suburban Transforma on 3.0 What is Iden ty 3.1 Image of The City 3.2 The Generic City 3.3 The Phenomenon of Place

Pg. 2 Pg. 3 Pg. 3 Pg. 4 Pg. 5 Pg. 6 Pg. 6 Pg. 8 Pg. 9 Pg. 12 Pg. 12 Pg. 12 Pg. 12

PART 2: PROJECT PROPOSAL 5.0 Proposal 5.1 Precedents 5.1.1 Finch Subway Sta on 5.1.2 Grand Central Sta on 5.1.3 Kyoto Sta on 5.1.4 The Interchange 5.1.5 Berlin Hauptbahnhol 5.2 Axis Mundi 5.3 Precedents 5.3.1 Washington Monument 5.3.2 CN Tower 5.3.3 Burj Khalifa 5.3.4 Eiffel Tower

Pg. 22 Pg. 23 Pg. 23 Pg. 24 Pg. 25 Pg. 26 Pg. 27 Pg. 28 Pg. 29 Pg. 29 Pg. 30 Pg. 31 Pg. 32

PART 3: DESIGN SOLUTION 6.0 Design 6.1 Building Program 6.2 What is Markham 6.3 Site Selec on 6.4 Selected Site Analysis 6.5 Design Inspira on 6.5.1 Building Placement 6.5.2 Central Axis 6.5.3 Façade Design 5.5.4 Plaza Design 6.5.5 Tower Design 6.6 Floor Plan 6.6.1 B2 Level

Pg. 36 Pg. 36 Pg. 37 Pg. 38 Pg. 40 Pg. 41 Pg. 41 Pg. 42 Pg. 43 Pg. 44 Pg. 46 Pg. 49 Pg. 49

Rendering Sec on 1 Sec on 2 Interior Rendering 1 Interior Rendering 2 Bus Terminal Rendering Train Terminal Rendering Exterior Rendering 1 Exterior Rendering 2 Exterior Rendering 3

Pg. 55 Pg. 55 Pg. 57 Pg. 59 Pg. 61 Pg. 63 Pg. 65 Pg. 67 Pg. 69 Pg. 71

08

Part 1: Thesis & Research
09

1960 0.058 Hectares / Person 2013
0.019 Hectares / Person

01 Sprawl
The sprawl of GTA began in 1960s when automobiles were sold at an affordable price to the common households. The suburban residents were able to commute longer distance to work, school or to other ci es with their automobiles. Consequently, the choice of housing loca ons was no longer bound by the commute distance of their daily life ac vi es. The developed land of GTA per capita has tripled from 1960 to 2011 (Gilbert, 2001). The rapid expansion creates urban sprawl and ini ates the era of homogeneous suburban development. These suburban developments were based on the repe on of the same endless modules. In The Geography of Nowhere, James Howard Kunstler cri cizes the urban sprawl that "Eighty percent of everything ever built in America has been built in the last fi y years, and most of it is depressing, brutal, ugly, unhealthy and spiritually degrading" (Kunstler, 1994). These standardized suburban developments were the by-product of subsidized housing projects "war town" during the post war era and o en drew reference from the Garden City movement in 1898 by Sir Ebenezer Howard. The construc on method of suburb housing is borrowed from military housing prefabrica on procedure, by turning the en re construc on site into an assembly line and each house is provided with a slightly different appearance and floor plan layout (Easterling, 2001). In consequence, the suburban city became a vast landscape of undis nguishable architecture. The idea of place and unique iden ty of a suburban city was lost during the transi on from Garden City movement to present suburban development. The appearance of the subdivision housing had created a demographic shi , from urban to suburban (Lukez, 2007). People who chose to live in the suburbia were hoping to live in a quiet and peaceful community and as a result many suburbs had become the "bedroom city". Those people who chose to live in the suburb will need to commute to downtown for work because the current suburbs are not self-sustainable. The current suburban housing has copied the image of quiet, peaceful neighborhood and each residence has its own front and backyards, private driveway and detach housing unit. They have overlooked the essence of the Garden City that each and every satellite city should be self-sustainable, and therefore long commute distance is undesirable.

2

1.1 Mariemont Example
Mariemont at Ohio is a town designed comprehensively by landscape architect John Nolen. The core principle of Mariemont design is reference from the Garden City. The Garden City idea is to create a self-sufficient suburb once it reaches a maximum popula on and another suburb will be developed nearby. The Mariemont is interna onally famous and documented as a successful example of the urban satellite city and later became a default protocol of residen al subdivision development in the interwar era (Easterling, 2001). The road infrastructure design in Mariemont is focus on hierarchy of street, there are five major streets connected to the town core and simple grids of streets are located in between the major streets. Within the grid, Nolen carefully located the residen al, commercial and public infrastructure in the proper ra o for achieving a perfect harmony in the design. Today Mariemont has proven that it is s ll one of the most successful self-sustaining satellites suburbs.

1.2 Problem of Sprawl
Conversely, today the suburban ci es in GTA are doing the opposite of the Garden City intended goals and the GTA ci es growth have turn into an unstoppable urban sprawl. Sprawl has made the metropolitans of Toronto vehicle dependent and the road infrastructures became the backbone of the city. Sprawl has created various problems such as loss of farmlands, increased public service costs, and suburban communi es that are lacked iden ty. According to the sta s cs of Ontario Farmland Trust, farmlands located in the southern Ontario have decreased at an alarming rate, whereby a total of 29,800 km2 of farmlands were lost in Ontario since 1951 (Ontario Farmland Trust, 2004). As suburbaniza on con nues, the GTA alone will lose 600km2 class one farmland by 2030 (Sta s c Canada, 1996). Furthermore, the GTA's tax payers will need to invest $55 billion to build new road and water infrastructures to accommodate the upcoming sprawls, in addi on to the high opera ng and maintenance costs, approximately $14 billion entailed to these new infrastructures (Slack, 2002).

3

1.3 Placelessness
TThe rapid expansion in the GTA has led to a banal, homogeneous design and development of the suburban housings in the Toronto community, resul ng in a lack of iden ty. Respec vely, Edward Relph describes this phenomenon in his ar cle Prospect of Place as Placelessness. Placelessness refers to an urban environment that does not contain any significant places or dis nct a tude toward place making, which does not recognize any important elements in places (Relph, 1976). Placelessness describes GTA suburban ci es perfectly; it is a vast landscape of similar architecture and building typology. It is a concept that also describes a place without a center, node or a significance point of loca on. Everyone who lived in these suburban communi es have experienced it; it is a place that does not call a en on to itself; it is a place that is remarkably unremarkable; even though you have experience everything we just men oned but yet you have experienced nothing (Relph, 1976). Edward Relph argues that placelessness in these suburban ci es is inevitable and it will con nue to be the future development trend. If we examine the current GTA suburban ci es growth, it is a valid assump on that the current GTA suburbia is advancing toward a city that is generic and similar as any other city in the North America. It is inevitable because we are overly dependent on the technique we used. We have always used a similar technique to construct a structure for efficiency and cost effec veness. In The Technological Society, Jacques Ellul stated that "The a tude of scien st, at any rate, is clear. Technique exists because it is technique. The golden age will be because it will be. Any other answer is superfluous." (Ellul, 1967). By way of explana on, technique has become the communal language of GTA suburban development and we are unable to think of other possibili es because the technique has become the only and dominant language that we speak. On the other hand, mass culture has also led to the inevitability of placelessness in suburbia. "As an unselfconscious a tude placelessness is par cularly associated with mass culture" (Relph, 1976). The media has always portrayed the idea of American Dream as an ideal way of life and devote to the no on that every individual who live in suburbia will have a be er and a fulfilling lifestyle. Furthermore, the dream has also used the idea of home ownership in suburbia as a status representa on which separates the middle class from the lower class. These portrayed images have led to the booming of suburbia and disperse development. Furthermore, placelessness will be inevitable and con nue to dictate the future trend of suburbia development. As the idea of placelessness has become more apparent in the GTA suburban ci es, the value of an iden ty and sense of place will con nues to diminish. Therefore, this thesis will explore the possibility of preven ng these suburban ci es heading toward the trend of placelessness and explore possible opportuni es to reinvent a dis nct iden ty for these GTA suburban ci es.

1.4 Generic City
On the other hand, Rem Koolhaas has called this placelessness phenomenon in suburban ci es the Generic City. In his ar cle of The Generic City, he describes the idea of Generic City as "It is nothing but a reflec on of present need and present ability. It is the city without history. It is big enough for everybody. It is easy. It does not need maintenance. If it gets too small it just expands. If it gets old it just self ­ destruct and renews. It is equally exci ng ­ or unexci ng ­ everywhere." (Koolhaas, 2007). Rem Koolhaas believes Generic City is the result and reflec on of present day needs and the mass culture of society. He sees today the peripheral ci es are becoming awfully similar that are characterless and fill with unno ceable architecture. In addi on, these ci es iden ty become as generic as their physical characteris c. Rem Koolhaas has a similar a tude toward these peripheral ci es as Edward Relph; however

4

he believes this phenomenon does not only happen in North America ci es but it has become a worldwide problem. According to Rem Koolhaas research, the popula on Generic city has grown exponen ally over the half century and the number of loca ons had increased drama cally. It exists in Asia, Europe, Australia and Africa. In the early 1970's, the residents of the Generic City is approximately 2.5 million residents and in 2013 it increased to 15 million (±500,000) (Koolhaas, 2007). The Generic City is the resultant of urban sprawl. Rem Koolhaas describes Generic City are the peripheral ci es originate from a downtown city core, the link with the city core iden ty has become weaker as the distance become longer and further away from the center. As a result, these edge ci es become an orphaned child that is center-less and disconnected from its mother-the city core. These center-less edge ci es are inherently confusing in orienta on, with disperse and low density developments. "Instead of concentra on ­ simultaneous presence in the Generic City individual moments are spaced far apart to create a trance of almost unno ceable aesthe c experiences." (Koolhaas, 2007). Moreover, the Generic City was fundamentally designed to be vehicle oriented and the road infrastructures become the guidance for future city growth. Rem Koolhaas has speculated the reason of the Generic City is dull and dreadfully similar to other edge ci es because the growth of these ci es are always pre-planned or pre-determined according to the demands of the society. It does not marinate with me and therefore it will always be a city without history or culture. "Compare to classical city, the Generic City is sedated, usually perceived from a sedentary posi on." (Koolhaas, 2007) The Generic City is a city that will create mass development but does not contain a soul and dis nct iden ty. It only exists to merely fulfill the demand and accommodate the city growth. Rem Koolhaas sees the Generic City "is fractural, an endless repe on of the same simple structural module; it is possible to reconstruct it from its smallest en ty." (Koolhaas, 2007).

5

2.0 GTA Suburbs
This thesis has chosen Markham as its proposal tes ng ground, because the condi on that is described above is very similar to the current Markham situa on. Moreover, Markham is one of the Greater Toronto Area suburban city that is growing exponen ally and the city has the poten al for a radical change toward the current suburban condi on. This city is urgently in need for an iden ty, it is one of the few suburbs in the GTA that is currently undergoing suburban to urban transforma on. Therefore, Markham is chosen as the favorable loca on for this thesis proposal.

2.1 Markham History
The history of Markham is originated back to 1791 when John Graves Simcoe the first Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada was appointed. During his appointment as Lieutenant Governor, Simcoe's decisions had directly affected the future of Markham. He established the system of free land grants which influenced the founding and development of today's Markham. Simcoe was also given the responsibility of genera ng the name of the Township and he chose to name a er his friend William Markham, the Archbishop of York during that me (Champion, 1979). The first se lement in Markham was led by William Moll Berczy, a German Ar st, in 1792. The group was traveled from Europe to North America and consisted of sixty-four families. Their ini al plan was to arrive in Philadelphia and se le in the area near Genesee of New York State. However, upon their arrival in the state of New York, dispute occurred over finances and land lease and the group of se ler that led by Berczy were forced to relocate elsewhere. In 1794, these se lers arrived in Markham Township and Berczy conveyed Simcoe to lease over 64,000 acres of land to the newly arrived families. As a result, Markham was known as the German Company Lands. How-

6

ever, the European se lers were not accustoming to Canada's harsh winter and the first few years were proven to be challenging for these families. Due to the struggle of the harsh Canadian winter and crop failure, these se lers decided to relocate further south to Niagara. Many other group of se lers arrived which including French Revolu onary Emigres, United Empire Loyalists, Pennsylvania-Germans, all these immigrants were hoping to find a be er living quality, however many have relocated due to the harsh climate. (Champion, 1979) In 1794 ­ 1830, the se lers that did not leave had forged an agricultural industry in Markham. Moreover, the rivers and streams in Markham were used to support water-powered machines such as water-powered saw, grist and woolen mills. Small villages that were located in Markham such as German mills, Almira, Bu onville, Cedar Grove and Unionville were experience huge amount of growth. (Champion, 1979) By 1857, majority of the township wilderness area had been cleared to accommodate the popula on growth. The road infrastructures were greatly improved as the popula on growth con nues to increase and Markham became a large township. The villages that are located within the region such as Thornhill, Unionville, and Markham began to expand quickly and specialized in various industries such as wagon works, tanneries, farm implement manufacturers and furniture factories. (Champion, 1979) In 1871, the Toronto and Nipissing Railway Company connected Markham with the Scarborough Uxbridge Line railway and placed the train sta ons in Unionville and Markham. Consequently, the sta ons a racted many transit oriented development and Markham popula on increased to 1,100 by 1891. However, with the increase and improved communica on with Toronto from the railway system, the industrial role of Markham to Toronto city core began to diminish. Furthermore, the local businesses were unable to compete with the larger Toronto suppliers. Consequently, these local industries began to anguish and Markham was once of the Canada great industrialized town were back to a peaceful agricultural based village. (Champion, 1979) In 1960s, a er World War II, Toronto was heavily industrialized due to World War II and experienced a postwar baby boom. Markham has absorbed waves of immigrants that came from all over the world (Champion, 1979). As the popula on increased and township became urbanized, the size of developed area of Markham had grown immensely and Markham became a con nua on of Toronto urban sprawl.

7

2.2 Diversity & Ethics
By 1970, Markham popula on has increased to 37,500 and became one of the major growth center of York Region. The growth and urbaniza on of Markham has steadily con nues ll 1991, the popula on reached 150,000. From 1992 to 2012 the popula on growth of Markham began to increase exponen ally, from 150,000 to 310,000 residents (Economic Development Department, 2012). Throughout the popula on growth, its demographic has changed drama cally compared to the past 30 years. Markham has become one of the most visibly diverse municipali es and well known for its mul culturalism. Approximately 57 percent of the resident is foreign born and 65 percent are Canada's visible minority. It is a community that contains rich cultural wealth which highly benefits its community wellbeing. Over me, the variety of cultures in Markham has increased and deepened. It was once a town that only comprised of Chris ans, whereas today Markham is also populated by Jews, Muslims, Hindus, Buddhist, and Silkhs. The ethics of Markham was once a European community and as of now many new minori es reside in Markham including immigrants from China, India, Korea, Sri Lank, Philippines and the islands of the Caribbean. With the new popula on growth, Markham has increased 103 percent of its popula on from the past two decades. Due to the nature of suburban neighborhood design, resident of Markham are vehicle dependents. In addi on, the density of Markham has remained low in comparison to a downtown Toronto. Therefore it is not viable to create a highly developed public transit system. However, the increased popula on has led to heavy traffic conges on within the city road infrastructure. 180,000 trips are made by car daily that can take less than 30 minute to reach by foot or bike (Irwin, 2009). Markham did not an cipate such substan al growth, and this has reflected by its road infrastructure planning. The road infrastructure has not experienced any major upgrade over the past two decades and it was not designed for 310,000 residents. Moreover, Markham has predicted that its popula on will increase another 37% to 421,600 by 2031 (Economic Development Department, 2012). The traffic conges on problem will only be more devastated as the popula on con nues to growth. Addi onally, it is inevitable that we will con nue the suburban sprawl and low density development which it will further worsen the problem. It has reached to a point that the Suburban life style of Markham can no longer be able to sustain and Markham had already begun its suburban transforma on, from suburb to urban.

8

2.3 The On-Going Transforma on of Markham
As of 2006, Markham begin to change its policies toward businesses by lowering tax rate which increase its compe veness with other municipali es, such as Richmond Hill, Vaughan, Hamilton and Toronto. Many high-tech companies have chosen to reside their Canada headquarters in Markham such as Broadcom Canada, ATI Technologies, IBM Canada, Apple Computer Canada, Motorola Canada, Honeywell Canada and many more world-wide companies. Furthermore, 900 high-technology and life sciences companies are located inside Markham, which generated about 38,000 employments. The overall employment in the GTA of this two sec ons is approximately 140,000 which is a quarter of the overall workforce. Since 1980 Markham has been seen as one of the bedroom city to Toronto, conversely the city begin to brand itself as the high-tech capitol of Canada since many high-tech companies have chosen to locate within Markham. Markham is not just a bedroom city to Toronto anymore; it began to transform itself to a live-work community and becoming more sustainable than its previous form. There are many opportuni es lie beyond the future of Markham. The provincial government has proposed "The Big Move", a regional transporta on master plan published by Metrolinx, for the overall Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area. The Ontario government has also proposed the future loca on of the 25 urban growth centers that spread across the Greater Toronto Area and the Golden Horseshoe. These centers were proposed in a form of combina on of a proposed or exis ng downtown to achieve a target density. The Big Move and urban growth centers plans are linked hand in hand to target the traffic conges on problem specifically to the Toronto suburban ci es like Markham. The "Big Move" plan proposed to increase the size of the GTA public transporta on system and enabling the rapid transit system to expand deeper into the 905 suburban ci es. On the other hand, the urban growth centers within the 905 area will be located within Hamilton, Downtown Burlington, Vaughan Metropolitan Center, Richmond Hill, Markham, Downtown Pickering and Downtown Oshawa. The idea of these urban growth center is to promote live-work environment which ul mately shorten the commute me. Hence, these plans will be the guidance for the future development and during this me, we can expect forthcoming growth in those areas. How do we use this opportuni es to aid Markham reinven ng a dis nct iden ty?

9

PARIS

HONG KONG

WHAT KIND OF CI
VANCOUVER SAN FRANSICO

LOS ANGELES
10

BEIJING

KARACHI

TOKYO

TY DO WE WANT?
SHANGHAI SEOUL

NEW YORK

MUMBAI
11

3.0 What is iden ty?
3.1 The Image of the City
In The Image of the City, Kevin Lynch described iden ty as "A Workable image requires first the iden fica on of an object, which implies its dis nc on from other things, its recogni on as a separable en ty. This is call iden ty, not in the sense of equality with something else, but with the meaning of individuality or oneness. Second, the image must include the spa al or pa ern rela on of the object to the observer and to other object. Finally, this object must have some meaning include the spa al or pa ern rela on of the object to the observer and to other object." (Lynch, 1960). He believes iden ty is an image which iden fies an object or a place and in his book he called it "imageability". The higher the imageability, the stronger the iden ty of the iden fied object or place is. Addi onally, this iden fied object or place should be able to relate to individual with certain meaning embedded. He also believes imageability of a city is built out of elements such as path, landmark, edge, node and district. In his ar cle, he further inves gated the func on of each elements and a strong image could not be achieve by one element. He believes that in order to forge a strong image, we need to strategically use the combina on of various elements. When a city with a strong image, the people who experience the city can easily orient themselves and the system of orienta on varies from different city. He believes the system of orienta on is used and interpreted in various way throughout the world and it is based on culture and the city urban fabric (Lynch, 1960).

3.2 The Generic City
In Ar cle of Generic City, Rem Koolhaas described iden ty as, "Iden ty centralizes; it insists on an essence, a point." (Koolhaas, 2007). He believes iden ty is the essence of the object that is being represented and it should hold a certain meaning that can be related to individual. The stronger the iden ty of a city, the more it resists to change and expansion. Therefore in his ar cle, he cri cized that the current suburban city as the Generic City and the identy of these city could change at any me. Furthermore, it is a city that is center-less and lack of a strong iden ty. He also argues that iden ty does not need to build on the culture or the history of that place. He cri cized that the tradi onal way of crea ng iden ty through culture or the history is no longer a viable op on. If iden ty is constructed in a form of sharing and recrea ng of the past, it will always be a losing proposi on (Koolhaas, 2007). The more we use the history to generate an iden ty, the meaning become less significant. He believes we have come to a point we no longer can abuse the history and forge a meaningful iden ty. Furthermore, he sees "Iden ty is like a mousetrap in which more and more mice have to share the original bait." (Koolhaas, 2007). Therefore, instead of genera ng an iden ty from the past, we should focus on capturing the essence of the present and interpret it into an architectural design.

3.3 The Phenomenon of Place
In the ar cle of The Phenomenon of Place, Chris an Norberg Schulz described iden ty as "Structure of place ought to be described in terms of "landscape" and "se lement", and analyzed by means of the categories "space" and "character". Space denotes the three dimensional organiza on of the elements which make up a place. Character denotes the general "atmosphere" which is the most comprehensive property of any place." (Schulz, 1976) He believes that iden ty could be divided and structured into two main elements, place and character. And with the combina on of different place and character, it will create a unique iden ty. The concept of a place that is men oned in his ar cle, refers to the configura on of a three dimensional space which could be referred as a city node, street,

12

building or even a room. The no on of the "character" is referred to an atmosphere that always goes along with the idea of a place. It is emphasized on experience and it could be created by the material and the structure of the place. Chris an also believes that the existence of architecture is to transform a site into a place by revealing the meaning that is hidden within the given environment. And he further argues that man will always create place from his understanding of the site and the meaning of this place is something that he can relate to. He further stated the three basic ways of man rela ng himself to a man-made place. 1. Man envisions his understand of his surrounding context and interpret it into a building structure. 2. Man has to symbolize these understood meaning and transformed into another medium, and in this case which will be a building and it will become part of the culture of that par cular place. 3. Man need to express his experienced meaning and translate it onto the place which will become his center of the world (Schulz, 1976). From this concept, he concluded that every culture has develops a "system of orienta on". If the system is weak, the people within this place will feel "lost" and the image of the city will be easily forgo en. The stronger the orienta on, the more apparent of the iden fica on of that place will be. He also men oned that it is possible for a place without orienta on or iden fica on, as to a person can get along without the feeling "at home". Conversely, he stated human iden ty is highly related to the place we live and vice versa that human iden ty will predetermine the iden ty of place (Schulz, 1976). Therefore it is important that our living environment has a strong orienta on system which will also provide a solid iden fica on.

13

What the others really saying?

Ancient Text Interpretation

Hermeneutics

4.0 Hermeneu c
Ever since the first building is erected, the concept of interpreta on in architecture has always been incorpora ng into building design methodology. In the early age, usually is the architect understanding of the surrounding context and then he reinterprets and represents these understood meaning through his architectural design. As men oned in the ar cle of Phenomenon of Place by Chris an Norberg Schulz, "Man wants to visualize his `understanding' of nature, `expressing' the existen al foothold he has gained. To achieve this he built what he has seen. Where nature suggests a delimited space he builds an enclosure." (Schulz, 1976). These meanings could be the interpreta on of the culture, historic event or the cosmos of the city. Furthermore, the building that is able to interpret the clear rela onship with these meanings o en becomes part of the city iden ty. This method of interpreta on has become the tradi onal ways of strengthening an iden ty of a place in architectural design. In contemporary, architect o en used the tradi onal method of interpreta on to synthesize a meaning into its building design. Likewise, in the process of interpreta on will create an iden ty or sense of place. However, today's architects usually use the concept of interpreta on to reinterpret an old meaning, culture or historic event into modern building design idea. These methods of interpreta on could be parallel and compare to the theory of hermeneu cs. Hermeneu cs is the theory of interpreta on that is used to interpret ancient text, especially in biblical, wisdom and philosophical context. The theory of Hermeneu cs is ini ated by Mar n Heidegger and developed further by Hans-Georg Gadamer. Many other fields have used the theory of Hermeneu c, such as archaeology, law, poli cal philosophy, religion, theology and sociology, as a method of interpreta on. In Interpre ng Environments: Tradi on, Deconstruc on, Hermeneu cs, Robert Mugerauer described the theory of hermeneu cs as "Within the contemporary Con nental tradi on of hermeneu cs ­ the theory and prac ce of interpreta on." (Mugerauer, 1995) In the common use of hermeneu cs interpreta on, it usually recognizes the historical and cultural background from which a text or work is developed, and since these context will become obsolete as me goes by, then the interpreter will reinterpret the true meaning behind the work or text to fit into today context. In a simplified term, it is "what the others really saying". Since the context is constantly changing, therefore there will be no simple of fixed meaning

14

and the used of hermeneu c will always be necessary for interpreta on. In the eyes of hermeneu c, all sort of understanding falls into the concept of interpreta on and which is always dependent on the context or the situa on and thus meaning is always produce in certain me and culture by people. These contexts that we currently experiencing are called the "horizon of understanding", for which we are able to see everything from a specific vantage point (Mugerauer, 1995). Heidegger further develops the idea of horizon of understanding and created the concept of "hermeneu cal circle". He believes in order to understand anything correctly we need to have prior connec on with or pre-understanding of the whole context and that is our horizon of understanding. Furthermore, from any understanding of the whole that is developed or projected will always origin from our "horizon". In the hermeneu cal circle, the center will always be our horizon and the circle will always expand concentrically during the process of understanding. (Mugerauer, 1995) Some me hermeneu cs might recovery meaning in texts or works that might not be apparent at the me the meaning is developed. Recovery of meaning is one of the major aspects of Hermeneu c. Since past condi on will always be different from the present, with the considera on of these differences, new meaning could occasionally be experienced during the process of interpreta on. Even though hermeneu c does not try to create new meaning, it takes away the obsoleted context. As a result, people can understand the text or work to its fullness meaning (Mugerauer, 1995).

Horizon of understanding

Pre-understanding of culture and context

The Horizon

Horizon

Hermeneutics Circle

15

4.1 Hermeneu c Precedents
4.1.1 Taipei 101
The Taipei 101 tower is located in the center of Xinyi District and designed by C. Y. Lee. The tower was formerly known as the Taipei World Financial Center. In 2004, it was officially ranked the tallest tower un l the Burj Khalifa in Dubai was constructed, but it s ll holds the record of tallest LEED green building in the world. The building form is a reinterpreta on and inspira on of a tradi onal Chinese pagoda, stalk of bamboo and a stack of ancient Chinese money box. The Taipei 101 tower used the concept of Chinese pagoda of connec ng the ground and the sky, which is ac ng as an axis mundi of Taipei (Taipei Financial Center Corp, 2009). And a Chinese pagoda symbolizes the Chinese culture and the idea of Buddhism (Cai, 2011). Furthermore, the green nt of glass and the repe on of building floor sec ons resemble the shape of a Chinese bamboo which symbolized the idea of learning and growth in Chinese culture. Lastly, each sec ons of the tower resemble the form of an ancient Chinese ingot which represen ng the meaning of abundance of wealth (Taipei Financial Center Corp, 2009). These elements are the reinterpreta on of the architect, which create a connec on between the Chinese cultures and believes with contemporary architectural design. The office tower is comprised with eight sec ons and each sec on contains eight floors. The number eight is constantly used within the building design because it represents the idea of fortune in Chinese's culture. The pronuncia on in Chinese of the number eight is rhymed with the word " " (Fa), which means fortune and wealth. Therefore, in Chinese common culture and supers on, the number eight is considered as a lucky number and symbolizes the idea of fortune. Furthermore, these floor sec ons of the tower are marked with the Chinese symbol of "Ruyi" on the exterior. "Ruyi" in Chinese is translated to "as you wish" and it is the Chinese hallmark of fulfillment and gra fica on. Moreover, these "Ruyi" is considered as a Chinese talisman which origin from the Chinese heavenly clouds. It symbolizes the idea of healing, protec on and happiness (Taipei Financial Center Corp, 2009). These design gestures are

16

Bamboo Stalk
Symbolize Learning & Growth

Chinese Ignot
Symbolize Abundance of wealth

Sign of "Ruyi" Chinese Pagoda
Symbolize Connection between the sky and the ground & idea of Chinese Culture Translate to "As you wish" Chinese hallmark of fulfillment and gratification

considered an interpreta on of the Chinese society common believes into the tower design scheme. In each side of the tower, there is an ancient Chinese coin placed above the entrances of the tower. The Chinese coin resembles the Arabic numerical of 101 and the tower contains 101 floor, and that is how the name of Taipei 101 is derived. The number of 101 through Chinese interpreta on is con nuously seeking perfec on. The meaning of 101 is that the number 100 represents perfec on in a tradi onal sense and 101 is interpreted as constantly be er than perfec on (Taipei Financial Center Corp, 2009). The combina on of the Chinese culture, common believes, and historical concept to form a tower design, is an excellent example of hermeneu c interpreta on. In addi on, C. Y. Lee has subtly interpreted these meanings into the building design and the tower has successful reinforced the city iden ty. It is necessary for C. Y. Lee to go through such process because the Taipei 101 is the city axis mundi and it will certainly be a landmark of the City of Taipei.

17

4.1.2 Barndominium
The Barndominium is a residen al building designed by LoJo, a Houston based architectural firm that is located in Texas, US. The house is designed for a couple that had re red and moved to the country side of Houston. The building design is inspired by the barn building typology and it is a reference to the tradi onal vernacular architecture of Texas. Although the building outlook resembles the form of a Texas barn, it does not func on or operate as one. The Bardonminium is a contemporary version of a tradi onal barn but operated as a live-work residen al unit and the home of a re red couple (Jolo, 2010). Lojo has reinterpreted the physical essence of a tradi onal barn and infused it into the building design. The reinterpreta on and representa on of the building form has imposed new meanings to the architectural design. The outcome of the building contains the connota on of the culture and the history of the Texas country life style. Furthermore, the Barndominium has now become a part of the iden ty of the area. The Barndominium design has incorporated many sustainable features such as, passive ven la on, roof solar panels, high efficiency HVAC system, recycled insula on and exterior wood panel. Furthermore, it is designed to be "float" above the site as a solu on to solve the subtle slope of the Texas landscape. The raised founda on design solu on also solves the problem of the Texas soil that contains high clay content. In consequences, it resolved as a crawl space which provides space for underfloor mechanical, plumbing and electrical. The workshop of the building is separately ven lated therefore it allow ac vely condi oned living space and the workshop is passive ven lated throughout the year (Jolo, 2010). Lojo not only reinterpret the building form into a contemporary modern style, but they also have integrated many up to date technology and design approach into the building design that will fit the contemporary life style. LoJo has re-presented the tradi onal image of a barn si ng on top of a country side Texas parries farmland into to a present-day version.

18

4.1.3 Ningbo Historic Museum
The Ningbo Historic Museum is designed by Architect Wang Shu, who is the first Chinese ci zen architect who receives the Pritzker Prize in 2012. Furthermore, the Ningbo Historic Museum design won the Lu Ban Prize in 2009, it is consider a top architectural prize in China. The Museum is located in Ningbo, China and it is built to exhibit the Ningbo city's history and culture. The building design concept is inspirited by Chinese vision of China's wilderness; it is reference from the Chinese landscape ink pain ng of mountain, water and ocean (Pasternack, 2009). At the first percep on of the building, it is hard to recognize any organic feature or natural form, but the bulky tectonic build form is actually an interpreta on of the nearby mountain of Ningbo. As ma er of fact the daun ng scale of the building, the building façade actually offer an in macy experience to the building users. The façade is cladded with 20 different types of bricks and les that is scavenged from surrounding farmer's home of the surrounding area. The cladding technique that is used to construct the building façade is borrowed from the local. The technique is used for region that o en compelled by the typhoons and it can be quickly rebuild and repair to provide immediate shelter (Pasternack, 2009). Wang Shu used the local construc on method that is to build the local tradi onal China's housing and reinterpreted this method to building a contemporary modern style museum. This is one of the example that demonstrates the interpreta on of old to new. Wang Shu has incorporated local scavenged les into the building design. These scavenged les are the vernacular material of the local area. In addi on, Wang Shu able to integrate an obsoleted tradi onal material into a contemporary modern building designs. It is a fusion of architectural style between the old and new. It opens up various new interpreta on of meaning by using these les. The gesture of using recycled material to create the museum building façade is a contemporary building design method. The concept of using recycled materials that is scavenged from the surrounding area of the farmer's home, it offers new meaning to the building design. These scavenged les carry the culture and history from the surrounding plebeian household of Ningbo and Wang Shu was able to reinterpret this meaning and translate it into the building façade design. Consequently, the museum wall façade is now embedded with Ningbo history and culture. With China's recent accelera ng urbaniza on, it has obliterated most of the surrounding building that carry the culture and history of Ningbo city. Therefore it is crucial that Wang Shu to capture the culture and history of the city and reinterpreted these meaning into the building design and allow the Ningbo historic Museum holds the iden ty of the city of Ningbo.

19

20

Part 2 : Project Proposal

21

5.0 Proposal
In conclusion with previous discussion, we should not continue with the current urban sprawl growth model, it is proved to be not sustainable and feasible for the future of Markham. Instead of con nues with the scatter growth model, Markham should begin to focuses on centralized development and increase its popula on density. Furthermore, it will be possible to generate an effec ve public transit system, if Markham increases its popula on density. Markham is considered a place that is "placelessness" as previously men oned because it is a city without a center and there is no physical reference point could be made. If there is a center point established within Markham, a downtown city core, the resident of Markham could use this center to orient themselves around the city. As of today Markham, there is a lack of physical references and 95% of the area is awfully similar and generic. If we examine the possible node and center point loca ons of the current city fabric, it could be the Pacific Mall, Markville Mall and the First Markham Place. These loca ons could be the representa on of Markham to the general public. Furthermore, the architecture of these building is very generic which can be relocated anywhere else in Toronto and no one will no ce the differences. Markham is known for its mul culturalism and diversity, however the urban fabric did not reflect these quality traits. And a vibrant suburban community like Markham, is devoured by the homogeneous development of the urban sprawl. The purpose of this thesis is to inves gate the possibility of inven ng a dis nct iden ty for the Greater Toronto Area suburban city. In this case, this thesis has chosen Markham as a test site, therefore the ques on is how we can use architecture to aid Markham to reinvent a dis nct iden ty. Furthermore, what kind of building typology could be proposed that will be appropriate and able to accomplish such task? It is proper to assume the proposed building typology should be a posi ve addi on to the future of Markham and should be well complied with the future proposed city plan. As previously inves gated, the "Big Move" and urban growth center are the proposed future plan and it will act as a guidance of the future development of Markham. A mobility hub would be appropriate for the propose building typology for this thesis and in the case of Markham. It is one of the building typology that will able to work well within and be part of the "Big Move" and Urban Growth Center plans. When a mobility hub is placed in a reasonable loca on, it will always ini ate a transit oriented development and idea will further inves gate in the following sec on of precedents. Furthermore, when a wave of transit oriented development imitated, it will increase the popula on density of the surrounding environment, and this could be the designated loca on for the future popula on growth. In addi on, once the area reach to an op mum density, an effec ve public transit system could become feasible. The mobility will act as a seed and eventually it will growth into a town center. Consequently, the mobility hub will become the center of Markham and the resident of Markham can use this center as a reference point to orient themselves within the city. When the mobility become an everyday des na on for the Markham resident and the center of Markham, it will be the perfect building to use it to represent and reinvent the iden ty of Markham.

22

5.1 Precedents

5.1.1 Finch Subway Sta on - Toronto, Canada
The Toronto Finch Subway Sta on is located at the intersec on of Yonge Street & Finch Avenue of City of Toronto. The sta on begin opera on since 1974, it has become one of the busiest TTC subways sta on of today and serving approximately 102,000 passenger per day. The sta on is adjoined with an above ground TTC bus terminal and it connects with majority of the TTC bus route. The sta on is considered as a TTC transporta on hub. The sta on iniated a waves of transit oriented development, during the construc on and a er the comple on. Addi onally, these developments including new shopping mall, condominium and office building surrounded the sta on approximately 2km radius. These new condominium occupied over 20,000 units. Moreover, the popula on density of that area has increase drama cally. As a result, the sta on becomes the center of the municipality of North York. The sta on is located at the heart of municipality of North York and it is use by over 102,000 passenger per daily. Therefore, this subways sta on would be the perfect piece of architecture to represent and reinforce the iden ty of North York. Even though, the sta on has the perfect opportunity to do so, unfortunately the architecture of the sta on fails to represent and express the unique iden ty of this area. The architecture of the sta on is only a rectangular 60's brick box building that is lack of any architectural expression and incapable of represen ng the vibrant community. The Finch subways sta on building is a subtle entrance that only used to connect people to the underground pla orms alternator.

23

5.1.2 Grand Central Station - New York, United States
The Grand Central Terminal is a railroad station located at the intersection of 42nd Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan, New York. The railway station is designed by Reed and Stem, and Warren and Wetmore architecture firm, both of these firm are based in New York City. The Grand Central is acted as an interchange hub that connects the subway, bus, streetcar and train. The station began operation since 1871, and went through a major renovation during 1913. After the renovation, the station attracted an upsurge of transit oriented development and created a mini-city within New York. The "mini terminal city" includes Commodore Hotel, Helmsley Building (former New York Central headquarter), Chrysler Building and various office building (Grand Central Terminal, 2013). Eventually, the Grand Central Terminal becomes one of the city node or center of the city, which is similar to the Finch Subway Station precedent that is previously mentioned. However the different between the Grand Central Terminal and the Finch Subway Station is that the Grand Central Terminal became one of the New York City landmark. Furthermore, it has successfully represented the historic and cultural aspect of New York City. As reported by a travel magazine Travel + Leisure, the Grand Central Terminal is ranked number six of the world most visit travel destination and it annually attract approximately 21,600,000 visitor (Matthews, 2011). The Grand Central Terminal not only acting just an ordinary train station to the City, it has become one of the image and representation of New York City.

24

5.1.3 Kyoto Station - Kyoto, Japan
The Kyto Station () is a railroad station and a transportation hub located in Kyoto, Japan. The Station is designed by Hiroshi Kara architect. The Kyto Station is the second largest railway station in Japan, it is a 15 story building that is integrated with a shopping mall, hotel, movie theater, Isetan department store and local government facilities. The station is adjoined with the city subway station, bus terminal and the air terminal. The Kyto Station has gone through several major expansion and renovation. The current Kyto Station begin operation since 1997 and it was a celebration to Kyto's 1,200th anniversary. Kyto is one of the least modern cities in Japan, we could consider the city of Kyto is the suburb of Japan. When this station was proposed for construction, many Kyto residents were afraid to accept such ambitious structure. Since the design of the Kyto station exhibited a futuristic architectural expression, with steel structural frame and enclosed with irregular rectangular glass façade. The resident of Kyto believes it will not fit with the urban fabric of the city of Kyto. When the building was constructed, it attracted many transit oriented developments. In addition, the station becomes the heart of the city of Kyto. Fortunately, the building became one of the landmarks in Kyto, despite that the aesthetic of the building is very opposite with Kyto urban fabric. In addition, the Kyto Station creates its identity through a distinct build form that contrast with the surround context and architectural programs that offer daily activity.

25

5.1.4 The Interchange - Minneapolis, United States
The Interchange train station is a proposed transportation hub and plan to be located in Downtown Minneapolis. It is a design and build project in collaboration with three firms, EE&K, Perkins Eastman Company and Knutson Construction. The overall project is contracted for $79.3 million. The expected completion is by 2014. The design team of this project is led by Peter Cavaluzzi architect. The intension of this project is to create a connection and relationship between transit and culture. The design team pictured this project to be a technological advance transit hub with mixused development and an all year round public gathering space for the city. The Interchange will expect more than 500 trains 1,900 daily bus trip to arrive and depart from the station (Furuto, 2013). According to Peter Cavaluzzi, he said "The Interchange will be the nexus of transit and culture in Minneapolis, a high-quality series of places for residents and sports fans to connect, circulate, and gather. The Interchange is expecting to become the new "central station square" for Minneapolis by proposing a public space, the Great Lawn. The Great Lawn is the heart of the design that provides space for public activities such as pre-game events, community concert, seasonal events and space of individual activities (Furuto, 2013). It is a public space that host gathering activities and make The Interchange as one of the city main destination. The Interchange is hoping to create an identity or sense of place through iconic building form and city gathering activity.

26

5.1.5 Berlin Hauptbahnhof - Berlin, Germany
The Berlin Central Station is one of the main railway stations in Berlin, Germany. The Station is developed by Gerkan, Marg and Partners, an architectural firm based in Hamburg. The lead architect of this project is Meinhard von Gerkan. The station is located on the historic site of Lehrter Bahnhof. Furthermore, the location choice is intended to signify the importance of the new Berlin Hauptbahnhof and the station is meant to become a city center. The Berlin Central Station design used exposed steel structure and enclosed with glass. Moreover, it offers a technical aesthetic looks and the building design could consider as a representation of high-tech architecture. The current Berlin Central Station begins its operation since May 2006. The Berlin Central Station receives approximately over 1,500 trains and 25,000 ridership daily. The station does not solely function as a train station but it also incorporated different programs such as shops, restaurants, and office space. In addition, the area distribution of these spaces are 15,000 m2 are for shop and restaurant, 50,000 m2 are for office and only 21,000 m2 are intended for railway platforms. From the space distribution, it indicates the importance of the shopping center and office space. The Berlin Central Station is a destination for commuter but it also becomes a daily activity destination for Berlin residents. The station becomes an important landmark of Berlin and it also creates a sense of place through the activities it offers.

27

5.2 Axis Mundi of the city
The goal of this thesis is to aid the GTA suburban ci es to reinvent a dis nct iden ty and the tes ng ground of this thesis will be the city of Markham. As concluded from previous inves ga on that iden ty could be established through a center which will be the focus point and representa on of the city. Furthermore, this thesis proposed to establish a center within Markham by using a mobility hub. From the precedent reviews, a mobility hub will always generate waves of transit oriented development and eventually the hub will become one of the center node of the city. Furthermore, majority of the mobility hub precedents that are reviewed also became the image or the representa on of the city. Therefore, it is clearly demonstrated that a mobility hub building typology is a viable op on to accomplish such task. As men oned previously the mobility hub is to create a center within Markham, in other word it is crea ng an axis mundi of the city. Axis mundi can be interpreted as the center of the universe and this centralized point is represen ng the connec on between sky and earth (Eliade, 1991). The idea of an axis mundi has appeared in many different cultures and in various forms. The representa on of an axis mundi in the architectural forms could be a pagoda, temple mount, church, obelisk, lighthouse or a skyscraper. It is a structure that is highly visible to its surrounding and act as the focal point of that occupied area. The axis mundi will also become a major contributor to the "system of orienta on" of the city. When an axis mundi is in place, the people in Markham can use it as a reference point to orient themselves within the city. Moreover, the mobility hub will most likely become a landmark to mark the loca on of the axis mundi of Markham. However, the mobility hub will not to be able to visibly locate the loca on of the axis mundi and allow people to use it as visual reference to orient themselves around the city, since a mobility hub will likely to be a one to three-storey high building. Therefore, a highly visible structure needs to be in place to create a func onal axis mundi for the city and symbolize the connec on between sky and earth for the city of Markham. Addi onally, this structure will become the center point of Markham and one of the representa onal images of Markham. Therefore, this structure needs to reflect the cosmos of Markham, in order to successfully to undertake such task. The next sec on will be reviewing precedents of axis mundi in ci es of Washington, Toronto, Guangzhou and Paris.

28

5.3 Precedents of Axis Mundi
5.3.1 Washington Monument ­ Washington, United States
The Washington Monument is the axis mundi of Washington, DC. It is the tallest building in DC and the world's tallest obelisk and stone structure (Na onal Park Service, 2013). The obelisk is designed by the architect Robert Mills and the construc on was completed by 1884. The Washington Monument is designed to honor and celebrate George Washington, the first president of the United States. The whole country of United States considered him as a na onal hero; therefore this obelisk is constructed to mark the 100th anniversary of his birth. He is an iconic figure of the American military and symbolizes the ideology of civic patrio sm (The White House, 2013). The original design of Washington Monument has a few varia ons when compared to the one that is constructed. The original concept is the winning design proposal of the compe on. The design had called for a neoclassical plan and a flat topped obelisk that is surrounded by a series of circular colonnade. In addi on, the statue of Washington in a chariot is located on top of the circular colonnade roof and within the colonnade there would be thirty statues of the Revolu onary War heroes. Ul mately, the design of the obelisk is to celebrate George Washington and represent his ideal of patrio sm. Unfortunately, the design was heavily altered due to financial issue and became today's Washington Monument but the original meaning is s ll embedded within the structure (Na onal Park Service, 2013). The Washington Monument is the tallest structure within the city of Washington, DC and is located nearby to the White House. The structure has marked the center loca on of the city and became a prominent landmark. The obelisk is tall enough for people within the city to use as an orienta on tool and it is part of the image of Washington, DC. The monument has effec vely represented the embedded meaning and it has become an axis mundi that symbolizes the city of Washington.

29

5.3.2 CN Tower - Toronto, Canada
The CN Tower is ac ng as the axis mundi of Toronto city, Canada. The tower is designed by WZMH Architects, a Toronto base architectural firm. The tower was designed to be a communica on and observa on tower. It is located in the financial district of Toronto's downtown. The tower was built to transmit radio and television signal across the city. During the early 70's, Toronto was experiencing a significant increase of skyscraper. As these skyscraper increased, the TV and radio recep on began to suffer. The signals that broadcast from other ci es to Toronto were bouncing off those newly constructed office towers because the Toronto's transmission tower were not high enough to clearly receive these incoming signals. As a result, the views frequently receive poor television signals. It was obvious that Toronto needed to have a new antenna that would be taller than any exis ng and future building within the city (CN Tower, 2013). In 1972, Canadian Na onal proposed to build a tower that would specifically solve the recep on problem. The tower took three years to construct and was completed in 1976. The CN Tower has become a world class tourist des na on and holds the record of the world's tallest tower for 34 years un l the comple on of Burj Khalifa Tower. As of today, the CN tower s ll func ons as a communica on tower that broadcast television and radio signals. It is also a famous tourist des na on for observing the aerial view of Toronto. The current CN Tower contains many programs that support tourist ac vi es such as the SkyPod that houses two observa on decks, a 360 Revolving Restaurant (Horizons) and the Glass Floor. The tower a racts approximately 1.6 million tourists annually (CN Tower, 2013). Although the tower itself does not embed any significant meaning, with the dis nct build form it has become a world famous landmark. It is the axis mundi of Toronto city and visually marks the loca on of Toronto's downtown. The tower can be seen from a far distance due to its height and people within the city have used it as a reference point to orient themselves within the city. Although the design of the tower is to effec vely broadcast television and radio signal, it s ll successfully represents the city of Toronto. The tower is a major contributor to Toronto's iden ty which ul mately has created a sense of place for the Toronto's residents.

30

5.3.3 Burj Khalifa - Dubai, United Arab Emirates
The Burj Khalifa is the new axis mundi for city of Dubai's main business district. The skyscraper is designed by architect Adrian Smith at SOM. The tower is currently featured as the world tallest building. The Burj Khalifa has 206 floors and the overall height is 829.8m. The building was completed in 2010 and the whole construc on took four years to finish. The design of the building is inspired from a na ve plant of Dubai, the Hymenocallis flower. The building floor plan is an abstrac on of the Hymenocallis flower which features a triple-lobed footprint. Furthermore, the shape of three onion domes can be seen when the building is view from above and it is a subtle way of Adrian Smith used to relate the building to Islamic tradi onal architecture. The spiral pa ern system of the building design is another reference from Islamic architecture, the Great Mosque of Samarra (Burj Khalifa, 2013). The building programs include 30,000 residen al units, 3 hectares of parkland, 12 hectares of manmade lake, 19 residen al tower, a shopping center, 9 hotels, and an observa on deck. In addi on, the building can accommodate 35,000 people at any me (Burj Khalifa, 2013). The architectural program of the building suggests crea ng a city within a city. The consolida on of city ac vi es into one residen al complex allows residents to live, work and play at one place. These architectural programs are condensed into a ver cal building block, a centralized point, which further reinforces the concept of an axis mundi. The Burj Khalifa has become the focal point of the city and the symbol of Dubai, due to its extraordinary height. The inspira on of the building design is Islamic culture. Although the representa on of these features is too subtle and weak, the Burj Khalifa does successfully represent the iden ty of Dubai as a glamorous and an extremely wealthy city.

31

5.3.4 Eiffel Tower ­ Paris, France
The Eiffel Tower is a world famous landmark of Paris, France which also performs as the axis mundi of the city. The Eiffel Tower was designed by the engineer Gustave Eiffel and it was named a er him. The overall construcon took over 2 years to complete and it was finished in 1889. The tower was intended to be the entrance arch for the 1889 Exposi on Universelle, a World's Fair that celebrated the 100th anniversary of the French Revolu on, and was planned to be taken down at the end of the fair. The tower was designed to be the centerpiece of the expos. It is globally the most recognizable structure and a cultural icon of France. With its magnificent height, it is the tallest structure of Paris and act as one of the center node of Paris. It surpassed the height of Washington Monument and held the record of tallest manmade structure in the world for over 41 years. The tower is also a world class tourist des na on that a racts over 250 million of visitors per year (Palermo, 2013). Gustave Eiffel had described the design of the tower as "the great pylon". The design of the tower consisted of four la ce girder truss that form a pyramid shape. The trusses are spread apart at the base and merge together when it reaches the top. Gustave Eiffel had once said the tower represents "not only the art of the modern engineer, but also the century of Industry and Science in which we are living, and for which the way was prepared by the great scien fic movement of the eighteenth century and by the Revolu on of 1789, to which this monument will be built as an expression of France's gra tude". The Eiffel Tower was design to be a monument of France and to capture the glorious moment of the French industrial revolu on. In addi on, during the World War I, the tower was used to jam German communica on which had majorly contributed to the victory of the First Ba le of the Marne (Palermo, 2013). The Eiffel Tower is the axis mundi of Paris. It is tall enough for the people within the city use it as a visual reference to orient themselves around the city. Furthermore, it created a focal point of the city. Its iden ty has evolved as a world class tourist des na on. The tower has captured the essence of the French industrial revolu on and symbolizes the 19th century technology advance of France. It is a piece of architecture that truly represents the city and the meaning it represents has made this tower become the cultural icon of Paris.

32

33

34

Part 3 : Design Soluon
35

Stores

Grocery Restaurant Restaurant

Cafe

Two types of traffics 1. Go to station for commute 2. Go to station to shop/ social

Shopping

To eat/ drink

Rest
Cafe

Arrival by car

Parking

Buy ticket

Wait

Departure by bus / train

Arrival by bus / train
Grocery Shopping Dry cleaning

Departure by bus / train

Library/ Book store Arrival by bus/ train Rest Sitting Area

Parking
Boutique Stores

Departure by car

Type 1

Departure
from the station
Restaurant

Arrival
to the station

Shallow pool/ Skating ring

Sitting Area Cafe Library/ Book store

Possible Program
Rest

Park

Arrival by car

Parking

Departure by bus / train

Grocery Arrival by bus/ train

Shopping

Dry cleaning

Cafe Restaurant Sitting area Bookstore/ Library Stores Boutique Grocery

Dry cleaning Bus Terminal Train Terminal Parking Park Shallow pool/ Skating ring

Parking

Departure by car

Boutique

Stores

Type 2

6.0 Design
6.1 Building Program
The ul mate goal of this mobility hub proposal is to become the axis mundi of the city and helps Markham to reinvent a new dis nct iden ty. This following sec on we will be discussing the appropriate building programs for this proposal and examine how these propose programs will help this mobility hub to achieve its goal. First we will look at who will come to this mobility hub and why? There will be two major types of traffic going into the mobility. 1. Go to the sta on for commute. 2. Go to the sta on for leisure (to shop/ social) The first type of traffic is obvious that this sta on will be majorly used for commute purpose, people who arrived to this mobility hub can transfer to other different public transporta ons to reach their final des na on point. In other word, this mobility will act as an interchange sta on for public transporta on such as TTC, YRT, Viva and GO Transit. This transit hub is designed for 50,000 - 100,000 daily entry and exit per day. This mobility hub will become a daily des na on point for majority of Toronto's commuters and this condi on will help this mobility hub to create a sense of place for these commuters and eventually this hub will become the representa on image of Markham. The second type of traffic is people who travel to the sta on for leisure purpose such as social and shopping. The reason for these ac vi es to be in place with the mobility hub are to diversify its ac vi es and a ract different types of traffic to the hub. If the mobility hub solely serving as a commuter interchange sta on then during then during nonrush hour the mobility will be unoccupied with no ac vi es. In order for this mobility hub to successfully become the focal point of Markham, it should provide different types of ac vi es all day around which will give people purpose to travel to the hub other than for the purpose of commu ng. Therefore building programs that includes social and leisure are vital and should be emphasized during the design process. Then we now look at what kind of building programs will enable and support the ac vi es that are men oned above.

36

If this mobility hub will act as an interchange sta on for public transit then the core building programs should include a bus and train terminal. In addi on, there should be shops that will be commuter oriented such as convenience store, book store, coffee shop, dry cleaning, groceries store etc... These stores that are men oned above are places for the commuter to complete their daily chores on the go. As previously men oned this mobility will contains leisure ac vi es to encourage ac vi es to be happening in non-rush hour. Therefore, there will be a central plaza incorporated in the mobility hub design which will promote social ac vi es. This plaza will become the city central plaza and the go-to des na on for hos ng city event or fes val and this will reinforce the mobility hub as the focal point of the city. In order to further promote the social ac vi es at the plaza, the ground level of mobility hub will includes restaurant, café or shops that is directly connected to the exterior plaza. Moreover, this mobility hub will also act as a shopping center for the surrounding area and which will encourage the usage of the hub during the weekend. Therefore, at the second floor of the mobility hub there will be more shops located. Even though, all these building programs are trying to help this mobility hub to achieve as the axis mundi of Markham but we haven't used anything to physically mark the loca on for people to use this hub as a reference point for orienta on purpose. Therefore, this mobility hub will include a 150m observa on tower located at the center of the plaza. This tower will not only act as the physically mark the axis mundi of Markham but will also become one of the prominent landmark of the city.

6.2 What is Markham
On the previous sec on we have talked about what kind of building programs are needed to be included for the mobility hub. The goal of this mobility hub is to use the building architectural design to reflect and represent the city of Markham. Before we are able to accomplish such goal, we need to first understand what make up of Markham todays and its future. By accomplishing this goal, then we will be able to recognize what is the different between Markham and other Municipali es of Toronto. By recognizing these differences then we can reflects these uniqueness and essences of Markham and then translate these quali es on to the architectural design of the mobility hub. 1.Even though, Markham is undergoing through a suburban to urban transforma on but currently it is s ll a suburban city to the Greater Toronto Area 2.Because of the nature of suburban city, Markham is placelessness and generic as Edward Relph and Rem Koolhaas had described it. 3.According to Toronto Star and The Globe and Mail, Markham is the most diverse city across Canada. It is a city that contain diverse ethnicity and mul culturalism. 4.As previously men oned many high-tech companies such as IBM, Apple, AMD etc... have locate its Canada headquarter within Markham and as a result Markham is branding itself as the high-tech capitol of Canada. Now we have iden fied what kind of building programs should come with this mobility hub and what kind of dis nc ve elements are needed to be reflected onto the building architectural design. Then the next sec on we will be exploring for the best possible loca on for this mobility hub to flourish within the city of Markham.

37

1

2

Residential Farmland Green Space Shopping Mall

Highway Boundary Railway

N

6.3 Site Selec on
In this thesis I have chosen three possible loca ons for this thesis proposal and in this following sec on we will be reviewing the pros and cons for each site and will be choosing the best possible loca on for the mobility hub proposal. The three loca ons we will be examining are listed as follow, Highway 7 East & Leslie St, Highway 407 & Kennedy Rd and 14th Ave & Woodbine Ave.

38

Site 1: Highway 7 East & Leslie St
This site is located at the west side of Markham. This area is where most of the new found high tech companies of Markham have resided. However, this area does not have a specific point where the center is locate, therefore these companies are sca ered across the area. If the mobility hub chooses to reside at this loca on it will able to establish a center and the future companies who choose to reside this area will able to place its building according to the center. Since this area has already populated with high-tech companies therefore it will be easier to establish a city center at this loca on. In coincidence, in this area there is an undeveloped empty lot which large in enough for a mobility hub to be constructed. The site is also adjacent to Highway 7 which is one of the major road of Markham which make access to the site more convenience. Moreover, the site is also near Highway 404 and Highway 407, subsequently if the area has successfully become the city center then this will allow people commute to the area to work easier. However, the minus of this loca on is that it is near Highway 404 and Highway 407 and it will become a physical barrier for the future city growth. If this loca on happen to be the future city center the future development could only expand toward north and west sides, which make this site not an ideal loca on to establish a city center. Furthermore, this mobility hub will be incorporated with a train terminal but this area does not have any train track located near the site, therefore it is another drawback to place the mobility hub at this loca on.

Site 2: Highway 407 & Kennedy Road
This site is located at the center area of the city. The main reason of this site is chosen because it is an existing Go train sta on. The exis ng train track connected from north of Markham and go all the way down to Toronto downtown Union sta on. This exis ng sta on parking lot contain ample of space for a mobility hub to be constructed. The exis ng sta on is currently act as the main train sta on for the Markham area and the parking is quickly becoming insufficient due to the rapid popula on growth of the area. Therefore replace this train sta on with the propose mobility hub will be a great preposi on. This loca on is adjacent to the Highway 407, therefore it increase accessibility to the site or to other municipality. However, this contain same issue with site number one, the Highway 407 will become a physical barrier for the future city growth. If the mobility hub is place at this loca on the future city expansion will likely expanding toward north. However, in this circumstances it will be more acceptable when compare to site number one. Even though, the highway blocked the south side of the site but it s ll allow the future city center to expand toward the other three direc on. Moreover, the surrounding area is s ll undeveloped therefore it has sufficient space for future development.

Site 3: 14th Avenue & Woodbine Avenue
This site is located at the south west area of Markham. This poten al site is the loca on of the low density office area of Markham. The area is isolated from the city and since Markham is transforming into an urban form therefore these low density office space will soon become obsolete and should convert into a higher density area. Therefore, placing a mobility hub at this loca on is a viable preposi on and which allow the future city center to expand to all direc on. The site is also near the Highway 407 and Highway 404 which will benefit to the future accessibility of the site and also allow future public transporta on disperse to their next des na on through highway. The site does has an exis ng train track and which will benefit to the propose mobility hub, however the train track is located below grade and does not connected to Toronto Downtown Union Train Sta on. Furthermore, compare to the two other site that have men oned above, its loca on is rela vely further away from Highway 7. Therefore, if this loca on happen to be the future city center, it might be isolated from the current Markham's main development.

39

15min Walki ng Dis tance

1.1km

Ave Warden

Pan Am Center

rea ent A elopm re Dev Futu

2

Residential Commercial Green Space Shopping Mall

Rodic

k Rd

404 way High

Highway Boundary Railway

Ke

r Cente GTA

nn

ed

yR

d

7 way High

n owa McC

Rd

k 1.5 m

N

6.4 Selected Site Analysis
In conclusion to the discussion above, this thesis have chosen site 2, the intersec on of Highway 407 and Kennedy Road, as the proposal tes ng ground. The reason site 2 is chosen as the favorable loca on, because it is an exis ng GO Train sta on and by placing this mobility hub at this vary loca on it matches the future upcoming Markham's city development. In the follow sec on we will be discussing how this mobility hub will go hand in hand with the future surrounding development and site analysis. As men on previously, the site 2 is the current exis ng Go Train Sta on which located near the intersec on of Highway 407 and Kennedy Road. There are a lot major development of Markham will be happening at this block. On the west side of the site, there will be one of the major development of the city, Downtown Markham, which will include mix-use residen al, retails and commercials. Furthermore, on the east side there will be a Markham Pan Am Center, for the upcoming 2015 Parapan American games and this facility will also become the community center of Markham. On the North West side of the site there will be a proposal of a city stadium, GTA Center, which will be a similar size of the Toronto Rogers Center. Therefore, if we replace the exis ng Go Train sta on with the propose mobility hub, which will greatly benefit to the surrounding future development. Hence, the mobility hub will not only support the upcoming development but which will also united all these sca ered developments as a whole and the mobility hub will easily become the central loca on of these developments.

40

ille i nv Unio

te Gate

Pan P an Am m Cent Cen Ce ent ter e
AB YMC l d lv

Hub A

2
Tower

Plaza

Exis Ex xis sting Go oS Stati tat on tati o
ay ghw Hig

Hub B

407

6.5 Design Insipira on
6.5.1 Building Placement
The follow sec on I will be explaining the design process and the reasoning behind the design decisions that have made which result of the mobility hub final design. The site is approximately 200 meters by 400 meters and the ini al approach to the building placement is to overlay a set of 10 meters by 10 meters grid parallel to the exis ng train track on to the site. The idea of the grid is a direct reference from the current suburban town planning. The suburban urban planning has always uses the grid to layout its city road infrastructure and which enabled the city to rapidly expand. However, because of the rapid expansion result from the grid plan, many suburban ci es have become placelessness and generic as we have discuss previously in sec on 1.3 and 1.4. Therefore, the concept of grid has also embedded the meaning such as generic, placelessness, repe on, rigidity and all these terms are well described to the current suburban city situa on. Then I have layout a 70 meter by 320 meter rectangular structure onto the grid. The dimension of the box is specifically related to the length of the Go Train. The size of the structure will allow the future mobility to operate six GO Trains within the building at any given me. Then I have split the structure into two smaller buildings because a structure with 320m in length will certainly not fit into the surrounding context. Therefore, the train terminal in the mobility hub design will be located underground. Furthermore, hub A and B will contain an underground connec on and which allow access between the two buildings without traveling outside. By spli ng the structure into two which result in two smaller structure then I able to place my plaza in between the two buildings and which result in an axis arrangement. The intersec on of the axis does provide emphasis on the idea of an axis mundi. Therefore the center of the plaza has now become the center point of the design. Previously, we have discussed that one of the goal of this mobility hub is to become the axis mundi of Markham and there will be a tower physically mark the center of the city. Therefore, it is obvious that the observa on tower will be locate at the center axis of the plaza and which will aid the mobility hub to become the central loca on of City of Markham.

Ke nn ed y

Rd

Rivis Rd

41

ille i nv Unio

te Gate
d

Pan P an Am Cent Cen C Ce e ent ter er
AB YMC vd lv l

Hub u A

2
Plaza la

Ex Exis x ting g Go oS Stati t tion tat tati o
ay ighw

Hub u B

H 407

6.5.2 Central Axis & Axis Mundi
From the previous site analysis, there is only one entrance to the current GO Train sta on and if this exis ng sta on is replaced with the propose mobility hub, the traffic to the site will increase drama cally, therefore new road infrastructure will need to be incorporated within the design. Furthermore, the layout of the new roads infrastructure should further highlight the no on of central axis, by doing that the new road will help the propose mobility hub become the focal point of Markham and these new road infrastructures will seamlessly blend together with the overall design scheme. The image above shows how the propose road infrastructure will be layout alone with the overall building placement. There are four new propose road which will be running perpendicularly across each other onto four different direc on, north, east, south and west, and forming an axis forma on and at the intersec on of the axis which will be the loca on of the observa on tower. Furthermore, the new propose road help to open up the site and provide three extra access points into the site and when compare to previous situa on there is only one. By laying out the road in such way, it tremendously help the mobility hub to be seen as the city central point. The no on of crea ng a city center within Markham can be parallel to the concept of founding of a city in an ancient Rome culture. Even though, the idea of the grid is a direct reference to the current suburban urban planning as discussed before, but the idea origin is from the Roman & Greek culture. Likewise, I would like to compare my design proposal to the process of founding a new city in ancient Rome culture. I believe the comparison is appropriate for this discussion, since both process are very similar and by contras ng to the process of how the ancient Rome found a new city, I believe it will further explain why the design process has taken onto the current direc on. When the people of the ancient Rome found a suitable place for a city to flourish, they will first layout two perpendicular road like an axis to mark the center. Then the city will start to expand outward from that marked center point. At the center of the city they will erect a large square, the most prominent building of the city, call the forum. It was used as a market place, social area and government office. Therefore, if compare to the ancient Rome culture, the mobility hub will be the forum of Markham, which will be locate at the heart of the city. Furthermore, the mobility hub loca on will become the city central and every new development will expand outward from the hub and use it as a reference point.

42

Ke nn ed
Rivis Rd

yR

10m 5m 10m 5m

6.5.3 Facade Design
The actual architectural design of the divided mobility hubs have also employed the uses of the grid and by doing so, the overall mobility hub design has become more cohesive. Both hubs are symmetrical by design and it is a mirror image of each other and the reflec on line are drawn at the tower. The design of the building façade is generated from a 5 meters by 5 meters grid system and each square piece is treated as a modular system. The modular squares then further divided into four smaller squares and the center points of the square are extrude 1.5 meters outward as shown in the image above. Then these modular piece will endlessly repeat onto the whole mobility hub building facades. The structures of the hub will most likely to be steel frame construc on and which will make the mobility hub become more transparent from exterior to interior. In addi on, the modular building façade system will also equipped a transparent led panel at the interior side of the building which will use to display digital media image. These images will be informa on about the city such as news, weathers and city events. Moreover, at night the led panels will be programed to emit colors. Therefore people can use the mobility hub as a landmark to orient themselves at night around the city.

The inspira on of this modular design is actually from a quote of Ram Koolhaas of how he described the current suburban city situa on in his Generic City ar cle "is fractural, an endless repe on of the same simple structural module; it is possible to reconstruct it from its smallest en ty." (Koolhaas, 2007). Furthermore, the façade design is symbolize the generic aspect of Markham. The idea of emi ng different color at night is a gesture of represen ng the mul culturalism and the vibrant popula on of the city. The building will radiate different types of color and each of the color represent different culture and diversity of Markham and this quality is o en compared with the concept of mosaic. Therefore, the idea is to make the mobility hub at night to become a mosaic like light box.

43

6.5.4 Plaza Design
From the previous sec on we have discussed how the exterior of the Mobility hub design is created and this sec on will step by step graphically reveal how the plaza design is generated.

1.I have layout all the access point to the plaza including from the building and exterior pedestrian access. The total access points to the central plaza is twelve. 2.Then I connect all the access point to each other as shown iin the image above. In addi on, I have separated the connec on into two traffic flows, a major and a minor, the thicker one represents major and the thinner one represents minor. rep repr re pr res esents ent en ts s min nor. .

3.3.From the previous exercise, I have generated the pa ern of the plaza walkway from the connec on between access points. Moreover, the empty space in between the walkway are randomly filled with grass, gravel, les and concrete pavement, and the end result is as shown in the image above. On the lower le hand side, I have added a shallow pool which will help increase social ac vi es in the plaza during summer and in winter the shallow pool can be used as a public ska ng rink.

44

4.Then I have con nue the pa ern onto the both side of the plaza as shown in the image above.

5.Finally, then I have added public sea ng and trees onto the plaza and the end result in shown in the image above.

45

6.5.5 Tower Design
Lastly, we are onto the design of the observa on tower which locate at the center of the plaza and the explana on process will be similar to the previous sec on. The reason for this tower to be in the mobility hub proposal is to physically mark the loca on of Markham axis mundi, in another word the center of Markham. When this mobility hub has become the central loca on of Markham, people within the city can you this tower as a reference point to orient themselves around the city. Since everywhere in these suburban ci es are awfully similar and therefore a landmark within the city is necessary. Another reason the tower is needed because it symbolizes the idea of Markham is the Canada's high-tech capitol. As men on previously, in sec on 2.3 because many high-tech companies have resided in Markham which includes IBM, Apple, AMD, Motorola and ATI, as a result Markham is branding its self as the Canada's high-tech capitol. These companies are about the idea of communica on, the higher the technologies it is, the easier for us, the user, to communicate to each other, like the smart phones and computers. Moreover, the metaphor of communica on and technologies has always compared to the idea of speed and efficiency of transporta on such as automobiles, trains, and jets ...etc Therefore, I believe the scheme goes along with the mobility hub proposal. This tower will be the only landmark within Markham. During the day the tower will display informa on like news, weathers and ci es events and at night it will emits colors which will enable to be seen at a far distance. The observa on tower design is generated as follow.

Tower Floor Plate

1.The tower design floor plate is generated from the result of the plaza design which is a irregular hexagonal shape.

46

150 m (Approx 50 Floors)

2.Then the shape of the floor plate is extruded 150 meters which is equivalent to 50 floors and each of the tower facades will display digital media as men oned previously.

8. However, the media image that is being displayed on the façade is limited to the direc on it is facing, therefore the tower is twisted about 90 degrees. As a result, the media image that is being display on the tower façade is no longer limited to the direc on it is display and these images that are being displayed can be seen all around. As a result, the result is shown in the image above

Digital Information Display

47

3

2

2

2

1

2

2

2

2 2 2
1

2 2

2
1

2

2

48

3

2

2

2

2

1

1

2

2

2

2
1

2 2

1

2 2

2
1

2
1

2

6.6 Floor Plan
6.6.1 B2 Level
This sec on will be explaining the layout of the mobility hubs floor plan and for the ease of explana on, we will begin at the lowest level of the building which is B2. B2 is the lowest level of the mobility hub and it is located at 12 meters below grade. This level is operated as the train terminal of the mobility hub and it can operates 6 GO trains at the same me. The B2 level can only be access from the level above and there are 24 escalators and 4 elevators connected from B1. Furthermore, it contains 4 open to above spaces, therefore people within the building can see the train opera on from the floor above. Lastly, this level is also behave as the wai ng area for the train terminal and each train pla orm does have its own sea ng area.

49

2 4 5 1 3 2 5 1

2 5 1 4

2 5 1

1 4 5

1 5

1 5 4

1 5

50

2 5 1

2 4 5 1

2 5 1

2 5 1 4

1 5 4

1 5

1 5 5

1 4

6.6.2 B1 Level
The B1 level is where the two mobility hubs above connect. It also connects to the underground parking and the mobility hub bus terminal. The people who drive to this mobility hub to commute does not need to enter from the main entrance above. The commuters can park their car in the underground parking lot and then enter at the B1 level which then they can either go to the floor below to the train terminal or directly walk across B1 level to the bus terminal. There are also a Kiss & Ride area for commuters to be drop off to the mobility hub which is located at the underground parking area and it is highlighted as green in the floor plan. Moreover, this floor contains commuter oriented shops such as convenience store, book store, coffee shop, dry cleaning and groceries store. Therefore, commuters can have the opportunity shops before they go on to their daily rou ne.

51

7

8

4 1 5

6 3 2 6

1

6 3 2 6

4 1 5 8

2 2 2

2 2

2 2 2

2 2 8

5 1 7 4

6 2 3 6

1

6 2 3 6

5 1 4 8

8

52

7

4 8 5 1

6 3 2 6

1

6 3 2 6

4 1 5

2 2 2 8 6 2 3 6

2 2

2 2 2

2 2

8

5 1 4

1

6 2 3 6

5 1 4

7

6.6.3 Ground Floor & Second Floor
The two mobility hubs layout is virtually iden cal and symmetrical to each other, therefore the following discussion will only focus onto one of the hub. The ground floor level is the area that contain the busiest traffic. The main circula on is design to be at the center of the ground floor and this idea is to help emphasis the center axis of the mobility hub which is shown in the floor plan. The shops of the mobility hub are located at the side of the building therefore the shops at the ground floor can connect to the exterior plaza. These shops does not limited to only merchandise store, it can also be café or restaurant. These shops will able to help promote social ac vi es at the plaza during non-rush hour . Moreover, the second floor layout is very similar to the ground and the shops on level above does not connected to the exterior instead it is supported by a service ally.

53

3 2 1

B2 Train Platform B1 Levels

Ground Floo

54

4

5

or Second Floor

Central Plaza
55

2

2

2 1

Parking

Shops

56

Side Plaza

Pedestrian Walkway Bike Path

4 7 6 5 3 8

Bus Terminal Ramp Bus Parking

Train Terminal

Bus Terminal

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64 4

65 65

66

67

68

69

70 70

71 71

Reference
Bonser, Stephen P, Janet Pelley, and E Kimberly. Sprawl Hurt Us All! Toronto: Sierra Club Eastern Canada Chapter, 2003. Canadian Urban Insitute. The New Geography of Office Location and the Consequences of Business as Usual in the GTA. Toronto: Canadian Urban Insitute, 2011. Mugerauer, R. (1995). Interpreting Environments: Tradition, Deconstruction, Hermeneutics. Texas: University of Texas Press. Gillham, Oliver. "What is Sprawl?" In The Urban Design Reader, by Michael Larice and Elizabeth Macdonald, 287-307. London: Routledge, 2007. Gussow, Alan. A Sense of Place. San Francisco: Friends of the Earth, 1971 Google Map. Google Map. 2012. httpL//map.google.com (accessed Decemeber 2012). The End of Suburbia: Oil Depletion and the Collapse of the American Dream. Directed by Gregory Greene. 2004. Koolhaas, Rem. "The Generic City." In The Urban Design Reader, by Michael Larice and Elizabeth Macdonald, 215-226. London: Routledge, 2007. Lynch, Kevin. The Image of the City. Massacbusetts: Joint Cnter For Urban Studies, 1960. Norberg Schulz, Christian. "The Phenomenon of Place." In The Urban Design Reader, by Michael Larice and Elizabeth Macdonald, 125-137. London: Routledge, 2007. Oldenburg, Ray. "The Problem of Place in America." In The Great Good Place, by Ray Oldenburg, Pg.3 - Pg.19. New York: Marloew & Company, 1989. Statistic Canada. 1996 Agricultural Census. Statistics Canada, 1996. Statistic Canada. York, Ontario (Regional municipality). Canada 2006 Census, 2006. Taipei Financial Center Corp. (2009). Taipei 101. Retrieved from Design Inspiration: http://www.taipei-101.com.tw/ch/Tower/buildind_04-1.html Town of Richmond Hill. Richmond Hill Statistic Summary: Statistics Fact Sheet 2011. Town of Richmond Hill, 2011.

72

Bibliography
Aureli, Pier Vittorio. The Possibility of an Absolute Architecture. London: The MIT Press, 2011. Bruce, Alex. Historical Sketch of Markham Township. Markham: Markham Historical Society, 1965. Bonser, Stephen P, Janet Pelley, and E Kimberly. Sprawl Hurt Us All! Toronto: Sierra Club Eastern Canada Chapter, 2003. Canadian Urban Insitute. The New Geography of Office Location and the Consequences of Business as Usual in the GTA. Toronto: Canadian Urban Insitute, 2011. Champion, Isabel. Markham 1793-1900 Markham: Markham Historical Society, 1979. Congress for the New Urbanism. "Charter of the New Urbanism." In The Urban Design Reader, by Michael Larice and Elizabeth Macdonald, 308-311. London: Routledge, 2007. Gillham, Oliver. "What is Sprawl?" In The Urban Design Reader, by Michael Larice and Elizabeth Macdonald, 287-307. London: Routledge, 2007. The End of Suburbia: Oil Depletion and the Collapse of the American Dream. Directed by Gregory Greene. 2004. Koolhaas, Rem. "The Generic City." In The Urban Design Reader, by Michael Larice and Elizabeth Macdonald, 215-226. London: Routledge, 2007. Kunstler, Jame Howard. Geography Of Nowhere: The Rise And Decline of America's Man-Made Landscape. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993. Lang, Robert. Edgeless Cities, Exploring the Elusive Metropolis. Brookings Inst Pr, 2003. Lukez, Paul. Suburban Transformations. London: Princeton Architectural Press, 2007. Lynch, Kevin. The Image of the City. Massacbusetts: Joint Cnter For Urban Studies, 1960. Metrolinx. Costs of Road Congestion in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area: Impact and Cost Benefit Analysis of the Metrolinx Draft Regional Transportation Plan. Toronto: Metrolinx, 2008. Metrolinx. The Big Move. Toronto: Metrolinx, 2008. Norberg Schulz, Christian. "The Phenomenon of Place." In The Urban Design Reader, by Michael Larice and Elizabeth Macdonald, 125-137. London: Routledge, 2007. Oldenburg, Ray. "The Problem of Place in America." In The Great Good Place, by Ray Oldenburg, Pg.3 - Pg.19. New York: Marloew & Company, 1989. Rykwert, Joseph. The Idea of a Town. London: The MIT Press,1989 Smith, Albert C, and Kendra Schank Smith. "A Grotesque Measure for Marietta." Journal of Urban Design, Vol 4, 1999: 245 - 253. Venturi, Robert, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour. Learning From Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form. The MIT Press; revised edition edition, 1977.

73

74

