RESILIENCE AS GOVERNMENTALITY: A NARRATIVE STUDY WITHIN MENTAL HEALTH by Philip Mach

Honours Bachelor of Science, University of Toronto, 2008 Bachelor of Social Work, Dalhousie University, 2013 An MRP

presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the Master of Social Work in the Program of Social Work

requirements for the degree of

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2014 © Philip Mach 2014 i

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions. purpose of scholarly research. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MRP

ii

in which a person may be resilient to difficult life circumstances. Resilience, in this way, is seen as a means to overcoming adversity in order to succeed in life. In the current study, the concept of resilience is examined in terms of the way it may guide or limit the actions of mental illness and ascertains the ways in which resilience affects how they have chosen, or individuals, as governmentality. Specifically, this study focuses on the lives of survivors of

The study of resilience in individuals is typically conducted to enumerate the ways

Resilience as Governmentality: A Narrative Study within Mental Health Master of Social Work, 2014 Philip Mach Program of Social Work, Ryerson University

ABSTRACT

have been taught, to manage their mental illness.

iii

To the incredible staff and faculty at Ryerson University: Thank you for giving me the

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

opportunity to be part of their community, for providing guidance and encouragement, and for being willing to relentless pursue social justice. This project has benefitted greatly from both the content and spirit of your work.

To my faculty advisor, Dr. Henry Parada: A special thanks for being patient with me as I waded through the vast landscape of Foucauldian and post-structural ideas and for supporting me throughout this past year.

To Dr. Jennifer Poole: Thank you for taking time out of your sabbatical to chat about the entire process.

Foucault, mental health and social work. Your thoughts have stayed with me throughout

To Dr. Purnima George and Dr. Kristin Smith: thank you for allowing me the opportunity to work with you as a graduate assistant. Working with you has been an honour and your mentorship will not be easily forgotten.

constantly humbled by your insights, your experiences, and your willingness to engage in Thank you.

To my MSW classmates: Thank you for an amazing year. I have found myself to be

difficult discussions. I know that I am a better social worker and a better person as a result.

iv

To my loving partner, Dr. Miranda Robinson, for believing that an IT guy could become a for agreeing to spend her life with him.

DEDICATION

social worker, for supporting that IT guy as he worked through two university degrees, and

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................1 CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW ..................................................................................................3 Resilience as Protection ....................................................................................................................... 3 Resilience as Restorative and Recovery ........................................................................................ 5 Tensions within Resilience Research.............................................................................................. 7 Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................. 9 Theoretical Framework..................................................................................................................... 10

Mad scholars and critical disability theorists. ............................................................................................. 10 Governmentality......................................................................................................................................................... 11

CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................................... 14 Data Collection and Sampling ......................................................................................................... 16 Analysis of Data .................................................................................................................................... 17 Katie's Story ........................................................................................................................................... 22 Michelle's Story .................................................................................................................................... 30 Lucy's Story ............................................................................................................................................ 36 The Narratives and Conditions for Existence ........................................................................... 41 Resilience as Restoration and Protection................................................................................... 44 Resilience as Governmentality ....................................................................................................... 45 Treatment as a Technology of the Self ........................................................................................ 47

CHAPTER 4: FINDINGS ....................................................................................................................... 21

CHAPTER 5: ANALYSIS ....................................................................................................................... 44

CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................ 48 APPENDICES .......................................................................................................................................... 51 REFERENCES ......................................................................................................................................... 55

vi

LIST OF APPENDICES Appendix A ­ Consent Form Page 51

vii

Chapter 1: Introduction

When you're going through hell, keep going.

­ Winston Churchill

Prime Minister of the United Kingdom who led the country and the allied forces through

The epigraph to this chapter is a well-known quote by Winston Churchill, the

World War II. It has been chosen because I believe that, at its essence, the quote captures

the idea of resilience eloquently despite not using the term. While I believe that the use of often used. In common language, we use "resilience" to identify those who overcome

the term itself is important, I believe that just as important is the spirit in which the term is difficult and sometimes impossible odds, to connote a belief that it is possible to endure, the epigraph, we may imagine a protagonist who has set out on a journey and has

and above all, to convey the feeling of hope that there can be a better future. If we examine encountered hardship. Perhaps this hardship is of the most tumultuous kind and that chaos and difficulties beset our protagonist from all sides. Despite these conditions, however, a triumphant hero manages to trudge on and surmount the obstacles in their way. Simply stated, while defeat and surrender are attractive when your world is in disarray, to continue on and survive is the core theme of our story.

resilience. The valiant hero overcoming adversity has been well-documented (e.g.,

The familiarity of this story is a central reason for my interest in the concept of

Campbell, 1973) but the status of this story has reached beyond the confines of myth and can be observed in the everyday. Based on my experience as a social work practitioner, I 1

find that the term resilience has not been used lightly nor has it been used sparingly. From working with those who express suicidal thought to youth involved with the child where those described as resilient faced considerable adversity. protection system, I have encountered the term with regularity and typically in situations These individuals would sometimes be held up as examples for others, sometimes

about their life circumstances were told that they simply needed to be resilient and push on, while others were told that they needed to be stronger so that they could overcome. this idea of needing to be stronger or more resilient. In my own life story, I have These practices raised questions as to what the experiences of people were as a result of encountered professionals who have used the term to describe me and felt the usage to be bittersweet; to be labelled resilient as the result of having survived adversity or trauma is simultaneous an admission of success and an acknowledgement of pain. The question remained, however, how do others experience resilience?

as inspiration and sometimes as models. I observed, as individuals who felt little hope

work contains their stories as I have received them. I give them my sincerest thanks as I could not have undertaken this project without them.

In this project, I explore this question through the help of my participants. This

2

Chapter 2: Literature Review
The study of the concept of resilience can be traced back to early work done by

Rutter (1985) and Garmezy (1987). These authors approached the topic from largely a

psychological perspective as they regarded it as a trait of personality. They believed that

such a trait allowed individuals to weather adverse conditions and succeed in life despite of them. While the literature has since explored alternate definitions of the idea of resilience, have encountered. The interplay between success and adversity distinguishes different definitions of resilience from one another and the relationship between the two is the notion of succeeding despite adversity is central to all constructions of resilience that I

important to recognizing these differences. Simply stated, the dominant conceptual views concerning the construct of resilience involves viewing resilience as either a protective mechanism or a restorative mechanism (Davydov, Stewart, Ritchie, & Chaudieu, 2010; Rutten et al., 2013; Shaikh & Kauppi, 2010). Resilience as Protection The view that resilience is a type of coping or "relatively positive adaptation in the

face of heightened risk for maladaptation" (Gardner, Dishion, & Connell, 2008, p. 275) is a prominent view within the literature. This characterization of resilience posits that resilience is a protective mechanism, or comprises of protective mechanisms, which allow individuals facing adversity or stress to succeed despite these factors. As Friedli (2009) argues, there is an inextricable link between mental health and this characterization of

resilience. The exact nature of this link and its subtleties, however, remains the subject of

3

research and discussion (Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker, 2000). With this said, some preliminary themes can be drawn from within this conceptual position. Extant literature that approach resilience as protective focus largely on one of two

domains: youth development and mental health. This duality is not as defined as one may

expect as research concerning resilience of youth often operationalize resilience outcomes resilience can also be described as resistance to adverse conditions or, to demonstrate the biomedical affiliation of this position, can be thought of as analogous to the body's natural immunity system; namely, that a resilient person is one who has a strong immunity to the social conditions that lend themselves to manifestations of psychopathology or other concerned with responding to difficult social conditions. negative social outcomes. Resilience in this perspective, then, is an individual endeavour The work of Bonanno (2005) highlights a particular social condition, that of grief

as lack of psychopathology (e.g., Werner, 1989). As Davydov et al. (2010) notes, this type of

and loss, and the manner in which resilience may provide an explanation of observations within this field. The author argues that reactions to loss typically do not result in deviations of normal functioning, but that a resilient reaction ­ that is, individuals find a means to adapt to the loss and continue functioning at normal levels ­ is a much more common reaction than is typically thought (Bonanno, 2004; Bonanno et al., 2002). This

type of social stress is closely-related to mental health and provides evidence that this

framing of resilience has a place within mental health research. Although direct study on Pollack, 2007), a more common approach to understanding resilience in this manner focuses on the development of youth.

the relation between this type of resilience and mental health exists (e.g., Hoge, Austin, &

4

of the protective aspect of resilience through an examination of youth development and this work continues to holds a prominent place in resilience literature. This initial work

The early work of Garmezy (1987, 1991, 1993) and Rutter (1985) began the study

influenced that of Werner (1989), a seminal piece in the field, who followed a number of

youth for over three decades of their lives in an effort to examine those factors which may have suggested examining the intersection of resilience and mental health with gender

protect them from negative life outcomes, including psychopathology. Subsequent studies (Brinkman, Brinkman, & Toomey, 2011); race, ethnicity and culture (Johnson & Beamer, as well as general youth adjustment (Gardner et al., 2008; Ungar, 2011; Ungar &

2013; Kulis, Reeves, Dustman, & O'Neill, 2011; Luthar, 1991; Ungar, 2006; Wallace, 2012) Liebenberg, 2009). While important differences exist in the approaches of these authors, these studies have sought to enumerate the factors which may buffer and protect youth from their social conditions but do not look examine the social conditions themselves. In are desirable so that resilient individuals can exist. Resilience as Restorative and Recovery The second conceptual position, resilience as a restorative mechanism, argues that

fact, it may be said that in order for such research to take place, negative social conditions

resilience is a mechanism that allows those individuals who have suffered setbacks to be restored to their previous levels of functioning. The work done within this position provides an important opportunity to connect to another body of research. Research

examining the ways in which resilience may be a restorative notion certainly exists and be seen in the work of Fredrickson, Tugade, Waugh, and Larkin (2003). Further work done 5

(Hobfoll et al., 2009; Marttila, Johansson, Whitehead, & Burström, 2013; Tugade &

Fredrickson, 2004) takes on a similar framing of resilience; namely, that resilience in this context is a mechanism that allows individuals to recover, after an initial period of difficulty, and regain pre-trauma or pre-stress levels of functioning. As these authors would from, rather than enduring through, adversity. To only, consider this area of research, argue (e.g., Tugade & Fredrickson, 2004), resilience is a mechanism for bouncing back

however, misses the opportunity to connect with a largely body of work on recovery (see Anthony, 1993) in the field of mental health. While Bonanno (2004) maintains that the concept of resilience should be considered distinct from the concept of recovery, the similarities between the two constructs is striking.

learning to live with mental illness. Davidson and Roe (2007) further develop the concept to distinguish between recovery from ­ the process of regaining previous levels of functioning after an initial period of lesser functioning ­ and recovery in ­ a process of

Recovery, as described by Anthony (1993) and Deegan (1988), is a process of

coping with changes that have lifelong consequences, regardless of level of functioning. If bear more than superficial similarities to the idea of resilience as restorative and that specifically, those who can be described by resilience as a protective concept. The the link between resilience and recovery is a rich one.

taking the work of these authors together, we find that the recovery from position seems to overlap exists between the recovery in position and those who succeed despite adversity; discussion here, therefore, agrees with the observations of Howell and Voronka (2012) that

6

Tensions within Resilience Research The apparent agreement in conceptual positions presented here is not meant to

overstate the homogeneity of resilience research as there are considerable tensions and disagreements between scholars of the field. The two framings of resilience research presented should be treated as a convenient means of understanding the work of a large The field is, by no means, in agreement about the nature of resilience, the process of here.

group of authors while acknowledging that there is substantial diversity within each group. resilience and how resilience may be understood. Some of these tensions are presented A major area of scholarship within the study of resilience concerns its definition and

its scope. The wide range of definitions within resilience research has been noted by a

Cox, 2012; Shaikh & Kauppi, 2010; Ungar, 2006; Zautra, Hall, & Reich, 2010) and has

Edward, Welch, & Chater, 2009; Fleming & Ledogar, 2008; Guest, 2012; Lenette, Brough, &

number of authors (e.g., Bonanno, 2004, 2005; Bonanno et al., 2002; Davydov et al., 2010;

resulted in a number of works that have attempted to provide clarity as to what the term Cicchetti, 2000; Rutten et al., 2013; Shaikh & Kauppi, 2010). Despite these endeavours,

resilience truly means (see Davydov et al., 2010; Feder, Charney, & Collins, 2011; Luthar & defining resilience remains a controversial undertaking and have led authors to argue that to effectively understand resilience, research must move beyond conceptions of the term located within individuals to examining the link between individuals and their social contexts (Ungar, 2011), with others going even further and applying the concept of

Ungar, 2006; Wexler, 2014). So while it is possible to group the work on resilience into 7

resilience to entire groups and cultures (Gardner et al., 2008; Johnson & Beamer, 2013;

conceptual categories, the differences in what resilience is and where it is located is a nontrivial matter. Richardson (2002) and Ungar and Liebenberg (2009) note a shift within resilience

research, from the modern to the postmodern, as scholars attempt to account for a wide

range of perspectives. The prevalence of this shift, however, should not be overstated as al., 2013) but should also not detract from the willingness of some scholars to examine

modernist writings on the concept of resilience are still very much present (e.g., Rutten et conceptions of resilience not based on modernist frameworks. Recent work (e.g., Guest,

term and have augmented the predominantly quantitative extant literature with a number this field are now confronted with the possibility of greater complexity as arguments are agency, among others (Shaikh & Kauppi, 2010). The move from modernist

2012; Marttila et al., 2013; Theron et al., 2011) has examined experiential framings of the

of qualitative findings. In a willingness to explore a number of perspectives, scholars within made about the framing of resilience as a matter of survival (Lenette et al., 2012) or human conceptualizations of resilience to postmodernist thinking may allow for greater insight in exploring resilience but may further increase tensions as to the true nature of resilience. Finally, an emerging group of authors have begun to analyze resilience utilizing a

complicit in reproducing existing inequalities. Guo and Tsui (2010) argue that invocation of the term resilience results in a pathologizing, deficit view of individuals that ignore the structural limitations on their actions. More alarmingly, to focus on this framing of

critical perspective 1 and have begun to question the nature of resilience whether it may be

resilience results in a discounting of the important ways that the individual may undermine
1

See Fook (2002) or Healy (2005), for background on critical perspectives

8

status quo relationships through micro acts of resistance. Harper and Speed (2012) echo these concerns regarding the individualization of mental illness and the concept of resilience presupposes "strengths" and necessitates "deficits." They argue that collective bear a diagnosis. Other authors have made similar arguments (Howell & Voronka, 2012;

action must be taken to produce society-wide recognition of the experience of those who Morrow, 2013; Morrow & Weisser, 2012), highlighting the connections that such practices have with larger political and knowledge structures, such as neoliberalism 2. A critique of resilience, then, proceeds from the individualizing nature of the term and recognizes the impact that larger systems have on personal action. Conclusion

and poststructural understandings of the term (Ungar & Liebenberg, 2009). While this since the inception of the term there has been little variance in how, mechanistically, resilience is thought to function. The prevailing pattern within the literature is a

The literature on resilience has become fragmented and is reflective of postmodern

fragmentation and differentiation should imply that the literature has become athematic,

characterization of resilience as either a protective property or as impetus to recovery. The scope and flavour of these framings have changed as research has progressed to become of the family, the community and beyond (e.g., Ungar, 2011) ­ and become more more nuanced; individual understandings have both been expanded ­ to include influences entrenched ­ through an examination of the biological bases for resilience (e.g., Feder et al., 2011). These changes notwithstanding, my examination of the literature has revealed little
2

variation in recovery as a concept which locates responsibility on mezzo and micro levels
This connection will be explored in the next section.

9

with little examination of how dominant discourse and macro systems have resulted in in this work.

present-day understandings of resilience. It is this examination that has been undertaken Theoretical Framework The current study is Foucauldian in orientation with a focus on the concept of

govermentality (Foucault, 2000) and its use by scholars within the field of Mad studies and Critical Disability theorists. Specifically, the current work examines the ways in which the lives of "consumers, psychiatric survivors, and ex-patients (c/s/x)" (Adame & Leitner, concept of resilience may act a technology that may govern and, more generally, affect the 2008, p. 146) of the mental health system. The primary point of interest is whether the and, in particular, whether the experience of resilience reinforces current social inequalities.

concept of resilience may be understood through the Foucauldian notion of govermentality

Mad scholars and critical disability theorists. The use of Mad scholarship and critical disability theory in the current work will not

be substantial, but provides some insights into the ways in which c/s/x communities to look beyond biomedical understandings of mental health and to examine other

experience the concept of resilience. First and foremost, Mad scholarship provides a means possibilities. As Poole et al. (2012) note, the biomedical model of mental health posits that mental health is the result of organic disorder and must be treated through medications. This results in a pathologization of persons through the reduction of individual narratives 10

to a set of symptoms and treatments. The authors further argue that such processes result

in stigma and discrimination and, therefore, provide incentives to look for alternatives to & Speed, 2012; Hiranandani, 2005; Poole et al., 2012; Poole & Ward, 2013) argue that

biomedical accounts of mental illness. Furthermore, scholars within this camp (e.g., Harper mental illness should be understood using the social model of disability; namely, that mental illness is a label which results in an experience of disability due to a socially constructed world which favours certain abilities over others. Governmentality. Governmentality is first described in Foucault (2000) as a type of social

arrangement which grants the greatest convenience to the state. Elaborations on what been taken up by a number of authors. In the work of Tremain (2001), discusses what

"convenience" may mean within this context is not done in the work, but has subsequently governmentality may mean for those with disabilities. The author's central argument is

that the labelling of certain bodies as "abnormal" or "disabled" can result in the constitution of a subject with prescribed ways of being; this is referred to as the productive element of power may be conceived as neither repressive nor a commodity, but rather as something which espouses a sensation of freedom while simultaneously directing actions toward increasingly convenient arrangements. More simply, rather than being a force which power. In reformulating power as a process, Foucault (1980) considers the ways in which

prevents and inhibits individuals from performing and being, this understanding of power examines the ways in which individuals believe they are acting autonomously but, in actuality, are acting in prescribed ways. Tremain (2001) argues that the discourses and

11

practices surrounding disability can be described by this type of power and can, therefore, be characterized as a governing of the self. More generally, Rose and Miller (1992) provide further means to contextualize the

current discussion. These authors argue that current governments, in defining the scope of the political and private, aim to exert control over both; however, as neoliberal forces espouse smaller governments, this control must come from a distance and is, thus, indirect in nature. The considerable stake that governments have in the private sphere results as a very natural consequence of the private sphere's role in the creation of citizens and the country. The state, therefore, enacts an indirect control over the private sphere by

impact of these citizens on matters that are considered public, such as, the economy of the identifying pertinent problems which become the issues taken up by, what the authors call, the intellectual machinery of political rationality. The intellectual machinery can be described as those knowledges which enable the government to perform its functions while political rationality is the larger paradigm which motivates the creation of such knowledge in order to justify its exercise of power.

allows the state to govern in accordance with neoliberal discourse. Rose and Miller (1992) simultaneous define proper functioning, arguing that this has resulted in a

Social work, then, can be positioned as a cog within the intellectual machinery that

note the ways in which the state has come to oversee practices within the medical field and "responsibilization" of medical conditions. This process occurs through locating

responsibility and causality of disease within the individual and absolving the impact of social conditions. Teghtsoonian (2009) examines this concept further in observing the ways it operates within the field of mental health and the subsequent downloading of 12

responsibility of care to the individual and their families; a trend which fits with the Joseph, 2013; Teghtsoonian, 2009). In short, a contemporary understanding of

neoliberal decree of shifting costs from public to private domains (George & George, 2013; governmentality within the field of mental health is one which recognizes the state's desire to constitute individuals who are able to use non-public resources to continue to be

productive members of society.

historians are not confined to certain time periods, but rather, reflect the ongoing attempts to eliminate disabled bodies. More precisely, Baker (2002) argues that, as violent acts of eugenics became unpalatable after the events of World War II, governing practices that

explored in the work of Baker (2002) who argues that eugenic practices documented by

The ultimate end of this governing of mental illness and, more generally, disability is

attempt to make disability invisible through treatment and rehabilitation came to the fore. Within the current context, it can be said that the ultimate end to the governmentality of disabling effects of certain conditions. Simply stated, the government of mental illness mental illness ­ and its inextricable link to neoliberal mandates ­ is to make invisible the seeks to eliminate those individuals with mental illness through the elimination of their

conditions, as the result of individual action. Such an elimination of disability results in the quo relationships of inequality.

absolution of state responsibility in the welfare of its citizens and the maintenance of status

13

Chapter 3: Methodology
For clarity, the question of interest in the current work concerns how the concept of

resilience is experienced by members of the c/s/x community. Put another way, this central point of exploration attempts to delineate the effects of resilience on the life

experiences of individuals who carry a mental health diagnosis and, more specifically, may the subjective realities of participants and the ways in which these subjective, constructed realities have been affected by understandings of resilience, regardless of the source of In fitting with this desire to collect stories, this study has adopted a qualitative, these understandings. Therefore, it is the stories of participants that are most relevant. narrative approach to inquiry. Fundamentally, a narrative approach to research is one that stories are co-constructed endeavours between researcher and participant and

affect how they story their experiences with mental illness. The crucial point of inquiry is in

which focuses on story and storytelling (Riessman, 2002). This approach acknowledges focuses, less on the facts within stories, but rather how stories are told (Creswell, 2013).

Above all, however, a narrative approach is concerned with the meanings of experience, as a central premise is that the act of telling stories is what creates our sense of humanity (Squire, 2008). This approach, therefore, allows for a rich examination of the way in which the experience of living with mental illness may be impacted by the concept of resilience. Although a number of definitions exist for what constitutes a narrative design, the

definition taken here is one which is common to the social sciences. A narrative approach, in the current context, is taken to mean an interest in the "interpreted description of the rich and multilayered meanings of historical and personal events" (Josselson & Lieblich, 2003, p. 259). The main features of a narrative approach are provided by Riessman and 14

Quinney (2005) through five criteria: "reliance on detailed transcripts; focus on language and contexts of production; some attention to the structural features of discourse; acknowledgement of the dialogic nature of narrative; and (where appropriate) a richness of constructed and storied realities.

comparative approach" (p. 389). A narrative approach, then, is one which focuses on the While Josselson and Lieblich (2003) discuss events, a more appropriate and fitting

distinguishes between narrative studies which focus on events and those which focus on experiences and the subsequent differences in analysis. Those studies which focus on events, typically approach analysis through an examination of structure, while those which approach inquiry though an examination of experiences are concerned with meaning. The area of interest of the current study is on the latter, so in accordance with Squire (2008), inherently meaningful and that the temporal sequencing of narratives themselves hold meaning, (b) stories are an essential part of humanity and provide the tools to create

evaluation of the content of narrative studies is that of experiences. Squire (2008)

the current exploration of resilience is conducted on the assumption that (a) narratives are

meaning in life, (c) narratives are a re-presentation of experience that is simultaneously coconstructed by researcher and participant, and (d) narratives are embedded with ideas of change or transformation. A further point of clarification is around what is meant by the term narrative. As

Riessman (2002) observes, a number of definitions exist for what constitutes narrative, but the most pertinent to social scientists are those narratives which are either discrete stories or larger accounts; specifically, this means that narratives can refer both to the stories and

examples provided by participants during an interview, as well as the interview itself as a 15

whole. This allows for an analysis of the stories of individuals ­ that is, the story of an within the larger narratives provided by an individual. Data Collection and Sampling In this study, 1-hour interviews were conducted with 3 individuals who fit the

individual, in its entirety ­ but also individual stories ­ that is, those stories embedded

inclusion criteria. To be included in the study individuals must: (a) be between the ages of 18-50, (b) be diagnosed with a mental illness, (c) previously or currently receive services from a mental health professional, (d) previously or currently take medication for a mental a health-care facility. The audio from each interview was recorded and then transcribed. Pseudonyms have either been chosen by participants or provided if one was not chosen. The study was approved by the university ethics review board. The rationale for criterion (a) was to select a sample that would most likely have

health diagnosis, (e) consider themselves to be stable, and (f) not currently be in the care of

been diagnosed and first became consumers or users of the mental health system after the concept of resilience had become a subject of study within the mental health field. As mentioned, initial research surrounding resilience took place in the 1980s as the result of work by Rutter (1985) and Garmezy (1987). As individuals tend to be diagnosed with mental illnesses in late adolescence (Brown & Scheid, 2010), an individual diagnosed in the 1980s would be approximately 50 years of age at the present moment ­ the upper limit for inclusion ­ while the lower limit for inclusion was selected so that only adults were included. The other criteria were selected to ensure that the sample consisted of

16

participants who were members of the c/s/x community and were in a position to discuss their experiences. Analysis of Data As Josselson and Lieblich (2003) note, a narrative approach to inquiry requires the

availability of transcripts in order for analyses to be conducted, as transcripts provide

some level of constancy compared to analyses based on memory of interviews. In keeping the analysis of transcriptions was done in two ways. Firstly, individual narratives were

with this, audio recordings were transcribed to provide a stable point for analyses. Briefly, analzyed in terms of plot, meaning and themes; the relationship between and the function other characters. Secondly, an analysis was conducted on the narratives as a group. The complete interviews were analyzed together as a group to identify similarities and

of characters; and the narrator's positioning of themselves in relation to their narrative and

differences between individual narratives, while examples and stories of particular events The analysis of narratives, in general, has been a matter of some discussion within

or experiences of importance across interviews were grouped together for analysis as well. the literature (Gubrium & Holstein, 2009), it is therefore the approach of this work to synthesize those techniques of analysis that best fit the current context. To that end,

been suggested by a number of authors (e.g., Chase, 2003; Fraser, 2004; Riessman, 2002; Riessman & Quinney, 2005). These narratives were analyzed in terms of plot, with the primary question being, how does the plot develop? (Riessman, 2002) In this analysis, the

complete interviews were taken as narratives and were the first unit of analysis as has

motivation was to explore why a story has been told the way that it has and why certain 17

elements were chosen to be included within a narrative while others are left out. Of seen within the literature on how resilience functions.

particular interest was whether the plots of participants' stories mirror the understandings Furthermore, another point of interest is that of meaning and how meaning was

constructed through the storying of life experiences. As Riessman (2002) and Squire (2008) note, the sequencing of experience provides insight into the meaning that

experience has and, more importantly, provides the basis for humanity. These authors argue that it is through this sequencing and storying that meaning is created and is necessary for human existence. This analysis was undertaken by focusing on the emerging

themes within each narrative, the dramatic elements of the story which draw attention and create intrigue, as well as the emotions that were conveyed in the telling and hearing of the narrative. Another element examined while analyzing individual narratives was that of

character. As Gubrium and Holstein (2009) note, a narrative typically contains characters and in deriving meaning from the narrative, it is important to consider the instrumental functions of a character, as well as the semiotic functions of the character. More simply, an analysis of narratives must investigate what a character does and what a character might represent. A complementary concept is the positioning of the narrator in relation to these other characters within the story (Riessman, 2002). A more general analysis of the

characters, which requires an examining of the relationships between the narrator and the positioning of the narrator can be done by examining the relation between the narrator and their plot, which bears specific interest to understanding the effect of resilience ­ as a

18

narrator's role within their story, as either passive victim or active agent, provides crucial insights to the way in which the concept of resilience has affected their life. In analyzing groups of narratives, as Riessman and Quinney (2005) note, depending

allowed for similarities across narratives to be discovered but also provided an

on propriety it was sometimes useful to compare and contrast different narratives. This

opportunity to explore the differences in narratives. A more important analysis done with all narratives, both individually and collectively, is described by Tamboukou (2008). In particular, Tamboukou (2008) describes a way in which a Foucauldian approach can be

taken to narrative analysis. The author outlines the ways in which this may be done by first discussing the need to examine the context which provides the conditions of possibility for certain narratives to arise. Said another way, the topic of exploration was the manner in which power/knowledge relationships allow for the production of particular stories and power. Therefore, a Foucauldian analysis of narrative examines the narratives gathered resilience.

narratives; the author acknowledges that this is in recognition of the productive aspect of and how they are products of existing power/knowledge relationships that may involve Additionally, Tamboukou (2008) argues that to further acknowledge the productive

means of power, the ways in which the subject is constituted through narrative must be

examined. While related to an examination of what meaning an individual may derive from a narrative (Squire, 2008), this approach considers meaning situated within the context of power/knowledge. This provides an opportunity to examine how individuals may constitute themselves as a resilient subject. Lastly, Tamboukou (2008) describes the ways

in which discourse and narrative must be contextualized to a particular space. The ultimate 19

end of this reasoning is that not only must the spaces described in narratives be analysed, but the narratives situated within spaces must also be deliberated upon.

20

Chapter 4: Findings
Three interviews were conducted with individuals who had been diagnosed with a

mental illness. The participants were female and high achievers. They had all completed one university degree and were in the process of completing subsequent degrees in postgraduate program or graduate programs while managing their mental health

diagnoses. By most metrics (e.g., Andersson & Ledogar, 2008), these individuals would be considered highly functional and resilient. Their narratives tell of the role of outward success in their lives but also the relationship between these successes and their diagnoses. that follows of the stories of these three individuals will make every effort to preserve the original meanings but also to provide the meanings which I took away from our conversations. While simultaneously recognizing that meaning in this context is coIn keeping with the suggestions of Riessman and Quinney (2005), the exploration

constructed between these narrators and myself, I have striven to be as respectful of these stories as possible by inferring meaning from the larger context of a person's story before attempting to infer meaning based on my own thoughts and feelings. It is my hope that of these storytellers. All names have been changed to maintain confidentiality.

while the exploration here will reflect some of myself, it will also reflect the original intent This section proceeds by first presenting the story of each person so that the

uniqueness of each story and its contribution to understanding resilience is considered. Each story will be examined using the elements outlined within the previous section, as applicable, since it should be noted that not all elements outlined existed within a particular narrative. The narratives will then be examined together but cautiously. The nature of this work is such that it seeks to understand but not generalize, as that falls 21

outside a narrative approach to inquiry (Creswell, 2013). Examining the narratives

together will provide insight into the different ways these narratives interact and highlight conditions which may exist that result in the emergence of such narratives.

points of interest. In particular, taking the narratives together, it is possible to consider the Within each narrative, I explore several key ideas in an order that, I hope, stays true

to the narratives of each story and if the element is pertinent to the particular narrative being discussed. Firstly, I examine each narrator's motivation, as my analysis of these narratives revealed that each narrative had a distinct motivation that provided a mechanism for advancing the plot within their stories. Secondly, I examine each

participant's relationship to medication, as medication became an important feature within each account. Thirdly, I examine the diagnoses given to each participant and the semantic functions of these diagnoses within each narrative. Fourthly, I discuss the relationships Lastly, I highlight aspects of a narrative that I feel are unique and important to understanding the story. Katie's Story In speaking with Katie, she seemed to be an intelligent and thoughtful individual. At each narrator has with the medical profession and, more specifically, doctors if relevant.

the time of meeting, she was a graduate student in her mid-20s and told a story in which within an academic environment nearly impossible so she had chosen to take a leave of

major depression played a significant role. The effects of depression had made functioning absence to focus on treating her diagnosis. Having done so, she was about to resume her

studies and the timing our conversation left me with a feeling of cautious optimism. Kate 22

spoke of the difficulties she had faced and while she spoke of her future hopefully, it difficulties. When asked to summarize her story, Katie shared that:

seemed as though she left space within her conceptions of her upcoming studies for further Depression can happen for no reason. Grad school really sucks when you're in depression. It sucks even more when you're on horrible meds. (laughs) Meds are an up and down rollercoaster of trying to adjust to things. And then, once you find the right combination they really help you get to the point where you have enough, you're clear enough and you have enough energy again to start pushing yourself forward because it's not obviously all the meds. They're not magic. You still need to be motivated and get yourself motivated and decide to do things. They help with that. Especially getting on [the right medication] has helped with that, but they give you a steady baseline to start from. You have to be the one who pushes to actually get back to being a functional human being.

Katie's story is one in which the onset of medical condition could not be predicted and the central tension is one of control and treatment of this condition. The place of medications within her narrative is central, but she also hints at the need for elements and beyond the medication, the need for medication could not be understated. developments beyond simply the medication. While Katie emphasized the need to go The centrality of medication within her story resulted from the way in which Katie

understood her diagnosis. She described that, while she had previously experienced

depression due to situational factors, her current experience with depression could not be similarly explained and that this led to a belief of her condition being organic. As she explained:

With the cause of her diagnosis established as organic, medication became a primary plot device within her narrative. The development of the story depended on whether a 23 particular medication was working and whether she was taking them properly. The

This entire recent bout of depression, there's no cause I can pinpoint, which is why I haven't been doing any actual therapy outside of seeing my psychiatrist, because there's no underlying cause that we can figure out. It's just chemical imbalance.

counterpoint and counterforce to medication then was, naturally, the diagnosis of major

depressive disorder; a seemingly unpredictable and unknowable phenomenon that could then, was as a means of removing obstacles and barriers that could be done by no other thing.

only be affected through medication. The symbolic role of medication within her narrative,

mechanism to control her diagnosis and change which seemed to be her main motivation.

A prominent feature of Katie's story was the way in which medication provided a

As the primary effects of her diagnosis prevented her from functioning as an academic the way that her depression prevented her from comprehending articles, thinking critically Indeed, it was her difficulties functioning within this area of her life that first led her to that something else was happening. She described:

need to return to that life became a driver for change. She mentioned a number of times the and her ability to remember; tools that are central to the career of a scholar of any field. seek professional help. Katie had just dealt with another medical condition before realizing All of sudden I had just entered this like crushing apathy, an inability to want to do anything and an inability to concentrate. My critical thinking skills were so low that I would read a paper five times and not understand what it was about.

These symptoms, then, were the primary indicators of the existence of the diagnosis and were the things that Katie worked to eliminate.

she described the ultimate goal of this process as being to recover. The effects of her

The difficulty of finding a means to effectively treat her diagnosis was highlighted as

depression caused to feel as though she had lost something of the life she knew and that, reflected on the difficulty of this:

perhaps, the life she would lead from that point on would not be the one she wanted. She

24

An important feature of her narrative is the rediscovery of herself, her cognitive abilities and, ultimately, the life which she had planned. In "recovering," Katie has described the process of, literally, getting something back. The apparent decline of her cognitive abilities was a source of distress and was

There were definitely some points where you just practically lose hope, you think "Ugh, well maybe I'll just be like this forever. Maybe there's nothing that's going to get me back to my old self or my old productivity levels." You know, for most of the past year and a half, I felt like I was like 50 IQ points short. I've always been like top of my class, very bright, sharp-thinker, very good reader, very good at comprehension and critical thinking and all of that disappeared with the depression. And it's finally starting to come back, I feel a lot more like myself these days.

described as one of the reasons for which she sought assistance. For Katie, her cognitive organic, and possibly treatable, condition was affecting her provided her with a way to

abilities were tied to her livelihood and to her identity, thus, being able to establish that an understand her experience. Katie characterized the first days of being diagnosed as "relief" as it provided a rationale for her perceived diminishing mental capabilities. She shared that:

Very much central to her fears was the onset of an untreatable ailment that would result in of a belief that it is possible to recover from depression and that these symptoms could be reversed, as opposed something with more permanent effects like Alzheimer's. 25

I guess it was actually a bit of a relief to know that it wasn't just my brain deteriorating into like early onset Alzheimer's or something, which I was very concerned about being an idiot. (Laughs) I was just like "Huh, what if my brain is broken forever?" And it was nice to find out that all these symptoms of depression I was experiencing ­ like the inability to concentrate and the memory loss and the inability to focus or perform higher mental tasks ­ were actually caused by the depression and not just because I was becoming stupider or something. Which (laughs) being an academic I was very concerned about.

a permanent reduction of cognitive function. The relief indicated here is perhaps indicative

cognitive abilities, had initially been diagnosed as "atypical depression" before it was changed to major depression. This seems to hint at a "typical" way of understanding

Katie shared that her symptoms, which consisted of this deterioration of her higher

depression, namely, as a thing which affects mood rather than ability. In addition to this, mood disorder and its dissimilarities to her current condition.

Katie described having experience a previous bout of depression that fit the archetype of a [M]y previous serious bout of depression when I was much younger [...] was situationally-based. And it was all very much emotional, but it didn't impact my school work, it didn't impact my ability to focus or concentrate or enjoy things. It was a very different experience the [first time compared to now] which is why I didn't immediately connect it and why I waited so long [to seek help].

It seems then that Katie's understanding of depression had been based on previous

experiences. The development of her story then required outside information that could

provide ways of changing her understanding of what types of symptoms could be ascribed article that described the ways that depression may affect academics and graduate students different. Perhaps even more important to the story was a self-report

to depression. It was important to the story, therefore, for Katie to come across a magazine

questionnaire that allowed readers to assess their own fit for depression. Katie shared her experience of encountering this magazine article. [T]hat [magazine article] sort of made the light bulb turn on and I thought "Oh! Okay. THAT might be the issue. It might be depression." Because it didn't reflect what I'd previously experience in my life before.

The article then plays a crucial role as without this article, it is unclear whether this

narrative would be one of mental health. The nature of her symptoms may have led Katie to consider a number of other avenues related more closely to learning and thinking, such as a

26

type of learning disability or attention disorder. The essence of this story, as a mental health narrative, is inextricably linked to the discovery of the magazine article. While much of Katie's story revolved around the struggle of finding the right

medications to battle the unwanted symptoms of her depression, much of it also focused on the role her social community played as well. She described being very much involved in a community she cared about and taking on a part-time position as an administrator at one of the centres within her community. The role this job played within her narrative was beyond financial enumeration, but extended into the therapeutic:

She also shared that:

It's definitely been helpful for me in terms of measuring my progress and seeing where I'm at. It's a really good litmus test of how well I'm doing in a day. Can I get through all of the day-to-day tasks and move onto something a little more long-term, tasks and things that have to be done over the course of a month or over the course of a year at the [centre], in terms of running it. Like, accounting stuff or things like that. And so, you know, I can tell I'm not doing great if I only just barely get through the emails and stuff. And if I'm doing really well I'll get through all that really quickly and be able to also tackle a bunch of other more long-term tasks that take a bit more planning and just sort of time management. So it's been very helpful I think, plus the fact that it gets me out of the house, (laughs) which when you have depression can be difficult. I've actually been doing the vast majority of the day-to-day [centre] running and so that's actually been a really good experience for me because even on bad days, or when I was still adjusting to drugs, I wouldn't mind going in to that kind of work. Because it was answering emails and doing spreadsheets, I can do that in my sleep. (laughs) I'm a grad student! So it was easy and you know all my friends were there so it was a very comfortable environment. So even on days when I was feel like I couldn't do anything, I would just go and even if I had been pretty non-functional the whole day, I would at least get myself up to a point where I could do the basic tasks. So, it was helpful in terms of showing me that I was still was competent and at least basic uh data management and you know, answering question, dealing with people. So it was definitely, it has been very helpful I think. Just having that sort of constant duty in my life as opposed to being totally unemployed and just like sitting at home.

The role of the centre in Katie's narrative then was multifaceted. While acting as a source of financial stability, it provided a proving ground to gauge her treatment progress, it 27

provided an ongoing source of social contact and provided an opportunity to reassure her that she was still capable of contributing to her community. The sense of routine imposed of structure to what she felt would have quickly become unstructured. onto her life, necessarily existing because of the nature of her work, also provided a sense Another notable feature of Katie's narrative was that of relationships. The

importance of her social relationships were emphasized a number of times, especially

regarding the support that her friends and family, her partner and her supervisor provided. While we did not speak about what that support entailed it was clear that, whatever form this support took, it was very much valued. In addition, her relationship with her doctor spent their time listening to the ways that she had been feeling and coping with her could be characterised as a partnership. She described her doctors as "more passive" and diagnosis, and provided recommendations based on her reports. Katie shared an exchange

that she had with her doctor that illustrated this. Having just received recommendations by an outside referral on her case, Katie disagreed with the recommendations made and made her concerns with the recommendations clear. They wanted to do something weird. They wanted to take me off the one drug that was working and put me on Ritalin because they were most concerned about my concentration and focus issues now. And I was like "If I'm going to take Ritalin, I would take a very small dose" like my previous psychiatrist recommended. A very small dose in addition to my medications. I don't want to switch off of the one that has been working that I've been on for a year now, just to try something else. I thought that was a terrible idea. I have no idea why [they] suggested it and luckily my psychiatrist also agreed with that and said, "You know what? Let's just try switching out the [one medication for a different one] and see if that helps." and it has.

So while Katie's doctor could have followed the guidance of his professional colleagues, he chose to work in partnership with Katie instead. 28

the arduous process of finding a combination of medications that effectively nullify the

Katie's story, on the whole, hinges on an organic understanding of her condition and

symptoms of this condition. Underlying this process was the drive to recover her previous

life and self, to become the academic that she felt that she could be. Her loss of this life and endured because she had to and not because she felt like she had a choice.

this self were the motivating factors to trudge through the treatment process. In short, she [The medications are] not toys. You don't go on these because you got sad one day. You don't go on these because your grandma died and it's a month later and you're still missing her. You know? (laughs) They're really serious drugs and they're not worth the process on and off and side effects and everything else unless you really need them.

Her need to live the life that she wanted was very much linked to her need for the

medications. Indeed, the medications provided a tool to mitigate the chemical imbalances through medication. This also meant that her diagnosis brought clarity and relief as it

in her brain, a thing that was beyond the reach of other tools and could be only be affected meant that her seemingly deteriorating cognitive abilities could be reversed. In partnership with her doctor, Katie was able to find a combination of drugs that allowed her to regain much of her previous levels of functioning. It should not be overlooked, however, that Katie was still productive during symptomatic periods, as she described her involvement with her community and her work at a centre within her community. Her narrative should be viewed as one in which both the contributions of the medical profession and social networks or communities play a part.

29

Michelle's Story In speaking with Michelle, I felt that her demeanour and her story invoked a feeling

of tension and ambivalence, as though it would be inappropriate to conclude anything to be wholly positive or negative. Michelle is in her 30s and is a mother of 3 children. She described having felt the effects of mental illness her entire life and that she had always felt that she was not "normal." This struggle and unease eventually led Michelle to seek help most important part of her story was, she stated that: and a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder. Having been asked what she felt was the I think it would be a lot easier for people, it would be easier for me, if I felt like I had support of family and friends. (laughs) Maybe people in the healthcare field. If there wasn't such a negative [perception of certain diagnoses], especially this one [borderline personality disorder].

This excerpt highlights some of the ambivalence that Michelle felt in wanting help from others but at the same time, feeling apprehensive in doing so. It also highlights the with those within the healthcare field.

importance of relationships in her narrative, as well as the various interactions she had The plot of Michelle's narrative is one of endurance. She described having lived for

most of her life without the involvement of medical professionals despite knowing that she may benefit from such intervention. In fact, Michelle shared several times that she wished that there were medications that she could take that would supress the symptoms of her diagnosis but was learning to live with the reality that no such treatment existed. She described that:

I had always known that I had suffered depression. I knew that I had serious depression when I was younger. I had an eating disorder when I was very young, like through my 20s type years. And I had a lot of problems back then that I completely buried and tried to avoid. [I] thought I was, I think, above treatment, needing treatment, wasn't going to acknowledge that I needed treatment. At one 30

Michelle seems to have endured a lot through her lifetime and would tell of the other things that she was enduring at the time we spoke. Her approach to toward the mental health avoidance likely would have continued had it not been for a series of events. system for most of her life was one in which she "avoided the mental health system." This Michelle described having a "large breakdown" as the result of a relationship ending

point, I had gone to a counsellor at university when I was probably about 20? And that didn't last. And so, I managed, from that age to when I was probably like 36ish, to function without having any sort of help from doctors [or] therapist[s]. I honestly don't know I how I got through my younger years without being on any sort of medication or anything.

with her partner and that it was this break up that led to her deciding that she needed outside help.

It emerged that the main motivator for Michelle was the welfare of her children. Although it was difficult to lose her partner and it was difficult to endure the life that she had up until that point, the impetus for change was to ensure that her children would be okay. In fact,

What triggered me was the break up, when I had gone through the break up with my partner then and I was completely...I've had...which I'm coming to realize (laughs) as I'm older not necessarily typical. But I've had thoughts since I was young about suicide or not wanting to wake up or wanting to be done. They're always there. I've always had those thoughts. The helpless, empty thoughts. I was really, really struggling after that break up. I was really, really struggling like to the point that I couldn't function and I have kids.

Michelle described her children as her primary survival mechanism. "They really motivate desire to provide and care for her children provided her with an important reason to seek professional care. In getting her diagnosis, Michelle's telling of the experience re-invokes the feelings

me," she said. "I'm pretty positive if I didn't have kids, I wouldn't be here on this earth." Her

of ambivalence and tension that I felt throughout our conversation. The diagnosis brought 31

some clarity and organization to her life's experiences but it also became a source of

anguish. While helping explain what she has felt throughout her life, Michelle shared that "I'm devastated at the same time. I'm really mixed on [the diagnosis]." In exploring this feeling of devastation Michelle relayed the story of learning about her diagnosis. She

described first being considered for the diagnosis by her psychiatrist and stated that she "wasn't very happy with it." What followed after this preliminary appointment with her psychiatrist was a period of research and exploration, during which Michelle learned about borderline personality disorder. Her resourcefulness was omnipresent in this exploration as she contacted friends and acquaintances who had experiences with mental health diagnosis, in general, and borderline personality disorder, more specifically.

began to recognize herself in their stories but, perhaps, the most powerful experience in listening to her story, was in her reading of a recommended book. [O]ne of the books is called Sometimes I Act Crazy: Living with Borderline Personality Disorder. I read it over Christmas. I haven't read a book from start to finish for over a decade because I don't have time. And I read that entire book and I cried through the entire book. And I took that book into the psychiatrist with it all marked up and underlined and he took it and he looked at it and he said, "This is great! You underlined all the right stuff!" And I said, "No, this isn't great! This is explains my whole life [and all the ways] that I've tortured myself." And it basically [said] that I'm always going to feel this way, that there is no magic pill and I'm going to feel this way unless I do an awful lot of work.

In discussing her possible diagnosis with a friend who carried that diagnosis, she

Her turmoil and distress at the cause of her life difficulties was almost palpable in her

telling of this experience. While her diagnosis provided an account of her life story, the explanation brought with it further hardships as it predicted a difficult road ahead for Michelle as she would have to make fundamental changes to her worldview, her

personality and, ultimately, to herself. Given the prospect of being required to completely 32

change everything about herself, the desire for a pill that could drastically alter the landscape of her future was unsurprising. The diagnosis then became a way of understanding herself but also became a kind of

judgment and possible condemnation of the self. Michelle desired to be "normal" but, having been given the diagnosis, knew that that was no longer a possibility without

substantial changes to her thought patterns. Michelle describes that one of the features of her diagnosis is the ability to affect how others feel. Specifically, Michelle described a difficult for her partner to spend time away from her. She shares that: common occurrence in her relationships, both past and present, in which she made it [I]f he wants to go out for the night and I don't want him to go out for the night, I can really kind of make him feel bad about his choice to go out for the night and that, he's leaving me or leaving me with the kids or make him feel guilty.

It would seem that for Michelle there were a number of occasions when she was reluctant continued presence. It may have been the case that her need to be with her partner was underpinned by the perpetual "emptiness" Michelle described as being an enduring element of her experience of borderline personality disorder. As Michelle shared:

to have her partner leave her. There was a need that she felt was being met by her partner's

Michelle attributed her awareness of this behaviour and her labelling of this behaviour as undesirable was the result of the explanatory ability of the diagnosis. Having gained this awareness, Michelle found alternate ways to address behaviours that she feels are "selfdestructive or that is destructive to the relationship." She shares that: 33

I realized that I try to get all my fulfilment kind of out of the relationship. And when I'm not getting it, when he's kind of pulling back or when he's doing something ­ which is completely understandable for him to go out and take a few hours off especially when he would offer to stay home and watch the kids so I could go do something ­ I'll kind of use that to my advantage.

So while there was a time that such disagreements resulted in blame being placed on own role in these situations. This should not to imply that the diagnosis is an overly

I'll stop myself and I'll call myself out on it and I'll actually even point it out to him. And the last time I called myself out on it because he was starting to feel bad. I said, "No, this is what I do. There's nothing wrong with what you're doing."

others, as a result of her therapy, Michelle illustrated how she has begun to recognize her positive object in Michelle's narrative, but that there are some constructive outcomes as the result of it. An interpretation that fits with the theme of ambivalence that is prevalent also forces a reinterpretation of Michelle's life story up until when the story was told. throughout this story is that while the diagnosis provides some possibilities for change, it It's really hard to accept the fact that a lot of the crap and basically stuff that you've done to yourself, or that you've done, that the torture you've endured is because of your personality and because of yourself. That you can't blame that all on an outside source.

The feeling of ambivalence and tension is rooted in a conflict between Michelle and herself. firmly positions her in the role of an active agent within her life narrative, it also forces the the feeling of ambivalence emerges as Michelle attempts to do battle with herself.

It is one in which the difficulties she has face are the result of her personality and while this responsibility for the pain and suffering she has endured onto her own shoulders. In short, Michelle indicated near the beginning of our conversation that the interpersonal

relationships are a difficult matter for those diagnosed with borderline personality

disorder and this quickly became a chief concern in her story. Her relationship with her her relationship with her children was crucial to her narrative as well. Michelle spoke about her children motivating her to find ways to survive as she was pre-eminently 34 concerned with their wellbeing. It was then a source of apprehension for Michelle to

partner played a pivotal part in her decision to seek professional help but further to this,

elucidate the ways in which one of her daughters had begun to exhibit the same behaviours that Michelle had come to believe were problematic. As Michelle describes: [W]e've known that there was something different with her since she was in kindergarten actually and had problems with her (laughs) interpersonal relationships. She's fine with adults but she's always had problems with peers and I've kind of worked with her over the years and she's gotten some maturity and she's gotten better but she's also approaching her teenage years...She has a lot of days when she shuts down and she knows that she's different and she doesn't understand why her brain kind of works the way it does. I think, we've had enough dialogue and she knows that we think very similarly, so she trusts me to come talk to me and we do practice quite a few of the - I have another workbook [based on the therapy that I'm using] (laughs) - we'll fit [it] in and work through things in the workbook for how to calm ourselves down when we're in the moment.

The unsettling nature of the diagnosis for Michelle's story extends beyond her own life narrative, it seems, and has become part of the narrative of her daughter's as well. The therapeutic techniques on herself but on her daughter as well. responsibility to find a different way of existing has pushed Michelle not only to employ Related to this discussion on interpersonal relationships, Michelle also spoke of the

negative connotations ascribed to the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder, which she spoke of as stigma. Michelle described an employment interview:

[I]n the interview they're giving different scenarios of different clients, client scenarios and things they would come up with. [...] In the interview, there's the main woman and another social worker, [they talked] about how they also have people with mental health diagnoses who are there [...] who they're working with. And she's talking about people who have borderline personality disorder and who are very difficult and I'm sitting there trying to keep a straight a face as I can. And she was giving me a negative. [...] And she's saying about them being difficult to work with, so I'm kind of embarrassed and struggling more with it. But then, when I'm reasonable and I step back and look at it, I understand what she's talking about. I understand the whole interpersonal. The what's at play if it's not me and how someone can be difficult. But it's definitely not something I want my employer to know.

35

So in addition to the generally stigma against mental health diagnoses, Michelle's story

highlights stigma even within the mental health system. Specifically, we see an example

here of the negative judgments attributed to a particular diagnosis and the ways in which it may affect the delivery of services and the barrier that it presents to certain individuals in looking for employment. In sum, Michelle's story is one that centres on a non-organic understanding of

mental health. The diagnosis of borderline personality disorder resulted in a desire for the the learned nature of this diagnosis left Michelle with only the option to examine herself. The diagnosis itself, subsequently, became a source of tension: it provided clarity and explanation of Michelle's life experiences but also cast Michelle into the role of saboteur within her own life. The uncomfortable nature of the diagnosis extended to the various relationships in the story and, most poignantly, into the life narrative of Michelle's daughter. Having identified a number of her of actions to be tied to her diagnosis, she noticed that her daughter had learned them as well and resulted in a further layer of framed. anguish in this story. Lastly, Michelle spoke of the negative ways in which this diagnosis is

existence of medications that could alter the effects of the diagnosis but the repercussion of

Lucy's Story Lucy's story is one that invoked a feeling of tenacity and an unwillingness to be

overcome. At the time of telling, she was in her 30s, married and had 3 children. She talked much about her difficulties with medications and, more generally, the medical system and her choice to stop taking medication for anxiety and obsessive compulsive disorders. Her 36

complete and total reliance on herself was a dominant feature of her story. When asked about how she would summarize her overall story, she stated that: Well, you've kind of made me see, that the mental health system kind of screwed me. Because I think the easy fix was the pills, put me on pills. Nobody really wanted to hear my story. And then [...it took] a huge life change that made me have to deal with these people [in the medical system] head-on that kind of changed my life. And made me in control. I was able to kind of deal with things without having to pop these pills but deal with them in a different way even though I have the same issues. Because those issues have never really gone away. I just deal with them in a different way. I guess there are alternatives. The answer isn't just about popping the pills. I do think it's possible for people to rewire their brain.

The life change that Lucy speaks about here is the birth of her second daughter, who has

complex medical needs that require Lucy to interact with medical staff often. The excerpt, listening to her story. These feelings, I believe were the result of Lucy's complete her goals.

in its entirety, speaks to the feelings of sheer perseverance and determination that I felt in unwillingness to allow anything, including these diagnoses, to prevent her from reaching Lucy's motivations are numerous and complex, reflecting the changes that she had

undergone throughout her life story and her role within her life story. For much of her made by others. In this sense, it may be said that there were periods within her story, reflected from the moment that Lucy and I began our conversation:

story, Lucy acted in the best interests of others and often seemed bound to the decisions where the story happened to her and she was a passive character within the story. This is It's kind of a long story. It started...I was living with somebody. I was ready to go to university and I waited a year so they were ready to go. And we'd been living together for over a year and when we both went to university a week after we got there, he dumped me. He finishes me. And it was in a big city. I was a country girl. I wasn't used to being on my own and kind of into this loopy, paranoia state and it kind of change my life basically. That was the trigger. That was a trigger. And I was supposed to move into [a residence] and I didn't. I moved into a house so I could be 37

While it might be said that Lucy makes choices to accommodate her partner at this point, I

near him even though he was in a [residence]. I wasted everything. I kind of put everything on hold for this guy, which was ridiculous. But yeah, I don't know what happened to me but that's when the triggers and everything started. The anxiety um, it started to go downhill from that moment, from then.

believe that it would be equally reasonable to say that Lucy takes on the role of a character of it.

within the life of another. In this sense, the story is someone else's and Lucy is simply a part As a result, the breakup of the relationship left Lucy without a life story and within

that context, the ending of the relationship is understandably distressing. Lucy described the period after the break up:

The loss of the relationship spurred Lucy to attempt to regain it and sparked what would be a battle that she would wage with herself over the course of twenty years. Lucy described a number of changes after this breakup but the constant factor across these

I became obsessive. So I would be calling all the time, calling him all the time. If I wasn't speaking to him, I'd be in my bed. I couldn't leave. I was like frozen. I used to have to hide underneath, in my bed. I used to have to go on the train. I would think I was going to jump in front of the train. I was hearing voices telling me to jump. [...] It sounds really bizarre now, thinking about it, but at the time it just took over me, took over my world. It was [a] really strange, strange experience. I started making like obsessive compulsive. It was how I was. I don't know. And that's how I am now and that was my trigger. And it's funny that how something so ridiculous just triggers in me that has now lasted me, almost twenty years?

stories was the feeling of the story happening to her and that she played a supporting role within the lives of others while ignoring her own needs. Lucy stated this succinctly and compellingly:

I just feel like I have given up everything for everyone else. I feel like in my house, nothing would run without me. I don't care what [my partner] says (laughs), I know that he wouldn't be able to deal with that. If there's always been an emergency, anything, I'm the one that deals with it. Every single time. He freezes. I'm being forced into the situation and I just deal with it. [...] Like how many times I've had to 38

It can be said that at some point within her narrative, Lucy became an active agent, creating and directing a narrative that suited her needs. In asking Lucy at what point this change occurred or whether this change may have

call 911. It's always me that does it. I'm the one that has always had to deal with it. Every time. I've had to put my life on hold for the last, I don't know, 14 years? 15 years? And now, when I say it's my time, I've found something that I really want to do [...] Like I've always wanted to do what I do now, like years ago. But I never had the guts to do it and now I'm doing it. And I feel like nobody's going to take it away from me. Nobody. So it is my time. And that's how I think that the feeling of pleasing myself. I'm just determined.

occurred over a period, she suggested that this may have happened when her second advocate for her and much of the time, she was advocating in opposition to the recommendations of medical staff. In speaking to that change, she says:

daughter was born. Because her daughter has complex medical needs, Lucy became an

The motivation then for Lucy to change her approach to life was initially the wellbeing of

I think it was when [my daughter] was born and she was in the hospital. And I felt like when she was in the hospital, we thought she was going to die. You know the doctors were saying one thing to us and telling us to let her go and I was like, "No." I became this person that was just fighting for her. And I was think it was then. Really. I just got this strength, I guess. I had to learn to advocate for her and I'd never ever done that before, for anyone. So I wanted her to live so much that I think that's when I became this person.

her daughter. In leading a life in which she perceived her role to be the support of others, it seems that this was repeated in her advocacy of her daughter. It might be said that a side effect of this advocacy was that she became a person who was able to assert her point of advocate for herself. view in opposition to others. In her learning to advocate for her daughter, she learned to The differences in opinion between Lucy and medical professionals did not begin

with the birth of her daughter, making the change in Lucy's communication with medical 39

professionals noteworthy. In reflecting on her experiences with mental health

professionals, in general, Lucy shared that she felt that nobody had taken time to listen to her and her story. Rather, the prescription of medication to treat her diagnoses, left her feeling dismissed.

She described that as being the end of her relationship with this doctor as there were no paid to whether the use of medications addressed her experiences. The feelings this

I ended up going to my GP and they just prescribed me pills and that was their answer to everything. Just pills. So that has basically been my mental health system every time I have seen a health care professional. I've been given tablets. Not really anything probably different to anyone else, but that was their fix, their quick fix.

follow-ups sessions. She was expected to take the medications and very little attention was inattentiveness invoked were clear. In describing her interactions with the GP, Lucy stated: I didn't really feel like they were hearing me. They would just try to medicate me without even really prodding. I was never really given a diagnosis until [later]. But, you know, it really was being medicated and that was it. That even balled my life because I had side effects from the medication that they had given me.

The side effects might have been justified, in this narrative, had the medications been effective, but in Lucy's case the medications were largely ineffectual. The apparent effects, left Lucy feeling markedly worse.

dismissiveness of the GP combined with ineffectual medications, with their host of side It was after a miscarriage that Lucy decided to cease taking medications completely.

taking had the side effect of increasing the risk of miscarriage. This knowledge, coupled with the other side effects and ineffectual nature of the medication, meant that the medications were doing more harm than good. At the time of our conversation, Lucy had

She had received a publication from a hospital indicating that the medication she was

40

discovered ways to cope with her diagnoses that did not involve medication. A main strategy was to keep herself busy. I have to keep busy. If I keep busy, I don't think about things. If I am lying in bed, it gives me more time to think about things. And obsess and process and that's not a good time for me. I stay awake a lot. Something bugs me in the middle of the night I have to deal with it first thing in the morning. [..] I have to keep busy and that's why I take on so much. That's my coping strategy. I don't have down time at all. Right now, I work for hospital. I deal with people who are dying and people that are in bereavement. I don't have any downtime, so the moment I leave work till I come home, I've got the kids to deal with. That's my day, every single day.

In this way, Lucy has managed to care for her children while completing a university substantial amount and the strength of her spirit suggests that she will continue to accomplish and achieve.

degree and attained acceptance into a graduate program. She has been able to accomplish a

an inner strength and her creativity in finding ways to cope with the effects of her

To summarize, Lucy's story is one that invokes a feeling of tenacity. Her discovery of

diagnoses provide a glimpse at possible ways to deal with mental illness without using and then becoming more self-focused. Through advocating for her daughter she found

medications. Her motivations are complex, beginning with the wellbeing of her daughter ways to voice her distrust of the medical profession and found ways to further advocate and stand up for herself.

The Narratives and Conditions for Existence In examining the narratives altogether, I found that across the four common

features discussed ­ namely, the motivation of the narrator, the participant's relationship to medication, the diagnoses carried by a participant and its semantic functions, and the narrator's relationship to the medical professional ­ there were a number of striking 41

differences and similarities. The most striking was the relationship between medication and each narrator, as the relationship could be described as need, want and reject, respectively. In Katie's story, there was an unwavering need for medication ­ rooted largely in an organic understanding of mental illness ­ while in Michelle's story there was a desire to, or at the very least the option to, take medication to affect her diagnosis. This was further contrasted in examining Lucy's story in which a total rejection of medication took each of their stories, their personalities, and their diagnoses. It also indicated a different kind of relationship between narrators and doctors. While Katie and Michelle had good

place. These three very different relationships to medication highlighted the uniqueness of

working partnerships with their physicians, this was not Lucy's experience and, as a result, was left to fend on her own. It would seem that the relationship between medication and a person may be a complex one and hinges on a number of factors. The existence of medication as a tool to change the behaviour of a person, at the

volition of a person, would seem to indicate a certain set of conditions. It seems to presume that control of the self is desirable and, as the theme of needing to function was common, it function and survive within society more effectively. In each of the narratives, the "trigger" Katie, it was an inability to function as a graduate student; for Michelle, it was the inability to function as a parent; and for Lucy, it was the inability to function independently. The To continue this line of reasoning, the desire to care for the self and loved ones disruption of performance seemed to underlie each of the reasons for seeking treatment. insinuates that if that duty was not carried out by these narrators, that they would go 42 may be the case that the control of the self is desirable for the very purpose of being able to that moved each narrator to seek medical intervention involved an inability to function. For

undone. It seems to imply that the care of the self and of others in their lives is an

endeavour that resides at the level of the individual. The urgency created through loss of their families depended on the restoration of this functionality. It might be said that the which to exist.

functioning was so great that it seemed as though the very existence of these narrators and feeling and spirit of their narratives intimated that to be productive is the only manner in

43

Chapter 5: Analysis
The narratives presented by the participants in this study have provided an

intriguing glimpse into the possibility of understanding resilience through a Foucauldian perspective. The exploration of these narratives has highlighted the uniqueness of each story but has also suggested a number of similarities. Firstly, the plots of the stories seem to mirror the way in which resilience is conceptualized within the literature; namely, as either a protective or restorative mechanism. Secondly, understandings of governmentality have an apparent focus in neoliberalistic discourses of productive and individuality that also emerged within my interpretation of the life stories shared during this work. Lastly, a closely related point is the use of medications and other treatments to control the self in the narratives within this work alongside the work of other scholars. Resilience as Restoration and Protection The plots of the stories provided by participants bear a striking similarity to order to exist within a neoliberalist society. These three ideas speak loudest in considering

dominant ways in which resilience is presented within the research literature. In

particular, an examination of Katie's story ­ which can be characterized as one where the protagonist is high-achieving, encounters adversity and then recovers through the aid of et al., 2013; Tugade & Fredrickson, 2004) understand the concept of resilience. This medical support ­ mirrors the way a number of authors (e.g., Hobfoll et al., 2009; Marttila conceptualization of resilience also corresponds with the work of Davidson and Roe

(2007); specifically, that recovery in best captures the experience of coping with mental

illness as it describes a process of learning to live with the effects of illness. It is noteworthy 44

that an organic understanding of mental health diagnoses underpins the writings of many

of the cited authors, as well as the narrative of Katie. This understand perhaps reflects the biology (Davydov et al., 2010).

historical relation between this conceptualization of resilience and its origins in the field of The plots of the stories of the other two participants seemed to be best explained

through understanding resilience as a protective phenomenon. Both Michelle and Lucy

were able to function at high-levels with little medical intervention, suggesting that they families, complete university and find employment while experiencing the symptoms of

were buffered from the assumed negative effects of their diagnoses. Both were able to raise their diagnoses. In this way, their experiences would seem to reflect the work of authors al., 2011; Gardner et al., 2008; Johnson & Beamer, 2013; Kulis et al., 2011; Luthar, 1991; stories, however, should not be ignored as it was evident that the supposed protective effect of resilience was far from complete. Each narrator poignantly conveyed the to one of empathetic achievement. Resilience as Governmentality A recurring notion within the narratives explored were the related ideas of

who believe that resilience protects individuals from adverse conditions (e.g., Brinkman et Ungar, 2006, 2011; Ungar & Liebenberg, 2009; Wallace, 2012). The subtleties within these

difficulties they faced within their lives and should not be trivialized by reducing their story

production and function. More specifically, the context in which production and function

emerged was within that of desire, as participants noted that they desired to be productive individuals who were capable of functioning within society. This is perhaps suggestive of 45

the discourses of neoliberalism successfully pervading society to the degree that

responsibilization (Rose & Miller, 1992) has extended beyond systems and structures, and has become an object of desire. The need to perform and function was a key motivator health and wellbeing been downloaded to individuals (George & George, 2013; within each narrative and suggests that not only has the responsibility for maintaining Teghtsoonian, 2009), but that individuals themselves have constructed their identities to

include responsibility as a core trait. Each participant emphasized the role of individual desire of participants to act in their own best interests is congruent with the neoliberal former support, this necessarily requires further administration and would eventually for independence then may be a recasting of neoliberalism as self-governance.

action in their stories while the obligations of institutions were scarcely mentioned. The desire for smaller governments (Rose & Miller, 1992). For participants to require greater result in larger governments and greater government spending (Joseph, 2013). This desire The eventual end-goal of this self-governance, as noted by Baker (2002), is to render

invisible disabilities of all sorts. The stories presented here suggest that this result may their diagnoses, the ways in which participants sought to control their diagnoses, and, that governmentality as new eugenics (Baker, 2002) may be a notion relevant to

have been accomplished with some success. The reluctance in which participants discussed above all, the ways in which participants sought to fit in and behave like others, suggest understanding mental illness. While social models of disability argue that impairment is disability is destroyed through self-government.

not a necessary result of disability (Hiranandani, 2005), it is unclear what might result if

46

Treatment as a Technology of the Self In reading resilience as a type of governmentality, treatment modalities must then

be read as ways of enacting that control of the self, a type of technology. Katie's story

provides likely the clearest account of such a situation. Her use of medications allowed her to affect the unaffectable and control something that would be typically be beyond her control. Together, her story and Lucy's reflects treatment based on a biomedical

understanding of mental illness (Poole et al., 2012). While Michelle's narrative is absent of medications, her use of therapeutic techniques to control her thoughts is somewhat function of a controller of symptoms within the life of the narrator. analogous to the use of medications. In both cases, the treatment undergone takes on the Michelle's case, however, deserves further analysis as the use of a therapy to control

actions has other implications. In this situation, the use of techniques to affect thought,

mood and actions require a level of active agency that it somewhat different from the use of medications. The requisite agency to control through technique suggests a different flavour to this possible example of governmentality. In all the stories examined, a diagnosis necessitated a constituting of the self as "abnormal" or "disordered" which led to the

undergoing of treatment as the obligatory next step but in Michelle's story, the diagnosis of a personality disorder required a labeling and continued labeling of thoughts, mood and actions as "disordered" that was on a different scale than others. For Michelle, the constituting of the self was perhaps an event that may have occurred a number of times

each day. The use of the treatment as prescribed course of action after constituting the self as "disordered" seems to keep with Tremain's (2001) description of the productive aspect of power.

47

Chapter 6: Conclusion
The exploration undertaken here is one of the first empirical studies done in an

attempt to examine the idea resilience through the lens of governmentality. The findings

and analysis suggest that reading resilience as governmentality may have some empirical bases, but further research is required to more thoroughly investigate the ways in which the concept of resilience may govern the self within the context of mental health. In

undertaking such an investigation, it may become possible to shift the discussion on mental health from a place of governance to a place of emancipation. While it is beyond the current work to answer the question of whether this reading of resilience will generate dialogue around the ways that the concept of resilience may be used to transform and to challenge occur, that it becomes an option in the future.

status quo relationships of inequality, it is my hope that even if this conversation does not The topic of resisting the status quo through resilience concepts must be situated

within the findings of this work and, specifically, within the tension between the individual has suggested that the conditions that allow for the existence of the concept of resilience is an artefact of that injustice. The facile conclusion may be that the system must adapt itself to better accommodate diversity, as some notable authors have argued (e.g., Poole et al.,

and the system. This work has proceeded on the basis that the current system is unjust and

2012). In the current work, however, I feel that such a conclusion goes against the tone and spirit of the stories I have had the privilege to be part of, as a desire for "normality" and to this tension between the individual and the system, when situated within the narratives given, may require us to look beyond a dichotomous relationship. 48 function in ways similar to others have been dominant within each narrative. I suggest that

may be appropriate in considering the needs of the individual. The desire to function and

The move from a dichotomous, mutually exclusive, binary of individual and system

be like others, while can be considered a symptom of the productive means of power, is an outcome desired by some within the c/s/x community. If this is the case and the wishes of c/s/x community members are to honoured, as is suggested by the professional values of social work (Harms & Pierce, 2011), this creates a further complication that may not be easily resolved. Plainly, if resilience is a self-governance concept which reproduces

inequality, then the abolishment of resilience and inequality may have to be undertaken

together. But if resilience is also a desirable trait, according to the people served by social both oppressive and empowering?

work, the path forward is less clear. What is the proper treatment of a concept that may be This discussion extends far beyond the current work, in its examination of the

nature of the relationship between individuals and their discursive environments (e.g., Butler, 2001), the possibilities of micro resistance (e.g., Hardt & Negri, 2009) or the creation of knowledge with an awareness of its political ramifications (e.g., Potts & Brown,

2005). It is my suggestion, however, that the current work may add a modest amount to conversations regarding the transformation of the self. It would seem that the desire to within the discussions concerning the use of the master's tools (e.g., Strega, 2005). It is membership within dominant groups.

these conversations and that, perhaps, the move toward social transformation may require compete in a neoliberal environment, may be an act of erasure but could also be situated difficult to envisage conditions in which becoming "normal" does not translate to seeking

49

explorations concerning resilience and social transformation. The participants within this study seemed to have suggested that the need for resilience is rooted in pragmatic concerns, as less resilient individuals trend toward physical extinction. The difficulty in

A possible way through these difficulties may be to engage in complementary

proceeding in this line of reasoning without consideration toward social conditions lies inclusion. Perhaps it may be relevant to examine the ways theories and actions aimed

within the trend toward the possible extinction of dialogue regarding social inequality and toward social transformation may complement the very real need for resilience to survive in harsh and difficult conditions. How that dialogue might unfold and how the challenges within that dialogue may be navigated, I believe is an avenue for further research.

as a type of governmentality might be reflected within the narratives of those who have

In closing, the current work has attempted to investigate whether reading resilience

used the mental health system. In analyzing the stories provided by the participants of this study, it was found that a Foucauldian reading of resilience was indeed possible, but the extent to which this might be done is something that I believe may be a topic for future governing elements of resilience and this desire to self-govern resulted in the need to

research. A somewhat unexpected finding was the desire of participants to take on the selfconsider the apparent tension between a social justice position, which might consider selfa need to honour the perspectives of service users. While I do not know if this tension can be resolved, I believe that this work aids in furthering an understanding of this tension.

government of all forms to be closely linked to oppression, while simultaneously espousing

50

Appendices
Appendix A ­ Consent Form CONSENT FORM

CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN RESEARCH

Narratives on the Experience of Resilience in Mental Health Settings You are being invited to participate in a research study. Please read this Consent Form so that you understand what your participation will involve. Before you consent to participate, please ask any questions necessary to be sure you understand what your participation will involve.

INVESTIGATORS This research study is being conducted by Philip Mach, a graduate student from the School of Social Work at Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of a Masters of Social work under the supervision of Dr. Henry Parada. The results of this study will be used to complete a major research project and for possible publication. If you have any questions or concerns about the research, please feel free to contact Henry Parada, Faculty Supervisor, at hparada@ryerson.ca, phone: 416-979-5000 ext. 6223 or the Principal Investigator, Philip Mach, at pmach@ryerson.ca.

PURPOSE OF THE STUDY The purpose of this study is to gather stories on what it is like to live with mental illness. The focus of the study is to learn more about the ways those with mental illness manage their day-today lives. 3-5 people are being asked to participate in this study. Only people who have said that they live with mental illness have been asked to participate.

DESCRIPTION OF THE STUDY AND YOUR PARTICIPATION If you volunteer to participate in this study, you will be asked to do the following things: A researcher will interview you about living with mental illness. During this interview, the researcher will ask you some questions about your experiences. The interview will take about an hour and a half and will take place in quiet location near Ryerson University. During the interview you might be asked about the kinds of things you do to manage your mental illness. Some example questions or things you may be asked to talk about are: What kinds of things do you do that you think are important for managing your mental

51

illness? Describe a time when you feel like you were doing well. For this study information on your age, gender, name and mental health diagnosis will be collected. The interview will be audio recorded and transcribed. If you are uncomfortable with being audio recorded, the interview can be done without being recorded. After the interview, you will be contacted about a follow-up session. You will be given the chance to check the transcript of the interview. If you find anything on the transcript that you would like removed, tell the researcher at that time and it will be removed and not used in the study. A copy of the research findings is available to participants. A copy can be sent to you by mail or email if you provide the researcher with your contact information.

POTENTIAL RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS The risks in this research are low. Some of the questions may be personal and may bring up difficult memories. This may make you feel uncomfortable or distressed. If that happens, you may choose to take a break or not answer the question. If you feel like you would like to stop the interview at any time, it is your right to do so. In sharing your stories with the researcher, others may be able to identify who you are. You will be given the chance to review your interview transcript with the researcher to remove things that you do not want to be included in it. The researcher will also remove information that might suggest you are when reporting on your interview. The researcher has provided you with a list of referrals that you may contact for more support.

POTENTIAL BENEFITS TO PARTICIPANTS AND/OR TO SOCIETY This study will help researchers get a better understanding of what it is like to live with mental illness and the types of things people living with mental illness think are important. You may find that talking about your life experiences may help you feel heard and supported. I cannot guarantee, however, that you will receive any benefits from participating in this study.

PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION You will not be paid to participate in this study.

CONFIDENTIALITY The researcher will be audio-recording and taking notes during the interview. The audio-recording will then be transcribed. You will be given you a participant number or you may choose an alias that will be used to identify which audio-recording and transcript is yours. A list will indicate your participant number or alias and will be kept in a locked filing cabinet.

52

The raw audio-recordings and transcripts will be kept on a password-protected computer that only the researcher will be able to access. The transcripts will be edited to remove any identifying information. The transcripts will be used to complete a research project and others may be involved in analyzing your transcript. The transcripts may also be used for article publication. Confidentiality will be maintained to the extent allowed by law. You can review or edit your transcript. The researcher will contact you when the your transcript is available for review or edit and you will have 2 weeks to do so from that point. The audio-recordings and transcripts will be destroyed within two years.

VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION AND WITHDRAWAL Participation in this study is voluntary. You can choose whether to be in this study or not. If you volunteer to be in this study, you may withdraw at any time without consequences of any kind. If you choose to withdraw from this study you may also choose to withdraw your data from the study. You may also choose not to answer any question(s) and still remain in the study. You may request that the interview be done without audio recording. Your choice of whether or not to participate will not influence your future relations with Ryerson.

QUESTIONS ABOUT THE STUDY If you have any questions about the research now, please ask. If you have questions later about the research, you may contact: Philip Mach pmach@ryerson.ca This study has been reviewed by the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board. If you have questions regarding your rights as a research participant in this study, please contact: Toni Fletcher, Research Ethics Coordinator Research Ethics Board Office of the Vice President, Research and Innovation Ryerson University 350 Victoria Street Toronto, Ontario M5B 2K3 416-979-5042 or toni.fletcher@ryerson.ca

SIGNATURE OF RESEARCH PARTICIPANT/LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study "Narratives on the Experiences of Resilience" as described herein. Your questions have been answered to your satisfaction, and you agree to participate in this study. You have been given a copy of this form. ______________________________________ Name of Participant (please print)

53

_____________________________________ Signature of Participant

___________________________ Date

Your signature below indicates that you are providing consent to be audio-recorded for the study "Narratives on the Experiences of Resilience" as described herein.

______________________________________ Name of Participant (please print)

_____________________________________ Signature of Participant

___________________________ Date

54

References
Adame, A. L., & Leitner, L. M. (2008). Breaking Out of the Mainstream: The Evolution of Peer Support Alternatives to the Mental Health System. Ethical Human Psychology and Psychiatry, 10(3), 146-162. doi: 10.1891/1559-4343.10.3.146 Andersson, N., & Ledogar, R. J. (2008). The CIET Aboriginal Youth Resilience Studies: 14 Years of Capacity Building and Methods Development in Canada. Pimatisiwin, 6(2), 65-88.

Anthony, W. A. (1993). Recovery from mental illness: The guiding vision of the mental health service system in the 1990s. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 16(4), 11-23. Baker, B. (2002). The Hunt for Disability: The New Eugenics and the Normalization of School Children. The Teachers College Record 104(4), 663-703.

Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: have we underestimated the human capacity to thrive after extremely aversive events? Am Psychol, 59(1), 20-28. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.59.1.20 Bonanno, G. A. (2005). Resilience in the Face of Potential Trauma. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14(3), 135-138. doi: 10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00347.x

Bonanno, G. A., Wortman, C. B., Lehman, D. R., Tweed, R. G., Haring, M., Sonnega, J., . . . Nesse, R. M. (2002). Resilience to loss and chronic grief: a prospective study from preloss to 18-months postloss. J Pers Soc Psychol, 83(5), 1150-1164. doi: 10.1037//00223514.83.5.1150 Brinkman, B. G., Brinkman, K. G., & Toomey, S. (2011). What to do About the Boys? Advocating for System Change When Doing Social Justice Work with Girls. [Article]. Journal for Social Action in Counseling & Psychology, 3(2), 53-70.

Campbell, J. (1973). The Hero with a Thousand Faces (3rd ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 55

Butler, J. (2001). Doing justice to someone: Sex reassignment and allegories of transsexuality. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies, 7(4), 621-636.

Brown, T. N., & Scheid, T. L. (2010). A handbook for the study of mental health : social contexts, theories, and systems (2nd ed.). Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University Press.

Chase, S. E. (2003). Learning to listen: Narrative principles in a qualitative research methods course. In R. Josselson, A. Lieblich & D. P. McAdams (Eds.), (pp. 79-99): American Psychological Association. Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design : choosing among five approaches (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks: SAGE.

Davidson, L., & Roe, D. (2007). Recovery from versus recovery in serious mental illness: One strategy for lessening confusion plaguing recovery. [Article]. Journal of Mental Health, 16(4), 459-470. doi: 10.1080/09638230701482394

Davydov, D. M., Stewart, R., Ritchie, K., & Chaudieu, I. (2010). Resilience and mental health. Clin Psychol Rev, 30(5), 479-495. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2010.03.003 Deegan, P. E. (1988). Recovery: The lived experience of rehabilitation. Psychosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 11(4), 11-19.

Feder, A., Charney, D., & Collins, K. (2011). Neurobiology of resilience In S. M. Southwick, B. T. Litz & D. Charney (Eds.), Resilience and Mental Health: Challenges Across the Lifespan (pp. 1-29): Cambridge University Press. Fleming, J., & Ledogar, R. J. (2008). Resilience and Indigenous Spirituality: A Literature Review. Pimatisiwin, 6(2), 47-64.

Edward, K. L., Welch, A., & Chater, K. (2009). The phenomenon of resilience as described by adults who have experienced mental illness. J Adv Nurs, 65(3), 587-595. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2648.2008.04912.x

Fook, J. (2002). Social work : critical theory and practice. London ; Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE.

Foucault, M. (1980). Two Lectures. In C. Gordon (Ed.), Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977 (pp. 78-108). New York: Random House.

Foucault, M. (2000). Governmentality. In (R. Hurley, Trans.) J. D. Faubion (Ed.), Power (Vol. 3, pp. 201-222): New Press. Fraser, H. (2004). Doing Narrative Research: Analysing Personal Stories Line by Line. Qualitative Social Work, 3(2), 179-201. doi: 10.1177/1473325004043383

Fredrickson, B. L., Tugade, M. M., Waugh, C. E., & Larkin, G. R. (2003). What good are positive emotions in crisis? A prospective study of resilience and emotions following 56

Friedli, L. (2009). Mental health, resilience and inequalities: WHO Regional Office for Europe Copenhagen, Denmark.

the terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11th, 2001. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(2), 365-376. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.2.365

Gardner, T., Dishion, T., & Connell, A. (2008). Adolescent Self-Regulation as Resilience: Resistance to Antisocial Behavior within the Deviant Peer Context. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 36(2), 273-284. doi: 10.1007/s10802-007-9176-6

Garmezy, N. (1987). Stress, competence, and development: continuities in the study of schizophrenic adults, children vulnerable to psychopathology, and the search for stress-resistant children. Am J Orthopsychiatry, 57(2), 159-174. doi: 10.1111/j.19390025.1987.tb03526.x Garmezy, N. (1991). Resiliency and Vulnerability to Adverse Developmental Outcomes Associated With Poverty. American Behavioral Scientist, 34(4), 416-430. doi: 10.1177/0002764291034004003

Garmezy, N. (1993). Children in poverty: Resilience despite risk. Psychiatry, 56(1), 127-130. George, P., & George, J. (2013). Interrogating the Neoliberal Governmentality of the Old Age Security Act: The Case of Sponsored Immigrant Seniors. Canadian Social Work Review, 30(1), 65-81.

Gubrium, J. F., & Holstein, J. A. (2009). Forms of Analysis. In Analyzing Narrative Reality (pp. 14-26). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. Guest, Y. (2012). Reflections on resilience: a psycho-social exploration of the life long impact of having been in care during childhood. [Article]. Journal of Social Work Practice, 26(1), 109-124. doi: 10.1080/02650533.2011.601287

Guo, W., & Tsui, M. (2010). From resilience to resistance: A reconstruction of the strengths perspective in social work practice. International Social Work, 53(2), 233-245. doi: 10.1177/0020872809355391 Hardt, M., & Negri, A. (2009). Governing the Revolution. In COMMONWEALTH (pp. 361375): Harvard University Press.

Harms, L., & Pierce, J. (2011). Working with People: Communication Skills for Reflective Practice: Oxford University Press. 57

Harper, D., & Speed, E. (2012). Uncovering Recovery: The Resistible Rise of Recovery and Resilience. Studies in Social Justice, 6(1), 9-25. Healy, K. (2005). Social work theories in context : creating frameworks for practice. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hobfoll, S. E., Palmieri, P. A., Johnson, R. J., Canetti-Nisim, D., Hall, B. J., & Galea, S. (2009). Trajectories of resilience, resistance, and distress during ongoing terrorism: The case of Jews and Arabs in Israel. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(1), 138-148. doi: 10.1037/a0014360

Hiranandani, V. (2005). Towards a Critical Theory of Disability in Social Work. Critical Social Work, 6(1). Retrieved from http://www1.uwindsor.ca/criticalsocialwork/towards-a-critical-theory-ofdisability-in-social-work

Hoge, E. A., Austin, E. D., & Pollack, M. H. (2007). Resilience: research evidence and conceptual considerations for posttraumatic stress disorder. Depress Anxiety, 24(2), 139-152. doi: 10.1002/da.20175 Howell, A., & Voronka, J. (2012). Introduction: The Politics of Resilience and Recovery in Mental Health Care. Studies in Social Justice, 6(1), 1-7. Johnson, J. L., & Beamer, K. (2013). Chapter 8. An indigenous narrative of resilience: Malama ko Aloha. [Article]. Subst Use Misuse, 48(13), 1369-1376. doi: 10.3109/10826084.2013.814998

Joseph, J. (2013). Resilience as embedded neoliberalism: a governmentality approach. Resilience, 1(1), 38-52. doi: 10.1080/21693293.2013.765741 Josselson, R., & Lieblich, A. (2003). A framework for narrative research proposals in psychology. In R. Josselson, A. Lieblich & D. P. McAdams (Eds.), (pp. 259-274): American Psychological Association.

Kulis, S., Reeves, L. J., Dustman, P. A., & O'Neill, M. (2011). Strategies to Resist Drug Offers Among Urban American Indian Youth of the Southwest: An Enumeration, Classification, and Analysis by Substance and Offeror. [Article]. Substance Use & Misuse, 46(11), 1395-1409. doi: 10.3109/10826084.2011.592433

Lenette, C., Brough, M., & Cox, L. (2012). Everyday resilience: Narratives of single refugee women with children. Qualitative Social Work, 12(5), 637-653. doi: 10.1177/1473325012449684 58

Luthar, S. S. (1991). Vulnerability and resilience: a study of high-risk adolescents. Child Dev, 62(3), 600-616. doi: 10.2307/1131134 Luthar, S. S., & Cicchetti, D. (2000). The construct of resilience: Implications for interventions and social policies. Development and Psychopathology, 12(4), 857-885. doi: 10.1017/s0954579400004156

Morrow, M., & Weisser, J. (2012). Towards a Social Justice Framework of Mental Health Recovery. Studies in Social Justice, 6(1), 27-43.

Morrow, M. (2013). Recovery: Progressive Paradigm or Neoliberal Smokescreen? In R. J. Menzies, G. Reaume & B. A. LeFrançois (Eds.), Mad matters : a critical reader in Canadian mad studies (pp. 323-333). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press.

Marttila, A., Johansson, E., Whitehead, M., & Burström, B. (2013). Keep going in adversity using a resilience perspective to understand the narratives of long-term social assistance recipients in Sweden. [Article]. International Journal for Equity in Health, 12(1), 1-11. doi: 10.1186/1475-9276-12-8

Luthar, S. S., Cicchetti, D., & Becker, B. (2000). The construct of resilience: a critical evaluation and guidelines for future work. Child Dev, 71(3), 543-562. doi: 10.1111/1467-8624.00164

Poole, J. M., Jivraj, T., Arslanian, A., Bellows, K., Chiasson, S., Hakimy, H., . . . Reid, J. (2012). Sanism, `Mental Health', and Social Work/Education: A Review and Call to Action (Vol. 1). Poole, J. M., & Ward, J. (2013). "Breaking Open the Bone": Storying, Sanism, and Mad Grief. In R. J. Menzies, G. Reaume & B. A. LeFrançois (Eds.), Mad matters : a critical reader in Canadian mad studies (pp. xiv, 394 p.). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press.

Richardson, G. E. (2002). The metatheory of resilience and resiliency. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58(3), 307-321. doi: 10.1002/jclp.10020 Riessman, C. K. (2002). Analysis of Personal Narratives. In J. F. Gubrium & J. A. Holstein (Eds.), Handbook of Interview Research: Context and Method (pp. 695-711). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. 59

Potts, K., & Brown, L. (2005). Becoming an anti-oppressive researcher. In L. A. Brown & S. Strega (Eds.), Research as resistance : critical, indigenous and anti-oppressive approaches (pp. 255-286). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press.

Riessman, C. K., & Quinney, L. (2005). Narrative in Social Work: A Critical Review. Qualitative Social Work, 4(4), 391-412. doi: 10.1177/1473325005058643

Rose, N., & Miller, P. (1992). Political Power beyond the State: Problematics of Government. The British Journal of Sociology, 43(2), 173-205. doi: 10.2307/591464 Rutten, B. P., Hammels, C., Geschwind, N., Menne-Lothmann, C., Pishva, E., Schruers, K., . . . Wichers, M. (2013). Resilience in mental health: linking psychological and neurobiological perspectives. Acta Psychiatr Scand, 128(1), 3-20. doi: 10.1111/acps.12095

Rutter, M. (1985). Resilience in the face of adversity: Protective factors and resistance to psychiatric disorder. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 598-611. doi: 10.1192/bjp.147.6.598

Shaikh, A., & Kauppi, C. (2010). Deconstructing resilience: myriad conceptualizations and interpretations. International Journal of Arts and Sciences, 3(15), 155-176. Squire, C. (2008). Experience-centred and culturally-oriented approaches to narrative. In M. Andrews, C. Squire & M. Tamboukou (Eds.), Doing Narrative Research (pp. 4264). London: SAGE Publications, Ltd.

Tamboukou, M. (2008). A Foucauldian approach to narratives. In M. Andrews, C. Squire & M. Tamboukou (Eds.), Doing Narrative Research (pp. 103-121). London: SAGE Publications, Ltd. Teghtsoonian, K. (2009). Depression and mental health in neoliberal times: A critical analysis of policy and discourse. Social Science & Medicine, 69(1), 28-35. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.03.037

Strega, S. (2005). The View from the Poststructural Margins: Epistemology and Methodology Reconsidered. In L. A. Brown & S. Strega (Eds.), Research as resistance : critical, indigenous and anti-oppressive approaches (pp. 199-235). Toronto: Canadian Scholars' Press.

Theron, L., Ann Cameron, C., Didkowsky, N., Lau, C., Liebenberg, L., & Ungar, M. (2011). A "Day in the Lives" of Four Resilient Youths: Cultural Roots of Resilience. Youth & Society, 43(3), 799-818. doi: 10.1177/0044118x11402853

Tremain, S. (2001). On the government of disability. Social Theory and Practice, 27(4), 617636. 60

Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2004). Resilient Individuals Use Positive Emotions to Bounce Back From Negative Emotional Experiences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86(2), 320-333. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.86.2.320 Ungar, M. (2006). Resilience across Cultures. British Journal of Social Work, 38(2), 218-235. doi: 10.1093/bjsw/bcl343

Ungar, M. (2011). The Social Ecology of Resilience: A Handbook of Theory and Practice: Springer.

Wallace, E. V. (2012). Differences in Mental Health Resiliency in Young African Americans. American Journal of Health Studies, 27(1), 8-12. Werner, E. E. (1989). High-Risk Children in Young Adulthoid: A Longitudinal Study from Birth to 32 Years. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 59(1), 72-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1939-0025.1989.tb01636.x

Ungar, M., & Liebenberg, L. (2009). Researching Resilience. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Wexler, L. (2014). Looking across three generations of Alaska Natives to explore how culture fosters indigenous resilience. Transcult Psychiatry, 51(1), 73-92. doi: 10.1177/1363461513497417

Zautra, A., Hall, J. S., & Reich, J. W. (2010). Handbook of adult resilience. New York: Guilford Press.

61


