   A  TALENT  MANAGEMENT  FUTURE  FOR  ECONOMIC  IMMIGRATION  IN  CANADA:  BUILDING   ON  BEST  PRACTICE  DIVERSITY/INCLUSION  AND  INTERCULTURAL  COMPETENCE   TRAINING      by      Ezekiel  Roos-Walker,  BA,  Trent  University         A  Major  Research  Paper      presented  to  Ryerson  University      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of        Master  of  Arts        in  the  Program  of      Immigration  and  Settlement  Studies         Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014      ©  Ezekiel  Roos-Walker,  2014        

  

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  MAJOR  RESEARCH   PAPER  (MRP)      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  Major  Research  Paper.  This  is  a  true  copy   of  the  MRP,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by  other   means,   in   total   or   in   part,   at   the   request   of   other   institutions   or   individuals   for   the   purpose   of  scholarly  research.        I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.                   
                                               

  Ezekiel  Roos-Walker                  

  

ii  

      A  TALENT  MANAGEMENT  FUTURE  FOR  ECONOMIC  IMMIGRATION  IN  CANADA:  BUILDING  ON  BEST   PRACTICE  DIVERSITY/INCLUSION  AND  INTERCULTURAL  COMPETENCE  TRAINING  

   Ezekiel  Roos-Walker      Master  of  Arts  2014     Immigration  and  Settlement  Studies   Ryerson  University      ABSTRACT     
One  of  the  key  questions  regarding  the  integration  of  economic  immigrants  into  Canadian  labour  markets  is   the  role  that  employers  will  play,  especially  given  the  forthcoming  changes  that  will  formalize  Expressions  of   Interest  (EOI)  as  intrinsic  to  the  selection  process.  Immigrants  are  not  a  social  or  financial  burden,  but  as  is   proven  through  self-reported  hiring  practices  and  projections  of  many  industry-leading  employers,  a  hugely   important   investment   that   adds   layers   of   value   to   workforces   in   Canada.   This   enthusiasm   to   hire   foreign- trained   professionals   is   not   matched   by   an   enthusiasm   to   fund   the   development   of   their   skills,   particularly   `soft'   skills   such   as   cultural   competency   and   teamwork,   in   a   context   that   is   alien   to   them.   To   explore   the   potential   for   expanding   programs   that   optimize   the   performance   of   multicultural   workplaces,   address   regional   labour   shortages   with   targeted   immigration,   and   accelerate   the   role   of   talent   management   in   the   profile  of  human  resources  departments,  this  study  is  a  demonstration  of  potential  in  Canada  for  a  much  more   integrated,  cross-sector,  solution-focused  economic  immigration  strategy.      Key  Words:  Diversity  and  Inclusion,  Talent  Management,  Economic  Immigration,  Skills  Training,  Intercultural   Competence  

                     iii  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS      This  study  was  made  possible  with  the  direction  of  Dr.  Rupa  Banerjee,  whose  guidance  was   instrumental  in  creating  coherence  out  of  chaos.  Much  of  the  value  of  this  paper  comes  from   an  anchoring  in  the  values  and  sensibilities  in  the  world  of  Canadian  employers,  which   would  not  have  been  possible  without  her  support.  A  huge  thanks  is  also  due  to  Prof.  John   Shields,  for  his  input  and  support.                                                                                                                                   iv  

Table  of  Contents  
Introduction  ........................................................................................................................................  1   Research  Questions  ..............................................................................................................................  2   Conceptual  Framework  .......................................................................................................................  3   Theoretical  Perspective  ......................................................................................................................  3   Institutional  Knowledge  ......................................................................................................................  4   Methodology  ............................................................................................................................................  5   Review  of  the  Literature   ...................................................................................................................  10   Analysis  ..................................................................................................................................................  24   Federal  Analysis  ..................................................................................................................................  25   Sub-Federal  Analysis  .........................................................................................................................  29   Private  Sector  Analysis  .....................................................................................................................  34   Assessment  1  ­  Toward  EOI-driven  Selection   ...........................................................................  45   Assessment  2  ­  Express  Entry  and  the  future  ­  a  talent  management  model  ................  49   Assessment  3  -  Action  Plan  ..............................................................................................................  54   Recommendations  and  Conclusions  ............................................................................................  58   Appendix  1  ............................................................................................................................................  60   Bibliography  .........................................................................................................................................  62  

  

v  

     

Introduction   The  labour  market  performance  of  Canadian  newcomers  is  a  major  issue,  both  for  

researchers  and  policy  makers.  At  the  Metropolis  Conference  2014  Corinne  Prince  St- Amand,  Director  General  of  Integration  at  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Canada,  claimed   that  the  issue  of  engaging  employers  is  the  number  one  immigration  issue  in  Canada  today.   To  address  underemployment  and  the  conundrum  of  skills  mismatches,  there  is  work  to  be   done  in  closing  the  divide  between  what  employers  need  and  what  they  believe  immigrants   have  to  offer.  This  paper  is  intended  as  a  contribution  to  that  goal.      To  address  the  employer  issue,  it  is  important  for  policy  to  reflect  the  interests  and  

demands  of  the  private  sector  in  relation  to  labour,  crucially,  on  the  terms  of  the  private   sector  itself.  Employers  need  to  understand  that  immigrants  have  the  skills  that  will   contribute  to  their  bottom  line  on  verifiable  and,  where  possible,  standardized  terms.   Programs  already  exist  that  offer  diversity  and  inclusion  (D&I)  strategies,  intercultural   competency  (ICC)  training,  and  occupation-specific  skills  training  for  workers  new  to  the   Canadian  labour  market.  It  is  important  to  demonstrate  consensus  between  policy  makers   in  government  and  employers  that  these  options  are  valuable.  It  is  useful  to  examine  how   organizations  might  measure  the  effectiveness  of  such  programming,  and  how  they   evaluate  the  results,  for  the  purpose  of  understanding  different  motivations  and  goals   across  sectors  and  how  they  may  be  approached.  Key  terms  to  this  analysis  are  worth   clarifying;  skills  and  skills  development  are  investments  to  be  measured  by  the  value  they   add  to  a  given  organization,  talent  is  an  asset  of  human  capital  that  employers  must  recruit  

  

1  

and  retain,  and  diversity  in  the  workplace  is  a  sound  business  policy  not  only  the  `right   thing  to  do'.        I  hypothesize  that  goals  of  policy  makers  and  employers  as  they  develop  strategies  

around  immigration  are  separate  but  overlapping  in  that  they  all  operate  on  a  value  chain   that  is  centered  on  talent.  ICC  training  and  development  is  a  missing  piece  that  can   strengthen  both  interest  groups  and  unify  them  on  the  basis  of  a  national  standard.    

     

Research  Questions   This  paper  focuses  on  the  following  questions:  Is  ICC  considered  in  the  talent  

management  value  chain  in  the  Canadian  private  sector?  How  are  Diversity  and  Inclusion   Strategies  used  to  pursue  the  goals  of  businesses  in  Canada?  The  underemployment  of   immigrants  in  Canada  must  be  addressed  by  engaging  with  the  needs  of  employers  who  are   not  connecting  with  immigrant  workers,  from  the  point  of  policy  and  programming.  By   assessing  the  way  ICC  and  D&I  Strategies  are  understood  in  the  private  sector  as  connected   to  economic  success,  a  comparative  analysis  to  immigration  policies  in  the  public  sector  can   be  used  as  a  forecasting  tool  for  the  labour  market  outcomes  of  skilled  immigrants.  Put  in   that  language,  policy  makers  will  have  a  tool  to  engage  with  employers  on  the  issue  of   immigrant  labour,  and  support  the  development  of  the  types  of  programs  that  employers   consider  impactful.  The  purpose  of  this  research  is  to  contribute  to  the  connection  between   immigration  policy  makers  and  employers  by  demonstrating  and  communicating  the   economic  value  of  ICC  and  D&I  Strategies,  and  recommend  a  Canadian  standard  for   Intercultural  Competency  in  the  workplace.  The  following  thesis  guides  this  analysis;   Canadian  immigration  is  talent  focused,  with  a  strategy  that  emphasizes  recruitment  but  

  

2  

deemphasizes  management,  and  existing  D&I  strategies  and  ICC  programming  can  address   that  gap  with  accelerated  investment  from  all  stakeholders.  

Conceptual  Framework   Theoretical  Perspective         This  research  will  be  based  both  on  established  theoretical  positions  as  well  as   practiced  institutional  knowledge  from  areas  such  as  business  and  workplace  skills   training,  settlement,  and  Canadian  Language  Benchmark  training.  Building  on  the  political   economy  theories  of  Reich  and  Thurow,  Courchene  (2001)  proposed  the  following  mission   statement  for  Canada,   "Design  a  sustainable,  socially  inclusive  and  internationally  competitive  infrastructure  that   ensures  equal  opportunity  for  all  Canadians  to  develop,  to  enhance,  and  to  employ  in   Canada  their  skills  and  human  capital,  thereby  enabling  them  to  become  full  citizens  in  the   information-era  Canadian  and  global  societies"  (p.  154).              This  paper  will  use  theoretical  approaches  to  analysis  of  Canada's  recent  policy  

developments  that  explore  neo-liberalism  and  examine  the  deregulation  of  immigrant- facing  employment  services  by  the  federal  government.  Developing  a  human  capital   opportunity  infrastructure  in  Canada  should  be  considered  a  key  component  of  federal   policy  towards  immigrants,  if  underemployment  and  skills  mismatches  are  to  be  seriously   addressed.  The  decreasing  presence  of  the  federal  government  in  social  programing  will  not   be  considered  ideologically  discouraging  in  this  study,  but  as  an  uncontestable  reality.   Courchene's  call  to  action  must  then  be  directed  away  from  the  federal  government,  and   used  as  a  target  for  practices  in  other  sectors.    

  

3  

  

There  is  another  theoretical  position  that  should  be  considered  in  terms  of  all  levels  

of  policy  and  the  concerns  of  businesses  in  Canada:  replacement  migration.  An  aging  and   declining  population  is  poised  to  put  deep  economic  strain  on  Canadian  markets  (TD   Economics,  2013),  as  the  working  population  will  be  outweighed  by  the  non-working   population  public  infrastructure  will  begin  failing  due  a  decreasing  tax  base   (PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP,  2008).  Population  decline  is  likely  to  introduce  a  whole   range  of  compound  economic  and  social  challenges,  such  as  strain  on  social  security  and   health  services,  change  in  public  health  and  resource  distribution,  and  an  unmanageable   increase  of  dependence  on  pension  income  (Saczuk,  2013).  With  the  deregulation  of   services  occurring  as  the  needs  of  communities  and  markets  for  skills  development  and   employment-oriented  services  increase,  communication,  collaboration,  and  an   understanding  of  shared  interests  across  sectors  are  more  vital  than  ever.  This  study   assumes  population  decline  to  be  a  motivating  force  across  sectors  for  the  improvement  of   labour  market  outcomes  of  immigrants,  and  that  the  economic  and  social  forecasts  speaking   to  the  impact  of  unmitigated  population  decline  are  disastrous  enough  to  encourage  action.    

Institutional  Knowledge         Some  areas  of  Canada  are  already  dealing  with  declining  population  growth,  and  are   turning  to  immigration  and  settlement  in  hopes  of  a  solution  (Theriault  and  Haan,  2012;   Depner,  2012).  In  other  areas,  economic  growth  is  happening  too  fast  for  labour  to  keep  up   with  demand,  and  once  again,  immigration  and  settlement  are  turned  to  as  an  immediate   relief  on  the  demand  for  labour  (Rai,  2013;  Lodermeier,  2012).  Unfortunately,  settlement   and  retention  are  not  always  private  sector  priorities.  As  Alboim  and  Cohle  (2012)  

  

4  

recognize,  the  increasing  dependence  of  companies  on  the  Temporary  Skilled  Worker   Program  has  led  that  immigration  class  to  grow  rapidly  in  Canada,  while  Family  Sponsors,   Refugees,  and  Federal  Skilled  Workers  numbers  decline.  This  troubling  trend  contributes  to   Courchene's  concern  (2001),  that  global-scale  labour  practices  and  increasingly  mobile   capital  are  a  threat  to  social  cohesion  in  Canada,  as  the  middle  class  loses  ground  to   precarious,  international  labour  and  social  programs  and  institutions  lose  the  economic   support  of  a  healthy  domestic  labour  force  (2001).      Since  these  issues  do  not  affect  all  areas  of  Canada  equally,  the  practical  analysis  of  

this  study  will  be  informed  by  practices  and  policies  from  specific  regions  in  Canada  as  well   as  sectors  within  the  economy.  Some  of  these  are  examples  of  where  the  demand  for  skilled   labour  is  particularly  high,  or  populations  are  dangerously  low.  Others  are  examples  of   planning  ahead  for  a  changing  labour  force.  Best  practices  are  especially  rich  in  sub-federal   programs  and  organizations,  such  as  the  Manitoba  Provincial  Nominee  Program  (MPNP)  or   Immigrant  Employment  Councils  (IECs),  and  in  branches  of  the  private  sector  such  as  HR   Strategy  and  Talent  Management.  Beyond  these  examples  a  larger  issue  stands  to  impact   the  future  of  immigrant  labour  market  outcomes;  the  introduction  in  2015  of  a  new  federal   system  for  FSWs  under  an  EOI  model,  known  as  `Express  Entry'  (Government  of  Canada,   2014).  Fundamental  to  this  study  is  the  level  of  congruence  of  the  new  federal  model  with   existing  best  practice,  and  what  it  means  for  regions  and  sectors  that  depend  on  an   increasingly  effective  system  for  the  increase  and  optimization  of  immigrant  talent.      

Methodology         While  this  research  largely  takes  the  form  of  an  inductive  policy  analysis,  it  should  

  

5  

be  revealed  that  the  method  is  largely  influenced  by  strategic  forecasting.  Within  Canada,   anxiety  is  strong  in  the  short  term  regarding  economic  `jobless  recovery'  and  `skills   mismatch'  (Deloitte,  2014;  Government  of  Canada,  2013;  Cryne,  2014),  but  these  are   symptoms  of  wider-reaching  trends  over  the  long-term.  The  two  influences  on  projections   and  strategies  for  any  informed  stakeholder  are  demographic  trends  and  technological   development.  When  discussing  policies  that  affect  and  will  effect  employment,  my  method   accounts  for  the  progressive  decline  of  Canada's  working  population,  particularly  as  it  will   have  effects  that  vary  across  regions,  making  the  very  idea  of  a  unified  Canadian  labour   market  and  strategy  appear  as  a  moving  target.  The  impact  of  technology  is  also  troubling   when  considering  labour.  Part  of  the  concern  is  that  technological  progress  continually   reorganizes  and  specializes  labour  demand,  another  part  is  that  it  increases  the  mobility  of   capital  and  liberates  industry  stakeholders  from  their  dependence  on  public  sector  labour   regulators  and  in  many  cases  labour  itself.  In  part,  as  this  paper  analyses  discourse  and   policy,  there  is  always  a  need  to  consider  how  decisions  made  now,  and  in  recent  history,   will  respond  to  demographic  change  and  technological  impacts  on  labour  that  reasonable   forecasts  predict.            The  analysis  presented  here  will  depend  upon  several  positivist  assumptions  

regarding  the  function  and  goals  of  a  range  of  policies.  Establishing  these  will  allow  a   comparative  analysis  of  the  general  progression  over  the  past  fifteen  years  of  how   immigrants  in  Canada's  labour  market  are  institutionally  approached  by  key  stakeholders   in  the  federal  government,  sub-federal  governments,  and  the  private  sector.  It  will  be   important  to  present  certain  goals  as  fundamental  to  development  in  each  of  these  theaters,   while  not  suggesting  the  absence  of  nuance,  in  order  to  establish  where  the  different      6  

sectors  compete  and  where  they  strive  for  compatible  ends.  From  this  I  will  present  the   theory,  grounded  in  the  heuristic  analysis  of  practices  that  suggest  common  and  uncommon   positivities  across  sectors,  that  although  each  stakeholder  is  demonstrably  working   towards  achieving  compatible  goals  there  is  a  particular  institutional  responsibility  being   left  vacant  by  all  participating  forces;  and  that  is  a  standardized,  hard-target  intercultural   competency  development  program  aimed  at  adding  value  to  the  labour  market   performance  of  immigrants  and  the  market  performance  of  their  employers.        The  theoretical  background  that  positions  this  theory  is  somewhat  more  broad  and  

conceptual,  though  I  would  argue  not  abstract.  The  context  of  this  development,  I  claim,  is   the  historical  period  in  Canada  in  which  the  established  (though  in  some  ways  imaginary)   industrial  state  best  described  by  Galbriath  (1966)  is  incrementally  giving  way  to  the  much   reduced  post-industrial  state  that  Courchene  (2001)  describes  within  the  influence  of  a   Global  Information/Knowledge  Revolution.  There  are  a  series  of  key  definitions  and   concepts  related  to  this  theoretical  background  that  should  be  addressed.      Neo-liberalism  is  an  often  discussed  influence  on  Canadian  policy  in  the  current  era,  

though  the  term  is  very  pliant  across  diverging  arguments.  This  paper  is  largely  interested   in  neo-liberalism  in  the  sense  that  Courchene  (2001)  describes,  as  a  global  force  that   supersedes  and  influences  central  state  authority,  largely  in  that  it  downloads  and  uploads   institutional  authority  away  from  the  central  government.  In  the  context  of  immigration,   this  means  the  increase  of  private  sector  mechanisms  in  influencing  the  selection  process,   but  also  the  increased  importance  of  regions  (with  their  specific  labour  market  and   demographic  centers  of  gravity)  on  the  selection  and  institutional  settlement  of  immigrants.         Another  important  conceptual  theme  is  skills.  Courchene  refers  to  skills  in  terms  of   7  

human  capital,  the  new  value  metric  for  labour  in  a  post-industrial  economy.  Courchene   discusses  skills  as  the  factor  that  Canada  must  turn  to  as  a  safeguard  for  the  middle  class   now  that  labour  competition  is  global.  Skills  also  play  an  important  role  in  the  relationship   between  labour  and  capital,  as  hiring  practices  have  become  very  focused  on  specific  value   chains  (http://www.humanresourcesiq.com/talent-management/articles/talent- management-the-people-value-chain/),  involving  highly  technical  skills,  communication   skills,  cultural  competencies,  leadership,  experience  and  qualifications,  and  sometimes  the   largely  intangible  concept  of  organizational  `fit'.  This  revolution  in  human  resources   strategy  is  not  only  impacting  immigrant  employment,  but  the  entire  Canadian  labour   market,  as  unemployment  and  job  vacancies  paradoxically  expand  together  in  a  `skills   mismatch'.  Human  capital,  the  long  hallmark  of  Canada's  successful  economic  immigration   `points'  system,  has  taken  its  place  at  the  center  of  HR  strategy  and  in  many  ways  economic   strategy,  as  `talent'.  Talent  is  the  new  economic  question  for  Canadian  businesses  (Dobson,   2014;  Deloitte,  2014),  and  the  role  that  the  immigration  system  plays  in  finding  and   developing  talent  will  be  important.      The  importance  of  immigration  in  the  search  for  talent  is  connected  to  the  unsettling  

concept  of  growth.  Canada's  native  born  population  is  not  growing,  but  economic  growth  is   still  desirable.  It  is  in  this  respect  that  federal  and  provincial  concerns  are  at  least  in  sync.   The  federal  concern  is  primarily  in  ensuring  that  growth  industries  have  fast  access  to  the   talent  they  need,  but  the  demographic  crunch  forecasted  for  Canada  has  not  yet  influenced   their  policies.  Provinces  also  must  provide  fast  access  to  talent,  particularly  because  some   labour  markets  are  outgrowing  populations  while  others  are  shrinking  quickly  enough  that   regional  economies  cannot  survive.  Many  regional  policies,  however,  are  equally  concerned      8  

with  demographic  and  social  decline  as  they  are  with  economic  decline,  and  for  this  reason   fast  access  to  talent  is  not  enough.  Retention  of  talent  is  very  important,  and  even  beyond   that,  retention  and  social  cohesion  of  community  populations  in  general.      The  final  concept  that  should  be  established,  and  in  some  ways  one  that  connects  the  

others,  is  Diversity.  Businesses  in  Canada  have  learned,  through  branding  and  compliance   with  multicultural  regulations,  that  hiring  immigrants  is  the  `right  thing'  to  do,  but  this  has   not  translated  into  positive  labour  market  outcomes  for  skilled  immigrants  in  Canada.  Now,   diversity  is  not  only  socially  responsible  but  is  recognized  as  good  business  (Bernier,   2014b),  especially  with  the  successes  made  by  large  employers  and  industry  leaders  in   improving  performance  outcomes  by  developing  more  inclusive  human  resource  policies.   This  mirrors  regional  efforts  to  improve  diversity  and  welcoming  in  their  communities  and   business  regulations,  and  most  importantly  has  led  to  the  growth  of  many  satellite   programs  and  even  growth  industries  in  consulting  and  education/training  sectors.   Diversity  practices  have  heuristically  created  the  beginnings  of  workplace  intercultural   competency  training  at  an  institutional  level,  by  virtue  of  market  demand.      The  missing  element,  I  will  argue,  is  cross-sector  standards  and  dialogue.  Unlike  

other  critics  of  neo-liberal  policy,  there  is  one  area  where  I  will  argue  that  it  has  a  promising   influence.  While  the  federal  government  retreats  from  settlement  and  immigrant   employment  services,  ultimately  becoming  a  talent  recruiter  through  the  new  Express   Entry  EOI  system,  it  leaves  a  funding  and  leadership  vacuum  in  the  non-profit  and  sub- federal  sectors.  The  arrival  of  immigrant  talent  will  need  to  be  managed,  and  in  the  post- industrial  state  this  paper  argues  that  a  collaborative  effort  between  private  sector  and   regional  demand  is  poised  to  create  a  high-performance  growth  sector  of  immigrant  talent      9  

management  and  development.  Existing  diversity  practices  in  private  and  sub-federal   institutions  have  heuristically  created  a  scalable,  practical  foundation  for  intercultural   competency  development  models  that  can  reform  workplaces  and  communities  to  be  more   inclusive  and  optimize  immigrant  labour  market  performance.  The  real  power  to   implement  this  new  talent  management  strategy  is  not  federal  authority,  it  lies  in  the   intersection  between  regional  economic  strategy,  HR  strategy,  talent  management,  and   talent  itself.      

Review  of  the  Literature      Fundamentally,  this  project  is  about  the  labour  market  performance  of  immigrants.   It  is  necessary  to  establish  a  review  of  the  relevant  perspectives  on  the  connection  between   immigrants  and  the  labour  market  in  Canada,  and  the  implications  stated  in  their  findings.   Not  only  is  this  important  to  show  the  increasing  relevance  of  workplace  skills  development   to  employers  of  immigrants,  but  it  should  demonstrate  to  policy  makers  that  this  issue  is  at   the  crux  of  Canada's  long-term  economic  future.  The  main  focus  of  these  issues  is  on   immigrants  who  enter  through  the  Federal  Skilled  Workers  Program,  as  economic   Provincial  Nominees,  or  are  in  Canada  as  international  students.  A  more  complete  review   would  also  address  Family  Class  migrants,  Refugees,  and  Business  Class  migrants.   Javdani,  Jacks,  and  Pendakur  (2012)  provide  a  review  of  literature  that  establishes   the  broad  claim  that  immigrants  are  key  to  Canada's  economy  and  labour  market  policy.     `The  literature  on  economics  of  immigration,  including  studies  reviewed  in  this  report,  has   mainly  focused  on  analyses  of  two  main  questions:  How  do  immigrants  fare  in  the  host   country  labour  market?  And  what  effects  do  immigrants  have  on  the  host  country  labour  

  

10  

market?'  (Javdani  et  al.,  p.  6).  In  the  literature,  relative  employment  earnings  (to  Canadian- born)  are  the  main  measure  of  labour  market  performance.  As  an  example  of  the  more   optimistic  end  of  the  general  trends,  recent  male  immigrants  enter  the  labour  market  at   low-wage  extremes,  advance  over  time,  but  a  glass  ceiling  prevents  their  entrance  into  high- wage  areas.  Labour  market  outcomes  are  perceived  as  deteriorating,  causes  are  hotly   debated,  largely  in  terms  of  whether  immigrant  human  capital  is  inferior  or  only  perceived   to  be  so  by  discriminatory  employer  values.     Declining  labour  market  performance  could  call  into  question  immigration  as  a  way   to  boost  economic  growth  with  high-skilled  workers,  but  the  appropriate  response  is   difficult  to  guess,  as  the  problem  is  so  multi-faceted.  While  Javdani  and  colleagues  (2012)   question  whether  immigrants  are  an  appropriate  tonic  for  Canada's  economic  future,  a   challenge  to  my  position,  they  provide  a  solid  overview  of  current  perspectives  to  start   from  and  identify  key  labour  market  concerns  in  detail.     Several  challenges  have  extended  across  the  Canadian  labour  market,  creating   general  malaise  around  the  idea  of  a  `skills  mismatch'  caused  by  entrenched  bad  practices.   Simon  (2013)  comprehensively  criticizes  inaction  across  employment  and  skills   development  areas,  notably  claiming  that  Canada  is  desperately  weak  at  generating  reliable   labour  market  information  (LMI),  and  even  acting  on  what  data  does  exist.  This  is  a   question  of  institutional  performance,  and  its  impact  on  the  labour  market  performance  of   immigrants  has  been  well  documented  (Sakamoto  et  al,  2013;  Girard  and  Bauder,  2005;   Schwartz,  2012;  Weiner,  2008).  Concurring  with  Simon,  TD  Economics  (2013)  addressed   education  and  both  public  and  private  sector  training  as  needing  radical  reform  to  combat   the  skills  shortage,  though  they  characterize  the  crisis  as  a  matter  of  forecast  and      11  

speculation.  One  suggestion  from  their  report  points  to  professional  development  training   as  one  key  to  ensuring  that  Canadian  businesses  attract  employees  to  their  vacancies,   "Employers  often  view  the  labour  market  as  a  public  good.  However,  the  direction  of   training  expenditure  is  not  just  a  private-sector  development,  as  public  sector  training  has   also  fallen  short  ...  Language  training  for  immigrants  and  on-the-job  training  for  people   drawn  from  non-traditional  labour  pools  will  be  crucial  for  boosting  labour  force   participation.  However,  firms  investing  in  human  capital  development  can  be  risky  due  to   the  frequent  turnover  of  workers,  notably  in  the  echo  and  Millennial  generation.  Obviously,   employers  who  appeal  better  to  Millennials,  while  staying  profitable,  will  attract  these   workers.  However,  in  aggregate,  poaching  is  a  zero-sum  game."  (TD  Economics,  2013,  p.38)      TD  Economics  also  point  to  a  change  in  public  sector  attitudes  to  address  the  issue,   as  the  Canada  Job  Grant  evinces.  Another  relevant  measure  is  the  continual  need  for  more   action  of  foreign  credential  recognition  improvements,  with  enthusiastic  anticipation  of  the   more  EOI-focused  FSWP  system.   Quinitini  (2014)  identifies  another  level  of  mismatch,  below  the  actual  disparity   between  job  vacancies  and  the  underemployed.  Skills  proficiency  and  skills  use  are   drastically  disjointed  in  many  Canadian  workplaces,  leaving  talent  underutilized.  Part  of  the   resulting  issue  is  that  investment  in  professional  development  by  the  individual  can  yield   low  return  on  wages,  and  investment  in  skilled  labour  by  employers  can  yield  sub-optimal   return.  The  detail  of  this  study  is  extensive  and  shows  that  skills  mismatch  is  not  only  about   tying  individuals  to  positions  but  about  activating  their  competencies  in  the  workplace.   Workplaces  that  fail  to  account  for  structural/cultural  limitations  on  high-proficiency   employees  such  as  learning-at-work,  influencing,  and  co-operation  waste  the  human  capital   that  could  be  available  to  them,  and  would  be  well  served  to  invest  in  upgrading  some   generic  skills  through  workplace  programming  in  such  individuals.   Quintini's  assessment  suggests  that  certain  skills  become  activated  only  when   packaged  with  other  skills  in  the  same  individual,  or  in  a  workplace  that  invests  in,  fosters,      12  

and  rewards  the  right  skills  combinations.  McMahon's  study  (2010)  connects  cultural   competencies  to  firm  performance  in  an  integrated  ten  year  study  accounting  not  only  for   balance  sheet  performance,  but  returns  on  assets  in  the  workforce  and  a  range  of  other   variables.  Several  key  findings  emerge.  Bio-demographic  diversity  is  the  most  recognizable,   but  the  most  significant  impact  on  performance  is  cognitive  and  task-related  diversity  (p.   44),  which  is  profoundly  influenced  by  culture.  It  was  also  shown  that  the  impact  of   diversity  is  amplified  in  situations  with  more  interpersonal  interactivity.  "Diversity   research  has  also  recognized  the  importance  of  organizational  culture  in  enabling  firm   performance"  (p.  44).  This  study  leads  the  way  in  an  important  field  of  research  for  the   private  sector,  and  the  following  statement  is  the  instructive  take  away,   "The instrumental implications of workplace diversity are doubtless important to businesses, and therefore diversity needs to be managed. In doing so, one could be "reactive" to deal with the phenomenon of diversity. A better approach might be to be "proactive" in leveraging diversity to achieve superior business performance. However, it is important to recognize that diversity is a fact of life in today's workplace. It is a reality as much as sustainability and achieving energy efficiency are in the 21st century" (2010, p. 47). Norris  et  al  (2007)  review  tools  and  techniques  in  ICC  development  training  and   assess  their  impact  on  the  performance  of  individuals  in  increasing  proficiency  and  use  of   other  skill  sets.  ICC  addresses  the  aforementioned  issue  of  organizational  culture,  in  other   words,  an  effect  ICC  program  can  create  the  right  environment  to  optimize  international   talent,  rather  than  squander  valuable  human  capital.  Norris  et  al.,  like  McMahon,  represents   what  may  soon  be  a  very  significant  field  of  study,  as  an  early  example  of  research  on  the   potential  of  ICC  programming  as  a  commercial  product  for  organizations  with  intercultural   talent  management  needs.   Moving  beyond  the  `skills  mismatch'  issue,  there  is  a  range  of  literature  relevant  to   the  attitudes  and  policies  across  sectors  and  stakeholders  in  Canada's  immigration  system.      13  

Flynn  and  Bauder  (2013)  claim  that  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Canada  (CIC)  views   Expression  of  Interest  (EOI)  statements  from  direct  employers  of  immigrants  as  an  efficient   mechanism  for  linking  migrants  to  labour  market  needs.  Part  of  the  appeal  is  also  to  get   them  `in  the  labour  market  faster  than  existing  immigration  streams'  (p.  12).  Giving   employers  greater  discretion  on  immigrant  selection  represents  a  general  deepening  of   neoliberal  policy.  Employers  also  exert  regional  influence  on  policy,  particularly  in  areas  of   Canada  where  populations  fail  to  meet  labour  market  demands.  The  main  criticism  of   regionalization  is  that  it  could  be  self-defeating  if  services  are  too  poor  to  retain   immigrants.  This  paper  criticizes  the  increasing  influence  of  neo-liberal  policy  on  labour   market  integration,  but  in  doing  so  demonstrates  how  significantly  this  new  direction  has   taken  root  and  is  continuing  to  build,  meaning  that  employer  concerns  and  demands  are  an   important  influence  on  policy.   On  the  opposite  side  of  this  discussion,  EOI-focused  immigration  is  the  key  to   increasing  access  and  speed  of  process  for  employers  who  see  immigrants  as  an  answer  to   skills  shortages.  Holmes,  Hjartarson,  and  McGuire  (2014)  present  both  the  enthusiasm  and   concerns  from  the  employer  perspective  regarding  upcoming  changes  that  will  strengthen   the  influence  of  EOIs.  Drolet,  Sampson,  and  Burstein  (2014)  also  address  the  employer   perspective  on  this  issue  with  a  review  of  literature  anticipating  upcoming  changes,  raising   concern  that  a  gap  has  been  left  in  the  research  detailing  the  specific  role  of  employers   under  the  new  system,  which  will  be  faster  but  not  necessarily  more  solution-focused.  As   this  study  illustrates,  the  literature  does  not  represent  an  employer-facing  investment   scheme  in  settlement,  development,  and  retention  of  immigrant  talent;  and  even  with  its   focus  on  improved  recruitment  it  leaves  the  role  of  the  employer  and  the  business      14  

argument  for  increased  investment  in  immigrant  talent  undefined.  This  means  that   incentives  to  hire  are  not  clear  enough,  services  related  to  immigrant  talent  acquisition  are   not  employer-friendly  or  accessible  as  single-point-of-service,  tools  and  resources  facing   employer  targets  (hiring,  training,  retention)  are  not  available,  and  employers  are  not  at  the   table  with  policy  makers  discussing  solutions  to  these  questions  (p.  29-30).     Lodermeier  (2012)  describes  how  the  skills  shortage  situation  in  Alberta  has  turned   to  immigrants  in  hopes  of  a  direct  workforce  solution,  and  the  need  for  workforce   development  services  is  a  barrier  to  targets.  The  most  particular  demand  for  services  is  in   smaller  communities  where  even  basic  settlement  services  are  insufficient  for  the  needs  of   both  immigrants  and  their  employers,  who  face  an  issue  of  retention.  Participants  in  the   study  (including  immigrants,  local  administrators,  and  employers)  strongly  support   initiatives  to  develop  workplace  skills  for  immigrants,  and  cooperative  relationships   between  communities  and  industries  have  been  the  most  effective  way  of  overcoming   barriers  to  this  goal.  Lodermeier  concludes  that  ICC  programs  are  widely  viewed  by  the   private  sector  as  value-added  investments  and  employers  are  calling  for  government   subsidies  in  that  area.   Girard  and  Bauder  (2005)  identify  two  major  structural  issues  impacting  labour   market  outcomes  of  immigrants.  Small  communities  have  higher  labour  market   participation  and  wage  outcomes  than  `gateway'  cities,  but  licensing  processes  that   devaluate  immigrant  human  capital  force  settlement  back  to  `gateway'  cities  because  it  is   easer  to  find  survival  jobs  there.  The  major  losers  in  this  study  are,  leaving  aside  the   immigrants  themselves  whose  hopes  for  high-wage  employment  are  frustrated,  the   economies  of  smaller  immigrant-receiving  communities  who  experience  a  type  of  brain-    15  

drain  as  potential  high-skilled  workers  relocate  to  `gateway'  cities  where  they  can  find  low- wage,  informal  work  to  survive.  McIsaac  (2003),  criticizes  `dispersion  strategy'  as  a  solution   to  this  in  immigration  policy.  Dispersion  relies  on  coercion  by  tying  temporary  workers  to   regional  economies  through  work  permits  that  do  not  allow  relocation.  Instead,  McIsaac   argues,  regions  with  population  and  labour  deficits  might  adopt  policies  that  strengthen   regional  economies  through  horizontal  partnerships  across  sectors.  This  is  a  practice  that   can  focus  on  retention  goals,  but  integrates  them  into  a  larger  strategy  of  regional  economic   strength,  partnerships,  and  development.       Rai  (2013)  demonstrates  that  information  about  the  Canadian  labour  market  is   misleading,  unreliable,  or  inaccessible  for  economic  immigrants.  This  problem  is  most   keenly  felt  when  the  federal  government  is  primarily  responsible  for  producing  and   delivering  the  information.  With  regard  to  services  that  are  aimed  at  minimizing  the   negative  impacts  of  credential  recognition  policy,  the  best  practices  seem  to  involve   simplifying  information  access  to  be  accessible  at  single-points-of-contact,  and  involving   local  level  stakeholders  in  developing  policy  and  delivering  services.  Concerns  about   credential  recognition  barriers  are  widely  corroborated  across  the  literature  (Schwartz,   2012;  Reitz,  2005).   Rai  indicates  that  provincial  and  municipal  level  success  has  been  gained  through   cooperation  between  stakeholders,  communities,  and  policy  makers  in  simplifying  the   connections  between  immigrants  and  jobs.  In  this  case,  employment  services  and   settlement  services  are  more  tightly  connected  to  ensure  that  immigrants  have  access  to  a   single-point-of-entry  when  seeking  assistance  with  economic  and  social  integration.      

  

16  

Like  Girard  and  Bauder,  Walker  (2006)  approached  the  question  of  immigrants  in   Canada's  labour  market  with  concerns  of  underutilization,  economic  marginalization,  and   general  deskilling.  In  a  very  comprehensive  review  of  literature  on  the  subject  from  sources   at  different  levels  of  government,  policy  research  and  journals,  public  forums,  professional,   community,  and  education  institutions  a  picture  emerges  of  labour  market  integration   being  treated  with  a  high  level  of  focus  on  skilled  immigrants.  The  initiatives  are  shown  to   be  continually  and  increasingly  developed.  Several  gaps  in  the  research  and  existing   initiatives  are  revealed,  showing  that  the  momentum  of  these  developments  should  be   deployed  in  certain  programming  areas  to  make  outcomes  more  effective.  The  following  is   an  excellent  outline  of  what  would  ideally  characterize  the  next  phase,  "re-examining  issues   and  operating  assumptions;  expanding  cultural  literacy,  and  communication  training  and   mentoring  services;  addressing  common  barriers  across  different  occupations;  expanding   services  outside  metropolitan  areas;  creating  rural-urban  labour  market  linkages;  and   bringing  more  immigrant  integration  programs  into  the  workplace"  (Walker,  2006,  p.  3).  All   of  these  recommendations  will  be  reinforced  in  my  study.   The  literature  reviewed  above  corresponds  to  the  objectives  of  my  paper  in  the   attention  to  immigration  as  a  labour  market  issue,  the  demonstration  of  increased  cross- sector  cooperation  to  improve  skilled  immigrants'  labour  market  performance  and  basic   human  capital  capabilities,  and  the  recognition  of  barriers  across  markets  that  can  only  be   addressed  by  partnerships  between  stakeholders  in  different  sectors.  Though  neo-liberal   policies  are  often  problematized,  they  are  viewed  as  the  reality  of  Canada's  current  political   and  economic  paradigm,  and  at  the  root  of  any  successful  policy  and  practice  is  a  realistic   understanding  of  neo-liberal  priorities  and  motivators.      17  

Bauder  (2006)  suggests  that  there  is  more  to  the  immigration/labour  market   dynamic  than  finding  jobs  for  immigrants.  The  nature  of  work,  the  access  to  professional   and  employment  development,  and  the  long-term  outcomes  relating  to  stable  employment   and  the  optimization  of  skills  deserve  more  attention.  It  is  these  factors  that  will  ultimately   have  the  greater  impact;  that  of  workers  on  the  labour  market,  rather  than  the  individual   impact  of  a  labour  market  on  workers.  Unskilled,  low-wage  labour  is  normalized  by  the   underuse  of  immigrant  talent,  making  low  talent-optimization  the  standard.  In  other  words,   it  is  in  the  interest  of  Canada's  overall  labour  market  to  pursue  programs  that  ensure   employers  mobilize  the  talent  of  their  immigrant  employees,  rather  than  fall  short  of  top   performance  due  to  the  many  reasons  immigrants  are  underemployed  in  Canada.  The   impact  of  deskilling,  underperformance,  and  survival  jobs  among  immigrants  in  the   workforce  will  reproduce  itself  across  the  general  Canadian  economy.          Colleges  Ontario  (2008;  2009)  and  the  Canadian  Labour  and  Business  Centre  (2004)  

each  provide  useful  background  on  the  types  of  workplace  specific  services  for  immigrant   skills  training  already  practiced  or  in  development.  The  general  importance  of  immigration   to  the  Canadian  labour  market  expressed  in  these  reflects  the  general  themes  already   presented  here.  The  details,  however,  of  private  sector  involvement  in  program   development  and  the  increasing  demand  should  add  credence  to  the  argument  that  these   services  are  becoming  essential  and  are  beginning  to  demand  attention  to  supply.  Also   relevant  here  are  provincial  bridging  programs  such  as  MCIs  commitment  of  funding  in   Ontario  (Canadian  Newcomer  Magazine,  2014),  often  linked  to  service  delivery  in  non- profit  agencies  and  education  institutions.  

  

18  

  

LaRoche  (2002)  represents  a  well-developed,  refined  model  for  the  delivery  of  

programming  aimed  at  developing  intercultural  competency  in  the  workplace  and   articulating  diversity  into  business  strategy.  As  manager  of  a  consulting  firm  in  ICC  and  D&I   (Multicultural  Business  Solutions),  LaRoche  joins  others  such  as  Michael  Bach  of  Deloitte,   Guillerme  Dias  (Schulick  Executive  Education  Centre),  the  Intercultural  Development  Index,   Joe  Gerstandt  at  Venn  Market  Strategies,  and  others  in  a  growing  but  infantile  discipline  of   employer-facing  strategy  and  consulting  on  how  to  optimize  the  talent  of  a  diverse   workforce.            As  presented  above,  Canadian  institutions  are  struggling  with  questions  of  how  

skilled  immigrants  can  be  made  to  reach  optimal  labour  market  potential,  and  private   sector  involvement  in  this  area  is  on  the  rise.  As  such,  the  questions  of  what  methods  are   being  used  to  apply  and  evaluate  ICC  and  D&I  programs  and  how  such  initiatives  appeal  to   their  core  interests  are  important  ones  for  coordinating  policies  and  standards  across   organizations  and  sectors.      A  final  area  of  concern  in  the  literature  is  population  decline  and  the  incorporation  

of  the  concept  of  replacement  migration  into  the  immigration  and  settlement  policies  of   Canada,  mainly  at  regional  levels.  This  is  an  important  focus  for  my  study  because  it   demonstrates  a  very  tangible  shared  interest  for  the  public  and  private  sector  regarding  the   future  of  skilled  labour  in  Canada.  Regions  with  declining  population  growth  have  focused   on  recruitment  and  retention  of  immigrants,  which  has  meant  the  necessary  improvement   of  all  settlement  services,  particularly  those  that  impact  quality  of  life  (Theriault  and  Haan,   2012;  Depner,  2012).  Largely,  services  of  this  kind  prioritize  the  attainability  of  high  wage   employment,  and  include  language  and  skills  training,  network  facilitation,  quality      19  

education,  mentoring,  and  other  measures  that  go  beyond  basic  services.  Burstein  (2007)   argues  that  regional  governments  can  only  salvage  declining  economies  by  reaching  out  to   local  stakeholders,  in  the  community  and  the  market,  with  policies  that  reward  D&I   strategies  and  promote  the  holistic  economic  and  social  integration  of  newcomers.  This   means  a  job  market  without  segmented  opportunity,  in  effect,  an  environment  that   encourages  the  human  capital  development  of  newcomers.      Replacement  migration  as  a  concept  is  itself  somewhat  suspicious,  and  the  

theoretical  literature  in  Canada  has  here  an  important  gap.  Kupizewski  (2013)  offers  an   analysis  of  the  theory  in  the  European  context,  critiquing  its  short  history  as  a  `silver  bullet'   response  to  population  decline  alongside  forecasts  about  fertility,  mortality,  and  labour   force  participation.  Sazcuk  (2013)  provides  a  core  critique,  revealing  that  replacement   migration  in  Europe  is  provably  insufficient  as  a  solution  to  the  coming  population  and   labour  force  crisis.  However,  there  is  room  in  immigration  policy  for  the  replacement   concept.  Social  cohesion  is  precarious  in  aging  demographics,  and  the  influx  of  newcomers   should  be  treated  with  conscious  attention  to  social  integration,  meaning  quality  jobs  and   access  to  professional  development  services  that  improve  opportunities.   PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP  (2008)  forecasted  that  Eastern  Canada  has  public   infrastructure  concerns  to  prepare  for  with  respect  to  population  aging.  A  majority  of  the   population  that  depends  on  income  from  sources  that  are  not  employment  based,  while   simultaneously  depending  on  health  services  at  an  unprecedented  level,  will  represent  a   dangerous  strain  on  public  infrastructure,  both  physical  and  institutional.  That  replacement   migration  has  been  adopted  as  a  serious  concern  in  Canadian  sectors  is  doubtless,   appearing  in  literature  from  the  Canadian  Council  of  Chief  Executives  (2009,  Preparing  Now      20  

for  the  Labour  Needs  of  Tomorrow),  TD  Economics  (2013),  and  Deloitte  (Canada  2025,   2014).        The  above  review  all  bears  out  the  forecasts  of  Courchene  (2001).  Canada  must  

adapt  to  the  current  paradigm,  which  is  a  post-industrial  `information-era'  economy.  In  this   era,  the  state  is  less  aggressive  about  regulation,  and  the  public  sector  is  shrinking.  Capital   is  globally  mobile,  and  no  longer  dependent  on  labour  in  the  traditional  forms  of  industrial   workforce  production.  Value  in  this  type  of  economy  is  only  added  by  skills,  technical  and   cultural,  that  correspond  to  a  post-industrial  production  model  in  the  form  of  human   capital.  It  is  in  this  way  that  Canadian  immigration  policy  and  private  sector  interests  can   collaborate  to  build,  improve,  and  institutionalize  programs  that  improve  the  human  capital   of  newcomers.      Courchene's  call  to  action  may  not  be  apparent  in  the  neo-liberal  policies  of  the  

federal  government  that  have  retreated  from  service  delivery,  but  the  involvement  of  the   private  sector  in  funding  programs  with  Colleges  Ontario,  mentoring  and  networking  in   eastern  Canada,  demanding  subsidies  and  other  support  for  ICC  training  in  Alberta,  and   adapting  diversity  policies  in  British  Colombia,  are  all  demonstrated  in  the  literature  above.   This  study  will  also  provide  analysis  of  best  practices  from  Human  Resources  (HR)  Strategy   and  Talent  Management.  This  bears  out  the  value  of  human  capital  in  the  labour  market,   and  the  crucial  role  it  plays  in  the  economic  and  social  integration  of  newcomers.  The   motivation  of  securing  a  healthy  labour  market  for  the  future  that  can  play  a  role  in   addressing  population  aging  is  established  across  sectors,  and  the  development  of  skills  has   become  a  core  programming  concern  for  many  immigrant  service  providers  and  employers.   All  of  this  validates  Courchene's  astute  assessments  about  the  value  of  human  capital  now      21  

and  in  the  future.  Building  on  this  evidence  this  study  will  posit  hard  targets  shared  across   sectors,  and  deepen  the  discursive  validity  of  human  capital  development  for  newcomer   employees  as  a  value-added  investment.  It  will  link  ICC  and  D&I  programming  to  improved   economic  outcomes,  and  support  the  expansion  and  standardization  of  successful  models.      What  follows  is  an  illustrated  presentation  of  Canada's  immigration  system  in  an  

informal  sense,  as  stakeholders  in  different  sectors  are  deeply  active  yet  not  necessarily  in   formal  communication  or  collaboration.  The  right  column  expresses  what,  after  a  literature   analysis,  appears  to  be  the  goal  of  each  sector  or  the  lens  through  which  each  sector  applies   its  influence  and  needs.  If  we  understand  these  as  independent  positivities,  the  whole   immigration  system  is  then  illustrated  by  the  combination  of  these  distinct  parts.  What  is   common  to  all,  and  what  strategy  do  their  combined  efforts  generate?  The  formula  at  the   bottom  of  the  chart  is  intended  as  a  simple  summary  of  the  current  and  future  Canadian   immigration  strategy  as  represented  by  the  needs  of  its  stakeholders.                                       22  

Table  outlining  summative  policy  positions:   Federal  Policies  
Neo-liberal;   deregulation  and   funding  cuts,   regionalization,   private  sector   influence.   Upskilling;  scaled-up   proportions  of  high- skilled  and  economic   migrants  in  general,   CEC     (combined  with   increased  pressures   on  Family  and   Humanitarian  Class   immigrant  streams   not  to  be  discussed   here).   Welcoming;  in  areas   with  demographic   needs,  `whole-of- society'  initiatives   combat   discrimination,   improve  settlement   services,  ensure   labour  equity,  and   build  cohesive  cross- cultural  communities.   Combating  Skills   Shortages:   Streamlining   credential  recognition,   use  of  LMOs,   Occupation   Classifications,  EOIs  to   target  the  selection   process  at  in-demand   labour  needs.   Fast  Labour  Market   Relief:     Selection  targets  high   skills  and  labour  needs,   not  adaptable  human   capital.  The  new  system  is   about  meeting  immediate   needs  with  manpower.  

Sub-Federal  Policies  
Regionalism;  lack  of   reliable  federal   funding  has  turned   settlement  towards   alternative  funding   models,  outreach  to   employer  partners,   and  excessive  use  of   TFWP.  Skills   priorities  are  focused   on  the  labour  needs   of  specific  regions,   including  low-skilled   positions.   Open  talent;   Canadian  employers   are  generally  eager  to   gain  access  to  global   talent  through   immigration  or   temporary   immigration.   Skills  and  Social   Services:   The  provinces  have   devoted  more   attention  to   developing  the  skills   of  newcomer   employees  in  their   regions  by  connecting   public  services  to   employment  outcomes   where  possible.   Growth:  The  leading   PNPs  are  those  that   require  immigration  to   combat  decline,  they  are   aggressive  about  funding   and  policy  partnerships,   but  will  not  compromise   on  the  importance  of   programming  with  a   social  focus,  particularly   on  improving  labour   market  opportunities  and   performance  rather  than   selecting  for  it.       Profitable  Diversity:   Large  companies  forecast   increase  in  culturally   diverse  workforces  while   appreciating  the   importance  of   intercultural  competency   in  workplace  culture   related  to  optimal   performance  in  the   marketplace.  

   Private  Sector  Policies  
Addressing   shortages;  Canada  is   dealing  with  a  skills   mismatch  across   most  growth  sectors,   making  employers   more  desperate  to   hire  immigrants.   Credential   recognition  and  fast   processing  are  top   priorities.   Diversity  and   Inclusion;  the  private   sector  has  moved   beyond  the  equal   rights  mandate  of  the   `Multiculturalism   Policy'  to  regard   cultural  diversity  as   adding  value  through   talent  and  market   expansion  

      The  Strategy  Map:  Fast  Labour  Market  Relief  +  Growth  +  Profitable  Diversity  =  Talent   Focused  Migration  

  

23  

  

Analysis   I  have  described  each  sector  as  having  a  distinct  theme  for  policy  targets,  expressed  

as  an  objective  positivity.  Inductively,  I  envision  what  these  apparently  compatible  yet   distinct  forces  aim  to  achieve  if  understood  as  a  unified  system,  and  the  hypothesis   generated  from  this  is  that  Canada  is  a  country  that  operates  with  a  Talent  Focused   immigration  system.  The  value  of  this  hypothesis  to  policy  and  practice  is  that  Talent   Management  is  a  clear  HR  strategy,  and  if  the  immigration  system's  model  is  compared   against  the  Talent  Management  model,  it  is  possible  to  see  which  areas  are  still  in  need  of   institutional  development.  The  recommendation  that  this  analysis  then  generates  is  that  to   achieve  a  more  effective  Talent  Management  Strategy  for  immigration,  Canada  should  build   on  existing  ICC  and  D&I  programs  by  developing  national  standards,  establish  a  clear  a   value  chain  model  for  both  immigrants  and  employers,  and  establish  metrics  for  evaluating   the  return  on  investments  in  immigrant  talent.      The  Fast  Labour  Market  Relief  model  espoused  by  federal  policy  has  come  to  the  

point  of  introducing  the  Express  Entry  Model  on  January  2015.  This  sees  the  CIC  setting   itself  up  as  a  talent  recruiter  for  Canadian  businesses  by  doubling  down  on  the  importance   of  LMOs  and  EOIs,  eliminating  the  "first  come  first  serve"  admission  system  and  replacing  it   with  a  talent  pool,  and  promising  faster  processing.  Regions  are  promised  faster  processing   for  Express  Entry  stream  applications  for  permanent  residency,  hoping  to  ease  their   dependence  on  TFWs.  Employers  are  enthusiastic  about  this  prospect,  and  hope  to  be   brought  into  policy  discussions  for  consultation  as  many  successful  provincial  policies  have   done  in  the  past.  The  following  breakdown  of  the  above  trends  offers  a  clearer   understanding  of  the  Talent  Focused  Migration  hypothesis.    

  

24  

Federal  Analysis      Many  of  the  debates  around  immigration  policy  in  Canada  today,  motivated  as  they   are  increasingly  by  private  sector  concerns,  are  grounded  in  a  single  process  that  can  be   recognized  throughout  civil  society.  The  institutions  that  have  defined  the  developed  world   since  taking  root  after  the  Industrial  Revolution  are  deteriorating  and  losing  ground  to  a   new  set  of  principles.  Courchene  presents  the  motivating  force  behind  this  change  as  the   Global  knowledge/Information  Revolution  (GIR),  which  is  dismantling  the  structural   foundations  of  the  industrial  (he  sometimes  refers  to  as  Fordist)  paradigm  (2001).        First,  the  nation-state  as  a  central  policy  instrument  is  under  radical  transition.  GIR  

transforms  governments  because  `powers  are  being  transferred  upward,  downward,  and   outward  from  central  governments  of  nation-states'  (p.  6).  Economic  space  is  now   integrated  completely  at  a  supranational  level,  while  privatized  services  devolve  powers   from  states  to  local  markets  and  subsidiary  partnerships  empower  provincial  and   municipal  governments  with  more  freedom  to  control  regulation.  While  not  yet  irrelevant,   the  nation-state  is  no  longer  a  suitable  policy  instrument  for  a  world  in  which  centralized   economic  localities  interact  at  high-speed  within  a  completely  global  market  interface.  The   concept  is  often  referred  to  under  the  blanket  statement  of  neo-liberalism,  but  from  the   perspective  of  paradigm  shift,  it  appears  as  much  as  an  adaptation  strategy.      Also,  physical  capital  is  losing  importance  and  human  capital  is  gaining  importance  

(Courchene,  2001).  Pre-GIR  economies  privileged  industrially  developed  nations  because,   with  markets  that  were  relatively  closed,  domestic  consumption  was  necessary  to  turn   production  into  profit,  and  for  that  high  wages  were  important  (p.102).  With  a  completely   integrated  global  economic  space,  domestic  consumption  loses  its  importance  to  the      25  

business  elite,  as  does  the  maintenance  of  a  high  wage  economy  within  territorial   boundaries.  High  wage  labour  now  has  no  protective  buffer  against  the  reserve  army  of   `floating'  labour  that  works  to  drive  down  wages  and  work  standards  in  developed   countries.  What  supports  wage  demands  in  a  global  market  is  not  territorial  boundaries  or   industrial  production.  Technical  skills  and  networks,  human  capital,  is  what  delineates   value  in  the  global  labour  market.     Courchene  frames  these  issues  largely  as  questions  of  instrumentality  (2001,  p.  104).   The  Canadian  standard  of  a  developed  economy  has  lost  its  institutional  protections.   Alboim  and  Cohle  (2012)  accuse  fast-relief  labour  motivations  in  immigration  of  short- sightedness,  and  articulate  very  clearly  where  the  development  of  recent  policy  in  Canada   has  arrived.  Their  major  concern  is  that  short-term  policies  geared  at  low-cost  economic   relief  are  counter-productive  to  building  social  cohesion  in  Canada.  The  return  of   guestwork  as  a  prominent  federal  strategy,  in  particular,  appeals  to  the  most  simplistic   interpretations  of  industrial  era  capitalism.  Precisely  because  the  earmarks  of  current  times   are  so  different  to  the  industrial  era,  with  small  rather  than  large  scale  production  and  a   population  that  is  stagnating  rather  than  growing,  new  strategies  are  needed.     A  certain  tension  exists  in  neoliberal  regimes  between  permissibility  and  regulation   (Menz,  2009).  Often  it  seems  that  regulation  is  tightening  in  some  areas  while   simultaneously  loosening  in  others.  This  is  what  Courchene  identifies  as  `glocalization',  or   decentralization  (2011,  p.  6).     "The  neoliberalized  state  does  not  abandon  migration  control.  Migrants  are   desirable  in  principle  so  long  as  they  are  perceived  as  useful  human  resources,  while   barriers  are  erected  against  the  unsolicited  entry  of  "undesirables""  (Menz,  2009,  p.  316).       

  

26  

In  the  European  context,  Menz  refers  to  Germany  and  the  U.K.  as  examples  where   private  employers  influence  migration  policy,  but  Canada  could  easily  be  described  the   same  way  when  one  considers  Provincial  Nominees,  Labour  Market  Opinions  (LMOs),  and   even  the  Canadian  Experience  Class  (CEC),  and  EOIs.      In  some  ways,  the  involvement  of  market  interest  in  immigration  represents  a  

weakening  of  state  sovereignty,  but  in  practical  terms  this  is  balanced  by  immigration   policies  that  reassert  the  power  of  the  federal  state.  The  insertion  of  increased  federal   control  over  funding  strategies  for  non-profit  immigrant  services  is  one  type  of  neo-liberal   regulation  (OCASI  Discussion  Paper,  p.  3),  manifested  for  example  in  the  decision  not  to   renew  the  Canada-Ontario  Immigration  Agreement  (COIA)  partnership  with  Ministry  of   Citizenship  and  Immigration  (MCI),  that  was  institutionally  establishing  devolved   settlement-service  responsibilities  to  include  more  input  from  the  province  and  local   providers.  Instead  of  such  non-profit  sector  oriented  partnerships,  the  federal  government   appears  more  comfortable  with  Provincial  Nominee  Programs  (PNPs),  perhaps  not   surprisingly,  as  their  focus  is  on  economic  selectivity  based  on  labour  market  predictions   rather  than  engagement  with  the  non-profit  sector  (Alboim  and  Cohle,  2012).  The  threat  of   these  trends  is  that  the  focus  on  recruiting  fast,  sometimes  expendable  labour  does  damage   to  programs  and  policies  that  support  retention,  mainly  in  the  settlement  sector.      Menz,  somewhat  oddly,  seems  to  put  the  burden  of  responsibility  for  increased  

economic  immigration  based  on  low-wage,  low-skill  employment  demands  on  the  working   class  in  the  developed  world  who  are  not  interested  in  low-tier  jobs  (2009,  p.  323).  If  this  is   true,  then  the  accommodation  by  the  neoliberal  state  to  the  needs  of  employers  can  hardly   be  considered  irresponsible.  When  considering  a  future  defined  by  an  aging  and  declining      27  

population,  however,  the  associated  wage  competition  that  this  practice  engenders  is  a   major  step  in  the  wrong  direction.  What  the  state  failed  to  do  in  turning  to  guestwork  for   the  benefit  of  employers  is  uphold  labour  standards  as  defined  by  the  industrial  era  middle- class,  and  institutions  such  as  labour  unions,  public  education,  and  minimum  wage.  It  is   possible  to  claim  that  this  capitulation  of  the  state  was  not  caused  by  a  low  supply  of   workers  for  low  quality  jobs,  but  by  the  failure  of  the  state  to  maintain  the  integrity  of   middle-class  institutions  as  industrial  production  began  to  disappear  from  the  developed   world.      The  FSWP  continues  to  operate  on  the  point  system,  which  strongly  favours  highly  

skilled  immigrants,  who  often  find  their  skills  devalued  by  employers  and  regulators  in   Canada  (Girard  and  Bauder,  2005;  Schwartz,  2012;  Alboim  and  McIsaac,  2009).  The  federal   failure  here  is  allowing  human  capital  to  go  to  waste  as  programs  that  develop  potential   were  downscaled  in  favour  of  economic  immigrants  with  high  technical  skills,  defined  as   job-ready.  `Best  and  brightest'-focused  point  system  evaluations  are  a  misallocation  of  the   human  capital  model.  Federal  regulations  have  recently  used  the  National  Occupational   Classification  list  (Human  Resources  and  Skills  Development  Canada,  2011)  to  screen  for   specific  labour  market  needs,  thus  rearranging  the  human  capital  model  as  a  filter  that   values  in-demand  technical  skills  over  generic  transferable  skills.        As  Bauder  (2006)  claims  somewhat  singularly,  the  real  impact  of  a  system  that  fails  

to  integrate  immigrants  into  the  labour  market  by  ensuring  employment  that  optimizes  top   talent  is  less  crucially  about  poor  employment  outcomes,  but  rather  about  a  labour  market   that  only  grows  in  low-skilled  sectors  and  demands  the  erosion  of  middle-class  labour   relations  and  conditions.  The  screening  process  that  values  occupational  demand  above      28  

other  key  concerns  is  less  flexible  and  future-proof  than  one  that  assumes  the  development   of  competencies  during  the  integration  process.          It  will  take  time  for  the  federal  government  to  realize  that  occupational  screening  

may  be  sensible  a  from  the  macro-management  view,  but  at  the  local  level  communities  and   governments  place  higher  value  on  investing  in  the  potential  of  immigrants.  The  `best  and   brightest'  high-skilled  immigrants  found  that  federal  macro-LMI  providers  overestimated   their  labour  market  worth,  and  the  federal  government  was  not  investing  in  their  success   by  providing  settlement  services  to  keep  them  from  falling  below  the  poverty  line  (Rai,   2013).  Unfortunately,  by  deregulating  the  human  capital  system  to  be  more  responsive  to   EOIs  and  LMOs,  the  federal  government  has  become  positioned  away  from  settlement  and   development,  with  the  selection  process  completely  devoted  to  the  values  of  fast,   occupation-specific  immigration  requiring  minimum  support  in  economic  or  social   integration.      

Sub-Federal  Analysis         From  1998  until  present,  provincial  nominee  programs  (PNPs)  have  deviated  from   the  more  centralized  national  agenda  that  has  defined  selection  policy  through  the  point   system.  Unlike  the  Economic  Class  Immigrants  (ECIs),  who  are  screened  through  the  point   system  and  its  human  capital/  high  skill  priorities,  provincial  nominees  are  often  selected  to   address  labour  needs  in  low  skilled  fields.  In  Manitoba,  Nominees  are  recorded  to  earn  39%   higher  wages  than  ECIs  (Pandey  and  Townshend,  2011,  p.  10).  This  successful  outcome   comes  from  thinking  beyond  the  confining  high-skills  priorities  of  the  FSWP  and  focusing   rather  on  the  needs  of  particular  regional  labour  requirements.  

  

29  

  

A  key  aspect  of  the  MPNP  is  that  it  is  distinctly  less  focused  on  highly  skilled  

immigrants  than  federal  programs  are.  Working  to  some  extent  against  the  `best  and   brightest'  regime,  Manitoba's  nominees  were  less  likely  than  federal  ECIs  to  have  a   university  degree  (Carter  et  al,  2010),  which  suggests  either  more  youth,  or  a  prevalence  of   low-  and  medium-skilled  job  opportunities,  or  a  combination  of  both.  In  this  model,  there  is   a  value  chain  that  prioritizes  qualities  beyond  high  technical  competencies,  understanding   rather  that  growth  of  populations  and  low-skilled  jobs  are  economically  advantageous,  at   least  in  the  short-term.  But  there  is  a  component  of  the  value  chain  that  looks  beyond   immediate  employment.      The  MPNP  has  worked  with  a  number  of  stakeholders  to  develop  innovative  

programs  providing  settlement  services,  such  as  language  development  and  training  niche   populations  such  as  seniors  and  single  mothers  (Carter  et  al.,  2010).  The  Community  (now   defunct)  and  Family  Support  immigration  streams  are  evidence  that  Manitoba  views  its   nominees  as  an  opportunity  to  address  population  decline  through  a  focus  on  developing   the  quality  of  integration  and  the  strength  of  community,  and  therefor  increasing  retention.   It  also  means  that  the  province  does  not  view  economic  productivity  as  the  only  measure  of   successful  integration,  and  suggests  that  immigration  targets  are  connected  to  strong   communities  that  grow  and  build  increasingly  solid  connections  within  the  province.      The  Carter  study  (2010)  revealed  that  Manitoba  nominees  became  progressively  

integrated  into  their  communities  over  the  five-year  period  following  arrival.  Cultural  ties   and  community  activity  was  a  category  that  the  interviews  addressed,  revealing  cross- cultural  connections  are  developed  in  Manitoba's  cities  and  towns,  unlike  the  "ethnic   enclave"  concept  common  in  large  cities.  Language  skills  also  yielded  a  positive  result,  with      30  

90%  of  those  who  had  lived  in  Manitoba  for  three  years  having  improved  (2010).  These  are   important  metrics  on  the  value  of  investing  in  immigrant  success  through  a  whole-of- society  approach.      In  the  study,  98  of  100  principal  applicants  received  some  type  of  settlement  

assistance.  These  go  beyond  basic  services,  as  the  following  illustrates,   "The  services  received  by  the  highest  proportion  of  provincial  nominees  included   community  orientation,  language  training,  help  in  finding  a  job  or  housing,  and  help  with   the  banking  system.  At  least  70  percent  of  the  arrivals  received  such  services.  Help  with  job   training,  translation,  children's  schooling  and  health  problems  was  received  by  between  a   third  and  a  half  of  the  respondents.  Lower  proportions  had  help  with  shopping,  getting   loans  or  credit,  legal  matters  and  personal  problems"  (Carter  et  al.,  2010,  pg  28).           Lewis  argues  that  the  MPNP  has  devolved  settlement  services  responsibilities  to  the  

extent  that  it  is  now  a  burden  on  the  immigrant  community  (2010).  However,  the  Carter   study  shows  general  satisfaction  and  even  a  very  positive  response  from  the  nominees,   suggesting  that  this  reallocation  of  tasks  has  not  led  to  low  quality  in  the  services  provided.   Furthermore,  it  is  apparent  that  there  is  little  failure  in  these  services  reaching  the   nominees,  at  least  the  principal  applicants.  Perhaps  a  more  internal  community  approach  to   settlement  services  should  be  explored  in  other  provinces  and  by  the  federal  government.      Settlement  in  Canada  is  critically  focusing  on  attraction  and  retention  of  immigrants,  

and  it  is  becoming  clear  that  this  concern  will  in  some  ways  be  impossible  to  address  unless   policy  looks  beyond  employer  recruitment  considerations.  Two  concepts  inform  this   approach;  replacement  migration  and  economic  growth.  Based  in  the  population  needs  of   smaller  urban  and  rural  communities  in  specific  regions  of  Canada,  where  immigration  is   seen  as  an  answer  to  economic  and  demographic  decline,  there  is  a  crucial  need  to  ensure   social  cohesion  and  limit  political  fractures  at  a  local  level  when  considering  the  settlement      31  

of  immigrants  (Burstein,  2007).  Another  key  recent  development  in  Canadian  settlement   has  been  connecting  successful  economic  outcomes  for  immigrants  and  their  employers   with  community-building  and  services,  the  needs  of  immigrants  as  families  as  well  as   individuals,  and  innovative  skills  training.  In  New  Brunswick,  settlement  agencies  in  the   non-profit  sector  have  expanded  in  under  a  decade  to  create  accessibility  in  small   communities  province-wide,  using  the  model  of  transversal  casework  to  broadly  improve   services  that  contribute  to  quality  of  life  for  immigrants  and  thereby  encourage  retention  to   support  labour  needs  (Theriault  and  Haan,  2012).  In  smaller  communities  in  Alberta,  skills   development  training  and  workforce  development  is  supported  by  employers  from  the   private  sector,  cooperative  culture  between  community  agencies  and  industry  is  on  the  rise   because  of  the  shared  goal  of  making  the  labour  market  more  rewarding  for  immigrants   through  professional  development  and  other  training  (Lodermeier,  2012).        As  Reitz  articulated  a  decade  ago,  the  federal  government  lacks  a  focused  strategy  to  

understand  labour  markets  and  the  potential  performance  of  immigrants  across  regions.   "The  success  of  Canada's  immigration  policy  depends  on  the  presence  of  one  essential   feature  in  the  emerging  global  labour  market;  namely,  institutions  that  link  workers  to  jobs   and  provide  for  the  international  transferability  of  skills"  (p.  8).  His  main  focus  was  on   credential  recognition,  which  has  indeed  seen  developments  at  both  the  federal  and   provincial  level  (Schwartz,  2012;  Rai,  2013).  The  Manitoba  Strategy  on  Qualification   Recognition  is  a  prime  example  of  how  devolving  responsibilities  from  the  federal   government  to  the  provincial  has  allowed  for  real  communication  and  cooperation  between   stakeholders.  After  identifying  the  need  for  a  Qualification  Recognition  Framework,  the   Province  reached  out  to  immigrants,  regulators,  employers,  government  representatives,      32  

post-secondary  education  representatives,  and  experts  from  outside  Manitoba  (Office  of  the   Manitoba  Fairness  Commissioner,  n.d.)  to  form  a  think  tank  on  the  issue.  This  core  group   then  reached  out  into  the  broader  community  of  stakeholders  to  present  their  ideas.  By   2009,  a  best  practice  model  had  been  documented,  and  Manitoba  could  move  forward  with   a  tool  that  would  help  assess  international  qualifications  that  was  built  on  the  nominee   program  itself  and  the  diverse  facets  of  the  labour  market  represented  throughout  the   community.  Using  principles  of  continuous  learning,  collaboration,  and  commitment  to   understanding  the  immigrant  experience,  this  model  is  considered  successful  in  bridging   the  gap  between  credentials  and  employment,  because  it  stays  grounded  in  the  context  and   specific  experiences  of  the  MPNP.      The  FCRO  (Foreign  Credential  Recognition  Office),  founded  in  2007,  is  the  federal  

government's  attempt  to  resolve  the  question  of  foreign  credential  recognition  under  the   mandate  of  CIC.  CIC  recognizes  that  Foreign  Credential  Recognition  is  now  largely  the   domain  of  Provinces  and  Territories,  defining  its  own  role  as  primarily  maintaining  an   online  compendium  of  information  and  facilitating  referrals  (Citizenship  and  Immigration   Canada,  2013).  It  recognizes  a  role  for  the  federal  government  in  actively  engaging   stakeholders  and  facilitating  communication  between  interests  of  immigrants  and  the   interests  of  Canadian  business.  In  this  context,  CIC  views  itself  as  one  of  many  responsible   parties,  seeking  to  maintain  managerial  authority  but  not  interested  in  a  more  assertive   role.        Reitz  also  made  the  point,  however,  that  foreign  education  and  training  may  be  

strong  in  most  areas  and  yet  still  leave  small  gaps  in  certain  proficiencies.        "Immigrants  also  experience  difficulty  in  gaining  a  licence  when  there  are  specific   gaps  in  their  training  or  when  specific  skills  are  not  transferable.  In  other  words,  their      33  

educational  background  may  be  relevant,  but  it  may  not  contain  all  of  the  elements  required   in  a  Canadian  context.  Frequently  in  these  cases  they  are  required  to  repeat  the  entire   training  program  in  Canada,  which  of  course  is  wasteful.  A  more  efficient  way  to  fill  specific   skills  gaps  would  be  to  provide  some  form  of  bridge  training,  such  as  occupation-specific   programs  involving  collaboration  among  educational  institutions,  governments  and   regulating  bodies.  The  University  of  Toronto's  Faculty  of  Pharmacy  has  developed  such  a   program,  which  enables  pharmacists  trained  outside  North  America  to  take  university- based  courses  and  other  resources,  thereby  facilitating  their  preparation  for  professional   practice  in  Ontario.  Known  as  the  International  Pharmacy  Graduate  Program,  it  is  offered  in   collaboration  with  the  Ontario  College  of  Pharmacy  and  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Training,   Colleges  and  Universities.  There  are  a  few  such  programs  in  the  health  professions,  and   others  are  being  developed"  (2005,  p.  9).           Again,  Reitz's  recommendation  has  been  to  some  degree  heeded.  Since  2003,  Ontario  

Bridging  Programs  have  helped  50,000  skilled  newcomers  find  work  in  their  fields   (Canadian  Newcomer  Magazine,  2014).  This  is  an  area  where  cross-sector  collaboration  has   been  especially  effective.  Importantly,  there  have  been  innovative  institutional   developments  that  respond  to  the  need  for  transitioning  or  complementing  skills  that   immigrants  arrive  to  Canada  with.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  in  one  decade,  the  very   idea  of  programs  and  services  that  effectively  condition  skilled  workers  for  success  in  the   context  of  a  new  market  and  society  has  gone  from  theoretical  to  the  practical  delivery  of   direct  solutions.  This  has  mainly  taken  place  under  provincial  purviews,  perhaps  because   labour  markets  are  simply  too  diverse  to  be  approached  above  the  regional  level.      

Private  Sector  Analysis         In  a  current  project  for  Pathways  to  Prosperity,  Drolet  and  colleagues  (2014)  have   conducted  a  strong  review  of  the  literature,  research,  and  key  issues  related  to  employer   investment  in  developing  immigrant  skills.  One  of  the  most  prominent  findings  of  this   review  refers  to  the  lack  of  information  for  employers  regarding  the  role  they  can  play  in  

  

34  

integration  and  settlement  of  newcomers.  In  this  context,  the  newcomers  in  question  would   be  employees,  and  the  authors  refer  to  a  total  absence  of  literature  pertaining  the  potential   for  employers  to  support  the  families  of  newcomers  with  services  and  other  benefits.        "The  most  prevalent  gap  identified  in  the  online  literature  is  the  perspective  of   employers  and  their  role.  While  this  information  is  starting  to  become  more  available,  it  is   unclear  whether  the  lack  of  information  is  due  to  the  researchers  failure  to  engage   employers,  or  if  the  employers  themselves  are  apathetic.  There  is  an  abundance  of  online   resources  available  to  employers  about  the  value  of  diversifying  their  workforce  and   successfully  integrating  newcomers  into  the  workplace,  but  the  advice  is  not  usually  framed   from  an  employer  perspective.  Although  it  is  noted  that  there  is  an  important  role  for   employers  to  play  in  the  overall  integration  and  settlement  of  newcomers,  information  on   what  that  role  really  looks  like  is  discussed  in  less  than  25%  of  the  relevant  literature"   (Drolet  et  al,  p.  31).         This  illustrates  that  one  key  barrier  to  progress  here,  if  not  the  most  important  issue,  

is  one  of  discourse.  In  other  words,  policy  and  research  is  failing  to  connect  with  the  private   sector.  One  interesting  theater  in  which  this  will  play  out  is  the  introduction  of  the  new   Express  Entry  system  that  is  to  replace  the  Expression  of  Interest  model  under  which   employers  have  been  given  increased  influence  over  the  selection  of  skilled  immigrants.   Without  meaningful  collaboration  between  employers  and  the  federal  government,  this   new  policy  could  fall  short  of  its  objectives  and  create  more  inefficiency  than  it  solves.  In  ten   years,  despite  a  consistently  increased  economic  focus  within  immigration  policies,   employers  still  report  the  same  issues  of  language,  cultural  competency,  Canadian   experience,  and  credential  recognition  as  barriers  to  hiring  immigrants  in  high  and  low   skilled  positions  (Reitz,  2005;  Drolet  et  al,  2014;  Lodermeier,  2012;  Ontario  Colleges,  2009).      The  motivations  for  employers  to  attract  immigrant  workers  are  not  mysterious.  

Drolet  et  al.  refer  to  job  gaps  and  skills  shortages,  and  the  need  to  become  more  globally   competitive  (p.  18).  With  major  private  sector  advocates  like  Scotiabank,  Google,  and      35  

Microsoft  disseminating  this  logic,  plenty  of  opportunities  exist  for  research  and   collaboration  between  policy  developers  and  the  business  world  to  develop  discussion,   shared  interests,  and  actionable  objectives.      Part  of  developing  this  new  way  forward  would  involve  an  updated  understanding  of  

workforce  skill  development  programs.  When  offered  by  non-profit  immigrant  serving   agencies  or  contextualized  as  newcomer-facing  services,  it  is  unlikely  that  employers  can   appreciate  diversity  and  inclusion,  or  cultural  competency  training  and  development,  as   investments  that  will  add  value  to  their  business.  Drolet  et  al.  emphasize  the  need  for   employer-facing  programs,  meaning  targeted  solutions  to  the  concerns  of  the  company   rather  than  general  services  for  individual  newcomers  (p.29).  As  a  result,  employers  can   rationalize  increased  support  for  these  programs  through  appeal  to  bottom-line,  rather   than  attempting  to  justify  what  appears  to  be  a  hand-out  to  a  specific  subset  of  employees.      How  does  one  begin  to  reshape  the  discussion?  Ideological  language  in  Canada  exists  

in  different  silos  of  public  and  private  interest,  as  explained  by  The  Whetstone  Group,   "Official  Canadian  multiculturalism  policy  is  based  on  a  philosophy  of  accepting  and   explaining  cultural  difference,  rather  than  eliminating  this  difference.  In  the  Canadian   private  sector  the  process  of  addressing  cultural  difference  in  the  workplace  falls  more   commonly  within  the  fields  of  cross-cultural  communications  and  diversity  management.   Cross-cultural  communication  training  is  now  frequently  considered  essential  to   Canadians"  (SP  Consulting;  The  Whetstone  Group,  2006,  p.  35).              The  Whetstone  Group  highlights  The  Maytree  Foundation,  TRIEC,  WRIEN,  and  EASI  

as  examples  of  organizations  that  have  led  the  way  in  developing  practices  that  bring  the   right  training  methods  together  with  business  models  and  goals.  These  include  involving   the  various  stakeholders  in  an  inclusive  and  transparent  collaborative  model.  With  input   from  employers  to  develop  the  training  tools,  these  models  seem  less  like  an  imperative  to      36  

promote  acceptance  for  the  sake  of  social  change,  and  more  like  a  practical  solution  to   problems  that  affect  the  performance  of  businesses.  With  that  as  a  bookend,  the  ensuing   years  since  2006  have  produced  a  number  of  changes  for  large  Canadian  employers.      As  summaries  by  the  likes  of  Drolet  (2014),  Javdani  (2012),  Walker  (2006),  and  

Flynn  and  Bauder  (2013)  show,  the  development  of  government  policy  over  the  past  ten  to   fifteen  years  has  been  given  due  attention  by  academia.  Likewise,  the  private  sector  has   produced  its  own  literature  of  wisdom  on  the  topic  of  employing  immigrant  workers.  What   follows  is  a  review  focused  on  the  development  of  diversity  and  inclusion  trends,  with   particular  focus  on  the  increasing  role  of  Intercultural  Competency  (ICC).      A  logical  place  to  start  is  1999,  when  the  Canadian  Global  Leadership  Initiative  was  

launched  by  the  Canadian  Council  of  Chief  Executives,  which  included  progressive  human   capital  development  at  the  institutional  level  as  part  of  rebranding  Canada  in  the  global   marketplace  (Canadian  Council  of  Chief  Executives,  1999).        RBC  produced  its  first  Diversity  Report  in  2005.  `Building  Cross-Cultural  

Competence  was  piloted  in  2005  in  Toronto  and  offered  to  HR  professionals  and  the  Royal   Way  national  sales  team.  This  customized,  interactive  workshop  helps  employees  learn   about  specific  cultures,  assess  their  own  cultural  IQ  and  build  cultural  curiosity'  (RBC,   2005).  In  2006,  they  partnered  with  TRIEC's  Mentoring  Partnership,  ACCES  Employment,   and  CareerBridge.ca.  They  piloted  new  programs  and  training  workshops  ­  Business   Excellence  Through  Diversity,  Building  Cross-Cultural  Competence,  and  Creating  an  Inclusive   Environment  for  People  with  Disabilities.  In  the  2007  report,  each  of  these  had  been   delivered  to  between  250  and  400  employees.  In  2011,  the  process  had  continued  to   develop,  with  programs  such  as  Building  Cultural  Dexterity  for  High  Performance.        37  

Today,  understanding  workplace  cultural  differences  and  communicating     effectively  with  people  from  diverse  backgrounds  is  more  important  than  ever.  Facilitated   webcasts  enable  employees  across  the  globe  to  discuss  diversity,  cultural  differences,   "unwritten  rules,"  stereotypes  and  generalizations,  and  communicating  in  a  cross-cultural   context.  RBC  also  has  Diversity  Moments.  Using  short,  web-based  vignettes,  Diversity   Moments  help  increase  employees'  and  managers'  knowledge  of  diversity  and  inclusion.   The  "moments"  cover  topics  including  invisible  disabilities,  Aboriginal  awareness,   generational  diversity  and  identifying  stereotypes.      In  2007,  Cisco  created  the  Global  Inclusion  and  Diversity  Council.  "The  council  is  led  

by  the  Senior  Vice  President  of  Human  Resources  and  is  supported  by  sponsors  at  the   executive  level  who  work  with  Employee  Resource  Groups  (ERGs)  to  improve  the  skills,   networking  capabilities,  and  career  opportunities  for  particular  groups  in  the  Cisco   community.  Council  members  also  serve  as  executive  sponsors  for  major  diversity   programs  and  are  important  communicators  of  the  diversity  message".  This  language   highlights  a  profit  incentive  message  rather  than  a  focus  on  workplace  culture  such  as  RBC   espouses,  but  the  approaches  are  targeted  at  nearly  identical  goals.      Husky  Energy  has  received  a  number  of  awards  related  to  their  Diversity  Initiatives  

since  1999  (examples  include  Vision  Award  from  Human  Resources  Development  Canada,   1999;  Alberta  Equity  Achievement  Recognition  Award,  2004;  Certificate  of  Recognition  in   the  areas  of  Workforce  Diversity  and  Aboriginal  Affairs  from  Human  Resources  and   Development  Canada;  2006,  Finalist  for  Diversity  Leadership  Award  of  Distinction  from   Alberta  Human  Rights  and  the  Alberta  Chamber  of  Commerce;  2002  and  2011).  The  basis   for  such  accolades  are  programs  such  as,  "Education  and  Training:  Husky's  web-based      38  

Respectful  Workplace  training  program,  delivered  to  both  employees  and  contractors,   outlines  Husky's  commitment  to  diversity  and  expectations  relating  to  respect  and   inclusion  in  the  workplace.  Other  sessions  addressing  multi-generational  teams,  workplace   bullying,  cultural  competency,  and  creating  an  inclusive  environment  are  delivered   regularly  to  staff  and  leaders  at  all  levels.  Integrated  Communication  Strategy:  Husky's   communication  activities  in  this  area  are  guided  by  a  framework  that  increase  dialogue  and   discussion  on  the  various  elements  of  workplace  diversity  and  inclusion"  (Social   Responsibility,  2014).      The  2008  Social  Responsibility  Report  from  KPMG  included  cultural  training  through  

web  modules,  and  classroom  training  called  `High-Impact  Communication  in  Diverse   Workforce',  targeted  not  only  at  the  workforce  but  management  and  partners  (KPMG  LLP,   2008).    Also  Advanced  Micro  Devices  has  a  sophisticated  approach  to  international   diversity  in  the  workplace  that  includes  education  and  training  for  employees,  pay-for- performance  incentives,  and  a  talent  management  strategy  that  focuses  on  international   employees  with  metrics  to  represent  progress  and  development  (AMD  Employees,  2014).      These  examples  show  that  large  Canadian  employers  are  highly  focused  on  

institutional  solutions  for  the  question  of  how  diversity  in  the  workplace  can  optimize   talent  performance  and  ultimately  profits.  Cultural  competency  is  a  major  theme,  because  it   improves  communication  and  teamwork,  and  fosters  employee  satisfaction  when  applied  to   the  culture  of  the  whole  company.  In  fact,  the  strategy  behind  diversity  and  inclusion   models  shares  a  great  deal  with  the  provincial  targets  of  retention  and  talent  skills   development.  Looking  ahead,  in  the  human  resources  field,  recruitment  is  likely  to  have  less  

  

39  

impact  than  how  companies  work  to  retain  and  optimize  their  key  talent.  In  this  context,   there  is  much  ground  to  cover  in  Canada.      Dobson  (2014a)  shows  that  Canada  ranks  behind  America  in  terms  of  information  

management,  workforce  analytics,  enabling  systems  and  infrastructure,  collecting  metrics,   and  measuring  the  business  impacts  of  HR.  Organizations  that  make  those  investments  now   will  be  more  business-driven  regarding  talent  when  the  crunch  becomes  more  competitive.   HR  must  become  more  analytical  and  forecast-capable  to  be  taken  seriously  as  a  leader  in   strategy  and  a  partner  of  management  rather  than  as  a  traditional  admin  department   (Dobson,  2014a).  This  will  be  especially  key  when  the  updated  EOI  system  generates  an   abundance  of  talent  with  intensive  management  needs.      Research  in  the  United  States,  for  example,  has  made  significant  advancements  in  

mapping  the  correlation  between  workplace  diversity  and  firm  performance  (McMahon,   2010).  McMahon  drew  together  several  studies  on  these  topics  from  2000-2009,  each   focusing  on  the  correlation  between  certain  metrics  from  each  side  of  that  equation.  Some   examples  include  Horwitz  and  Horwitz  (2007),  who  compared  "task  related  vs  bio- demographic  diversity  and  cognitive  diversity"  and  "quantity  and  quality  of  performance,   social  integration,  team  cohesion,  decision  making,  creativity,  and  problem  solving"   (McMahon,  2010,  p.  45).  Other  studies  used  metrics  like  management  diversity  initiatives  to   knowledge/skills/ablilites  in  the  workforce,  individual  demographic  attributes  to  sales   revenue,  nationality  to  net  contribution  margin/market  share,  ethnicity  to  productivity,   boardroom  diversity  to  financial  performance,  and  so  on  (McMahon,  2010,  p.  9).  The   conclusion,  after  synthesizing  the  various  data,  was  that  the  impact  of  diversity  on   performance  is  curvilinear  in  that  in  general  more  diversity  leads  to  long-term  improved      40  

performance,  but  that  this  is  better  realized  through  an  integrated  and  complex  relationship   of  causes.  In  other  words,  a  variety  of  cooperating  metrics  are  required  to  demonstrate  the   impact  of  workplace  diversity  on  the  performance  of  a  company,  though  over  the  long  term   a  clear  correlation  can  be  made  between  diversity  management  and  profit.      Not  surprisingly,  this  type  of  conclusion  creates  more  open  questions  than  those  it  

closes.  The  true  impact  of  workplace  diversity  on  performance  is  revealed  less  by  direct   financial  performance  than  by  longer-term  change  in  the  company.  The  research,  then,   adapts  and  broadens  to  look  at  return  on  assets,  return  on  sales,  return  on  equity,  and   market  share  as  more  illustrative  metrics  (McMahon,  2010,  p.  9).  Even  further,  the  metrics   are  being  altered  to  account  for  impacts  on  quality  of  results,  decision  making,  social   integration  KSAOs  (Knowledge,  Skills,  Abilities,  Other),  and  other  less  tangible  qualities  in   the  ongoing  research.  It  is  in  this  area  that  ICC  is  relevant  to  company  policies  as  it  can  be   programmed  for  deliverables  and  assessed  using  defined  metrics.  Given  the  significance  of   this  research  regarding  hard  solutions  for  maximizing  economic  success,  the  vacuum  of   research  on  this  subject  in  the  Canadian  context  is  troubling.  Looking  to  practices  in  human   resources,  it  is  possible  to  get  some  sense  of  how  the  subject  is  framed  and  what  practices   are  under  way.        Companies  have  moved  beyond  the  view  that  diversity  is  the  `right  thing'  to  an  

understanding  that  it  is  the  way  to  top  competition,  as  illustrated  by  the  high  performance   firms  on  the  list  of  Canada's  Best  Diversity  Employers,  such  as  Enbridge,  Sodexo,  and  CIBC   (Bernier,  2014b).  TD  is  progressive  in  strategically  eliminating  biases  among  all  managers   by  providing  training  in  cross  cultural  awareness,  diversity  interviewing  and  hiring   (Dobson,  2014b).  Also  becoming  clear  in  HR  strategy  is  the  importance  of  combatting  the      41  

effect  of  screening  for  Canadian  experience  and  credentials,  and  a  push  for  making   recertification  and  bridging  for  foreign-trained  professionals  through  professional   associations  more  easily  attainable  (Kreissl,  2014).  Dealing  with  these  issues,  from  a  hiring   perspective,  can  reduce  the  impact  of  the  skills  shortage  which  is  exacerbated  by   procedural  inefficiencies  such  as  those  mentioned  above,  and  make  the  opportunities  or   lack  thereof  for  foreign-trained  professionals  in  Canada  more  transparent.      The  hiring  and  recruitment  question  has  been  so  dire  that  it  has  created  a  growth  

industry  of  third  party  talent  consultants  to  connect  immigrants  to  employment   opportunities.  Organizations  such  as  emergiTEL  provide  assessment  of  immigrant  job   candidates  that  companies  with  traditional  hiring  practices  simply  lack  the  structure  for,   such  as  long-term  value  and  soft  skills  assessments  (Bernier,  2014a).  In  many  ways,  this   type  of  service  only  exists  because  HR  practice  and  the  assessment  mechanisms  of   governments  in  Canada  are  faulty  when  it  comes  to  understanding  the  full  value  of   immigrant  talent.  The  metrics  used  traditionally  are  not  sophisticated  enough  to   understand  the  potential  locked  behind  low  competencies  in  areas  that  are  easily  met  by   effective  (and  existing)  programs,  such  as  enhanced  language  training  (ELT),  occupation- specific  language  training  (OSLT)  and  bridging  programs,  soft  skills  and  intercultural   competency  training,  and  training  in  understanding  Canadian  workplace  culture.  More  to   the  point,  hiring  practices  are  forgoing  hiring  immigrants  in  many  cases  who  could  be   trained  in  these  competencies  after  being  brought  into  the  company,  integrated  into  their   job  training  and  responsibilities.        Human  Resources  strategy  has  a  great  deal  to  say  about  workforce  training.  In  

training  for  hard  skills,  such  as  workplace  health  and  safety,  it  is  understood  that  effective      42  

programs  have  continuity,  that  is,  that  training  programs  need  to  be  reinforced  with   periodic  follow-ups  and  review  sessions  (King,  2014).  Building  group  dynamics  and   facilitators  within  the  training  module  for  ongoing  self-accountability,  and  strong   participation  from  supervisors  can  increase  the  added  value  of  training  sessions.  This   should  also  apply  to  soft  skills  and  intercultural  competency  training.  The  more  a  company   as  a  whole  is  able  to  buy  in,  with  group  accountability  and  the  enthusiasm  of  supervisors   and  management,  the  more  impact  will  be  made  by  the  deliverables  of  the  training.  Corus   CEO  John  Cassaday  embodies  this  understanding  of  leadership  by  seeing  his  role  as  a   consistent  impression  across  the  company  regarding  vision,  values  and  other  aspects  of   brand  culture  (Gorsline,  2014).      Corus  displays  a  values-first,  skills-second  approach  to  employees,  screening  for  

`organizational  fit'  and  basic  qualifications.  With  specific  skills  at  the  bottom  of  the  value   chain,  Corus  is  able  to  establish  a  workforce  with  compatible  core  values  and  ensure  quality   performance  that  will  have  a  positive  bottom  line  impact.  The  assumption  is  that  if  a   candidate  is  a  great  organizational  fit  but  lacks  a  certain  skill,  the  company  or  the  individual   can  easily  direct  resources  toward  addressing  that  gap.  The  way  that  immigrants  are   screened  through  the  FSWP  is  essentially  the  opposite  of  this.        The  federal  government  screens  on  a  value  chain  with  the  top  priority  as  high  skills,  

and  a  close  second  is  labour  market  compatibility.  The  Express  Entry  changes  will  be  an   attempt  to  raise  labour  market  compatibility  on  the  value  chain,  thereby  the  two  values   become  balanced  as  the  dualistic  sole  criteria.  A  term  often  used  for  this  combination  is   `job-readiness'.  Provincial  programs  place  high  priorities  on  labour  market  compatibility   but  some,  in  regions  that  hope  to  grow,  put  likelihood  of  retention  equally  high.  In  this      43  

model,  it  is  understood  that  economic  immigrants  have  added  value  when  they  are  looking   for  somewhere  to  settle  and  build  a  career,  so  such  indicators  as  accompanying  family  and   community  integration  are  important  factors  for  selection.  It  is  understood  that   investments  in  social  development  such  as  settlement  services,  employment  services,  skills   development  programs,  and  access  to  quality  education  have  two  important  functions  for   individuals  of  this  type.  `Job  readiness'  can  be  developed  after  arrival  using  these  types  of   programs,  improving  the  competencies  and  qualifications  of  the  immigrant  through   Canadian  funded  and  generated  programs  (in  some  cases  employer  generated),  while  this   same  social  spending  serves  as  an  attraction  and  incentive  to  stay.        Employers  have  a  variety  of  approaches  to  screening  foreign  trained  employees.  

Most,  as  is  traditional  across  hiring  practices,  have  competencies  and  qualifications  high  on   the  value  chain,  but  assume  that  all  immigrants  have  soft  skill  defaults  that  mitigate  the   quality  of  their  actual  abilities.  As  shown,  many  large  employers  have  tried  to  reimagine  the   culture  of  their  organizations  to  be  more  inclusive,  or  address  hiring  biases.  The  real   innovation,  however,  involves  the  value  chain.  As  Corus  demonstrates,  there  is  tremendous   value  to  consistency  across  the  company  around  values  and  vision.  Intercultural   competency  training  that  affects  the  entire  company  culture  creates  a  functioning   environment  that  can  access  the  full  potential  of  skills  and  competencies  that  get  lost  when   communication,  leadership,  and  values  are  simply  not  connecting  (Guillerme,  Keating,  and   Hoppe,  2010;  LaRoche,  2003).  In  other  words,  there  is  an  organizational  benefit  to  reorder   the  value  chain  when  screening  for  immigrant  talent;  priority  number  one  is  that  the   individual  is  highly  skilled,  priority  number  two  is  that  the  programs  are  available  to   develop  cultural  and  communication  competencies  between  the  individual  and  the  existing      44  

workforce  (in  effect  the  capacity  to  efficiently  ensure  `job  readiness'),  and  the  final  priority   is  that  the  individual  will  be  surrounded  by  a  compatible  community  and  is  able  to  integrate   comfortably  so  that  retention  of  the  talent  is  likely.  This  last  point  is  important  because   once  the  investment  has  been  made  to  bring  the  newcomer  into  the  country  and  develop   soft  skills  and  cultural  competencies  to  ensure  that  talent  is  effectively  utilized,  the   company  deserves  a  long-term  employee  and  regions  in  Canada  are  desperate  for   demographic  growth.  

Assessment  1  ­  Toward  EOI-driven  Selection         Canadian  businesses  have  had  a  long  interest  in  hiring  immigrants,  and  a  long   struggle  with  institutionalizing  practices  that  can  optimize  immigrant  talent.  The  private   sector  has  mainly  focused  on  advocating  for  faster  processing,  better  systems  to  verify   credentials,  and  other  mechanisms  related  to  `hit-the-ground-running'  job-ready  immigrant   selection  (Holmes  et  al.,  2014).  With  EOIs,  many  of  these  concerns  have  been  institutionally   addressed,  but  why  do  the  same  concerns  exist  today  as  ten  years  ago  (Reitz,  2005)?  It  may   be  that  neo-liberal  policies  are  inherently  detrimental  to  a  healthy  domestic  economy,  as   some  argue.  The  central  authority  of  the  federal  government  has  been  deemphasized,   creating  regionally  specific  policies  and  the  downloading  of  traditionally  federal  services  to   sub-federal  government,  private,  and  non-profit  bodies.  With  less  rigorous  federal  attention   to  settlement  and  skills  development,  and  only  the  guidance  of  macro-analytic  LMI  to   ensure  strong  employment  outcomes,  the  recruitment-facing  EOI  system  does  not  have   strong  enough  institutional  support  in  areas  that  encourage  skills  development,  talent   optimization,  and  retention.    

  

45  

  

The  reason  for  a  continuation  of  the  same  complaints  from  the  private  sector  reflects  

a  core  confusion  about  newcomers  held  by  both  the  private  sector  and  policy  makers.   Neither  sector  has  shown  committed  interest  in  the  responsibility  for  skills  development   tailored  to  newcomers.  The  government  tends  to  view  economic  immigrants  as  a  necessary   challenge  to  labour  market  practices;  they  are  the  solution  to  declining  economic  growth,   but  their  actual  skills  and  ability  to  succeed  without  excessive  amounts  of  assistance  are   suspect.  To  account  for  this,  the  system  prioritizes  high  skills  and  labour  market  demand   (Rai,  2013),  believing  this  is  a  formula  for  job-readiness.  The  private  sector  tends  to  view   immigrants  as  a  silver  bullet  for  skills  shortages;  they  are  internationally  connected  and   possess  in-demand  skills,  but  the  burden  of  getting  through  federal  processes  and   regulatory  bodies  makes  access  to  them  inefficient  and  costly  (Holmes,  2014;  Drolet,  2014).   In  fact,  neither  view  captures  the  economic  reality  of  immigrants  of  every  class  in  Canada   today.  Immigrants  are  an  investment  opportunity.   The  authority  of  the  federal  government  over  economic  immigration  policy  is   focused  on  screening  rather  than  development.  The  point  system  is  designed  to  determine   who  the  applicant  is,  and  what  they  have  done.  This  is  not  a  mechanism  that  understands   the  impact  of  immigrants  on  the  labour  market,  only  whether  or  not  an  immigrant  is   qualitatively  suitable  under  a  certain  normative  view  of  the  labour  market.  The  process   then  becomes  focused  on  identifying  the  `best  and  brightest'  applicants,  under  a  central   body  of  criteria.  In  some  sense,  these  policies  have  fallen  out  of  step  with  current  migration   trends.  According  to  Rai,  three  trends  characterize  the  current  period  in  Canada's   immigration  history;  increased  volume  (and  increased  proportion  of  economic   immigrants),  most  immigrants  are  university  educated  and  skilled,  and  labour  market      46  

success  within  the  first  five  years  of  settlement  is  declining  (p.  10,  2013).  The  preference  for   highly  skilled  workers  has  been  firmly  implemented  in  policy,  but  it  has  not  led  to   improvement  in  labour  market  outcomes.     In  Human  Capital  Theory,  people  acquire  marketable  skills  that  enhance  their   productive  capacity,  which  is  a  means  of  increasing  status  in  the  workforce.  These   marketable  skills  may  take  the  form  of  specific  knowledge  or  training,  strategic  connections   to  other  individuals  or  institutions,  and  more  intangible  personal  qualities  such  as  manners   and  communications  skills  (Lopez,  2007).  In  any  case,  the  skills  attained  represent  an   investment  of  time  and  usually  labour  and  money,  made  by  the  individual  or  some  other   interested  party  in  improving  their  workforce  potential.  In  other  words,  returns  on  human   capital  investment  are  not  limited  to  occupation-specific  labour  relief.      Contrary  to  the  occupation-specific  value  chain,  advocates  of  human  capital  in  

immigration  selection,  such  as  Alboim,  claim  that  the  most  important  qualities  in  an   immigrant  are  youth  and  the  ability  to  adapt  in  Canada's  changing  economy  (2009).  In  spite   of  the  decline  in  labour  market  outcomes  over  the  past  decade,  Alboim  argues  that  this   approach  emphasizes  the  right  criteria;  "education,  language  skills,  and  transferrable  work   experience"  (2009,  p.  46),  and  adds  that  these  are  still  the  best  predictors  of  economic   success.  In  Alboim's  analysis,  human  capital  priorities  represent  a  long  view,  as  opposed  to   occupational  screens.  Judging  by  the  decline  of  labour  market  success  that  Rai  (2010)   identified  as  a  pervasive  trend,  the  limited  definition  of  human  capital  used  in  federal  policy   is  a  failure.      The  central  misconception  about  immigrants  remains,  that  they  are  an  expense  for  

government  and  a  challenge  for  businesses,  rather  than  talent  to  be  invested  in  for      47  

economic  growth  that  will  benefit  both  business  and  government.  But  even  neo-liberal   policies  such  as  regionalization  of  services  have  demonstrated  the  value  of  investing  in   immigrant  talent,  not  only  as  workforce  talent  optimization,  but  for  social  and  economic   wellbeing  in  small  communities  with  an  existential  stake  in  economic  and  demographic   growth.  Recent  years  have  seen  the  expansion  of  Welcoming  Communities  in  Canada   (Burstein,  2009),  which  bring  the  cross-sector  approach  to  bear  on  issues  beyond  simply   workplaces  competencies.  In  small,  growing  communities,  businesses  are  investing  in  social   programs  and  community  organizations  that  serve  immigrants  and  the  settlement  process.   Formerly  the  domains  of  public  or  non-profit  sector  organizations,  settlement  and   community  services  for  immigrants  have  become  workforce-optimization  products  (TRIEC,   Theriault  and  Haan,  Lodermeier,  LaRoche,  Bersin).  Specifically,  these  are  products  that   represent  added  value  to  the  bottom  lines  of  businesses  in  areas  with  labour  demand.   Robust  settlement  services,  including  skills  development  within  the  workplace  and  in   immigrant  communities,  are  a  retention  policy  and  retention  means  economic  growth.        Having  reviewed  the  developments  since  Reitz  (2005)  produced  his  article,  we  can  

see  that  much  progress  has  been  made  in  spite  of  the  continuance  of  a  core  misconception.   Institutions  have  been  created,  within  businesses  or  through  cross-sector  partnerships,  that   facilitate  investment  in  immigrant  talent,  but  businesses  still  advocate  for  the  Think  Fast   (Holmes  et  al,  2014)  approach  of  success  through  selection.  Likely  there  will  be  no  reversal   of  the  EOI  and  EE  developments,  but  for  them  to  work  effectively  they  should  be   accompanied  by  a  streamlined  system  for  investing  in  skills  and  talent  development.      The  private  sector,  over  the  past  decade,  has  been  the  realm  of  development  in  a  

different  direction;  diversity  and  inclusion  (D&I)  strategies  and  talent  management.  Though      48  

LMOs  and  EOIs  are  perhaps  the  most  obvious  indicators  of  private  sector  reliance  on   immigration  during  this  period,  the  businesses  have  moved  well  beyond  this  in  terms  of   programs  focused  on  developing  the  workplace  performances  of  diverse  employees.  D&I   often  has  a  strong  focus  on  non-immigrant  groups  such  as  women  and  Aboriginals,  but   more  important  than  who  businesses  are  focused  on  is  the  awareness  of  a  need  for  change   in  management  culture  and  workplace  competencies  across  the  board.  On  the  talent   management  side  is  a  new  awareness  of  the  value  of  certain  workforce  segments  and   therefor  the  strategic  importance  of  employee  retention,  appreciation,  and  development.   The  position  of  large  employers  in  Canada,  in  terms  of  conventional  wisdom,  treats   diversity  as  an  asset  with  a  real  positive  impact  on  the  bottom  line.  Critically,  some   companies  are  moving  toward  developing  metrics  for  evaluating  and  assessing  the  impact   of  immigrant  employees  and  on  the  workplace  environment,  or  `culture',  that  is  best  able  to   ensure  optimal  return.      

Assessment  2  ­  Express  Entry  and  the  future  ­  a  talent  management  model         The  previous  section  has  illustrated  how  over  recent  years,  neo-liberal  policy  has   tilted  the  economic  immigrant  selection  process  towards  the  demands  of  employers.   Although  this  has  largely  not  met  goals,  positive  institutional  developments  have  been   made  to  improve  the  capacity  of  employers  to  invest  and  direct  policy  towards  skills   development  for  newcomer  employees  and  job-seekers.  While  immigrant  talent  is  clearly   not  an  investment  either  the  private  or  public  sector  is  comfortable  making  alone,  it  has  at   least  become  clear  through  the  literature  that  it  is  an  investment  opportunity.  The  non- profit  sector  would  likely  be  only  too  happy  to  make  this  investment,  but  investments  

  

49  

require  money.  Exacerbating  this  standoff  is  the  misconception  that  improved  immigrant   labour  market  outcomes  can  be  achieved  with  a  more  employer-driven  selection  policy,   allowing  employers  to  directly  select  immigrants  from  a  pre-screened  Express  Entry  pool  of   job-ready  migrants.  The  response  from  employers  has  been  enthusiastic,  though  certain   concerns  about  speed  of  access  to  workers  remain.  As  innovative  as  this  new  system  may   be  in  a  perfect  scenario,  it  is  still  built  upon  the  assumption  that  immigrants  will  enter  the   pool  job-ready  and  totally  self-reliant,  eliminating  the  need  for  reskilling  or  any  type  of  time   consuming  skills  development  programs.  The  Express  Entry  mechanism  is  a  recruitment   strategy,  to  facilitate  direct  access  to  talent,  but  talent  management  does  not  end  with   recruitment.  The  top  concern  for  employers  is  immediate  job-ready  immigrants,  and  with   that  in  mind,  a  national  standard  for  inter-cultural  competency  as  deliverable  through   targeted,  skills  development  products  (programs,  webinars,  modules,  and  strategy   consulting)  is  a  necessary  institutional  development  going  forward.      Deloitte  recently  produced  a  paper  on  the  Open  Talent  Economy  (2014),  a  strategy  

model  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  immigration,  but  nonetheless  illustrates  some  realities   behind  the  Express  Entry  model,  and  demonstrates  what  it  leaves  out.  The  paper  nicely   articulates  a  view  of  employee/employer  relations  from  the  perspective  of  private  sector   organizations,  in  which  talent  in  the  knowledge  economy  can  be  accessed  fluidly  in  a   deregulated  environment.      Although  it  appears  to  suggest  the  dissolution  of  labour  laws,  this  view  does  have  the  

right  attitude  toward  talent.  Talent  is  not  a  cost,  it  is  an  investment.  Returns  on  an   investment  are  only  as  good  as  the  resources  put  toward  developing  it.  If  we  apply  this  

  

50  

concept  to  immigrant  talent,  the  talent  that  Canadian  businesses  will  have  access  to  thanks   to  the  Express  Entry  model,  we  see  that  some  pieces  are  missing.      To  ensure  that  talent  investments  result  in  added  value,  a  talent  strategy  is  required.  

The  Open  Talent  concept  offers  guidance  in  this  respect.   "There  are  two  key  dimensions  to  critical  workforce  segments.  First,  they  drive  a   disproportionate  value  in  the  organization.  Second,  they  are  difficult  to  find  and  retain.   These  are  the  workforces  where  talent  investments  should  be  made  to  drive  business   results.  Forming  a  strategy  to  guide  those  investments  will  also  incorporate  employer   brand,  talent  program  enablers,  and  the  way  talent  considerations  align  with  the  business   infrastructure."  (Deloitte;  2014,  p.  5-6)      Here  we  see  the  Express  Entry  model  effectively  characterized.  Immigrants  are  

required  to  populate  critical  workforce  segments,  or  the  employer  would  have  gone  the  less   demanding  route  of  hiring  a  Canadian.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  the  talent  will  arrive   fully  able  to  perform  the  tasks  that  the  employer  is  expecting.  In  other  words,  simply   bringing  a  human  being  to  Canada  and  expecting  a  perfect  employee  having  made  no   attempt  to  ensure  that  they  are  culturally,  emotionally,  or  physically  prepared  to  excel  is   not  a  strategy.  The  next  phase  of  a  talent  strategy  is  important  for  addressing  this,   "Next,  we  need  to  assess  which  talent  solutions  are  required  to  help  these  critical   workforces  be  effective.  We  must  also  assess  how  well  the  organization  delivers  on  these   solutions.  These  talent  solutions  will  be  the  investments  the  company  makes  in  the  critical   workforces"  (Deloitte,  2014,  p.  6).        In  the  cited  example,  as  stated  earlier,  immigrant  talent  is  not  specifically  

considered.  The  literature  related  to  services  that  optimize  immigrant  talent  is  vast,   including  but  not  limited  to  language  training,  family  services,  housing  and  other  settlement   services,  soft-skills  training,  assistance  with  networking,  and  funding  for  skills  development   programs  and  other  training.  As  immigrants  require  a  wider  range  of  services  than      51  

domestic  talent  to  reach  optimum  performance,  the  cost  to  the  organization  will  be  greater.   This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  employers  can  simply  engage  the  Express  Entry  system   and  criticize  it  when  the  talent  fails  to  perform.  Express  Entry  addresses  the  question  of   recruitment  for  critical  workforce  segments,  not  for  management  or  maintenance  of  the   recruited  talent.  In  the  coming  years,  it  will  be  important  to  see  which  sectors  step  up  to   fund  this  programming.  A  final  concern  remains  unaddressed,  and  this  is  regarding   measurements  and  standards.  Going  back  to  the  talent  strategy,   "Finally,  every  organization  needs  the  infrastructure  to  track  these  resources  and  measure   how  well  they--and  the  investments--are  performing.  The  observed  outcomes  drive   constant  reassessment  and  adjustment  of  the  talent  strategy.  That  takes  analytics,  which   requires  both  data  and  the  technology  to  collect  and  use  it"  (Deloitte,  2014,  p.6).      One  option  for  this  element  is  to  wait  for  each  employer  to  develop  its  own  metrics  

for  successful  investment,  leaving  the  results  unreliable  for  comparative  studies.  However,   there  is  a  potential  role  for  government  in  this  area,  either  provincial  or  federal  or  some   type  of  collaboration.  A  national  standard  for  assessing  the  value  added  by  immigrant   talent,  and  for  the  effectiveness  of  programs  that  develop  immigrant  workforce  skills  and   improve  intercultural  competencies  in  the  workplace,  would  be  a  powerful  argument  for   expanding  economic  immigration.  Additionally,  companies  that  demonstrate  improvement   or  solid  practice  on  the  basis  of  a  government­set  standard  could  be  rewarded  with  tax   breaks  or  subsidies,  and  thereby  accrue  funds  to  continue  improvements  and  scale-up  their   models.        This  is  the  area  that  could  offer  a  first  step  in  standardizing  talent  management  as  a  

profitable  model  for  immigrant  employers.  Developing  reliable  metrics  and  reporting  is  not   an  unusual  activity  for  the  private  sector,  and  in  fact,  demonstrating  the  added  value  of      52  

immigrant  talent  to  shareholders  is  an  intuitive  practice.  This  will  also  help  to  regulate  the   effectiveness  of  economic  immigration  in  Canada  with  dollar  values  as  evidence,  a  metric   that  everyone  can  agree  on.  Then,  the  model  of  talent  management  through  skills   development  and  investment  in  basic  programs  and  infrastructure  to  support  immigrant   employees  can  become  an  aspect  of  the  employer's  brand,  and  a  demonstration  of  good   practice  on  balance  sheets.      Just  as  Deloitte  painted  a  happy  picture  of  an  open  talent  economy  with  the  talent  

strategy  model,  what  is  demonstrated  above  is  excessively  optimistic.  There  is  no  reason  to   believe  either  government  or  businesses  will  absorb  the  cost  of  managing  the  influx  of   skilled  immigrant  professionals  as  they  arrive  through  the  Express  Entry  model.  The  federal   government  has  not  given  much  description  of  operational  specifics  beyond  the  promise   that  immigrant  talent  will  be  quickly  and  plentifully  accessible  (Government  of  Canada,   2014).  In  spite  of  the  many  institutional  models  mentioned  here  for  cross-sector   partnerships,  there  has  been  no  discussion  of  their  involvement  in  implementing  the  new   system,  which  is  nothing  if  not  a  model  demanding  cross-sector  collaboration.  As  for  the   private  sector,  concerns  about  speed,  deregulation,  and  incentives  for  `trusted'  businesses   are  their  main  interests  (Holmes  et  al.,  2014).  All  stakeholders  are  apparently  confident  that   the  new  system  will  only  allow  permanent  residency  to  immigrants  who  are  completely   self-reliant,  job-ready,  and  will  be  fully  served  by  the  current  settlement  system  that  has   failed  to  integrate  immigrants  into  the  economy  for  the  past  decade.  What  type  of  services   will  be  provided  for  the  families  of  principle  applicants,  to  ensure  they  can  access  the  labour   market?  What  funding  will  be  available  to  community  organizations  for  increased  `whole-

  

53  

of-society'  settlement  programs  and  retention  focused  programs  in  regions  that  intensify   migration  influx  due  to  heavy  use  of  the  system?        At  the  very  least,  some  type  of  metric  analytics  are  going  to  be  needed  to  assess  

whether  the  system  is  providing  talent  that  adds  value  to  businesses.  It  would  be  best  if   those  metrics  represented  national  or  provincial  standards,  so  that  they  could  be  used  as   the  basis  of  incentives  for  those  that  use  the  system  effectively  and  responsibly.  

Assessment  3  -  Action  Plan      The  current  immigration  policy  trends  in  Canada  ­meaning  the  shift  toward  

employer-based  selection,  regionalization  of  services  and  selection  to  connect  with  labour   markets,  the  Canadian  Experience  Class,  and  the  tumults  of  the  TFWP  ­  reflect  an  era  of   transition  in  which  commonly  held  beliefs  are  in  conflict  with  circumstance.  The   conventional  wisdom,  that  underemployment  of  immigrants  can  be  addressed  by  reforming   the  process  of  selection,  is  a  rejection  of  certain  principles  that  have  begun  to  register  in  the   practices  and  policies  of  employers,  though  not  federal  policy.  Private  sector  institutions,   without  the  heavy  burden  of  bureaucratic  hierarchy  to  prohibit  the  rapid  adoption  of  new   practice,  are  more  capable  of  reforming  practice  to  suit  new  circumstances  than  are  those  of   the  public  sector.  While  the  federal  government  continues  the  questionable  project  of   selecting  successful  new  Canadians  by  occupation,  immigrant  employers  are  learning  what   kinds  of  programs  can  be  effective  in  optimizing  talent  in  the  workforce  by  providing  the   right  workplace  and  community  conditions.      The  available  tools  in  ICC  are  either  commercial  (IDI,  CCAI)  or  non-commercial,  

direct  or  indirect  or  mixed,  assessed  with  self-reporting  or  evaluative  (performance,  

  

54  

portfolio,  surveys,  interviews,  role  plays)  tools,  and  exist  as  established  instruments   (assessment  scales,  inventories,  indexes).  A  study  of  these  tools  established  that  they  can   help  set  and  reach  targets  for  tracking  development  of  students  in  higher  learning  or   foreign  language  programs  (Sinicrope  et  al,  p.50)  and  physician  trainees  (p.  19).  In  Canada,   particularly  in  those  examples  of  employers  that  have  identified  the  need  for  intercultural   competency  training,  studies  on  the  available  methods  and  combinations  thereof  that  offer   tools  for  setting  and  reaching  targets  could  lead  the  way  to  establishing  standards.      Some  progress  has  been  made  in  studying  the  impact  of  ICC  in  the  private  sector,  

either  through  performance  reports  from  within  companies  or  in  studies  by  private   research  consultants  across  sectors.  Bersin  reports  on  companies  surveyed  regarding   motivations  to  invest  in  diversity  and  inclusion,  showing  that  Fortune  500  companies  are   more  likely  than  others  to  list  `increase  in  innovation/agility',  enhance  employee   engagement,  or  enhance  ability  to  acquire  new  talent.  Conversely,  Fortune  500  companies   are  much  less  likely  than  others  to  be  motivated  by  a  belief  that  investment  in  diversity  is   the  `right  thing  to  do'  (Bersin  and  Associates,  2010).  The  report  also  shows  that  mature   talent  management  strategies  are  now  common  in  sectors  such  as  banking  and  technology,   while  other  sectors  are  still  in  early  stages  (2010).        Bersin  studies  show  concerns  that  D&I  programs  lack  focus,  in  that  they  often  do  not  

map  to  strategic  talent  outcomes  or  business  outcomes.  D&I  accounts  for  dismally  low   percentage  of  funding  directed  at  employee  learning,  and  only  10%  of  those  organizations   surveyed  adjusted  strategy  and  solutions  based  on  metrics  or  feedback  (2013,  p.  24).  Bersin   highlights  that  proper  follow-through  with  D&I  requires  goals,  tracking,  and  accountability   (p.  33).  The  initiatives  are  not  meaningful  unless  they  are  integrated  with  a  detailed  talent      55  

management  strategy  that  has  full  support  from  leadership  and  across  the  organization     (Bersin  and  Associates,  2013).      There  is  little  need  for  further  theoretical  development  of  ICC  and  D&I,  particularly  

as  the  breadth  of  programs  and  products  is  already  very  rich.  Employers  are  self-reporting   to  a  certain  extent,  and  consultants  like  Bersin  offer  more  objective  reporting  as  outsourced   researchers,  but  communications  of  the  results  of  these  programs  with  hard  quantifiable   returns  on  investment  documented  are  not  in  abundance.        This  is  what  the  private  sector  can  bring  to  the  discussion,  or  in  other  words,  the  role  

that  remains  elusive  for  employers  (Drolin,  2014;  Holmes,  2014)  in  the  integrated  cross- sector  schema  of  Canada's  future  FSWP.  Talent  management  strategies  are  often  configured   as  a  way  for  HR  concerns  to  become  integral  to  the  overall  business  strategy  of  an   organization,  and  communicating  this  requires  "a  coherent,  meaningful  operating  language   that  ensures  the  consistent  and  relevant  measurement  of  talent  requirements"  (SHL  Group   Limited,  2008,  p.  9).  Properly  developed,  this  tool  ensures  that  performance  and   competency  assessments  from  senior  levels  are  guided  by  appropriate  grounding  in  a  talent   strategy  with  a  focus  on  goals  and  business  needs.  SHL  claims  that  a  sophisticated   organizational  strategy  involves  the  process  of  define,  measure,  and  realize  (2008,  p.  14).   When  onboarding  international  talent,  an  organization  requires  the  communication   capabilities  to  define  intercultural  competency  as  it  meets  organizational  demand,  measure   and  track  the  development  of  intercultural  competency  in  the  workplace  both  as  it  relates   to  newcomer  employees  and  to  the  culture  of  the  existing  workplace,  and  finally  the   infrastructure,  technology,  and  expertise  to  deploy  actionables  against  measurable  targets.  

  

56  

  

To  go  beyond  talk,  HR  practice  in  talent  management  teaches  that  there  is  a  core  

need  for  infrastructure  that  centers  around  metrics,  targets,  and  performance.  Earlier  in   this  study,  self-reported  advances  in  D&I  practice  have  shown  a  change  in  organizational   attitudes  toward  the  value  of  well-managed  workforce  diversity.  What  these  reports  do  not   reveal  to  the  public  is  their  measurement  tools,  their  targets,  and  their  quantifiable  success.   An  external  analysis,  as  provided  for  example  by  Hireimmigrants.ca,  is  the  only  opportunity   for  a  real  view  of  progress  toward  infrastructure  and  institutional  development.   Hireimmigrants.ca  is  a  primary  resource  regarding  how  talent  management  is  already  in   practice  as  an  investment  in  international  talent  (Appx.  1).  Each  example  has  very  little  to   do  with  recruitment,  everything  to  do  with  business  strategy,  and  is  connected  on  a   continuum  from  targets  to  actions  to  results.  One  undisclosed  piece  is  critical;  the  metrics   and  methods  of  evaluating  success  and  reporting  of  them  in  connection  to  the  programs   themselves.        Understandably,  this  information  is  not  in  the  interest  of  the  organizations  to  share,  

but  it  is  possible  to  infer  through  the  nature  of  targets  and  strategies  whether  hard   reporting  and  evaluation  is  at  least  possible.  Of  the  fifteen  employer  examples,  ten  use   strategies  that  depend  on  quantifiable  deliverables  (professional  development  programs,   surveys,  case-specific  initiatives,  performance  reviews,  workplace  training  workshops  and   modules,  language  and  ICC  training).  In  other  words,  there  is  no  reason  these  initiatives   cannot  be  tracked  and  reported,  though  the  data  is  not  publically  available.  In  addition,  ten   examples  used  these  measures  to  address  quantifiable  targets  (addressing  specific   shortages  in  skilled  positions,  fostering  leadership  pipelines,  compliance  with  diversity   hiring  mandate,  performance,  and  talent  retention).  The  less  quantifiable  strategies  and      57  

targets  demonstrate  a  more  advanced  understanding  of  value  added  by  D&I  programming,   such  as  employee  satisfaction  and  engagement  with  community,  tapping  leadership   potential,  and  optimizing  key  talent  performance.  To  qualify  these  impacts,  long-term   studies  would  be  necessary  to  examine  integrated  data  sets  in  the  style  of  McMahon  (2010)   which  comprehensively  tracks  returns  on  assets,  returns  on  sales,  and  other  profit  metrics   integrated  into  a  mixed-method  assessment  of  diversity  onboarding  strategies.      

Recommendations  and  Conclusions      The  following  recommendations  pertain  to  all  stakeholders  in  the  outcomes  of  

economic  immigration  to  Canada.   1. In  addition  to  the  Express  Entry  model,  Canada  needs  a  Talent  Management  model   for  immigration  and  settlement.   2. Retention  and  talent  optimization  through  skills  development  are  the  hallmarks  of   Talent  Management  Immigration,  and  so  advancements  in  regional  policies  should   be  expanded  where  they  encourage  retention  and  improve  social  cohesion,   economic  integration,  and  the  achievement  of  personal  goals  for  immigrants  and   their  families.   3. Towards  defining  targets;  build  on  the  HR  strategies  and  regional  goals  of  retention,   talent  optimization,  and  skills  development.  Without  hard  and  clearly  stated  targets   for  specific  regions,  organizations,  and  federal  initiatives  any  progress  will  be   rhetorical  only.   4. Towards  measuring  programs;  private  sector  actions  such  as  those  illustrated  in   Hirimmigrants.ca  and  self-reported  in  annual  reports  require  quantitative  analysis      58  

and  transparency,  in  order  to  assign  dollar  value  to  D&I  programs  and  tools  across   regions  and  sectors.   5. Towards  realizing  targets;  after  establishing  standard  metrics  in  the  analysis  of   existing  practices,  upward  scaling  and  new  goals  can  be  established.  The  role  of   government,  much  reduced  in  terms  of  service  delivery,  can  still  be  influential  in   incentivizing  good  practice  through  funding  and  other  rewards,  and  communicating   the  message  of  diversity  as  good  business  across  Canadian  labour  markets.      This  study  claims  that  Canadian  immigration  is  talent-focused  and  needs  to  

institutionalize  talent  management  through  D&I  and  ICC  as  well  as  talent  recruitment   through  Express  Entry  EOIs.  Through  a  review  of  existing  practices,  it  is  clear  that  regional   policy  makers  have  a  range  of  opportunities  to  engage  with  in  the  private  sector,  whether   through  products  that  develop  and  track  ICC  (IDI,  Multicultural  Business  Solutions,  CCAI)  in   specific  workplaces  or  through  consulting  firms  that  have  solution0focused  talent   management  strategies  and  methods  of  evaluation  for  progress  in  these  regards  (Bersin,   SHL).  The  way  seems  clear  to  developing  a  new  Canadian  standard  for  workplace  D&I  and   ICC,  especially  when  shared  interests  of  regional  governments  and  businesses  through   innovative  metrics,  reporting,  and  discourse.  The  federal  recruitment  infrastructure  must   welcome  and  support  this  complementary  strategy.  It  is  not  only  an  argument  for  equitable   reform,  but  understood  by  businesses  strategists  and  HR  forecasters  as  sound  practice  that   translates  to  healthy  balance  sheets.  The  idea  of  immigration  and  settlement  as  a  burden  on   economic  stakeholders  is  one  that  fails  to  optimize  talent  and  reach  targets,  it  is  time  that   the  immigration  system  be  presented  across  sectors  as  an  investment.           59  

   Company   RBC   Teshmont   ScotiaBank  

Appendix  1   Strategy   MOSAIC   ICC  and  community   development   Invest  in  skills   development,   networking,   leadership.   Support  foreign   professionals  in   upgrading   experience  and   credentials   On-the-job  skills   development   Integrate  diversity   strategy  with   leadership  pipeline   strategy  using   advisory  boards.   Identify  transferable   skills  and  encourage   engagement  with   staff  and  community.   Workplace   mentoring,  cultural   competence   guidebook   In-house  mentoring   Target   ICC  Development   Talent  Retention,   Engagement   Improve   performance,  foster   talent  pipelines   Develop  foreign   talent  with  Canadian   competency  gaps  to   address  skills   shortages.   Groom   internationally   trained  employee  for   promotion.   Tapping  leadership   potential  in   culturally  diverse   staff.   Trackable   Yes,  through  outside   program   Yes,  through   employee  surveys   and  HR   Unclear,  unreported  

Syncrude  

Yes,  on  a  case-by- case  basis.  Only   specific  example   reported.   Yes,  on  a  case-by- case  basis.  Only   specific  example   reported.   Yes,  not  publically   reported.  

Walmart  

Pitney-Bowes  

KPMG  

Optimization  of   Unclear.   International  Talent,   address  shortages.   ICC  development   Unclear.  

St.  Michael's   Hospital   Gennum  

Developing  ICC  for   international  talent,   onboarding   Improve   performance  facing   international   patients  

Unclear.  

Providence  Health   Care  

ICC  training.  

Yes,  through  training   schema  and  scales.  

  

60  

Iris  

Intensive  training   Minimize  cultural   including  ICC  as  part   barriers  to  hard   of  onboarding.   competencies  of   international  talent     City  of  Saskatoon   Build  diversity  into   Compliance  with   mandate  as   self-regulated   employer   diversity   expectations   Mount  Sinai  Hospital   Survey  used  to   Meet  diversity   determine   objectives   onboarding  success.   Ernst  &  Young   Internal  diversity   training  and   leadership   infrastructure,   diversity  accounted   for  in  performance   reviews   On-the-job  training   fro  skilled   immigrant   employees,   including  culture   and  communication   Career  development   and  retention  of   internationally   trained.  

Unclear,  meeting   training  objectives   can  certainly  be   tracked.   Yes.  

Yes.  

Yes,  via  performance   reviews  and   retention  quantities.   Unreported.  

Cambria  Credit   Union  

Address  skills   shortages  

Yes,  via  HR,   retention,  and   training  evaluations.  

     

  

The  above  chart  has  been  compiled  from  studies  collected  on  Hireimmigrants.ca,  and  coded   to  show  their  value  for  expanded  practice  across  Canada  in  terms  of  clarity  of  strategy,   targets,  and  the  ability  to  evaluate  progress  quantifiably.                 

  

61  

Bibliography      AMD  Employees  (2014),  Advanced  Micro  Devices  (AMD),  Retrieved  from   http://www.amd.com/en-us/who-we-are/corporate-responsibility/employees      Alboim,  N.  (2009).  Adjusting  the  balance:  Fixing  Canada's  immigration  policies,  The  Maytree   Foundation,  Toronto,  CAN      Alboim,  N.  and  Cohl,  K.  (2012),  Shaping  the  future:  Canada's  rapidly  changing  immigration  policy,   The  Maytree  Foundation,  Retrieved  from  http://maytree.com/spotlight/shaping-the- future-canadas-rapidly-changing-immigration-policies.html        Bauder,  H.  (2006),  Labor  movement:  How  migration  regulates  labor  markets.  Oxford  University   Press,  Cary,  USA      Bernier,  L.  (2014a).  Connecting  Talent  with  Opportunities.  Canadian  HR  Reporter,  27(10),  6.        Bernier,  L.  (2014b),  Diversity  Not  Just  About  Compliance,  Canadian  HR  Reporter,  27  (5),  2.      Bersin  and  Associates  (2013),  The  diversity  and  inclusion  benchmarking  report:  The  current   landscape:  Garr,  S.      Bersin  and  Associates  (2010),  Talent  management:  Benchmarks,  trends,  and  best  practices:   O'Leonard,  K.      Burstein,  M.  (2007).  Promoting  the  presence  of  visible  minority  groups  across  Canada.  In  Bill  Reimer   (Ed.)  Our  Diverse  Cities  3,  Metropolis:  Migration,  Economic  Growth  and  Social  Cohesion.   (pp.  42-46).  Retrieved  from   http://canada.metropolis.net/pdfs/ODC_Summer07_3_en.pdf#page=44      SHL  Group  Limited  (2008),  Guidelines  for  best  practice  in  integrated  talent  management,  Surrey,   UK:  Bywater,  J.,  Guest,  F.,  and  Guarini,  J.,  Retrieved  from   http://www.shl.com/assets/resources/best-practice-integrated-talent-management.pdf      Canadian  Labour  and  Business  Centre  (2004).  Towards  Understanding  Business,  Labour  and  Sector   Council  Needs  and  Challenges  Related  to  Enhanced  Language  Training.  Canadian  Labour  and   Business  Centre,  Ottawa,  CAN      Canadian  Council  of  Chief  Executives  (June  16,  2009),  Preparing  for  the  labour  needs  of  tomorrow,   Retrieved  from  http://www.ceocouncil.ca/publication/preparing-now-for-the-labour- needs-of-tomorrow      Canadian  Council  of  Chief  Executives  (April  15,  1999),  Business  leaders  launch  major  initiative  to   overcome  barriers  to  innovation  and  growth,  Retrieved  from   http://www.ceocouncil.ca/news-item/business-leaders-launch-major-initiativeto-    62  

overcome-barriers-to-innovation-and-growth-35      Carter,  T.,  Pandey,  M.,  &  Townsend,  J.  (2010).  The  Manitoba  provincial  nominee  program:   Attraction,  integration  and  retention  of  immigrants,  Institute  for  Research  in  Public  Policy,   no.  10,  Montreal,  CAN      Cisco  (2012),  Cisco  Inclusion  and  Diversity,  Retrieved  from   http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac49/ac55/docs/Cisco_IDFlyer.pdf      Citizenship  and  Immigration  Canada  (2013),  "Evaluation  of  the  Foreign  Credentials  Referral  Office   (FCRO)",  Retrieved  from  http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/evaluation/fcro.asp      Colleges  Ontario  (2009).  Enhancing  the  Role  of  Colleges  in  Immigrant  Integration  to  Employment:  A   Report  on  Consultations  with  Employers  and  Associations.  Colleges  Ontario,  Toronto,  CAN      Colleges  Ontario  (2007).  Language  Skills  for  the  Workplace:  Developing  a  Framework  for  College   Delivery  of  Occupation-specific  Language  Training  in  Ontario.  Colleges  Ontario,  Toronto,  CAN      Courchene,  T.  (2001).  A  state  of  minds:  Toward  a  human  capital  future  for  Canadians.  Institute  for   Research  in  Public  Policy,  Montréal,  CAN      Cryne,  S.  (2014),  A  Look  at  the  Growing  Skills  Gap  and  Importance  of  Employee  Mobility,    Canadian   HR  Reporter,  27  (5),  15.      Deloitte  (2014),  CanadaWorks  2025:  The  lost  decade,  unsustainable  prosperity,  or  the  northern   tiger?,  Retrieved  from  http://www.hrpa.ca/Pages/Canada-Works-2025.aspx      Depner,  W.  (2011).  An  assessment  of  the  role  community  services  play  in  the  attraction  and  retention   of  immigrants  in  south  Okanagan.  Metropolis  British  Columbia,  Vancouver,  CAN        Dobson,  S.  (2014a).  Get  Ready  for  'Talent  Decade'.  Canadian  HR  Reporter,  27(12),  1-1,10.    

Dobson,  S.  (2014b)  TD  recognized  for  focus  on  diversity,    Canadian  HR  Reporter,  27  (8),  8.        Drovidiic,  B.  (October  7,  2008),  Talent  Management:  The  People  Value  Chain,  Retrieved  from   http://www.humanresourcesiq.com/talent-management/articles/talent-management-the- people-value-chain/        Flynn,  E.  and  Bauder,  H.  (2013).  The  private  sector,  institutions  of  higher  education,  and  immigrant   settlement  in  canada.  Ryerson  Centre  for  Immigration  and  Settlement,  Toronto,  CAN        Galbraith,  J.  (1966),  The  New  Industrial  State:  Episodes  1-6,  The  Reith  Lectures,  Retrieved  from      63  

http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00hbc47      Gorsline,  K.  (2014),  CEO  Weaves  Consistent  Web  Across  Company,  Canadian  HR  Reporter,  27  (4),   13      Girard,  E.  and  Bauder,  H.  (2005).  Barriers  blocking  the  integration  of  foreign-trained  immigrant   professionals:  implications  for  smaller  communities  in  ontario.  Immigrant  Labour  Project,   University  of  Guelph,  Guelph,  ON,  CAN      Government  of  Canada  (2013),  The  New  Canadian  Job  Grant,  Economic  Plan  2013,  Retrieved  from   http://www.budget.gc.ca/2013/doc/themes/skills-eng.pdf      Government  of  Canada  (2014),  Express  Entry,  Retrieved  from   http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/publications/employers/express-entry- presentation.asp      Gorsline,  K.  (2014),  `Hire  Tough,  Manage  Easy'  Good  Recipe,  Canadian  HR  Reporter,  27  (4),  13.      Guilherme,  M.,  Keating,  C.,  and  Hoppe,  D.  (2010),  Intercultural  Responsibility:  Power  and  Ethics  in   Intercultural  Dialogue  and  Interaction.  In  Guilherme  M.,  Glaser  E.  and  Mendez-Garcia  M.  D.   C.  (Eds.),  Languages  for  intercultural  communication  and  education:  Intercultural  dynamics   of  multicultural  working  :  Myths  of  progress  in  a  neocolonial  world  (pp.  77-94).  Bristol,  GBR:   Multilingual  Matters.      Hireimmigrants.ca  (June  17,  2014).  New  Canadians  Help  Each  Other  and  all  Staff  Succeed  at  RBC,   Retrieved  from        http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/new-canadians-help-each-other-and-all- staff-succeed-at-rbc/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (June  9,  2014).  Using  a  Diversity  Lens  Helps  Scotiabank  Succeed.  Retrieved   from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/using-various-diversity-and-inclusion- practices-helps-scotiabank-succeed/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (April  16,  2014).  Investing  in  Staff  Helps  Teshmont  Consulting  Retain  their   Employees,  Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/investing-in-staff-helps-teshmont- consulting-engage-and-retain-their-employees/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (may  3,  2013).  Reflecting  the  City:  Employment  Equity  at  Work  ­  City  of   Saskatoon.  Retrieved  from        http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/reflecting-the-city-employment-equity-at- work-city-of-saskatoon/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (October  30,  2012).  Syncrude  Strengthens  its  Workforce  by  Recognizing   Foreign  Skills  and  Experience.  Retrieved  from        64  

  

   Hireimmigrants.ca  (September  30,  2011),  Walmart  provides  a  foot  in  the  door,  Retrieved  from   http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/walmart/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (August  11,  2010).  Leadership  Program  Helps  Diverse  Employees  Reach  Top   Roles  at  Pitney  Bowes.  Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/top-roles-pitney-bowes/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (March  11,  2010).  KPMG  Takes  a  Holistic  Approach  to  Integrating  Immigrants.   Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/kpmg-integrating/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (December  29,  2009).  Mentoring  Leads  to  More  Engaged  and  Inclusive   Workforce  at  St.  Mike's.  Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/mentoring-st-michael-hospital/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (November  4,  2009).  Cross-Cultural  Training  Helps  Skilled  Immigrants   Integrate  at  Deloitte.  Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/cultural-training-deloitte/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (October  31,  2009),  Buddy  Program  and  Communication  Training  Boost  Skilled   Immigrant  Integration  at  Gennum.  Retrieved  from          http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/buddy-communication-integration/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (October  4,  2009).  Employee  Survey  Helps  Mount  Sinai  Target  Diversity   Initiatives.  Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/mount-sinai-survey/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (May  8,  2009).  Cross-Cultural  Guide  Helps  Nurses  Treat  Diverse  Patients.   Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/cross-cultural-guide-phc/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (June  1,  2008).  Iris  Power  Engineering  Uncovers  the  Talents  of  Skilled   Immigrant  Employees.  Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/iris-uncovers-talents/      Hireimmigrants.ca  (December  1,  2006).  Inclusiveness  Leaders  and  Champions  Support  Diversity   Efforts  throughout  Ernst  &  Young.  Retrieved  from        http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/inclusiveness-leaders-champions/      Hirimmigrants.ca  (April  27,  2006).  Culture  training  and  Job  Placements  Helps  Cambrian  Credit   Union  Address  Labour  Shortage.  Retrieved  from      http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/cambria-labour-shortage/         65  

http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/success-stories/syncrude-strengthens-its-workforce-by- recognizing-foreign-skills-and-experience/  

Human  Resources  and  Skills  Development  Canada  (2011),  "Welcome  to  the  National  Occupations   Classification  2011,  Retrieved  from   http://www5.hrsdc.gc.ca/NOC/English/NOC/2011/Welcome.aspx      Husky  Energy  (2014),  Diversity,  Retrieved  from   http://www.huskyenergy.com/socialresponsibility/diversity.asp        Javdani,  M.,  Jacks,  D.,  and  Pendakur,  K.  (2012).  Immigrants  and  the  Canadian  economy.  Metropolis   British  Colombia,  Vancouver,  CAN      KPMG  (2008),  KPMG's  Social  Responsibility  Report  2008  ,  Retrieved  from   https://www.kpmg.com/Ca/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/Social _Responsibilitiy.pdf      King,  T.  (2014).  The  Secret  to  Making  Training  Stick,  Canadian  HR  Reporter;  27  (8),  18.     Kreissl, B (2014), Dealing with Foreign-Trained Professionals, Canadian  HR  Reporter,  27  (8),  23. Kupiszewski,  M.  (Ed.).  (2013).  International  migration  and  the  future  of  populations  and  labour  in   Europe,  Springer,  London,  UK      Laroche,  L.  (2003),  Managing  cultural  diversity  in  technical  professions,  Butterworth-Heinemann  ­   Managing  Cultural  Diversity  Series,  Burlington,  USA      Lewis,  N.  M.  (2010).  A  decade  later:  Assessing  successes  and  challenges  in  Manitoba's  provincial   immigrant  nominee  program.  Canadian  Public  Policy,  36(2),  241-264.      Liakopoulos,  A.,  Barry,  L.,  Shwartz,  J.  (2014),  The  Open  Talent  Economy:  People  and  Work  in  a   Borderless  Workplace,  Deloitte,  Retrieved  from   http://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/human-capital/articles/open-talent- economy1.html      Lodermeier,  V.  (2012).  A  chance  for  a  better  life:  development  of  the  immigrant  workforce  in  smaller   communities  and  rural  Alberta.  Bow  Valley  College,  Calgary,  CAN      Lopez,  E.  (2007).  The  Canadian  point  system  and  its  discontents:  Integration  of  immigrants  into  the   labour  market  into  the  21st  century.  ProQuest  Dissertations  and  Theses,  Ryerson  University,   Toronto.  Retrieved  from   http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/304701634? accountid=13631.  (304701634)      MccArthy  Tetrault  (2014),  Diversity  Makes  us  Stronger,  Retrieved  from   http://www.mccarthy.ca/Diversity_Makes_Us_Stronger.aspx        McIsaac,  E.  (2003).  Nation  building  through  cities:  A  new  deal  for  immigrant  settlement  in  Canada.   Caledon  Institute  of  Social  Policy.  Ottawa,  CAN      66  

   McMahon,  A.  (2010)  "Does  Workplace  Diversity  Matter?  A  Survey  of  Empirical  Studies  on  Diversity   and  Firm  Performance,  2000-09."  Journal  of  Diversity  Management  5:2  (2010):  37-48.      Menz,  G.  (2009).  The  Neoliberalized  State  and  Migration  Control:  The  Rise  of  Private  Actors  in  the   Enforcement  and  Design  of  Migration  Policy,  Debatte:  Journal  of  Contemporary  Central  and   Eastern  Europe  (17/3)  (pp.  315-332).  Retrieved  from   http://www.tandfonline.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/doi/abs/10.1080/096515609034579 23#.Uzid-Fxtd-U        Office  of  the  Manitoba  Fairness  Commissioner  (n.d.),  Qualification  Recognition/  MB  Context,   Retrieved  August  2014  from  http://www.manitobafairnesscommissioner.ca/qualification- recognition/mb-context/      Ontario  Council  of  Agencies  Serving  Immigrants  (2009).  Canada-Ontario  immigration  agreement   (COIA):  Crafting  a  vision  for  the  sector.  OCASI  Discussion  Paper.  Retrieved  from   http://w.ocasi.org/downloads/OCASI_Discussion_Paper_COIA_Renewal_Jun-09.pdf      Pandey,  M.  and  Townshend,  J.  (2011),  Provincial  nominee  programs:  an  evaluation  of  the  earnings   and  retention  rates  of  nominees,  Prairie  Metropolis  Center,  Edmonton,  CAN        PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP  (2008).  Population  aging  and  public  infrastructure:  a  literature   review  of  impacts  in  developed  countries.  Infrastructure  Canada,  Ottawa,  CAN      Quintini,  G.  (2014),  Skills  at  Work:  How  Skills  and  their  Use  Matter  in  the  labour  Market,  OECD   Social,  Employment  and  Migration  Working  Papers,  No.  158,  OECD  Publishing.  doi:   10.1787/5jz44fdfjm7j-en      RBC    (2005),  Diversity  at  RBC  Highlights,  Retrieved  from  http://www.rbc.com/diversity/diversity- progress-report.html      RBC  (2006),  Diversity  Progress  Report  2006,  Retrieved  from   http://www.rbc.com/diversity/diversity-progress-report.html      RBC  (2007),  Diversity  Progress  Report,  Retrieved  from  http://www.rbc.com/diversity/diversity- progress-report.html      RBC  (2011),  Diversity  Works  Here,  Retrieved  from  http://www.rbc.com/diversity/diversity- progress-report.html      Rai,  V.  (2013).  Labour  market  information  for  employers  and  economic  immigrants  in  Canada:  A   country  study.  Centre  for  the  Study  of  Living  Standards,  Ottawa,  CAN        Reitz,  J.G.  (2005).  Tapping  immigrants'  skills:  New  directions  for  Canadian  immigration  policy  in   the  knowledge  economy  .  Retrieved  from:   http://www.hireimmigrants.ca/resources/research/files/Reitz_IRPP_TappingImmigrantSk      67  

ills%5B1%5D.pdf      Saczuk,  K.  (2013).  Development  and  Critique  of  the  Concept  of  Replacement  Migration.  In   Kupiszewski,  M.  (Ed.).    International  Migration  and  the  Future  of  Populations  and  Labour  in   Europe  (pp.  233-242),  Springer,  London,  UK      Schwartz,  B.  (2012),  Admitted  but  excluded,  removing  occupational  barriers  to  entry  for  immigrants,   Frontier  Center  for  Public  Policy,  Winnipeg,  CAN      Sakamoto,  I.,  Jayapal,  D.,  and  Bhuyan,  R.  (2013),  An  overview  of  discourses  of  skilled  immigrants  and   "Canadian  experience":  An  English-language  print  media  analysis,  CERIS  ­  The  Metropolis   Center,  Toronto,  CAN      Simon,  B.  (2013),  Skills  development  in  Canada:  So  much  noise,  so  little  action,  Canadian  Council  of   Chief  Executives,  Retrieved  from  ceocouncil.ca/skills      Sinicrope,  C.,  Norris,  J.,  Watanabe,  Y.  (2008),  Understanding  and  Assessing  Intercultural   Competence:  A  Summary  of  Theory,  Research  and  Practice,  Second  Language  Studies  26  (1),   1-58      SP  Consulting,  &  The  Whetstone  Group.  (2006).  Help  wanted:  Bridging  the  gap  between  immigrants   and  employers.  (Catalogue  no.  SP-673-06-06E).  Retrieved  from  Government  of  Canada   Publications  website:  http://publications.gc.ca/site/archivee- archived.html?url=http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2013/rhdcc- hrsdc/HS28-72-2007-eng.pdf      TD  Economics  (2013),  Jobs  in  Canada:  Where,  what  and  for  whom?  Toronto,  ON,  CAN:  Burleton,  D.,   Gulati,  S.,  and  McDonald,  C.      Thériault,  L.  and  Haan,  M.  (2012),  Non-profit  immigrant  settlement  agencies  in  New  Brunswick:   Answering  the  call  for  population  growth?  Atlantic  Metropolis  Centre,  Halifax,  NS,  CAN        Walker,  K.  (2006).  What  works:  Labour  market  integration  initiatives  for  skilled  immigrants  in   Canada.  Human  Resources  and  Social  Development  Canada,        Ottawa,  CAN                 

  

68  


