BRIDGING  THE  PARALLAX  GAP:  SETTLER-COLONIALISM  AND  THE  RELATIONSHIP   BETWEEN  INDIGENOUS  PEOPLES  AND  RACIALIZED  MIGRANTS  IN  CANADA      By         Jesse  Root  BSSC  The  University  of  Ottawa           A  Major  Research  Paper     Presented  to  Ryerson  University         In  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of         Master  of  Arts   In  the  Program  of   Immigration  and  Settlement  Studies                                                                        Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014        Jesse  Root  2014     

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  THESIS   _________________________________________________________________________________________________           I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  major  research  paper.  This  is  a  true   copy  of  the  MRP,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my   examiners.   I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  paper  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by   other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for   the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  electronically  available  to  the  public.                                            

  

ii  

BRIDGING  THE  PARALLAX  GAP:  SETTLER-COLONIALISM  AND  THE  RELATIONSHIP   BETWEEN  INDIGENOUS  PEOPLES  AND  RACIALIZED  MIGRANTS  IN  CANADA      Jesse  Root   Master  of  Arts,  2014   Immigration  and  Settlement  Studies   Ryerson  University   Abstract     I  intend  to  expand  the  idea  of  the  immigrant  as  settler,  and  establish  on  a   theoretical  basis  that  'settlerism'  is  about  an  ideology  of  neo-colonialism,  not  about   movement  to  a  place  that  is  not  your  own.  In  this  way,  there  can  be  migrants  who   are  allies  with  Indigenous  peoples,  who  reject  settler  and  neo-colonial  ideologies  at   the  same  time,  as  there  can  be  migrants  who  adopt  consciously,  or  unconsciously,   these  oppressive  ideologies.  After  establishing  this  theoretical  framework,  the   remainder  of  this  MRP  presents  case  studies  which  profile  some  of  the  important   work  being  done  by  organizations  to  build  bridges  between  Indigenous  and  migrant   communities  in  Canada  and  to  decolonize  relations  among  these  groups  which  make   up  much  of  Canada's  population.  A  brief  discussion  about  the  policies  and  other   state  tools  used  to  separate  these  two  communities  with  an  analysis  of  why  this  is   the  case  will  also  be  included.              Key  words:   Indigenous,  migrant,  racialized,  settler,  decolonize,  dialogue,  relationship,  settler- colonialism,  post-colonialism         iii  

   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT      I  would  like  to  thank  first  of  all  my  supervisor  Harald  Bauder  and  second  reader   Hayden  King  for  their  continued  support  on  this  project  by  asking  challenging   questions  and  offering  critical  feedback  on  the  work.  Furthermore  I  would  like  to   thank  my  family  for  their  continued  support  in  my  education  and  their   encouragement  to  follow  my  dreams.                                                 

  

iv  

   DEDICATION      I  would  like  to  dedicate  this  paper  to  all  of  those  people  and  organizations  

who  resist  colonialism  and  white  supremacy  each  day  of  their  lives  and  struggle   against  systems  that  oppress.  I  write  this  paper  in  the  hopes  that  non-racialized   peoples  like  myself  recognize  that  racism,  xenophobia  and  colonialism  are  our   problem  and  will  see  their  important  role  in  being  allies  in  this  work  to  dismantle   and  reconstruct  a  society  which  empowers  all  of  its  members.                                                 

  

v  

   Table  of  Contents   Author's  Declaration..........................................................................ii   Abstract.................................................................................................iii   Acknowledgements............................................................................iv   Dedication............................................................................................v   Table  of  Contents...............................................................................vi      PART  ONE:  INTRODUCTION............................................................................1     PART  TWO:  KEY  TERMS...................................................................................7   PART  THREE:  THEORETICAL  FRAMWORK....................................................10   PART  FOUR:  METHODOLOGY..........................................................................13   PART  FIVE:  CRITICAL  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LITERATURE...............................15   PART  SIX:  CASE  STUDIES.................................................................................40   PART  SEVEN:  DISCUSSION..............................................................................54   PART  EIGHT:  CONCLUSION  ............................................................................60   BIBLIOGRAPHY                 

  

vi  

PART  ONE:  INTRODUCTION   In  immigration  and  settlement  research  within  the  Canadian  context  there  is   much  analysis  about  the  ways  in  which  immigrants  integrate  into  the  Canadian   mosaic,  what  services  they  require  and  which  federal  state  or  non-governmental   body  is  responsible  for  their  delivery,  as  well  as  how  they  perform  in  the  Canadian   labour  market.  In  all  these  cases,  there  is  an  acknowledgement  that  migrants  to   Canada  have  relationships  to  the  state,  and  inevitably  the  citizens,  and  the  systems,   which  the  state  functions  to  support.  What  is  often  missing,  however,  is  an   acknowledgement  of  the  diverse  populations  that  make  up  the  state  and  how   different  communities  within  Canada  might  view  migration  and  migrants   themselves.  This  is  particularly  true  of  those  peoples  who  have  a  different   relationship  to  the  state,  and  Canadian-ness  namely  Indigenous  peoples.  It  is  this   relationship  between  racialized  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples  within  the   borders  of  what  is  commonly  referred  to  as  Canada  that  this  paper  will  highlight,   analyze  and  provide  some  helpful  concepts  to  better  understand.           Before  I  go  much  further  in  this  endeavor  it  is  important  to  disclose  some  

important  elements  of  the  bias  and  my  social  position  that  impact  my  research  and   my  worldview.  First,  I  am  a  settler,  which  as  will  become  clearer  throughout  this   paper,  means  that  my  ancestors  played  an  active  role  in  a  process  of  colonization   which  subjugated,  attempted  to  erase  the  experience  and  identity  of  Indigenous   peoples.  This  was  carried  out  both  formally,  through  legislation  and  residential   schools,  as  well  as  informally  through  perpetuation  of  racist,  xenophobic  and  claims  

  

1  

of  cultural  superiority  and  violence  against  Indigenous  peoples  who  had  inhabited   this  land  before  European  contact.  As  a  product  of  this  experience,  I  hold   responsibility  for  actively  pursuing  reconciliation,  decolonization  and  being  an  ally   to  Indigenous  peoples.  Secondly,  I  am  also  not  a  racialized  migrant  to  this  country   and  therefore  I  have  access  to  certain  privileges  based  on  my  skin  colour,  and  status   in  Canada  that  are  not  available  to  racialized  groups.  In  this  way,  this  project  has   been  very  difficult  as  I  am  writing  this  paper  not  knowing  intimately  the  lived   experience  of  either  community  about  whom  I  am  writing.  Another  element  of  the   privilege  is  my  access  to  education  that  allows  me  a  forum  to  disseminate   information  such  as  that  found  in  this  paper.  One  of  the  major  structural  issues   surrounding  research  of  this  type  is  that  racialized,  and  Indigenous  communities  in   Canada  do  not  have  the  same  access  to  formal  educational  institutions  as  me,  and   therefore  don't  have  access  in  the  same  way  to  disseminate  information  about  their   experiences  in  their  communities.  Extreme  care  has  been  taken  on  my  part  to  seek   out  sources  and  stories  informed  by  Indigenous  and  racialized  migrant  peoples  in   order  to  use  my  privileged  position  to  center  and  raise  up  these  voices  through  this   work.  Surely,  this  was  done  imperfectly  and  I  am  happy  to  receive  feedback  and   criticism  to  be  a  better  ally  and  continue  to  decolonize  my  relationships,  research   and  work.  In  saying  that,  my  intention  is  not  to  speak  for  either  Indigenous  or   migrant  communities,  but  rather  to  speak  for  myself  and  from  my  experience  to   inform  some  key  debates  that  are  happening  in  small  ways  in  different  pockets   within  and  without  of  academia.  My  hope  is  to  inspire  some  change  in  state,  and   non-governmental  institutions  through  highlighting  concepts  and  initiatives  that  

  

2  

will  help  to  create  decolonized  systems  based  on  mutual  respect  and  understanding   between  racialized  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples  rather  than  those  which   separate  and  alienate  them  from  one  another  and  continue  the  legacy  of   colonization.        I  came  to  an  interest  in  this  topic  through  a  couple  of  key  pieces,  which  

allowed  me  to  consider  the  questions  around  Indigenous  and  racialized  migrants  in   Canada  specifically.  The  first  of  these  was  Bridget  Anderson's  Book  Us  and  Them?:   The  Dangerous  Politics  of  Immigration  Control.    In  this  book,  Anderson  develops   some  helpful  analytical  categories  when  we  consider  the  relationship  between   migrants  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  those  who  also  are  criminalized  and  excluded   from  participation  in  what  she  calls  the  Good  Citizen  which  has  access  to  the   Community  of  Value,  or  in  other  words  a  position  of  privilege  and  access  to  the   benefits  of  the  state  and  citizenship.  She  positions  the  good  citizen  in  direct  contrast   to  the  failed  citizen  and  the  non-citizen  and  argues  that  the  failed  citizen  and  the  non- citizen  are  intentionally  separated  from  one  another  so  as  not  to  build  solidarity   between  those  who  do  not  have  access  to  the  community  of  value,  but  they  are  also   criminalized  and  illegalized  because  they  don't  represent  the  ideals  of  the  state  in   terms  of  race,  class,  values,  culture,  work  ethic  andrelationship  to  neo-liberal  market   ideologies.  Therefore,  they  pose  a  threat  to  system  which  values  white,  educated,   wealthy,  hard-working,  self-sufficient,  English  speaking  members,  which  are   characteristics,  embodied  in  the  good  citizen.  On  the  other  hand,  the  failed  citizen  is   a  group  of  people  within  society  who  have  formal  citizenship,  or  some  other  status   vis  a  vis  the  state  but  do  not  have  access  to  the  community  of  value  because  they  

  

3  

deviate  from  the  above  mentioned  norms  embodied  in  the  good  citizen.  Finally,  the   non-citizen  doesn't  have  any  formal  status  within  the  state  and  are  barred  entry   when  possible  through  immigration  controls,  and  when  impossible  are  tolerated   and  given  marginal  rights,  no  access  to  the  full  benefits  of  the  community  of  value.   (Anderson,  2013)        In  thinking  about  these  categories,  I  attempted  a  similar  exercise  in  order  to  

apply  these  categories  to  the  Canadian  context.    The  result  of  this  thought   experiment  was  the  realization  that  in  many  ways,  because  of  their  unique   relationship  to  the  state  as  well  as  because  of  the  systemic  legislative,  social  and   political  barriers  erected  to  limit  their  participation  and  access  to  the  community  of   value  including  high  levels  of  incarceration,  limited  funding  to  their  education  as   well  as  rules  around  land  ownership  and  access  to  resources  Indigenous  peoples  in   Canada,  in  many  ways  embody  the  characteristics  of  Anderson's  failed  citizen.  On   the  other  hand,  through  strict  immigration  controls,  temporary  foreign  work   schemes,  structural  racism  and  other  barriers,  racialized  immigrants  seem  to   embody  many  of  the  characteristics  of  the  non-citizen  as  described  by  Anderson.   With  these  categories  established,  what  became  of  most  interest  to  me  were  the   questions  about  why  Indigenous  communities  and  racialized  migrant  communities   are  separated,  the  reasons  for  this  separation,  and  by  extension  what  these   relationships  could  look  like  if  systemic  barriers  to  positive  relationship-building   didn't  exist.  Finally,  this  was  important  to  understanding  why  these  relationships   are  foundational  to  the  establishment  of  institutions  and  societies  of  respect  and   mutual  understanding.    

  

4  

  

The  second  piece  that  inspired  me  to  dive  into  a  study  of  the  

migrant/Indigenous  relationship  in  Canada  was  Harald  Bauder's  editorial  Closing   the  Immigration-Aboriginal  Parallax  Gap  which  first  describes  the  fact  that   discourses  of  immigrant  and  Indigenous  issues  are  separated  in  academic   discussions  and  further  goes  on  to  offer  a  goal  of  an  aboriginal-immigration  dialectic   where  there  would  be  "an  introduction  of  the  aboriginal  narrative  into  the   contemporary  immigration  debate."  (2011,  p.  518)  In  thinking  about  this,  I   understood  the  importance  of  these  discourses  being  in  communication  and   informing  one  another.  What  also  became  evident  is  that  the  gap  between  these   discourses  was  helpful  to  address,  but  it  seemed  to  me  that  in  filling  the  gap  there   was  the  danger  in  conflating  the  two  discourses  and  therefore  losing  their  unique   and  valuable  elements.  Along  these  lines,  thinking  about  bridging  the  gap  was  a   helpful  metaphor  because  it  allows  for  the  passing  of  information  over  the  bridge   allowing  for  a  dialogue,  while  at  the  same  time  acknowledging  the  unique  elements,   and  the  separate  bodies  of  knowledge  and  experience  are  present  on  each  side  of   the  bridge.        The  paper  will  be  structured  as  follows.  First,  I  will  identify  some  key  terms  

that  are  important  to  my  argument  which  will  include  Indigenous,  migrant,   racialization,  decolonization,  and  settler  and  solidarity  to  name  a  few.  Next,  I  will   outline  the  theoretical  framework  through  which  I  will  be  making  my  argument,   namely  post-colonial  theory.  Next,  I  will  outline  my  methodology  and  explain  why   this  method  was  chosen  for  this  specific  research  project.  What  follows  will  be  a   literature  review  outlining  some  of  the  important  arguments  within  the  anti-racist,      5  

decolonization,  Indigenous  and  immigration  and  settlement  literature.  The   literature  will  also  identify  some  specific  holes  in  the  literature,  some  of  which  will   be  addressed  in  my  paper,  and  others  will  be  identified  as  falling  outside  of  the   scope  of  this  project  but  are  valuable  areas  for  further  study.  Next,  I  will  profile  five   organizations  that  have  actually  operationalized  programs  or  other  initiatives  to   build  decolonized  relationships  and  reconciliation  between  Indigenous  peoples  in   Canada.  This  will  be  done  in  order  to  both  promote  this  work  as  important,  but  also   to  act  as  a  model  for  work  that  should  be  expanded  upon.  Finally,  I  will  tie  this  all   together  by  providing  some  analysis  linking  the  literature  and  academic  work  in  this   field,  as  well  as  the  on  the  ground  community-based  work  that  is  taking  place  across   the  country.  I  will  conclude  by  reiterating  my  original  argument  and  identifying   areas  for  further  research.  This  will  be  done  to  make  the  point  that  new,  more   complete  understandings  through  formal  education  in  schools  as  well  as  informally   through  the  institutions  of  the  media  and  the  citizenship  process,  of  what  it  means   to  be  a  settler,  and  the  histories  of  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada,  will  enable   decolonized  relationships  of  mutual  understanding  and  respect  to  be  formed   between  racialized  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples  that  could  foster  reconciliation.                

  

6  

PART  TWO:  KEY  TERMS   It  is  important  in  this  discussion  to  clearly  outline  the  language  that  will  be   used  and  the  definitions  for  that  language.  To  begin,  Indigenous  will  be  used  in   reference  to  peoples  typically  referred  to  as  Indian,  Métis,  First  Nations,  Inuit,  Native   or  Aboriginal,  which  also  recognizes  the  fact  that  they  are  the  original  peoples  of  a   space  (in  this  case  the  land  we  call  Canada).  This  term  is  used  intentionally  and  in   the  political  context  of  colonialism  to  first  establish  that  the  land  was  taken  from   indigenous  peoples  in  many  cases  violently,  by  white  Western-European  settler   populations  through  the  process  of  colonization.  Secondly,  it  is  used  to  challenge  the   colonial  discourse  of  Terra  Nullis  that  colonization  happened  on  land  that  didn't   have  people,  political  organization  or  any  discernable  civilization  on  it,  and   therefore  it  wasn't  previously  "claimed".     Migrant  will  be  used  in  reference  to  people  who  have  moved  to  Canada  from   another  place.  Immigrant  will  not  be  used  because  it  first  presupposes  that  the   intention  is  to  gain  some  sort  of  legal  status  in  Canada  and  further  that  the  move  is   intended  to  be  permanent.  Migrant  allows  for  a  diversity  of  experiences  to  be   included  and  broadens  the  definition  to  include  those  who  resist  state-centric  and   otherwise  exclusive  labels  around  the  movement  of  people.       Racialization,  and  racialized  are  terms  that  recognize  the  social  construction   of  the  concept  of  `race'.  It  speaks  about  a  process  by  which  people  are  defined  by   phenotypical  elements  of  their  identities  and  that  these  classifications  categorize   people  into  groups  who  then,  as  a  result  of  being  labeled  as  others,  experience      7  

different  treatment  including  exclusion  and  discrimination.  Furthermore   racialization  of  the  other  in  this  paper  will  be  looked  at  as  a  colonial  process,  which   results  in  opposition  to  whiteness,  therefore  white  people  are  not  racialized,  but   participate  in  the  process,  from  a  position  of  power.     Decolonization  is  the  process  of  breaking  down  colonial  systems  and   discourses  by  posing  a  direct  challenge  to  them  as  legitimate.  Decolonization  is   about  radically  altering  power  structures,  which  disempower  colonized  peoples  and   empower  them  to  live  with  dignity  in  a  system,  which  values  them  as  integral  parts.   Decolonization  is  not  an  end,  but  is  rather  a  continual  process,  in  this  way  we  can   describe  actions  working  towards  dismantling  colonial  systems  as  contributing  to   this  process.   Reconciliation  is  based  on  the  notion  that  there  is  first  a  problem  in  a   relationship,  in  this  case  between  indigenous  peoples  and  Canada.  Because  of  this   problem,  reconciliation  is  again  a  process  about  living  in  right  relationship  and   settling  the  conflict.  Taiaiake  Alfred  cautions  against  the  discourse  of  reconciliation   as  also  requiring  restitution.  He  argues:     Reconciliation  may  be  capable  of  moving  us  beyond  the  unpalatable  stench  of   overt  racism  in  public  and  social  interactions.  This  would  be  an  easy  solution   to  the  problem  of  colonialism  for  white  people,  and  no  doubt  most  would  be   satisfied  with  this  obfuscation  of  colonial  realities.  But  logically  and  morally,   there  is  no  escaping  that  the  real  and  deeper  problems  of  colonialism  are  a   direct  result  of  the  theft  of  our  lands,  which  cannot  be  addressed  in  any  way   other  than  through  the  return  of  those  lands  to  us.  (Alfred,  Wasase:   Indigenous  Pathways  of  Action  and  Freedom,  2005,  pp.  166-67)   State  is  used  throughout  this  paper  in  reference  to  the  institutions  and  

  

8  

systems  which  exist  in  Canada.  The  state  has  many  actors  including  government   who  shape  these  institutions  and  systems  formally  through  law,  and  informally   through  practice  in  order  to  control  the  peoples  living  within  the  state.  In  this  way  I   conceptualize  the  state  as  having  agency  and  influence  and  therefore  is  not  a  neutral   or  passive  entity.  Canada  will  also  be  defined  as  a  settler-colonial  state  in  that  it  has   a  history  of  violent  colonialism,  which  continues  to  this  day,  and  has  a  settler   population  who  occupies  the  land.     While  there  is  an  entire  section  of  the  literature  review  section  of  this  paper   dedicated  to  the  term  settler  and  its  contested  definition,  I  will  define  it  as  those  who   use  their  privilege  to  disempower,  or  otherwise  marginalize  Indigenous  peoples  and   therefore  perpetuate  ideologies  of  colonialism  and  white  supremacy.     Finally,  Solidarity  is  the  notion  that  although  an  issue  may  not  having  a  direct   impact  on  a  specific  community  with  which  one  identifies,  there  is  the  necessity  for   one  to  support  the  actions  of  the  marginalized  community  as  a  way  to  augment  their   voices  and  contribute  to  the  movement  for  change  that  is  being  sought.                             9  

   PART  THREE:  THEORETICAL  FRAMEWORK      The  difficulty  with  choosing  a  theoretical  framework  through  which  to  

complete  this  project  was  based  on  trying  to  find  one  that  adequately  captures  both   the  race  questions,  as  well  as  those  of  colonization.  The  framework  that  seemed   most  apt,  yet  still  incomplete  was  post-colonial  theory.     There  are  a  few  key  critiques  that  are  present  within  post-colonial  thought   which  are  particularly  apt  to  this  discussion,  namely  that  it  includes  a  grounding  of   post-colonial  realities  within  and  in  response  to  the  actions  and  continuing  affects  of   formal  colonization  and  imperialism.  In  other  words  post-colonialism  "names  the   period  of  colonial  rule  together  with  its  gradual  weakening  and  demise...it  analyses   [colonialism's]  effects  both  in  its  heyday  and  during  the  period  that  follows  the  end   of  the  literal,  concrete  colonial  presence."  (Hiddleston,  2009,  p.  4)  What  is  important   to  note  from  this  definition  is  that  post-  colonialism  sees  current  realities  in   reference  to  the  legacies  of  colonial  imperialism,  while  at  the  same  time  leaving   room  to  define  contemporary  realities  and  actions  as  colonial  even  though  the  literal   concrete  colonial  presence  has  formally  ended.  Another  contestation  made  by   Hiddleston  is  that  "the  colonial  project  of  course  not  only  relies  on  the  institution  of   a  capitalist  form  of  exploitation,  but  also  a  spread  of  a  belief  in  white  racial   supremacy."  (p.12)  The  important  element  of  this  quotation  is  linking  colonialism,   with  the  concept  of  white  racial  supremacy.  First,  this  allows  us  to  begin  to  look  at   Indigenous  communities  and  racialized  migrant  communities  through  the  same  lens   in  terms  of  the  fact  that  they  have  both  been  considered  non-white  and  therefore  the  

  

10  

enemy  when  placed  in  relation  to  white  supremacist  ideologies  including   colonialism.  At  the  same  time  however,  it  ensures  that  although  both  groups  of   peoples  are  marginalized  by  white  supremacy  but  also  recognizes  their  unique   experiences  within  it.  Therefore,  a  critique  of  colonialism,  such  as  post-colonial   theory  has  inherent  in  it  a  challenge  to  white  supremacy  and  is  a  way  to   discursively,  but  carefully  talk  about  Indigenous  peoples  and  racialized  migrants  in  a   similar  light  without  conflating  the  experiences  or  identities  of  those  who  make  up   these  groups.  Another  conception  of  post-colonial  theory  that  is  instructive  to  this   work  is  illustrated  by  David  Jefferess  who  contends  that:  "Postcolonial  studies   constitutes  a  critical  practice  that  seeks  to  deconstruct  the  antagonistic  discourse  of   colonial  knowledge  and,  at  the  very  least  gesture  towards  a  liberatory  praxis."   (2008,  p.  180)  Here,  the  elements  Hiddleston's  notions  that  contemporary  realities   are  based  on  colonial  legacies  is  met  with  a  challenge  to  deconstruct  these  realities   through  a  liberatory  praxis,  which  is  about  actions  that  liberate  those  oppressed  by   these  colonial  and  neo-colonial  systems.  In  this  outlook  the  racialized  migrant,  and   Indigenous  communities  in  Canada,  are  active  agents  of  resistance  to  oppression  as   opposed  to  simply  reacting  to  oppression;  this  agency,  Jefferess  argues,  leads  to   liberation.  In  this  scenario,  liberation  from  oppression  is  furthermore  impossible   without  the  resistance  to  it.  In  other  words  resistance  is  the  practice  that  leads  to   the  dream  of  liberation  from  the  legacies  of  colonial  oppressions  that  continue  even   though  formal  colonial  authority  has  ceased.  (p.  181)  Furthermore,  Jeferess  speaks   about  postcolonial  theory  as  being  based  on  the  notion  of  reconciliation,  which  is:  

  

11  

"derived  from  praxis,  wherein  thought  is  intensified  through  action."  (p.  185)  This   notion  has  also  informed  my  methodology,  which  is  explained  in  the  next  section,        So  while  some  issues  remain  problematic  and  colonial  about  developing  

theoretical  frameworks  as  they  don't  adequately  account  for  the  diversity  of  the   populations  that  they  are  used  to  research  with,  postcolonial  theory  provides  some   helpful  notions  to  consider  when  talking  about  liberation  and  dignity  for  Indigenous   and  racialized  migrant  peoples;  namely  the  focus  on  white  supremacy,  praxis,  and   basic  contemporary  realities  in  terms  of  ongoing  colonial  legacies.                                                 

  

12  

PART  FOUR:  METHODOLOGY   In  order  to  address  both  the  academic  and  community  based  elements  of   Indigenous  and  racialized  migrant  relations  in  Canada,  a  mixed  methodology  was   used  which  includes  both  a  critical  review  of  the  literature  as  well  as  a  case  study   component.  This  means  that  the  way  in  which  I  have  chosen  to  write  this  paper  is   using  two  specific  sections.  Frist,  the  thought  or  academic  section  where  I  outline   the  arguments  made  in  the  literature,  and  the  practice  section  where  I  highlight   some  key  organizations  and  programs  which  are  attempting  to  create  environments   of  learning,  mutual  respect,  decolonization  and  reconciliation  among  migrant   communities  and  Indigenous  communities  in  Canada.        Next,  in  the  literature  review  portion,  because  of  the  limited  information  

dealing  specifically  with  the  relationship  between  racialized  migrants  and   Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada,  the  search  terms  that  were  used  were  intentionally   broad  and  included  the  terms  Indigenous,  native,  aboriginal,  decolonization,  post   colonialism,  anti  racism,  reconciliation,  immigra*  (to  account  for  immigrant  and   immigration),  migrant,  racialized,  and  Canada.  These  terms  were  used  in  the   Ryerson  Library  "search  all"  function,  as  well  as  more  specifically  in  specific   databases  concerning  both  the  literature  on  Indigenous  peoples  and  immigration.   They  were  also  used  in  Google  to  account  for  the  grey  literature  including   government  publications,  and  publications  from  non-governmental  organizations   and  foundations.  Finally,  bibliographies  of  articles  and  books  were  scanned  for   relevant  information  on  sources  that  would  be  helpful  in  completing  the  literature   review.  This  exercise  also  helped  identify  the  community  organizations,  which  were  

  

13  

eventually  chosen  for  the  case  studies  that  are  presented  in  this  paper.  Furthermore,   sources,  which  dealt  with  content  that  was  outside  of  the  Canadian  context,  were   excluded.  However,  conceptual  information  that  wasn't  developed  for  the  Canadian   context,  but  was  applicable  to  it  was  included.        The  next  section,  the  case  studies  profiles  five  key  organizations  who  are  

currently  working  on,  or  carrying  out  programming,  which  attempts  to  encourage   dialogue  and  understanding  between  Indigenous  and  racialized  migrant  clients.   These  include  No  one  Is  Illegal,  Kairos:  Canadian  Ecumenical  Justice  Initiatives,   Canadian  Roots  Exchange,  The  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  of  Canada,  and   The  City  of  Vancouver.  While  this  list  is  not  exhaustive  it  provides  a  thorough   sample  which  helps  illustrate  key  practices  and  the  importance  of  this  kind  of  work.   Information  from  these  organizations  was  obtained  through  literature  from   websites  and  other  publicly  available  documents  including  vision  statements  and   strategic  plans.    A  content  analysis  was  completed  to  understand  the  programs,   develop  the  frame  of  analysis  and  ultimately  illustrate  important  concepts  and   specific  strategies  used  to  operationalize  decolonized  programming  to  build   relationships  of  mutual  understanding  and  respect  between  the  two  communities   being  studied.                                      14  

PART  FIVE:  CRITICAL  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LITERATURE         In  Canada  there  are  many  different  ethnic,  racial,  cultural,  social  and  religious  

groups  that  make  up  what  we  call  Canada.  This  literature  review  will  focus  on   describing,  but  also  analytically  engaging  with  the  material  around  two  groups   within  Canada,  namely  Indigenous  and  racialized  migrant  peoples.  These  two   groups  are  not  often  considered  within  the  same  discussions  as  separate  and   distinct  communities,  but  there  is  a  movement  among  some  organizations,  and   within  the  academic  literature  to  invite  Indigenous  peoples  and  migrants  into   conversation  with  each  other  to  see  where  cooperation  might  be  possible,  and  how   this  process  of  learning  about  and  understanding  each  other  could  lead  to  a   reconciliation  based  on  mutual  respect,  understanding  and  dignity  for  both  groups.        One  of  the  most  common  and  relevant  themes  to  the  subject  of  Indigenous  

and  migrant  relations  in  the  Canadian  context  is  that  of  multiculturalism.  This  policy   has  been  lauded  by  supporters  as  an  expression  of  the  values  of  diversity  and   inclusion  of  everyone  into  Canadian  society.  Literature  that  makes  reference  to   Indigenous  and  migrant  relations  in  regards  to  multiculturalism,  however,  offers  a   powerful  critique.  Srikanth  (2012),  Abu-Laban  (2001)  and  Bannerji  (2000)   articulate  significant  critiques  about  the  ways  in  which  migrants  to  Canada  as  well   as  Indigenous  peoples  have  been  treated  under  multiculturalism.        Srikanth  narrates  the  story  of  the  development  of  Canadian  cultures  and  

makes  the  argument  that  "Canadian  multiculturalism  was  not  an  outcome  of  change   in  the  mindset  of  the  majority  population,  but  the  result  of  pragmatic  considerations   of  the  Canadian  bureaucrats  and  policy-  makers,  who  sought  a  new  strategy  to  

  

15  

manage  diversities  in  the  changed  national  and  international  context."    (2012  p.20)   This  narrative  is  continued  by  Abu-Laban  who  makes  the  point  that  Government   response  throughout  the  1960s  and  1970s  was  to  use  Royal  Commissions  to  address   the  needs  of  women,  language  minorities  and  Aboriginal  peoples.  These   commissions,  however,  were  based  on  liberal  principles  of  equality  as  opposed  to   challenging  the  many  systems  of  injustice  that  affected  these  peoples.  The  solution   of  multiculturalism,  which  came  out  of  the  Biculturalism  and  Bilingualism   Commission,  was  one  example  of  creating  a  homogenous  solution  to  address  the   needs  of  a  diverse  community.  (Abu-Laban,  2001)  Expanding  on  this  idea  of  the   liberal  and  inequitable  focus  of  Canadian  multiculturalism,  Gyepi-Garbrah,  Walker   and  Garcea  contend  that:  "Whitestreaming  [read  multiculturalism],  a  series  of   discourses  centered  on  cultural  neutrality,  colour  blindness  and  universal   citizenship,  provides  mainstream  societal  institutions  and  people  with  a  workable   rationale  for  setting  aside  indigeneity."  (2013,  p.  1799)  What  is  explicit  in  this   understanding  of  multiculturalism  is  an  understanding  of  its  basis  in  the  larger   white  supremacist  colonial  project.  Furthermore,  these  quotations  are  helpful  in   shedding  some  light  on  the  necessity  to  understand  Indigenous  and  racialized   migrant  experiences  as  both  being  impacted  because  of  their  racialization,  which  is   explicitly  positioned  in  subordination  to  whiteness.    The  point  made  by  Srikanth   regarding  the  pragmatic  goals  of  multiculturalism  is  also  affirmed  by  Abu-Laban   who  argues  that  "state  response  to  redress  [through  multiculturalism]  was  about   expediency  rather  than  principle."    (Abu-Laban,  2001)    These  critiques  of   multiculturalism  conceptualize  Indigenous  peoples  and  migrants  within  the  same  

  

16  

category  as  minority  ethnic  groups  for  which  it  should  account.  While  this  is  helpful   in  some  respects,  we  cannot  conflate  the  racialized  migrant  and  Indigenous   communities  and  by  consequence  losing  the  uniqueness  and  inherent  differences  in   their  experience.     Arguments  on  the  other  side  of  this  debate,  like  those  of  Kymlicka  in  the   piece  Finding  our  Way:  Rethinking  Ethnocultural  Relations  in  Canada.  Kymlicka   (1998),  differentiate  between  immigrant  versus  other  non-Indigenous  minorities  in   Canada  and  contends  that  "immigrants  have  chosen  to  come  to  Canada  and   therefore  should  integrate."  (p.35)  and  furthermore  that  indigenous  peoples  are   considered  a  national  minority  similar  to  the  French  and  English.  Finally  Kymlicka   contends  that  because  of  this  position  as  a  national  minority,  indigenous  peoples   should  be  afforded  special  rights  by  the  state.  (Ibid)  Dale  Turner  makes  the   following  observations  of  Kymlicka's  work:  "national  minorities  (including   aboriginal  peoples  the  English  and  the  French)  are  the  fundamentally  privileged   sovereign  groups  in  Kymlicka's  multinational  state...  however  for  various  reasons   the  national  minorities  relinquished  or  transferred  certain  powers  to  the  larger   political  union."  (Turner,  2006,  p.  64).  What  is  problematic  about  placing  these  three   very  different  actors  within  the  category  of  national  minorities  who  have  access  to   privileged  sovereignty  is  that  it  in  some  ways  removes  agency  from  indigenous   peoples,  and  does  not  recognize  the  serious  power  imbalances  between  the  English   and  French  colonizer,  and  the  Indigenous  actor  as  colonized.  Furthermore,  when  we   consider  these  groups  privileged  national  minorities  in  Canada,  we  also  do  not  have   room  for  conceptions  of  the  racialized  migrant,  which  leads  to  the  conclusion  made      17  

by  Kymlicka  in  which  they  are  not  privileged  to  maintain  their  culture,  therefore   they  should  integrate.       Lastly  the  analysis  of  Bannerji  (2000)  is  helpful  here  and  provides  a  more   radical  and  perhaps  historically  accurate  interpretation  of  multiculturalism  and   posits  that  multiculturalism  rather  than  combatting  the  conflict  in  society  among   different  peoples  and  celebrating  diversity  actually  reinforces  barriers  between   communities  to  ensure  white  supremacy.  What  is  being  suggested  here  is  that   Multiculturalism  was  not  only  a  pragmatic  step  towards  not  addressing  the  systemic   ways  in  which  society  was  inaccessible  to  minority  groups  asserting  their  rights  but   it  was  also  intentionally  created  others  as  minority  groups  to  ensure  British  and   French  (white  European)  domination  was  protected.  It  is  here  that  the  intersections   between  anti-racism  and  decolonization,  as  well  as  white  settler  ideologies  and   neoliberalism  become  important  specifically  with  reference  to  migrant  and   Indigenous  communities  and  peoples  in  Canada.        The  next  debate  in  the  literature  is  one  about  how  the  term  "settler"  should  

be  defined  specifically  with  respect  to  racialized  peoples.  This  is  instructive  here   when  we  are  considering  the  ability  of  racialized  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples   to  enter  into  relationships,  as  it  sets  the  stage  for  potential  areas  of  contention  in  the   relationship  building  required  for  reconciliation  to  occur.  While  this  section  of  the   critical  analysis  of  the  literature  will  be  highly  theoretical  in  nature  it  is  important  to   discuss  the  theoretical  concepts,  which  permeate  the  literature  and  might  inform   any  further  work  in  the  discipline.    Dhamoon  and  Abu-Laban  (2009)  contend  that:    

  

18  

"As  well  as  a  dialectical  relationship  between  renationalization  and  othering,   there  is  also  a  complex  interaction  between  gender,  race,  and  class  dynamics.   As  such,  not  only  is  it  useful  to  embrace  work  which  considers  processes  of   racialization,  but  it  is  also  useful  to  address  the  manner  in  which  race   thinking  interacts  with  other  forms  of  difference  and  inequality."  (p.179)   What  is  important  to  understand  from  this  argument  is  that  the  complexity  of   identity  and  defining  groups'  relationships  to  one  another  we  need  to  consider  the   intersections  of  other  markers  of  difference  such  as  race,  class,  gender  among   others.  This  is  furthermore  important  when  talking  about  what  it  means  to  be  a   settler,  as  settlers  who  identify  differently  in  terms  of  the  above-mentioned   categories,  according  to  Dhamoon  and  Abu-Laban,  would  have  a  different   experience  depending  on  their  identity  markers.   Lawrence  and  Dua  (2005)  echo  this  argument  when  they  who  argue  that  anti- racism,  by  ignoring  the  continued  colonization  of  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada  and   also  failing  to  integrate  the  intersectional  analysis  mentioned  above,  is  actually   supporting  neo-colonial  practices.  Furthermore  Lawrence  and  Dua  nuance  their   analysis  by  making  the  points  that  anti-racist  theory  needs  to  center  its  analysis,   especially  in  Canada,  within  the  context  of  Indigenous  sovereignty  over  Indigenous   land.  Secondly,  they  must  place  discourses  of  colonization  central  to  the  concepts  of   racism.  Finally,  they  point  to  anti-racist  activists  as  needing  to  find  ways  to  carry  out   their  work  in  ways  that  do  not  disempower,  but  rather  supports  Indigenous  peoples   in  their  struggle  for  self-determination  and  reconciliation.  (p.  235)  This  argument  is   also  supported  by  Smith  who  posits  that:        Organising  by  people  of  colour  was  based  on  the  notion  of  organising  around   shared  victimhood.  In  this  model,  however,  we  see  that  we  are  not  only      19  

victims  of  white  supremacy,  but  complicit  in  it  as  well.  Our  survival  strategies   and  resistance  to  white  supremacy  are  set  by  the  system  of  white  supremacy   itself.  What  keeps  us  trapped  within  our  particular  pillars  of  white   supremacy  is  that  we  are  seduced  by  the  prospect  of  being  able  to  participate   in  the  other  pillars.  (2012,  p.  5) Along  the  same  lines  as  Lawrence  and  Dua  racialized  peoples,  and  their   complicity  in  colonialism,  is  called  into  question  as  it  is  so  insidious  in  the  culture  in   which  they  are  being  socialized  as  "new  Canadians"  they  are  subject  to  falling  into   the  benefits  of  adopting  colonial  mindsets  and  that  this  is  problematic  because  they   are  then  perpetuating  white  supremacist  ideologies,  but  do  not  have  the  visual   markers  of  this  ideology,  namely  white  skin  colour.  The  argument  of  mutual   victimhood  is  in  this  way  only  part  of  the  story,  and  leaves  out  the  impact  of   racialized  peoples  living  on  colonized  lands.     A  question  that  is  asked  by  Hayden  King  in  a  report  published  out  of  a  round- table  on  immigration  and  settlement  held  at  Ryerson  University  was:     Is  this  tendency  for  bigotry  [colonialism,  oppression,  xenophobia,  and  racism   towards  Indigenous  peoples]  exclusive  to  one  colour  of  people;  what  about   all  the  dismissive  Black  and  Yellow  people;  or  those  Red  and  Brown  peoples   who  advocate  assimilation?  (King,  2014).     Later  on  in  the  piece,  he  answers  his  question  by  quoting  Indigenous  scholar   Taiaiake  Alfred  who  argues  that:     The  enemy  is  not  the  white  man  in  racial  terms;  it  is  a  certain  way  of   thinking.  While  this  "way  of  thinking"  in  North  America  appears  to  manifest   disproportionately  in  European  Settlers,  it's  not  exclusive  to  them-  it  exists  in   all  cultures  all  skin  colours,  in  racialized  peoples.  For  us,  as  Indigenous   peoples  it's  our  own  disconnection  from  each  other,  and  from  the  land  that   leads  us  down  this  path.(2005,  p.  102)  

  

20  

  

Within  this  line  of  thinking  anyone,  including  red  people  could  participate  in  

the  discriminatory  actions  of  a  settler.  What  is  also  a  very  important  nuance  here  is   the  idea  that  red  peoples,  or  Indigenous  peoples  espouse  these  ideologies  when  they   are  separated  from  themselves,  their  land  and  their  cultures,  all  of  which  happened   through  the  process  of  white  supremacy  and  colonization.  Here  we  can  begin  to   understand  being  a  settler  as  a  more  holistic  concept  based  on  an  ideology  or  a  "way   of  thinking"  as  outlined  by  Alfred.  What  is  also  clear,  however,  is  that  peoples  can   unlearn  these  ideologies.  John  Sutton  Lutz  identifies  the  ideology  of  power  that   Alfred  and  others  allude  to  in  the  following  way  in  terms  of  "the  white  problem":     "having  removed  Aboriginal  peoples  from  their  resource  base,  labeled  them   as  lazy  or  difficult  employees,  and  relegated  many  of  them  to  the  bottom  of  the   occupational  scale,  our  treatment  of  them  has  become  a  standard  by  which,  as   Canadians,  we  measure  ourselves.  The  poverty  and  attendant  social  problems  on   aboriginal  reserves  has  been  an  international  embarrassment  for  this  country  for   over  a  century.  It  is  repeatedly  brought  up  by  the  press  as  a  national  scandal,  a   sobering  reminder  to  Canadians  who  like  to  think  of  themselves  as  a  "generous   people"  living  in  a  "just  society."  (2008,  p.  297)        Henry  Yu  expands  on  this  by  defining  the  white  dominance  of  Indigenous   peoples  through  "land  dispossession, residential schooling, immigrant exclusion,

and racial discrimination in voting, housing, and employment"  (2011,  p.  301) as legacies which need to be dealt with in order to have reconciliation.  What  is  
important  about  the  Lutz,  and  Yu  quotations  above  is  that,  firstly,  the  problem  is   framed  as  a  white  problem  as  the  direct  connection  to  western  European   colonialism  is  the  root  of  the  ongoing  issues  and  some  of  the  ongoing  benefits  of   white  European  settlers  in  Canada.  What  is  further  important  here  is  that  when  it  is   framed  as  a  white  problem  then  we  can  provide  the  grounds  on  which  to  build  

  

21  

reconciliation  with  white  settler  populations.  Furthermore,  we  can  also  begin  to   understand  that  reconciliation  is  a  different  and  separate  process  from  the   reconciliation  and  relationship  building  required  to  create  right  relationship  with   racialized  migrants  who  do  not  have  the  same  relationship  to  the  European  colonial   project  as  European  settlers  who  benefit  from  white  privilege  do.  These  ideas  will  be   expanded  on  further  in  the  analysis  section  of  this  paper.     What  is  really  central  to  this  analysis,  and  is  something  I  believe  is  very   important  is  the  way  in  which  Lawrence  and  Dua  as  well  as  Abu-Laban  are  careful   about  not  conflating  the  diverse  stories  and  positions  of  Indigenous  and  migrant   communities  in  Canada,  and  rather  call  for  an  integrated  framework  of  respect  and   mutuality  between  the  concepts  of  decolonization  and  anti-racism.  To  use  the  image   of  the  Parallax  Gap  introduced  by  Bauder  (2011)  these  authors  seem  to,  rather  than   advocate  filling  the  gap,  use  the  image  of  a  bridge  to  connect  two  distinct  sides,   which  recognizes  the  value  in  connecting  on  the  one  side  Indigenous  peoples'  and   on  the  other  migrant  communities.     Another  idea,  which  permeates  the  literature  and  is  introduced  above,  is  a   more  specific  conversation  about  white  supremacy.  This  conversation  is  based  on   the  notion  that,  as  mentioned  above,  Canada  was  conceived  as  a  white-settler  nation   by  Britain  and  France  at  the  expense  of  Indigenous  peoples.  What  is  important  to   also  note  on  this  front  is  that  Canada  had  also,  until  1976  explicitly  allowed  for   discrimination  based  on  race  in  terms  of  denying  non-white  racial  minorities  entry   to  Canada  in  their  immigration  policy.  (Kelley  &  Trebilcock,  2010)  Because  of  this   fact,  there  are  systemic  barriers  that  are  rooted  in  the  history  of  white  supremacy      22  

through  colonialism  and  nation  building  in  Canada  which  limit  the  full  inclusion  of   non-white  populations,  which  is  a  characteristic  that  racialized  migrants  and   Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada  both  share.  What  is  important  to  note  here  is  the  links   between  colonization  of  Canada,  Canada's  preference  for  white  western  European   immigrants  and  the  idea  of  white  racial  superiority  and  dominance.      This  concept  of  normative  whiteness  is  also  explored  using  different  terms  

throughout  the  literature.  The  language  of  settler,  and  what  that  means  is  contested   ground,  and  requires  some  explanation.  In  Lawrence  and  Dua  (2005)  there  is  the   suggestion  made  that  migrants  of  colour  point  to  their  own  racism  in  order  to   legitimize  the  stealing  of  and  settling  on  Indigenous  lands.  In  this  argument,  the   concept  of  settler  is  challenged  as  an  exclusively  white  phenomenon  and  racialized   migrants  are  bunched  into  the  otherwise  white  British/French  category  of  settler.   Walia  (2013),  Smith  (2012),  Sharma  and  Wright  (2009)  and  Jafri  (2012)construct   the  idea  of  the  settler  more  as  an  ideology  or  worldview  as  opposed  to  the  colour  of   one's  skin,  or  being  a  migrant  to  colonized  land.  Smith  constructs  three  pillars  of   white  supremacy  two  of  which  talk  specifically  about  Indigenous  peoples  and   racialized  migrants.  The  first  of  these  is  colonialism,  which  talks  about  the   assimilation  of  Indigenous  populations  to  claim  land  and  resources.  The  second  is   orientalism,  which  justifies  anti-immigrant  rhetoric  as  the  other  is  cast  as  a  threat  to   the  domination  of  the  white  settler  population  (p.68).  Within  this  framework  the   settler  ideology  includes  both  an  attempt  to  erase  the  other,  and  to  ensure  control   over  land  and  resources  for  economic  and  settlement  purposes.  This  framework   also  does  not  talk  much  about  the  role  of  non-white  settlement  and  settlers.  This      23  

question,  however,  is  picked  up  by  Sharma  and  Wright,  Jafri  and  Walia.  Whereas   with  Lawrence  and  Dua,  there  was  the  statement  made  that  migrants  of  colour  are   de  facto  colonizers,  Sharma  and  Wright  (2009)  contend  that  this  divide  between   Indigenous  peoples  is  furthered  by  the  state  using  the  colonial  language  of  minority   rights,  which  pit  the  interests  of  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples  against  each   other.  This  analysis  is  expanded  upon  by  Jafri  who  argues  that  racialized   communities  are  complicit  in  some  ways  in  terms  of  the  formation  of  the  settler- colonial  state,  but  this  does  not  mean  they  are  necessarily  privileged  within  it.  This   point  is  interesting  because  it  acknowledges  first  that  by  being  settlers  migrants  are   contributing  to  the  formation  of  the  state  which  is  being  constructed  on  Indigenous   territories  and  to  their  disadvantage,  but  also  recognizes  the  disadvantages  that   they  experience  as  racialized  peoples  in  a  white  supremacist  society.  Finally,  Walia   challenges  the  idea  that  migration  should  be  considered  a  form  of  settler- colonialism  at  all.  She  posits  that  "displacement  and  precarious  migration  are   products  of  colonialism  and  capitalism  and  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  identify  all  those   who  migrate  as  those  seeking  to  colonize"  (p.  129).  This  idea  that  being  a  settler   entails  the  element  of  intent  to  colonize  is  also  supported  by  Smith,  and  to  some   extent  by  Jafri  using  his  concept  of  complicity  vs.  privilege.  In  this  quotation   racialized  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples  are  both  displaced  by  systems  of   colonialism  and  capitalism  and  therefore  assuming  the  intent  to  colonize  is  a   dangerous  categorization  that  makes  relationship  building  between  Indigenous   peoples  and  racialized  migrants  difficult.  This  conclusion  is  supported  further  by  the   work  of  Phung  (2011)who  states:  

  

24  

"Relying  on  monolithic  notions  of  the  term  "settler"  runs  the  risk  of  reducing   settler­Indigenous  relations  to  overly  simplistic  binary  models  of  thinking.  If   we  lump  all  non-Indigenous  people  into  a  single  category  of  settler,  then  do   we  risk  erasing  and  subsuming  the  different  histories  and  everyday   experiences  of  settler  privilege  and  marginalization  from  which  white   settlers  and  settlers  of  colour."  (p.  308)   This  question  is  very  complex  and  the  lived  out  complexities  of  this  relationship   between  migrants  onto  Indigenous  lands,  and  the  Indigenous  peoples  are  equally  so.   In  Madariaga-Vignudo    (2012)  in  reference  to  a  community  where  Indigenous   peoples  and  African  refugee  migrants  it  is  mentioned  that  the  relationship  between   the  two  communities  is  both  conflictual  and  compassionate.  On  the  one  hand,   Indigenous  peoples  and  the  African  refugees  are  in  conflict  over  the  scarce   resources  of  public  housing,  for  example,  while  also  building  relationship  and   empathy  based  on  mutual  marginalization.        Another  discussion  in  the  literature  is  about  the  importance  of  cities.  We  

know  that,  on  the  one  hand,  migrants  are  settling  mostly  in  cities,  and  on  the  other   that  many  Indigenous  peoples  are  moving  to  the  cities.  According  to  Statistics   Canada  in  2008  54  percent  of  Indigenous  peoples  live  in  cities.  (Statistics  Canada)  In   this  lies  both  an  opportunity  for  collaboration,  learning  and  relationship  building,   but  as  well  an  opportunity  for  conflict  and  harm.  To  illustrate  this  Stanger-Ross   (2008)  contend  that  cities  have  historically  been  critical  to  the  establishment  of  the   colonial  state  and  continue  to  be  the  key  sites  for  the  reproduction  of  colonial   relations.  It  is  further  argued  that:  "The  potential  alliances  and  cultural  exchange   between  Indigenous  peoples  and  newcomers  is  greatest  in  cities"  (Gyepi-Garbrah,   Walker,  &  Garcea,  2013,  p.  1801)  Consequently,  the  fact  that  cities  are  the  places  

  

25  

where  exposure  between  Indigenous  and  racialized  migrants  to  the  other  is  highest;   they  are  also  the  places  in  which  many  of  the  case  studies  that  will  be  profiled  later   take  place.        There  is  a  significant  body  within  the  literature  which  provides  a  critique  

about  the  ways  in  which  Indigenous  peoples  are  portrayed  in  the  education  system,   and  generally  through  other  methods  of  public  education  including  the  media,  and   the  immigration  system.  In  terms  of  the  discussion  within  this  paper,  it  is  important   to  see  racialized  immigrants  as  distinct  members  within  the  larger  society  because,   as  mentioned  above,  they  don't  have  the  same  relationship  to  colonialism,  white   supremacy  and  other  systems,  which  seek  to  erase  Indigenous  identities.  Much  of   the  discussion  in  this  section  will  be  focused  on  the  portrayal  of  Indigenous  peoples,   but  it  is  important  to  see  these  as  barriers  in  building  relationships  between   racialized  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada.        The  main  issues  that  are  outlined  within  the  education  literature  are  the  lack  

of  consultation  with  Indigenous  peoples  about  the  educational  content  about  them.   Linked  to  that  is  the  discourse  and  presentation  of  Indigenous  peoples  as  historical   artifacts  without  a  contemporary  contribution  to  society,  biased  information  which   portrays  them  as  political  deviants,  savages  and  those  who  need  to  be  civilized;  and   just  a  general  lack  of  any  information  at  all  in  the  formal  school  curricula.  (Haig   Brown,  2007;  Suleman,  2011;  Francis,  2007)  What  is  also  important  to  recognize   about  this  literature  is  that  it  cannot,  nor  should  it  be  divorced  from  the  colonial  and   white  supremacist  discussions  above  because  education  is  a  significantly  powerful  

  

26  

means  of  ensuring  whose  story  is  told,  how  it  is  told,  and  wields  immense  power  in   ensuring  colonial  ideologies  are  taken  up  by  the  next  generation  of  settlers  including   white  and  racialized  peoples.        Stuart  Hall,  in  his  work  The  West  and  the  Rest:  Discourse  and  Power  develops  

a  strong  argument  around  the  power  of  discourse  as  it  is  used  and  perpetuated   through  state  education  systems  in  order  to  frame  narratives  and  establish  the   "truth"  in  any  given  situation.  Reflecting  on  Foucault's  work  he  argues,  "The   question  of  whether  or  not  a  discourse  is  true  or  false  is  less  important  than   whether  it  is  effective  in  practice."  (Hall,  2007,  p.  58)  In  this  way,  we  can  establish   that  education  through  the  media,  citizenship  processes  and  through  formal  school   education  are  the  means  through  which  a  discourse  is  perpetuated.  Let's  now  look  at   some  reflections,  which  outline  the  critiques  of  the  types  of  discourses  established   about  Indigenous  peoples  through  education.        First,  to  speak  to  the  topic  of  lack  of  consultation  of  Indigenous  peoples  in  

creating  the  curricula  which  are  being  presented  about  them  is  addressed  by  Francis   (2007),  Suleman  (2011)  and  Cole  (2006).  The  consensus  around  this  discussion  is   that  consultation  has  not  happened  to  develop  information  that  Indigenous   communities  identify  with.  Francis  (2007)  calls  the  image  that  is  produced  through   education,  is  that  of  the  imaginary  Indian  and  contends  that:  "Non-Native  Canadians   can  hardly  hope  to  work  out  a  successful  relationship  with  Native  people  who  exist   largely  in  fantasy"  (p.  238).  Suleman  posits  that  "The  information  presented  is   frequently  not  from  an  Aboriginal  Perspective  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been  

  

27  

prepared  with  the  input  of  Aboriginal  Peoples."  (p.  20)  This  quotation  affirms  the   construction  of  an  imaginary  subject  in  Indigenous  peoples  as  presented  in  the   education  system  by  largely  including  non-Indigenous  knowledges  of  and  about   aboriginal  peoples.  Furthermore  it  explicitly  names  the  fact  that  Indigenous  peoples   don't  appear  to  be  consulted.  Cole  (2006)  looks  to  more  of  the  structural  ways  in   which  teacher  education  and  a  lack  of  consultation  in  developing  training  programs.   In  his  book,  he  sets  up  a  narrative  between  two  characters  Coyote  and  Raven.    This   part  of  the  dialogue  is  particularly  instructive:     Coyote:  Look  at  the  huge  numbers  of  nonaboriginal  faculty  teaching  first   nations  this  or  Indigenous  that  at  Canadian  universities,  it's  an  epidemic,  an   infestation,  a  plague.     Raven:  I  wonder  how  many  Muslims,  how  many  Christians  are  teaching   Jewish  studies  in  Canadian  Universities  or  vice  versa...  tell  me  where  did  the   white  people  get  their  qualifications  in  `aboriginal'  education,  `aboriginal'   studies.   Raven:  Without  Aboriginal  people  in  control  of  all  aspects  of  research  and   teaching  about  aboriginal  peoples  it  will  be  just  a  continuation  of  the   department  of  Indian  Affairs  model,  the  Indian  Act.     Coyote:  I'm  getting  to  the  end  of  my  leash  with  these  nonaboriginal  people   who  design  and  implement  aboriginal  teacher  education  programs  without   seeking  community  input.  They  bring  a  few  natives  on  board  who  go  along   with  their  ideas...my  idea  is  there  can  be  no  aboriginal  teacher  training   program  unless  it  is  initiated  designed,  taught  and  controlled  by  aboriginal   people.  (p.  316-317)   This  rich  dialogue  provides  much  insight  into  the  education  system  and  some  of  the   systemic  issues  found  within  it  for  aboriginal  people.  The  first  point  that  is   important  to  take  away  is  that  Indigenous  peoples  are  the  experts  of  their  own   stories  and  should  be  the  ones  telling  those  stories.  Secondly,  any  education  system,   including  the  one  we  have  now,  without  this  leadership  from  Indigenous  peoples  is  

  

28  

colonial  and  further  subjugates  Indigenous  peoples.        Furthermore,  in  this  colonial,  white  supremacist  discourse  about  Indigenous  

peoples  that  they  are  both  historical  artifacts  of  Canadian  history,  and  that  they   were  and  continue  to  be  savages  and  political  dissidents  who  require  civilization.   Suleman  (2011)  mentions  that:    "Information  tends  to  focus  more  on  the  cultural   aspects  of  Aboriginal  peoples  rather  than  examining  the  complexities  of  Aboriginal   history  or  the  current  realities  faced  by  aboriginal  peoples  in  Canada."  (p.  20).  In  a   piece  by  Celia  Haig  Brown  entitled  Resistance  and  Renewal:  First  Nations  and   Aboriginal  Education  in  Canada  she  quotes  one  of  her  students:  "  I  have  heard  more   about  Native  people  with  alcohol  related  issues  who  receive  free  tuition  to   university  than  I  have  heard  what  has  happened  to  them."  (2007,  p.  169)  This   discourse  which  first  makes  Indigenous  peoples  seem  like  only  a  part  of  the  past,   and  then  when  it  does  recognize  them  paints  them  as  freeloading,  alcoholics  without   the  context  of  the  trauma  inflicted  upon  them  by  the  Canadian  state  which  is   responsible  for  many  of  these  behaviours  is  problematic  in  so  many  ways,  but  is   part  of  the  formal  and  informal  education  processes  of  Canada  nonetheless.        Another  way  in  which  migrants  are  educated  about  Indigenous  peoples  is  the  

process  of  immigrating  and  the  process  of  obtaining  Canadian  citizenship.  These   systems  are  by  and  large  shaped  by  misconstrued  notions  of  who  Indigenous   peoples  are  and  the  ways  in  which  they  live  in  contemporary  Canada,  and  the   histories  that  shaped  them.  In  order  to  become  a  citizen,  candidates  are  required  to   complete  a  citizenship  test.  The  government  of  Canada  created  a  study  guide  for  the  

  

29  

test  entitled  Discover  Canada:  The  Rights  and  Responsibilities  of  Canadian  Citizenship.   In  this  68-page  guide,  the  word  aboriginal  is  mentioned  62  times.  Of  these  62  times,   some  are  in  relation  to  the  composition  of  the  various  categories  of  aboriginals  in   Canada  outlining  population  percentages  of  Indian,  Metis  and  Inuit  populations.  The   rest  of  the  times,  they  are  represented  in  the  Canadian  History  sections,  which   outline  things  such  as  mention  in  passing  of  Indian  residential  schools,  when   aboriginals  were  granted  the  right  to  vote  and  other  such  historical  information.   There  is  one  mention  of  contemporary  Indigenous  ways  of  life  in  Canada,  which   reads:  "In  today's  Canada,  Aboriginal  peoples  enjoy  renewed  pride  and  confidence,   and  have  made  significant  achievements  in  agriculture,  the  environment,  business   and  the  arts."  (Citizenship  and  Immigration  Canada  ,  2012,  p.  10)  Needless  to  say   this  affirms  both  the  non-consultation  and  misrepresentation  points  made  above   and  also  affirms  that  immigrants  to  Canada  are  encouraged  to  adopt  colonial   understandings  of  Indigenous  peoples  making  relationships  of  mutual   understanding  and  trust  exceedingly  difficult.        Along  the  lines  of  a  general  lack  of  information  about  Indigenous  

peoples  in  formal  and  informal  educational  settings,  is  offered  by  Godlewska  (2010),   who  contends  that:     The  omission  of  Aboriginal  Peoples  in  much  of  the  Canadian  history   curriculum  represents  British  colonial  policies  engaged  in  creating  a   homogeneous  society  amongst  French  and  English  settlers  and  more  recent   newcomers  without  mentioning  the  impact  of  immigration  policies  on  the   country's  Indigenous  peoples.  (p.  426)     Along  the  same  lines,  but  through  a  lens  of  anti-racism  Laurence  and  Dua  2005  

  

30  

argue:     Their  [Indigenous  peoples']  removal  needs  to  be  written  into  the  histories  of   racist  exclusion  that  peoples  of  colour  faced--not  in  a  cursory  way,  as  in  a   meaningless  generic  statement  that  "First  Nations  were  here  before  the   settlers"--but  with  a  least  some  specific  information  as  to  how  the  lands   where  people  of  colour  settled  were  removed  from  the  control  of  specific   Indigenous  nations.  (p.  11)   To  bring  this  argument  full  circle,  we  once  again  find  ourselves  with  the  insidious   and  ever-present  discussion  about  white  supremacy,  and  colonialism  being  to  blame   for  a  non-existent  or  poor  relationship  between  Indigenous  peoples  and  racialized   migrants  in  Canada.  This  time,  however,  the  argument  that  this  ideology  is   perpetuated  through  state-sponsored  and  led  formal  and  informal  educational   process  which  creates  a  discourse  where  Indigenous  peoples,  are  portrayed  in  a   poor  light  or  erased  completely.  How  can  we  expect,  given  this  system,  relationships   to  form  between  white  settlers  or  migrants  of  colour,  which  are  positive?  To  start  to   unpack  this  question  the  next  section  of  the  critical  analysis  of  the  literature  will   focus  on  the  literature  around  the  notion  of  political  belonging,  and  what  structural   elements  should  be  included  when  thinking  about  reconciliation,  mutual  trust  and   understanding.        When  talking  about  who  belongs  in  the  community  and  who  does  not,  Anna  

Stanley  (2014),  Harsha  Walia  (2014)  and  Bridget  Anderson  (2013)  provide  us  with   an  almost  unified  voice  of  who,  in  settler  colonial  societies,  belongs  and  is   encouraged  through  state  institutions  to  exist  and  who  is  not.  What  Stanley  calls   "the  good,  successful  moral  citizen"  (p.3),  and  what  Anderson  describes  as  simply   the  "good  citizen"  are  all  based  around  capitalist,  white,  financially  psychologically      31  

and  medically  self-sufficient,  and  otherwise  "contributing"  members  of  society.  This   is  what  it  means  to  belong,  and  when  you  fall  outside  of  these  norms  you  no  longer   belong  in  what  Anderson  (2014)  would  call  the  community  of  value.  Stanley  (2014)   argues  in  fact  that:  "The  very  process  of  becoming  a  good,  successful,  moral,  and   respectable  citizen  with  access  to  the  resources  of  the  state  transforms  newcomers   into  colonialists."  (p.3)  What  is  important  here  is  that  the  state  produces  criteria   that  values  and  prioritizes  certain  actions,  and  these  actions  actually  encourage   people  to  become  colonialists.  The  discourse  that  is  perpetuated  by  the  state  then   actually  transforms,  or  indoctrinates  newcomers  into  continuing  the  legacy  of   domination  over  Indigenous  peoples  in  order  to  belong.        In  the  literature,  however,  there  are  many,  more  helpful  ways  to  

conceptualize  what  it  means  to  be  part  of  communities,  which  account  for  power   dynamics,  do  not  require  subjugation  of  anyone,  offer  spaces,  which  include  diverse   groups  of  people.        Already  in  this  review,  we  have  spoken  about  the  issues  around  

multiculturalism  as  a  model  of  belonging.  To  contrast  this  model,  however,   Ghorayshi  (2010)  Fleras  and  Elliot  (2002)  and  Sandercock  (2009)offer   interculturalism  as  an  alternative  to  consider.  Fleras  and  Elliot,  and  Sandercock   posit  that  interculturalism,  rather  than  simply  talking  about  respectable  coexistence,   is  about  relationships  between  cultural  groups  which  produce  alternative  hybrid   notions  of  citizenship  and  belonging.  Ghorayshi  furthers  this  argument  by   suggesting  that  interculturalism  is  about  "finding  ways  of  addressing  diversity  and  

  

32  

difference  that  negate  exclusion,  discrimination,  inequality  and  a  fixed  notion  of   Canadian  identity."  (p.91)  A  few  important  challenges  are  raised  here,  namely  that   alternative  notions  of  citizenship  are  possible  through  interculturalism,  and   furthermore  that  this  citizenship  does  not  necessarily  need  to  be  based  on  the   colonial,  and  therefore  white  supremacist  notions  of  the  settler  state.        This  closed  view  of  multicultural  as  opposed  to  intercultural  political  

communities  is  based,  as  Coates  (2005)  argues,  on  the  centrality  of  the  nation  state   and  national  government  as  the  frames  through  which  Indigenous  history  is  viewed.     Furthermore,  Abu-Laban  (2001)  warns  that  when  the  state  is  central  to  the   discourse  of  what  it  means  to  be  values  within  the  polity  "Minoritized groups demanding fairness and inclusion or autonomy will continue to target Canada's national symbols and state institutions because they arose from the suppression of cultural diversity and from gross inequalities." (p. 265) Furthermore, and more along the lines of the legal institutions and control mechanisms that exist within the state, even when talking about things such as Indigenous self-determination and self-government it is done through a colonial lens. Atleo (2010) posits that "The dominance of the legal approach to self determination has, over time, helped to produce a class of Aboriginal `citizens' whose rights and identities have become defined solely in relation to the colonial state and its apparatus...political belonging is about being distinct" (p.24). What is being argued here is that Indigenous peoples want to assert their rights, which are inherent to them, not granted to them by the state, and any arrangement in which the state is granting rights to Indigenous peoples is paternalistic and colonial. A desirably political community of belonging is not then about granting of rights to Indigenous peoples, but rather about

  

33  

respecting the power of people to assert their rights for themselves without risk of intervention. This same critique is leveled by Alfred who in his words states: "institutions and ideas that are the creation of the colonial relationship are not capable of ensuring our survival; this has been amply proven by the absolute failure of institutional and legalist strategies to protect our lands and our rights." (2005, p. 24) Overall, the literature on political belonging seems to conclude that there need to be alternative forms of belonging that are conceived outside of the confines of the settler colonial state, respect selfdetermination and that respect and empower diversity. When talking about political belonging, it is also important to consider the political community and its origins. In order to do this, conceptualizing the settlercolonial state and specifically what this means in the Canadian context is imperative. Patrick Wolfe describes the insidious settler colonial mentality as follows: Settler colonialism has both negative and positive dimensions. Negatively, it strives for the dissolution of native societies. Positively, it erects a new colonial society on the expropriated land base--as I put it, settler colonizers come to stay: invasion is a structure not an event. (2006, p. 388) This quotation is vitally important especially in the context of the notion outlined in this paper of decolonization. Wolfe contends that settler colonialism, or the ideologies which seek to erase indigenous peoples are ongoing processes and a structural element of society, therefore decolonization must also be understood as a process which is continually striving to resist settler colonialism. Another important element of settler colonialism is related to neo-liberal discourses of progress, self-sufficiency and civility. Audra Smith, in reflecting on indigenous historian Philip Delioria makes the following observation with reference to the colonial ideal:    34  

This dream was one of indigenous pacification, containment and demobilization. In order to be actualized in the present, this dream requires that indigenous economic activities be watched, that there be a state-police presence in their communities and that Indians be passive in the face of this surveillance, regulation, scrutiny and possible intervention. (2008, p. 195) This expands on Wolfe's assertions made above by mentioning the surveillance, regulation intervention and scrutiny that are essential to settler colonialism in order to ensure dominance and compliance to the rules set out by the dominant colonial way of life.    Because  of  the  ways  in  which  the  state  structures  and  institutions  are  

influenced  by  settler  colonialism  another  question  that  is  importantly  asked  in  this   literature  is:  can  state  led  initiatives  including  those  such  as  the  examples  cited  in   the  City  of  Vancouver  case  study  actually  act  to  decolonize  the  settler  colonial  state?   Here  again  an  understanding  of  decolonization  is  important.  Sharma  and  Wright   contend  that:     Decolonization  can  be  construed  as  a  liberation  of  "nations,"  rather  than  as  a   liberation  of  people  from  social  relations  that  are  organized  through  their   hierarchical  placement  within  a  ruthless,  global  competition  for  profits,   whether  private  or  public.  When  that  happens,  it  loses  its  material  moorings   and  becomes  about  gaining  a  particular  group's  power.  (2008,  p.  128)     The  interesting  dichotomy  that  is  set  up  here  is  that  in  many  ways,  the  unity  that  is   part  of  the  conception  of  the  nation  in  indigenous  thought  is  a  liberatory  space,   whereas  the  nation  in  settler  colonialism  is  an  oppressive  actor  with  agency  which   encourages  assimilation,  erasure  of  difference  and  compliance  to  norms  which  are   defined  by  the  colonial  power  to  disempower  others.        Finally, within the literature, there are multiple solutions that have been proposed in order set the ground for a bridge to be built to foster good relationship, mutual respect

  

35  

and understanding between Indigenous peoples and racialized migrants in Canada. The literature proposes three main areas for action. First, there is a higher-level academic exercise outlined by Abu-Laban (2001) who proposes the idea of a forum for a postcolonial future. Secondly, Coates (2005) offers a suggestion for an educational methodology around comparative history. Many other authors speak talk about the necessity for dialogue projects between Indigenous peoples and racialized migrants. In the next section, some of these initiatives will be presented as case studies. Finally, there are some methods proposed by Sehdev (2011) who advocates for treaty relations among racialized migrants and by Gyepi-Garbrah et al. (2013) who advocate for Indigenous organizations to take up educational programs to educate migrants about their histories and struggle. Coates (2005) develops an idea that talking about histories of Indigenous peoples in well-structured and focused international conferences would "provide an opportunity to better understand the central dynamics of a vital relationship [between Indigenous peoples and other communities] in countries around the world, and allows scholars to learn directly from the historical developments affecting Indigenous peoples in many different regions." (p.14) In this way there could be a best practices developed to understand these phenomenon, as well as the building of an intercultural body of literature to consult in how to build these relationships. Furthermore, Abu-Laban (2001) proposes a "forum for a post colonial future" this forum would be a broad societal dialogue made up of stat actors and societal actors who would have a mandate to "hear grievances from the past and acknowledge, and apologize for, Canada's creating past injustices. (p.271) This truth-telling and apologizing initiative would aim to, as the Truth    36  

and Reconciliation Commission does for survivors and families of survivors of Canadian Indian Residential Schools, provide an opportunity for people to share their stories and to seek some redress. While these largely high-level solutions could be helpful for some progress towards decolonizing relationships between Indigenous peoples and racialized migrants, what seems to be a stronger theme within the literature is the focus on community based dialogue projects. Kasparian (2010), Sutherland (2012), and Yu (2011) all share in their support for and value of dialogue between migrants and Indigenous peoples based on the notion that knowing one another, and the truths that are not commonly shared through education, or the media as mentioned above, is the best way to begin relationships aiming at reconciliation. What is important to add here, though, is that dialogue is also an important exercise in learning about oneself. As Alfred (2009) posits the logic of colonization is logic of disconnection and erasure of Indigenous peoples from their cultures, traditions and ultimately themselves. Dialogue also allows for self-reflection and knowing oneself, and offers then a challenge to colonial systems, which seek to destroy that knowledge. Furthermore, this notion of knowing oneself is essential to racialized migrants because a self-reflective dialogue around their new lives in Canada leads to the types of analysis that challenge state and media centered initiatives which seek to present untrue and misrepresenting stories about Indigenous peoples. Finally,  Sehdev  (2011)  offers  a  helpful  narrative  in  which  racialized  migrants   are  encouraged  to  think  about  their  relationship  to  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada  in   terms  of  treaties.  They  argue  that:  "we  need  to  turn  from    an  understanding  of  treaty   as  a  historical  artifact,  based  in  European  notions  of  rights  and  freedoms,  and  move      37  

toward  Aboriginal  philosophies  of  treaty  as  a  process  of  making  and  keeping  good   relations."  (p.273)  Treaties  in  this  sense  are  a  constant  and  challenging  process  of   negotiating  power  and  ideas  of  superiority  that  the  Canadian  colonial  system  are   based  upon  but  ultimately  work  to  build  respect  and  trust  which  are  essential

elements of building positive and reconciliation based relationships. Finally, Gyepi-Garbrah et al. (2013) offer an Indigenous-led, educationfocused program geared towards educating non-aboriginal and migrant communities which is part of the operations of a settlement service organization in Winnipeg Canada. They argue that "it is important because it may permit modern cultural hybridity in ways that are led by the strength of Aboriginal cultures in ways that are not fixed in idyllic past or in negative modern misconceptions of `whitestream' society." (p.1799)
Overall,  the  literature  on  the  topic  about  the  relationship  between  Indigenous   peoples  in  Canada  and  migrant  peoples  to  Canada  is  complicated  and  broad  based.   The  theoretical  discussions  particularly  around  the  settler-colonial  state,  and  the   contentious  discussion  around  the  relationship  between  migrants  as  settlers  on   Indigenous  lands,  while  at  the  same  time  being  marginalized  by  the  white   supremacist  state,  are  very  interesting  and  require  some  further  research.  One  thing   that,  I  believe,  this  literature  lacks,  however,  is  a  discussion  about  how  the  ideas   actually  get  operationalized  in  the  day-to-day  relationships  between  Indigenous  and   racialized  migrants  in  society  more  broadly.  Perhaps  more  work  (Srikanth,  2012)   around  studies,  which  profile,  as  the  Madriaga-Vignudo  (2012)  study  did,  would      38  

help  bring  to  light  how  these  hypothesized  relationships  are  being  lived  out.  The reality  of  the  solution  discussion in the literature is that we cannot say how

successful these proposals will be. Furthermore, we cannot say if one solution above others, or a multi-faceted approach incorporating elements of these, or entirely new ideas are required to address this historically based systemic issue of broken relationships. The next section of the paper, however, will examine projects taken on by organizations that have explored some of these questions and put these ideas into practice.   
                                                                                       39  

PART  SIX:  CASE  STUDIES      No  One  Is  Illegal         In  this  section,  I  will  outline  the  work  of  six  different  organizations  that  have   through  their  operations  made  significant  efforts  in  order  to  begin  to  build   reconciled  relationships  between  Indigenous  peoples  and  migrants  in  Canada.  The   six  organizations  will  are  No  One  is  Illegal,  Kairos  Canadian  Ecumenical  Justice   Initiatives,  Canadian  Roots  Exchange,  The  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  of   Canada,  and  the  City  of  Vancouver.  These  organizations  were  chosen  not  only   because  of  their  commitment  to  this  work  but  also  because  they  show  the  breadth   and  diversity  of  this  work,  as  well  as  highlight  some  of  the  different  approaches  that   have  been  taken  in  order  to  achieve  the  objectives  that  have  been  set  out.        No  one  is  Illegal  (NOII),  according  to  Harsha  Walia,  an  organizer  with  the  

Vancouver  Chapter  of  the  organization  is     Concurrently  an  ideological  framework  to  counter  border  imperialism...  and   an  extended  network  of  grassroots  migrant  justice  groups  without  any   overarching  centralization  rooted  in  anticolonial,  anti-capitalist,  ecological   justice,  Indigenous  self-determination,  anti-occupation  and  antiopressive   communities.  (Walia,  2013,  p.  98)      NOIIis,  according  to  this  quotation,  an  organization  that  is  interested  in  building   community  coalitions  with  like-minded  organizations  around  shared  priorities.   What  is  also  interesting  about  this  description  of  the  organization  is  the  fact  that   while  NOII  identifies  itself  as  a  migrant  justice  organization  but  at  the  same  time   sees  working  with  communities  who  are  battling  colonialism,  capitalism  and  an   affront  on  Indigenous  self-determination  as  integral  to  their  mandate  of   deconstructing  boarders  and  working  for  just  societies  for  all.  Walia,  in  a  quotation  

  

40  

from  an  interview  with  the  Halifax  media  co-op,  explains  NOII's  intersectional   analysis  in  this  way:     "It  is  central  to  organize  our  movements  in  solidarity  with  Indigenous   struggles  and  to  understand  that  we  cannot  have  any  social  or  environmental   justice  movement  that  doesn't  deal  with  the  reality  of  settler  colonialism   because  every  system  of  oppression  is  organized,  within  Canada  at  least,   around  settler  colonialism.  (Walia,  In  Canada  Every  System  of  Oppression  is   Organized  Around  Settler  Colonialism,  2014)   We  can  tie  this  idea  into  some  of  the  theoretical  concepts  discussed  earlier  in  the   paper  and  identify  the  themes  of  colonialism  and  white  supremacy  as  some  of  the   themes  through  which  NOII  has  established  a  broad  mandate  of  working  on  issues   of  migration,  borders  and  citizenship  but  also  of  Indigenous  self-determination,  anti- colonialism  and  anti-racism.  On  the  Vancouver  chapter  website  alone,  there  are  12   campaigns  listed  under  their  "Indigenous  support"  tab.        What  is  most  powerful  about  this  model  of  organizing  around  issues  of  social  

justice  is  that  it  seems  to  be  a  forum  for  any  group  facing  marginalization  due  to   systems  of  oppression  inherent  in  settler  societies  such  as  Canada,  to  voice  their   issues,  obtain  some  support  and  furthermore  to  feel  part  of  a  community  that  sees   "your"  issues  as  inherently  relating  to,  and  impacting  "theirs".  Especially  in  a  system   that  seeks  to  separate  peoples  from  one  another  and  create  differences  amongst   groups  through  the  process  of  othering,  NOII  seems  to  be  providing  through  their   community-based  model  a  significant  and  empowering  challenge  to  the  notion  that   relationships  of  trust,  reconciliation  and  mutual  respect  can  be  fostered  between   Indigenous  peoples  and  racialized  migrants  in  Canada.    

  

41  

Kairos:  Canadian  Ecumenical  Justice  Initiatives   Kairos:  Canadian  Ecumenical  Justice  Initiatives  is  an  ecumenical,   membership  based  organizations  which  works  on  a  broad  range  of  social  justice   issues  on  behalf  of  11  different  church  organizations  including  The  Anglican  Church   of  Canada,  The  Canadian  Catholic  Organization  for  Development  and  Peace,   Canadian  Conference  of  Catholic  Bishops,  Canadian  Religious  Conference,  Christian   Reformed  Church  in  North  America,  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church  in  Canada,   Mennonite  Central  Committee  of  Canada,  The  Presbyterian  Church  in  Canada,   Presbyterian  World  Service  and  Development,  The  Primate's  World  Relief  and   Development  Fund,  Religious  Society  of  Friends  (Quakers)  and  the  United  Church  of   Canada.  In  its  membership  Kairos  has  both  organizations  that  represent  entire   denominations,  such  as  the  Anglican  Church  in  Canada,  but  also  has  the  official   development  organizations  of  denominations  such  as  the  Primate's  World  Relief  and   Development  Fund  as  members.  Furthermore,  specifically  with  respect  to  their   programming  around  Indigenous  rights,  Kairos  is  made  up  of  many  of  the   organizations  who  were  responsible  for  running  of  residential  schools  as  well  as  for   aggressive  and  violent  missionary  conversions  of  Indigenous  and  non-Christian   migrants  of  colour  to  North  America.     In  terms  of  their  work,  a  board  made  up  of  the  member  organizations  sets   strategic  priorities  which  are  outlined  most  recently  in  a  document  entitled  Kairos   Strategic  Plan  2010-2015.  This  document  outlines  specific  intentions  to  work  with   both  Indigenous  and  migrant  communities  in  Canada  using  a  rights-based  

  

42  

framework.  It  suggests  that  "By  focusing  our  advocacy  in  Canada  on  the  economic,   social  and  cultural  rights  of  Indigenous  and  migrant  communities,  Kairos   contributes  to  the  goal  of  a  Canada  without  poverty."  (Kairos:  Canadian  Ecumenical   Justice  Initiatives  ,  2009,  p.  7)  The  link  here  that  is  drawn  between  Indigenous  and   migrant  communities  generally  is  the  economic  and  social  barriers  they  face  to   inclusion,  in  other  words  their  shared  experience  of  marginalization  in  Canada.   Another  interesting  element  of  the  Kairos  model,  which  is  not  necessarily   represented  in  their  policy,  is  the  integration  of  these  two  pieces  of  work  in  the  day- to-day  operations  of  the  organization.  There  is  one  staff  person,  in  the   organizational  chart  of  the  organization  who  is  responsible  for  both  the  Indigenous   and  migrant  justice  portfolios  of  work  who  has  the  title:  "Network  and   Indigenous/Migrant  Relations/Movement  Building  Coordinator"  (Kairos:  Canadian   Ecumenical  Justice  Initiatives  ).  In  this  way,  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  do  this  work   in  silos  because  the  same  individual  is  responsible  for  the  program  with  respect  to   both  communities,  and  can  see  the  links  and  necessity  in  bringing  these  two  groups   together  through  the  program  work  of  the  organization.        To  give  an  example  of  one  event  that  Kairos  has  done  particularly  well  in  this  

area  that  I  was  fortunate  to  be  able  to  attend  as  a  placement  student,  was  an   Indigenous  migrant  education  night  that  was  held  in  Edmonton,  Alberta.  First,  the   event  began  with  an  exercise  called  The  Blanket  Exercise  in  which  participants,  who   were  from  both  the  Indigenous  and  migrant  communities  within  Edmonton,  were   asked  to  stand  on  blankets,  which  represented  Turtle  Island,  or  North  America.   Throughout  the  course  of  the  participatory  exercise,  participants  are  led  through  a  

  

43  

narrative  of  Canada's  colonial  history  and  the  blanketed  area  gets  smaller  and   smaller  representing  the  land  that  Indigenous  peoples  were  removed  from  through   the  process  of  colonization.  The  event  followed  with  a  representative  from  an   Indigenous  community  as  well  as  a  racialized  migrant  community  member  offering   reflections  on  the  necessity  of  building  relationships  between  racialized  migrant  and   Indigenous  communities.  Some  of  the  concerns  raised  by  the  Indigenous   representative  on  the  panel  were  around  the  effects  of  colonization  in  the  present   day  and  how  the  focus  for  Indigenous  peoples  is  not  relationship  building  and   fostering  connection,  but  rather  on  survival  in  broken  communities.  Harvey  Eagle,   the  Indigenous  representative  also  touched  on  the  notion  of  what  a  good   relationship  between  colonizer,  settler,  and  colonized  looks  like  and  challenged  the   notion  that  there  was  ever  a  good  relationship  at  all,  and  therefore  advocated  for  a   radically  new  and  inclusive  opportunity  to  build  genuine  good  relationships.  (Eagle,   2014)  This  was  followed  by  a  presentation  in  which  the  coordinator  for  Action  for   Healthy  Communities,  a  settlement  organization  that  had  agreed  to  host  the  event,   expressed  her  worry  about  the  fact  that  newcomers  don't  know  the  stories  of   Indigenous  peoples  and  therefore  don't  know  how  to  be  good  neighbours  despite   their  genuine  intention  to  do  so.  She  also  lauded  Kairos  for  organizing  the  event  as  a   good  educational  first  step  for  migrant  communities  to  begin  to  understand   Indigenous  histories  and  histories  of  Canadian  colonization  from  Indigenous   perspectives.    (Dumo,  2014)  Overall,  both  the  strategic  mandate  of  Kairos  as  well  as   their  staffing  structure  seem  to  lend  well  to  be  able  to  integrate  programming  and  

  

44  

resource  development  for  education  between  Indigenous  and  migrant  communities   in  Canada  with  the  goal  of  mutual  respect  and  decolonized  relationships.     Canadian  Roots  Exchange   Canadian  Roots  Exchange  is  an  education  initiative  for  youth  recognizing   their  unique  position  in  creating  change  and  building  sustainable  movements  for   reconciliation.  It  identifies  that  its  work  is  "built  on  the  hope  that  we  can  inspire  a   generation  of  leaders  who  will  redefine  and  strengthen  relationships  between   Canada's  peoples."  (Canadian  Roots  Exchange    n.d.)  This  focus  on  youth  is  focused   then  both  on  education,  but  also  knowledge  dissemination  in  that  it  is  about   developing  leaders  who  are  equipped  to  share  their  knowledge  and  model  what   decolonized  relationships  look  like  between  settler  and  Indigenous  peoples.   Canadian  Roots  identifies  five  main  goals  in  terms  of  the  program  design  which   include:  building  networks  of  solidarity,  practicing  what  we  preach,  discovering   positive  realities,  creating  safe  spaces  for  dialogue,  including  Indigenous  worldviews   in  everyday  thought  and  having  fun  together.  These  goals  are  reflective  of  the  ways   in  which  the  program  is  structured  around  exposure-experiences  and  cross  cultural   community  visits,  storytelling  and  group  facilitated  debrief  processes  to  understand   what  the  experience  was  and  what  participants  took  away  from  them.        In  terms  of  building  networks  for  solidarity,  this  is  based  on  a  relational  

sense  of  knowing  one  another  and  understanding  history  from  the  peoples  who   experienced  it.  Canadian  Roots  suggests  that:  "As  we  learn  about  one  another's   triumphs,  struggles,  challenges  and  opportunities,  we  commit  ourselves  to  standing   up  together  for  a  more  equal  and  prosperous  Canada."  (Canadian  Roots  Exchange  

  

45  

n.d.)  The  concept  of  solidarity  as  the  focus  of  the  program  is  well  represented  in  this   quotation  and  challenges  participants  to  stand  together,  based  on  the  call  of  those   who  experience  oppression,  to  challenge  it  and  support  more  fair  and  just   communities  through  relationships  based  on  mutual  understanding  and  accurate   histories.        The  second  goal  around  practicing  what  we  preach  is  about  taking  guidance  

from  the  Indigenous  and  settler  communities  with  whom  Canadian  Roots  Exchange   works,  to  ensure  respect.  It  identifies  the  need  to  only  go  where  they  are  invited,  as   well  as  to  having  Indigenous  and  newcomer  leadership  as  ways  that  they  ensure   that  this  goal  is  central  to  their  programming.  This  ensures  genuine  consultation  and   challenges  colonial  notions  of  white  supremacy  in  terms  of  leadership,  knowledge   and  powerlessness  often  faced  by  these  communities  within  Canada.        The  next  goal  of  the  organization  is  to  discover  positive  realities  about  

Indigenous  peoples.  This  is  a  very  important  one  when  doing  work  around   marginalization,  and  truth  telling  as  these  provide  options  to  share  contemporary   stories  of  hope  and  resilience  in  the  face  of  systems  that  disempower  certain   peoples.  Canadian  Roots  challenges  through  this  goal  the  colonial  notions  that   Indigenous  and  racialized  migrants  need  to  be  saved  and/or  civilized  and  also  offers   these  communities  an  opportunity  to  learn  about  and  celebrate  their  identities.  This   is  a  particularly  powerful  challenge  to  the  education,  media  and  immigration   processes  which  seek  to  place  Indigenous  peoples  as  deviants,  historical  artefacts,   and  otherwise  as  needing  state  intervention  to  function  as  valuable  and  distinct   members  of  society.    

  

46  

  

Whenever  sensitive  topics  are  discussed  within  a  group  of  people  it  is  

important  that  Canadian  Roots  creates  a  safe  space  for  dialogue  to  happen  where   participants  feel  both  challenged  by  the  information  they  are  learning  and  sharing,   but  also  that  they  are  comfortable  enough  to  have  a  positive  learning  experience.   The  fact  that  this  notion  of  caring  for  participants,  yet  pushing  the  comfort   boundaries,  is  central  to  the  goals  of  the  program,  offers  an  opportunity  for   transformed,  trust-based  and  respectful  relationships  to  emerge.        The  notion  that  Indigenous  histories  and  worldviews  are  relevant  to  the  

contemporary  political  social  and  economic  fabric  of  Canada  is  a  radical  notion  that   challenges  colonial  processes  which  seek  to  exclude  them.  The  goal  of  the  Canadian   Roots  Exchange  to  "fighting  the  myth  held  by  too  many  Canadians  that  Indigenous   knowledge  is  inapplicable  or  irrelevant  to  modern  life"  (Canadian  Roots  Exchange   n.d.)  is  of  utmost  importance  because  these  stories  are  not  told  through  the   education  and  other  systems  which  rather  support  colonial  and  white  supremacist   ideologies  and  value  this  knowledge  above  Indigenous  knowledge.        The  education,  dialogue  and  exposure  elements  of  the  Canadian  Roots  

Exchange  program  as  expressed  through  its  statement  of  philosophy  and  goals   seems  to  be  a  positive  way  in  engaging  youth  in  the  process  of  learning  about  each   other  in  a  supportive  environment.  This  program  also  is  positive  because  it  equips   people  through  its  leadership  development  focus  in  creating  ambassadors  for   reconciliation  and  therefore  ensures  that  the  program  has  the  opportunity  to  touch   those  who  participate  in  it.  Finally,  the  focus  on  youth  builds  sustainable  movements   for  reconciliation,  which  is  important  to  ensure  long-term  solutions  based  on  mutual  

  

47  

respect  and  understanding  in  a  colonial  system.  This  is  sorely  needed  in  a  system,   which  is  based  on  separation  of  communities  from  one  another  coupled  with  an   aggressive  educational  regime  that  spreads  misinformation  and  false  narratives  of   uncivilized  peoples  needing  civilization  about  Indigenous  peoples  to  both  white   settlers  and  racialized  migrants.       The  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission     

The  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  of  Canada  (TRC)  is  an  organization   that  has  a  very  broad  mandate,  but  for  the  purposes  of  this  paper,  I  will  be  focusing   on  one  specific  part  of  it,  and  ways  that  programming  around  this  element  have   taken  place  in  the  context  of  building  relationships  between  Indigenous  and   racialized  migrant  populations.  In  the  mandate  document  of  the  TRC  the   organization  has  the  responsibility  to  "Promote  awareness  and  public  education  of   Canadians  about  the  IRS  [Indian  Residential  School]  system  and  its  impacts;  and   identify  sources  and  create  as  complete  an  historical  record  as  possible  of  the  IRS   system  and  legacy.  The  record  shall  be  preserved  and  made  accessible  to  the  public   for  future  study  and  use."  (Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  of  Canada  ,  p.   1)Here  we  can  see  very  clearly  that  the  intention  of  the  organization  is  to  educate   Canadians  about  what  happened  in  residential  schools  but  also  create  a  historical   record  that  is  shared  for  further  learning.  Over  the  course  of  the  past  year  alone,  the   TRC  itself  through  their  national  events,  but  also  the  individual  commissioners  have   focused  on  the  need  for  migrants  to  engage  with  the  TRC  process  as  they  now  are   part  of  Canada  and  therefore  have  a  role  to  play  in  the  process.    

  

48  

  

At  the  TRC  event  that  I  was  fortunate  enough  to  attend  in  Edmonton  Alberta  

in  March,  one  of  the  most  interesting  elements  was  a  cultural  showcase  in  which   migrants  as  well  as  Indigenous  youth  were  asked  to  share  a  cultural  art,  dance  or   music  display  with  those  who  were  at  the  event  and  tuning  in  on  the  live  webcast  of   the  event.  There  were  Indigenous  youth  who  performed  such  cultural  dances  as  the   jingle  dance  and  throat  singing,  but  also  a  group  of  two  racialized  migrant  brothers   who  rapped  about  their  experience  of  migration,  the  hardships  they  faced  in  their   home  country,  and  also  the  struggles  they  faced  here  after  migration  on  the  basis  of   their  race.  This  showed  both  a  sense  of  solidarity  among  these  Indigenous  and   migrant  youth,  that  they  were  able  to  share  the  stage  and  their  artistic  expression  of   what  it  meant  to  be  them;  but  also  that  there  was  room  for  relationships  to  be  built   among  these  communities  through  their  cultural  traditions  and  stories.  The  theme   of  knowing  one  another,  which  is  similar  to  the  focus  of  the  Canadian  Roots   Exchange  program  seemed  to  be  a  very  integral  part  of  this  part  of  the  TRC   programming  and  also  showed  not  only  an  opportunity  but  a  necessity  for  cultural   and  artistic  elements  of  expression  were  important  to  the  sharing  of  the  individuals'   stories.        The  other  two  instances  that  will  be  highlighted  were  in  a  more  workshop-

style  setting  in  which  in  the  one  case  Commissioner  Justice  Murray  Sinclair   addressed  the  Canadian  Council  for  Refugees  plenary  at  their  November  2013  fall   consultation.  The  other  was  a  workshop  conducted  with  the  Ontario  Council  of   Agencies  Serving  Immigrants  (OCASI)  and  their  partners  at  an  event  entitled:  From   Remembrance  to  Reconciliation,  which  was  also  held  in  November  2013.  What  was  

  

49  

presented  in  both  of  these  settings  was  similar  and  provided  some  of  the  context   around  the  residential  school  project,  some  of  the  consequences  of  this  brutal   initiative  and  some  of  the  ongoing  intergenerational  effects,  which  continue  to   colonize  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada.  Furthermore,  and  more  specific  to  the  topic   at  hand,  was  a  challenge  to  the  Canadian  institutions  which  continue  to  colonize  and   assert  white  supremacist  dominance  over  racialized  peoples.  Central  to  the   discussion  at  the  Canadian  Council  for  Refugees  was  the  fact  that  institutionally   migrants  were  barred  from  the  real  histories  of  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada,   including  residential  schools  and  that  any  relationship  between  migrants  and   Indigenous  communities  needed  to  be  based  on  a  common  understanding  of   Indigenous  peoples  by  migrant  communities  and  that  these  histories  were  taught  by   Indigenous  people  from  Indigenous  perspectives.  (Sinclair  ,  2013  )  At  the  OCASI   event  there  was  a  focus  on  the  civilizing  mission  that  colonization  put  at  its  centre,   in  which  white  settlers  perpetuated  ideas  of  superiority  to  justify  the  colonization  of   Indigenous  peoples  and  their  lands.  Furthermore  there  was  a  significant  point  made   around  the  need  to  know  yourself,  and  how  that  happens  in  communities  and  when   your  community  is  ignorant  of  your  story.  Furthermore  this  lack  of  knowing  your   own  culture  has  detrimental  affects  on  your  sense  of  identity.  Sinclair  argued  that   "You  do  not  learn  who  you  are,  you  do  not  learn  where  you  came  from  only  from   your  parents.  You  learn  it  also  from  your  extended  family,  from  your  neighbours,   from  the  leaders  in  your  community,  from  the  heroes  that  your  community   addresses  on  your  behalf,  and  from  the  reinforcement  of  those  vales  through  the   institutions  in  which  the  leaders  of  your  community  come  from."  (Remembrance  to  

  

50  

Reconciliation  ,  2013  )  What  is  important  from  this  quotation  specifically  is  that   Justice  Sinclair  is  both  offering  a  scenario  in  which  the  best  of  times  offers   Indigenous  peoples  and  the  communities  that  surround  them,  which  may  or  may  not   be  made  up  of  Indigenous  peoples,  the  self-determination  in  shaping  the  identities   of  the  members  of  the  community  in  certain  ways  and  based  on  certain  cultural   values  and  traditions.  There  is,  however,  in  this  quotation  a  sense  of  this  process   going  terribly  wrong,  as  is  did  in  Canada,  when  paternalistic  and  intrusive  colonial   state  institutions  are  the  ones  naming  the  heroes,  values  and  cultural  norms  which   are  appropriate.  This  limits  and  even  rejects  entirely  self-determination  of  the   community  and  its  members.          The  positive  part  of  the  interventions  of  the  TRC  in  migrant-centred  

community  organizations  is  that  Indigenous  peoples  are  leading  the  dialogue  and   inviting  migrants  to  listen  and  learn  what  is  required  for  relationships  to  be  formed   with  members  of  the  Indigenous  community  in  Canada.  Furthermore,  it  is   combatting  again  problematic  education  and  providing  an  alternate  discourse  of   Indigenous  history  and  struggle  with  information  that  is  sorely  missing  from  both   formal  and  informal  methods  of  learning.     The  City  of  Vancouver   The  final  case  study  is  around  the  campaign  of  the  municipal  government  of   Vancouver  in  its  attempt  to  both  provide  a  forum  for  dialogue  between  what  it   terms  "the  original  inhabitants,  the  First  Nations;  the  urban  aboriginal  peoples  who   have  come  to  Vancouver  from  other  territories;  and  immigrants  who  are  newcomers   to  Vancouver"  (City  of  Vancouver  ,  2011,  p.  5).  The  other  project  was  the  creation  of  

  

51  

a  guide  outlining  all  the  information  that  newcomers  needed  to  know  about   Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada  and  Vancouver  which  included  information  about   aboriginal  cultural  teachings,  aboriginal  organizations  in  Vancouver  and  the  work   that  they  do,  the  Indian  Act  and  Indian  Residential  Schools,  some  definitions  of   important  concepts  such  as  treaties,  and  finally  a  section  on  dispelling  common   myths  about  Indigenous  people  in  Canada.  (City  of  Vancouver  ,  2014)      In  the  report  issued  at  the  end  of  the  dialogue  project  in  the  City  of  

Vancouver,  which  had  elements  of  dialogue  between  intergenerational  members  of   migrant  and  Indigenous  communities  as  well  as  intercultural  exchanges  to   Indigenous  friendship  centres  and  reserves,  there  were  some  important   recommendations  made.  These  included  the  need  for  continued  dialogue,  the  need   for  formal  and  informal  education  to  centre  the  stories  of  the  contemporary  realities   faced  by  Indigenous  peoples,  the  value  of  cultural  exchanges,  the  inclusion  of  the   arts,  culture  and  heritage,  not  only  historical  elements,  to  the  education  of  migrants   about  Indigenous  peoples.  (City  of  Vancouver  ,  2011)        What  is  important  about  this  initiative  is  that  it  was  initiated  by  an  elected  

assembly  of  settlers  who  held  a  specific  amount  of  power  and  access  to  resources  in   order  to  produce,  carry  out  the  research  in  consultation  with  Indigenous   communities,  and  disseminate  the  information  broadly  through  city  service  centres   and  the  city  broadly.  Furthermore  the  focus  on  public  education  and  dispelling  the   myths  about  Indigenous  peoples,  as  well  as  connecting  newcomers  to  Indigenous   service  and  programming  locations  allowed  for  newcomers  to  educate  themselves   about  the  issue.  Finally,  the  dialogue  project  and  their  helpful  recommendations  

  

52  

particularly  around  the  need  for  accurate  information  about  Indigenous  peoples  to   be  portrayed  to  migrants  to  Canada  is  vital  given  its  relative  availability  through   other  state  institutions  including  the  education  system,  media  and  immigration  and   citizenship  processes.                                                             

  

53  

PART  SEVEN:  DISCUSSION   In  terms  of  trying  to  identify  some  themes  and  conclusions  that  draw   together  the  case  study  and  literature  review  portions  of  this  paper  and  tie  it  to  the   post-colonial  methodology  of  praxis  there  are  three  points  I  would  like  to  discuss.   The  first  point  is  around  the  argument  in  the  literature  around  the  term  settler,  and   what  it  means  for  white  people  who  do  not  identify  as  migrants,  with  white  people   who  identify  as  migrants,  and  with  racialized  people  who  identify  as  migrants.  The   important  part  of  this  point  is  to  center  the  notion  that  was  outlined  in  the  literature   that  colonialism  and  notions  of  white  supremacy  are  deeply  interrelated  and  that,  in   the  case  of  Canada  at  least;  colonialism  is  inseparable  from  white  supremacy.  In  the   categories  listed  above,  there  are  two  of  three  who  then  have  a  greater  access  to   power  and  privilege  within  Canadian  society  because  of  their  connection  to   whiteness,  namely  white  people  who  don't  identify  as  migrants  to  Canada  and  white   migrants  to  Canada.  The  group  that,  however,  does  not  experience  those  same   privileges  afforded  to  white  people  are  racialized  migrants.  This  is  not  to  say  that   oppressive,  discriminatory  and  otherwise  marginalizing  actions  and  ideologies   cannot  take  root  in  racialized  migrants  but  simply  that  their  relationship,  because  of   their  definition  outside  of  white  supremacy  positions  them  differently  in  relation   colonialism,  and  the  ongoing  erasure  of  Indigenous  identities  through  institutional,   social  and  other  forces  in  settler-  colonial  Canada.  What  is  also  important  to  note   here  is  the  opportunity  for  relationships  that  are  possible  between  Indigenous   peoples  and  racialized  migrants  in  Canada.  On  the  one  hand,  Indigenous  peoples   face  both  the  dispossession  of  land  and  resources  inherent  in  colonialism,  but  also  

  

54  

experience  the  consequences  of  xenophobia  and  racism,  which  is  a  result  of  being   positioned  in  opposition  to  white  supremacy  and  superiority.  That  however  is  not   the  whole  story,  as  it  leaves  out  the  context  of  the  pressures  that  are  in  place  to  mold   and  shape  racialized  migrants,  even  through  their  own  marginalization  based  on   race.  As  discussed  above,  migrants  through  their  participation  in  the  immigration   and  citizenship  processes,  the  formal  education  system  and  through  the   consumption  of  mainstream  media  are  in  many  ways  encouraged  to  adopt  the   colonial  mentalities  that  dominate  state  discourses.  In  essence  the  state  constructs   racialized  migrants  as  settlers  through  indoctrination  of  colonial  discourses,  which   encourages  the  adoption  of  prejudicial  views,  and  active,  or  passively  discriminatory   actions.  In  this  way  the  act  of  being  a  settler  is  learned,  and  ideological  and  about   much  more  than  taking  up  physical  space  which  has  been  colonized  and  may  or  may   not  be  covered  by  treaties.     Given  this  information,  perhaps  we  need  to  start  thinking  about  settlerism,   and  not  simply  being  a  settler.  Adopting  the  language  of  settlerism,  particularly  from   the  point  of  view  of  non-Indigenous  peoples,  allows  us  to  do  a  couple  of  things.  First,   it  allows  us  to  broaden  the  definition  of  being  a  settler  beyond  a  solely  geographical   concept  and  start  thinking  about  it  in  terms  of  a  system  that  is  based  on  the   domination  of  Indigenous  peoples  that  is  insidious  to  the  settler-colonial  state  and  is   expressed  through  its  actions,  institutions  and  structures.  In  this  way,  it  is  more  of   an  ideology,  or  a  system  of  belief.  What  is  inherent  in  this  proposition  is  that  in   essence  anyone,  including  racialized  migrants  whether  by  their  own  volition  or   because  of  the  barriers  erected  by  the  state  to  separated  Indigenous  stories  and  

  

55  

realities  from  public  discourses,  can  practice  settlerism.  Furthermore  these  actions,   regardless  of  who  performs  them  dehumanize,  erase  and  contribute  to  the  ongoing   colonization  of  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada.  We  need  to  complicate  this  idea   further  though  because  as  it  stands  it  still  presumes  the  conflation  of  white  settler,   and  racialized  migrant  populations  in  terms  of  their  relationship  to  Indigenous   peoples.     It  was  mentioned  above  that  colonialism  and  white  supremacy  are  intricately   linked  and  that  talking  about  the  concepts  separately  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which   Indigenous  and  racialized  migrant  communities  are  alienated  from  one  another.   However,  It  seems  wrong  to  then  conflate  a  community,  which  benefits  from  both   colonialism  and  white  supremacy  as  settlers  do,  with  a  community  who  may  benefit   from  colonialism  but  still  be  positioned  in  opposition  to  white  supremacy,  which  is   the  experience  of  racialized  migrants  in  Canada.  Settlerism  then  as  a  concept  needs   to  incorporate  the  fact  that  racialized  migrants  and  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada   share  a  common  system  because  of  their  status  as  not-white.  What  is  interesting   about  this  is  that  whiteness,  regardless  of  its  relationship  to  western  European   colonization  of  Canada,  is  connected  to  colonialism.   I  believe  it  is  helpful  to  think  of  settlerism  because  when  something  is   positioned  as  an  ideology  or  as  a  world-view,  it  also  suggests  that  there  is  another   option,  an  alternative  that  allows  for  resistance.  Particular  to  this  point  is  the  fact   that  these  ideologies  are  taught,  and  therefore  are  learned,  which  allows  for  the   option  of  unlearning  and  adopting  of  more  inclusive  and  less  violent  world-views  

  

56  

that  do  not  have  colonialism  at  their  center.  The  content  of  these  new  ideologies   then,  is  where  I  will  turn  next.     Secondly,  what  seems  clear  about  the  creation  of  new  ideologies,  is  that  who   is  the  producer  of  the  knowledge  and  who  gets  to  say  which  knowledge  is  truth  has   a  tremendous  bearing  on  who  will  be  included  and  excluded  and  even  erased.  With   this  understanding  in  mind  what  is  clear  if  our  expectation  is  to  decolonize   relationships  between  Indigenous  peoples  in  Canada  and  racialized  migrants  to   Canada,  Indigenous  peoples  need  to  be  solely  in  charge  of  the  production  of   knowledge  and  stories  that  are  being  told  about  their  communities.  This  means  that   institutions  including  the  education  system,  the  media,  and  the  immigration  and   citizenship  processes  need  to  be  radically  altered  to  make  central  the  leadership  of,   and  self-determination  for  Indigenous  peoples  central.  Colonial  thinkers  don't  know,   and  cannot  possibly  be  trusted  with  Indigenous  stories  and  histories,  nor  can   institutions  created  by  an  inherently  colonial  settler  state  such  as  Canada.  This   reminds  me  of  the  old  adage  that  you  cannot  use  the  master's  tools  to  deconstruct   the  master's  house.  Giving  Indigenous  peoples  the  spaces  to  self-define  and  teach   their  discourses  provides  a  radical  challenge  to  the  ability  of  the  state  to  define  and   shape  the  ideas  of  new  immigrants  to  Canada.  In  this  way  migrants  then  would  be   able  to  resist  the  institutions  that  perpetuate  these  untruths.     The  final  part  of  this  analysis  is  around  the  question  of  dialogue  projects  and   what  comes  next.  It  seems,  at  least  through  some  of  the  literature  and  case  studies,   that  a  dialogue  model  is  the  way  that  has  captured  much  of  the  imagination  of   organizations  that  have  carried  out  work  with  Indigenous  peoples  and  migrants  to  

  

57  

Canada.  In  the  examples  of  Kairos,  the  Canadian  Roots  Exchange,  and  the  City  of   Vancouver  dialogue  projects  were  at  least  one  of  the  primary  focuses  of  the   programming  work  of  the  organization.  What  is  important  to  recognize  here  is  that   what  is  required  to  decolonize  Canada,  and  the  relationships  between  different   groups  living  within  the  geographical  space,  is  a  comprehensive  project  of  reform,   and  therefore  requires  comprehensive  action.  In  this  way,  I  think  the  most  helpful   and  powerful  model  is  that  which  is  exhibited  by  No  One  Is  Illegal.  In  case  of  NOII,  as   mentioned  above,  they  center  their  analysis  in  an  intersectional  analysis  which   includes  colonialism,  anti-racism,  anti-capitalism  Indigenous  self-determination,   and  anti-occupation  and  encourages  holistic  solutions  that  resist  colonial  tactics  of   compartmentalizing  issues  and  therefore  people.  Furthermore  their  focus  on   coalition  work  with  like-minded  organizations  led  by  the  very  communities  most   affected  by  colonial,  white  supremacist  settler  ideologies,  allows  for  the  community   to  determine  the  needs  and  priorities  of  their  engagement  in  issues  and  initiatives.   In  this  way,  a  community  can  define  the  solution  and  tactics  that  work  best  for  them   and  relationships  of  power  in  this  context  are  then  decolonized.  While  this  system   seems  like  the  best  option,  Hayden  King  still  offers  some  important  warnings  that   may  arise  out  of  coalition  work  with  Indigenous  peoples  using  the  model  such  as   that  used  by  NOII.  He  cautions  that     "If  our  allies  go  home  without  recognizing  their  responsibilities  (challenging   colonial  frameworks  in  institution,  economy  and  society  generally  in  an  effort   to  end  colonization)  the  conditions  that  produce  our  struggles  will  remain   and  recycle.  Indigenous  communities  will  continue  to  be  marginalized  so   others  may  benefit."  (2014,  p.  12)       

  

58  

There  is  an  important  reminder  here  that  decolonization  and  coalition  work  which   challenges  colonialism  in  solidarity  with  Indigenous  peoples  is  ongoing  and  doesn't   simply  end  with  the  end  of  a  campaign,  or  when  a  specific  goal  has  been  reached.  It   rather  involves  ongoing  work  to  dismantle  colonial  views,  which  have  been   ingrained  in  people  through  the  settler  colonial  state,  as  well  as  active  work  to   challenge  others  to  identify  and  work  to  correct  settlerism  within  themselves.                                                                                                              59  

PART  EIGHT:  CONCLUSION            This  study  attempted  to  offer  a  thoughtful  presentation  of  the  academic,  grey  

and  government  literature  as  well  as  case  studies  of  organizations  that  are  doing   important  work  of  building  decolonized  relationships  between  Indigenous  peoples   in  Canada  and  racialized  migrants  to  Canada.  Furthermore  it  sought  to  offer  and   highlight  some  work  being  done  by  organizations,  and  outline  areas  for  further   work  within  this  field  both  at  the  academic  and  grassroots  levels.  What  became  clear   throughout  was  that  there  is  a  desperate  need  for  truth  from  the  Indigenous   perspective  to  be  shared.  Decolonization  it  seems  happens  both  when  we   collectively  as  white  settlers  as  well  as  new  migrants  to  Canada  understand  truly  the   histories  of  the  lands  which  we  occupy  and  our  positions  in  relation  to  a  notion  of   white  supremacist  colonization  which  persistently  rears  its  ugly  head  through  the   institutions  of  the  state.  Taiaike  Alfred  (2009)  contends  that  colonialism  is  a  project   that  is  based  on  the  notion  of  the  perpetuation  of  disconnection,  which  is  radically   challenged,  by  notions  of  relational  and  interconnected  worldviews  held  by   Indigenous  peoples.  In  this  way,  connecting  with  ourselves,  our  true  histories,  and   understanding  these  histories  in  relation  to  one  another  is  a  form  of  resistance  to   colonialism  and  the  organization  institutions  and  structures  of  the  settler-colonial   state,  which  is  Canada.  It  is  actions  of  resistance  like  this  that  I  believe  will  begin  to   build  the  bridge  across  the  parallax  gap  that  is  apparent  in  the  immigration   discourse  as  outlined  by  Bauder  (2011)  and  will  also  begin  to  build  the  bridges   between  the  relational  gap  that  exists  between  Indigenous  peoples  and  racialized   immigrants  because  of  the  ideology  of  settlerism.    

  

60  

BIBLIOGRAPHY        Abu-Laban,  J.  (2001).  The  Future  and  the  Legacy:  Globalization  and  the  Canadian   Settler  State.  Journal  of  Canadian  Studies  ,  262-276.      Alfred,  T.  (2009).  Peace,  Power,  and  Righteousness:  An  Indigenous  Manifesto.  Don   Mills:  Oxford  University  Press.      Alfred,  T.  (2005).  Wasase:  Indigenous  Pathways  of  Action  and  Freedom.   Peterborough:  Broadview  Press  .      Anderson,  B.  (2013).  Us  and  Them?:  The  Dangerous  Politics  of  Immigration  Control.   Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press.      Atleo,  C.  (2010).  From  Indigenous  Nationhood  to  Neo-Liberal  Aboriginal  Economic   Development:  Charting  the  Evolution  of  Indigenous  Settler  Relations  in  Canada.   Canadian  Social  Economy  Hub  .      Bannerji,  H.  (2000).  The  Dark  Side  of  the  Nation:  Essays  on  Multiculturalism,   Nationalism  and  Gender.  Toronto:  Canadian  Scholars'  Press.      Bauder,  H.  (2011).  Closing  the  Immigration-Aboriginal  Parallax  Gap.  Geoforum  ,  517- 519.      Bauder,  H.  (2011).  Closing  the  Immigration-Aboriginal  Parallax  Gap.  Geoforum  ,  42   (5),  517-519.      Canadian  Roots  Exchange  .  (n.d.).  Our  Philosophy  .  Retrieved  June  22,  2014  ,  from        Canadian  Roots  Exchange  :  http://canadianroots.ca/en/our-philosophy/      Citizenship  and  Immigration  Canada  .  (2012).  Discover  Canada:  The  Rights  and   Responsibilities  of  Citizenship  Study  Guide.  Ottawa:  Government  of  Canada  .      City  of  Vancouver  .  (2014).  First  Peoples:  A  Guide  for  Newcomers  .  Vancouver  :  City  of   Vancouver  .      City  of  Vancouver  .  (2011).  Vancouver  Dialogues:  First  Nations,  Urban  Aboriginal,  and   Immigrant  Communities  .  Vancouver  :  Social  Policy:  City  of  Vancouver  .      Coates,  K.  (2005).  Learning  from  Others:  Comparative  History  and  the  Study  of   Indigenous-Newcomer  Relations  .  Native  Studies  Review  ,  3-14.      Cole,  P.  (2006).  Cyote  and  Raven  Go  Canoeing:  Coming  Home  to  the  Village  .  McGill- Queens  University  Press.  

  

61  

Dhamoon,  R.,  &  Abu-Laban,  Y.  (2009).  Dangerous  (Internal)  Foreigners  and  Nation   Building:  The  Case  of  Canada  .  International  Political  Science  Review  ,  163-183.      Dumo,  S.  (2014,  March  26).  Indigenous/  Migrant  Education  Night  .  (S.  Dumo,   Interviewer)      Eagle,  H.  (2014,  March  26).  Indigenous/Migrant  Education  Night  .  (S.  Duomo,   Interviewer)      Fleras,  A.,  &  Elliot,  J.  (2002).  Engaging  Diversity:  Multiculturalism  in  Canada.  Totonto:   Nelson  Thompson  Learning  .      Francis,  D.  (2007).  The  Imaginary  Indian:  The  image  of  the  Indian  in  Canadian   Culture  .  In  T.  Das  Gupta,  C.  E.  James,  R.  C.  Maaka,  G.-E.  Galabuzi,  &  C.  Andersen,  Race   and  Racialization:  Essential  Readings  (pp.  234-239).  Toronto  :  Canadian  Scholars'   Press.      Ghorayshi,  P.  (2010).  Diversity  and  Interculturalism:  Learning  from  Winnipeg's   Inner  City  .  Canadian  Journal  of  Urban  Research  ,  89-104.      Godlewska,  A.,  Moore,  J.,  &  Bednasek,  C.  (2010).  Cultivating  Ignorance  of  Aboriginal   Realities  .  Canadian  Geographer  ,  417-440.      Gyepi-Garbrah,  J.,  Walker,  R.,  &  Garcea,  J.  (2013).  Indigeneity,  Immigrant  Newcomers   and  Interculturalism  in  Winnipeg  Canada.  Urban  Studies  ,  1795-1811.      Haig-Brown,  C.  (2007).  Resistance  and  Renewal:  First  Nations  and  Aboriginal   Education  in  Canada  .  In  T.  Das  Gupta,  C.  E.  James,  R.  C.  Maaka,  G.-E.  Galabuzi,  &  C.   Andersen,  Race  and  Racialization:  Essential  Readings  (pp.  168-178).  Toronto:   Canadian  Scholars'  Press.      Hall,  S.  (2007).  The  West  and  the  Rest:  Discourse  and  Power  .  In  T.  Das  Gupta,  C.  E.   James,  R.  C.  Maaka,  G.-E.  Galabuzi,  &  C.  Andersen,  Race  and  Racialization:  Essential   Readings  (pp.  56-60).  Toronto:  Canadian  Scholars'  Press.      Hiddleston,  J.  (2009).  Understanding  Postcolonialism.  Stocksfield:  Acumen  Publishing   Limited.      Jafri,  B.  (2012,  March  21).  Privilege  vs.  Complicity:  People  of  Colour  and  Settler   Colonialism  .  Retrieved  February  28,  2014,  from  Federation  for  the  Humanities  and   Social  Sciences  :  http://ideas-idees.ca/fr/blog.privilege-vs-complicity-people-of- colour-and-settler-colonialismx      Jefferess,  D.  (2008).  Postcolonial  Resistance:  Culture,  Liberation  and  Transformation.   Toronto:  University  of  Toronto  Press.  

  

62  

Kairos:  Canadian  Ecumenical  Justice  Initiatives  .  (n.d.).  Contact  .  Retrieved  June  22,   2014,  from  Kairos:  Canadian  Ecumenical  Justice  Initiatives  :   http://www.kairoscanada.org/contact/      Kairos:  Canadian  Ecumenical  Justice  Initiatives  .  (2009).  Kairos  Strategic  Plan:  2010- 2015.  Toronto.      Kasparian,  S.  (2010).  Aboriginal  Peoples:  Canada's  First  Welcoming  Community.   Where  do  Aboriginal  Immigrant  Relations  Stand  Today?        Kelley,  N.,  &  Trebilcock,  M.  (2010).  The  Making  of  the  Mosaic:  A  History  of  Canadian   Immigration  Policy  .  Toronto:  University  of  Toronto  Press.      King,  H.  (2014).  Intervention-  Addressing  the  Indigenous-Immigration  "Parallax   Gap".  Ryerson  Conference  on  Immigration  and  Settlement.  Toronto:   Antipodefoundation.org.      Kymlicka,  W.  (1998).  Finding  our  Way:  Rethinking  Ethnocultural  Relations  in  Canada   .  Don  Mills  :  Oxford  University  Press.      Lawrence,  B.,  &  Dua,  E.  (2005).  Decolonizing  Anti-Racism  .  Social  Justice  ,  32  (4),  120- 143.      Lutz,  J.  S.  (2008).  Makuk.  Vancouver  :  UBC  Press.      Madriaga-Vigundo,  L.  (2012).  Refugee-Aboriginal  Relations:  A  study  of  a  Canadian   Inner  City  .  Masters  Abstracts  International  .      Phung,  M.  (2011).  Are  People  of  Colour  Settlers  Too?  .  In  A.  H.  Foundation,   Cultivating  Canada:  Reconciliation  Through  the  Lens  of  Cultural  Diversity  (pp.  291- 298).  Ottawa:  Aboriginal  Healing  Foundation  .      Sinclair,  M.  (Performer).  (2013  ).  Remembrance  to  Reconciliation  .  Toronto  ,  Ontario   ,  Canada  .      Sandercock,  L.  (2009).  Towards  a  Cosmopolitan  Urbanism:  From  Theory  to  Practice.   In  L.  Sandercock,  &  G.  Attili,  Where  Strangers  Become  Neighbours:  Intergrating   Immigrants  in  Vancouver  Canada  (pp.  193-229).  Dordrecht:  Springer.      Sehdev,  R.  K.  (2011).  People  of  Colour  in  Treaty.  In  A.  Mathur,  J.  Dewar,  &  M.   DeGagne,  Cultivating  Canada:  Reconciliation  Through  the  Lens  of  Cultural  Diversity   (pp.  265-274).  Ottawa:  Aboriginal  Healing  Foundation  .      Sharma,  N.,  &  Wright,  C.  (2008).  Decolonizing  Resistance,  Challenging  Colonial   States.  Social  Justice  ,  120-138.  

  

63  

Sharma,  N.,  &  Wright,  C.  (2009).  Docolonizing  Resistance,  Challenging  Colonial   States  .  Social  Jusitce  ,  120-138.      Simpson,  A.  (2008).  Subjects  of  Sovereignty:  Indigeneity,  the  Revenue  Rule  and   Juridics  of  Failed  Consent.  Transdisciplinary  Conflict  of  Laws  .      Sinclair  ,  M.  (Performer).  (2013  ,  November  28).  Kitchener  ,  Ontario  ,  Canada  .      Smith,  A.  (2012).  Indigeneity,  Settler  Colonialism,  White  Supremacy.  In  D.  M.   HoSang,  L.  Oneka,  &  L.  Pulido,  Racial  Formation  in  the  Twenty-First  Century.   Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press.      Srikanth,  H.  (2012).  Multiculturalism  and  the  Aboriginal  Peoples  in  Canada  .   Economic  and  Political  Weekly  .      Stanger-Ross,  J.  (2008).  Municipal  Colonialism  in  Vancouver:  City  Planning  and   Conflict  over  Indian  Reserves  .  The  Canadian  Historical  Review  ,  541-580.      Stanley,  A.  (2014).  Intervention-  Addressinh  the  Indigenous-Immigration  Parallax   Gap.  Toronto:  Antipode  Foundation  .      Statistics  Canada.  (2008).  Aboriginal  Peoples  in  Canada  in  2006:  Inuit,  Metis,  and  First   Nations,  2006  Census.  Ottawa:  Government  of  Canada.      Suleman,  Z.  (2011).  Vancouver  Dialogues:  First  Nations,  Urban  Aboriginal  and   Immigrant  Communities  .  Vancouver  :  Social  Policy:  City  of  Vancouver  .      Sutherland,  J.  (2012).  Doorways  to  Home  Indigenou/Newcomer  Neighourhood   Dialogues.        Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  of  Canada  .  (n.d.).  Schedule  N:  Mandate  of  the   Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  of  Canada  .  Retrieved  June  22,  2014  ,  from   Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  of  Canada  :   http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/File/pdfs/SCHEDULE_N_EN.pdf      Turner,  D.  (2006).  This  is  not  a  Peace  Pipe:  Towards  a  Critical  Indigenous  Philosophy  .   Toronto:  University  of  Toronto  Press.      Walia,  H.  (2014,  February  22).  In  Canada  Every  System  of  Oppression  is  Organized   Around  Settler  Colonialism.  (C.  Hadley,  Interviewer)  Halifax  Media  Co-op.      Walia,  H.  (2013).  Undoing  Border  Imperialism  .  Edinburgh:  AK  Press.      Wolfe,  P.  (2006).  Settler  Colonialism  and  the  Elimination  of  the  Native  .  Journal  of   Genocide  Research  ,  387-409.  

  

64  

Yu,  H.  (2011).  Nurturing  Dialogues  between  First  Nations,  Urban  Aboriginal,  and   Immigrant  Communities  in  Vancouver  .  In  A.  H.  Foundation,  Cultivating  Canada:   Reconciliation  Through  the  Lens  of  Cultural  Diversity  (pp.  301-308).  Ottawa:   Aboriginal  Healing  Foundation.           

  

65  

