JOHN R. CONNON OF ELORA, ONTARIO AND HIS 360-DEGREE PANORAMIC CAMERA

by Cassandra Rowbotham

Bachelor of Fine Arts York University Toronto, Ontario, Canada 2012

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Photographic Preservation and Collections Management Toronto, Ontario, Canada ©Cassandra Rowbotham 2014

DECLARATION I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

ABSTRACT

John R. Connon (1862-1931) was a photographer and inventor who lived in Elora, Ontario, Canada during a time of remarkable innovations in the medium of photography. In 1886, Connon began to develop one of the earliest cameras to be capable of a full 360-degree photographic panorama using a single exposure. His early dedication to the use of flexible roll film, introduced by the Eastman Dry Plate and Film Company in 1885, allowed Connon to invent a camera that was ahead of its time. Through an agreement with C. P. Stirn, of C. P. Stirn's Patent Photographic Concealed Vest Cameras, Connon's design was transformed into the Wonder panoramic camera, further inspiring a succession of full-circle panoramic cameras including the Kodak Cirkut cameras. This thesis explores the history of Connon and his invention while acknowledging the history of this little-known  Canadian  inventor's  important   contribution to the history of photographic technology.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Certain institutions and individuals were instrumental in the research and construction of this thesis. George Eastman House, Archives of Ontario, and most importantly the Wellington County Museum & Archives all house collections crucial for this research and provided me with excellent assistance accessing their materials. Faculty and staff at Ryerson University, including my first and second readers Robert Burley and Todd Gustavson, Technology Curator at George Eastman House, as well as Film & Photography Preservation & Collections Management programme director David Harris all deserve credit for encouraging and supporting me with my academic pursuits. I send a special thankyou to Brian Polden and Martin Magid for their valuable contributions to my research. Finally, I would like to recognize Robert Lansdale, editor for the Photographic Historical Society of Canada's  publication   Photographic Canadiana. His guidance, patience and enthusiasm kept me focused, excited and motivated to continue and promote this research into Canadian photographic history.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS Author's  Declaration Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Figures Introduction Literature Survey & Collections Research 1. The Panorama and Its Origins 2. Thomas & John Connon: Early Photographic Involvement 3. Challenging the Limitations of the Photographic Medium 4. Manufacturing the Panoramic Camera 5. The Quest for Recognition Appendix Bibliography ii iii iv v vi 1 4 11 20 27 38 53 60 63

v

LIST OF FIGURES Titles as listed are descriptive. Sources are provided with images. Figure 1: Figure 2: Figure 3: Figure 4: Figure 5: Figure 6: Figure 7: Figure 8: Figure 9: Figure 10: Figure 11: Figure 12: Figure 13: Figure 14: Figure 15: Figure 16: Figure 17: Figure 18: Figure 19: Figure 20: Figure 21: Figure 22: Figure 23: Figure 24: Figure 25: Figure 26: Figure 27: Figure 28: Figure 29: Figure 30: Robert Barker's  rotunda, Edinburgh, 1801 Rotation of a panoramic camera lens Fontayne and Porter, Cincinnati panorama, 1848 Eadweard Muybridge, Panoramic San Francisco (fold out), 1877 Eadweard Muybridge, Panoramic San Francisco (overlapped), 1877 Scanning motion of a rotating lens panoramic camera Megaskop Panoramic Camera, ca. 1854 Ellipsen Daguerreotype panoramic camera patent diagram, 1843 Thomas  Sutton's  view  camera, ca. 1861 Pantoscopic camera, 1862 Gem Panorama patent diagram, 1889 John  R.  Connon's panoramic camera at the Elora Gorge, ca. 1887 Portrait of Thomas Connon, ca. 1880 Portrait of John Robert Connon, ca. 1880 Original Connon photography studio at Mill & Metcalfe Streets, ca. 1863 Connon home and photography studio at Geddes and Moir Streets, ca. 1872 Connon family portrait, ca. 1880 John Connon, aged 5, 1887 John Connon taking a photograph, ca. 1913 Connon photography studio cabinet card versos, ca. 1870 Connon landscape stereoview, ca. 1875 Outdoor group portrait from the Connon photography studio, ca. 1880 Roll-holder design by Thomas Connon, ca. 1881 John R. Connon with a stereoscopic camera, ca. 1885 John  R.  Connon's  shutter patent diagram, 1890 Falling timbers, 1886 Sketches for the panoramic camera, ca. 1885 Fishtail lens barrel scanning motion diagram John Connon's  first  panoramic  negative, 1886 Original panoramic camera lens, ca. 1886 vi 12 14 15 15 16 16 17 17 17 18 18 19 20 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34

Figure 31: Figure 32: Figure 33: Figure 34: Figure 35: Figure 36: Figure 37: Figure 38: Figure 39: Figure 40: Figure 41: Figure 42: Figure 43: Figure 44: Figure 45: Figure 46: Figure 47: Figure 48: Figure 49: Figure 50:

John  R.  Connon's  panoramic camera, ca. 1887 Disassembled panoramic camera, ca. 1887 John  R.  Connon's  panoramic camera patent, 1887 Oiled panoramic paper negative, ca. 1887 Panorama of Brooklyn Bridge, ca. 1890 Connon & Stirn agreement, 1889 Wonder panoramic camera, George Eastman House C. P. Stirn panoramic camera patent, 1889 Wonder panoramic camera directions for use, ca. 1890 Wonder panoramic camera, historical photograph, ca. 1890 Trimmed panoramic negative, 1890 Kamaret advertisement, ca. 1890 P. S. Marcellus, Cycloramic camera patent diagram, 1893 Rockwood & Shallenberger, panoramic camera patent diagram, 1890 William J. Johnston, panoramic camera patent diagram, 1904 Portrait of John R. Connon, ca. 1920 Cartes de visite in store window, ca. 1875 Large paper negative with corresponding print, ca. 1885 Large nitrocellulose negative, ca. 1890 Small nitrocellulose negative, ca. 1890

34 35 36 40 43 44 45 46 46 48 49 53 53 54 54 59 61 62 62 62

vii

INTRODUCTION

John Robert Connon (1862-1931) of Elora, Ontario, patented a full-circle panoramic camera in 1887. This was the first revolving panoramic camera made to use a roll of newly released flexible film, allowing it to capture a full 360-degree image in a single exposure. The late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries represented a transitional and innovative period  in  the  field  of  photography.  Prior  to  Connon's  invention,  photographers  had  been  limited   to using metal or glass photographic plates to capture fine detail in their subjects. While they also had the option of using the paper negative process, this was considered an inferior method as it resulted in a lower resolution image. After its invention in 1851, the collodion process was preferable because of its reproducibility and clear results, but the use of glass plates made it cumbersome to carry out, particularly when photographing outside of the studio. Panoramic photography was affected by the same restrictions. Photographic panoramas made by a single exposure involved the use of a curved emulsion support and usually entailed large, unwieldy view cameras incapable of capturing a view of more than 150-degrees. Overcoming these physical limitations of the materials while striving for a reproducible and high quality photographic process was a challenge for many panorama photographers. Although a variety of innovative solutions were patented, it was the invention of flexible film that truly solved the issue  of  photography's  materiality  which had hindered development of panoramic photography. Flexible roll films, first largely marketed by George Eastman, were not initially accepted by photographers. Early versions had inconsistencies and were unable to match the image quality of the glass plate. However, John Connon had been an enthusiast for this new method of making negatives and had already experimented with semi-transparent sensitized paper as an assistant in

1

his father's (Thomas Connon 1832-1899) traditional photography studio business. John Connon's  early  dedication  to  this  new  material  was  a  key  factor  in  the  design  and  development   of  his  full  circle  panoramic  camera.  Following  the  invention  of  Eastman's  flexible  film,  his   camera offered a new, unique and compact solution for creating 360-degree panoramic negatives. Ahead of its time, photographers and consumers were not yet aware of the possibilities  for  the  panoramic  format  and  Connon's  camera  never  enjoyed great commercial success or historical recognition. Soon the camera was outdone by similar and improved versions patented by other inventors. Because of this, John R. Connon has had little attention for his contributions to the field of panoramic photography and most of what is known about him lies tucked away in numerous archives across Ontario. This thesis examines these collections to uncover  the  story  of  John  Connon's  360-degree panoramic camera and explores how his invention contributed to the field of panoramic photography. There is little published material available about the history of photography in Canada and I was hard pressed to find any mention of Connon and his contributions. As a result my research for this thesis employed many primary sources, dating from 1852 to 1956. I first heard about John Connon from a member of the Photographic Historical Society of Canada who had written a short article about him and had suggested there was more research to be done. I was intrigued  by  Connon's  story  and  made  my  first  visit  to  the  Archives  of  Ontario  in  September  of   2013, where a large collection of his textual records are kept. My objective was to investigate his life history as well as the unique qualities of his camera and why he was only rarely mentioned in published texts on the history of photographic cameras. What I found was a vast collection of letters, prints, negatives and other records that described a detailed story about this Canadian inventor who  it  appears  has  either  been  overlooked  or  forgotten  in  photography's  history. My

2

research expanded to collections at other institutions across Ontario and New York State as I discovered  how  far  Connon's  invention  had  actually  taken  him. My investigations have focused on the development, significance and context of John Connon's  invention.  Throughout  this  process  I  have come across a number of other important Canadian contributors to the field of photography that went unrecognized in existing written histories. This thesis aims to construct an account of one of those contributors, John R. Connon and his invention of the 360-degree panoramic camera. In this paper I analyze the factors that prevented  Connon's  historical  acknowledgement  by  investigating  the  photographic  industry  at   the time of his invention. By providing a background of the panoramic format, the Connon family and their involvement with photography, a description of related cameras, and an evaluation  the  factors  that  affected  Connon's  success,  my  goal  is  to  not  only  reveal  the  story  of   John Connon but  also  explore  his  relationship  to  a  fascinating  time  in  photography's  history.

3

LITERATURE SURVEY & COLLECTIONS RESEARCH

Although  little  has  been  published  that  is  specific  to  the  invention  of  John  R.  Connon's  panoramic   camera, a survey has been conducted of relevant texts related to the history of panoramic photography and photographic technology, and the photographic industry during the late nineteenth century. The first section begins with a review of existing literature on the history of the panoramic format and camera technology, which examines panoramic painting and the history of panoramic cameras. The next section focuses on the photographic industry in North America during the late nineteenth century, including texts that refer specifically to the time period Connon was working in, in order to provide greater context for topics covered in this thesis. Following this is an examination into related published materials, such as newspaper and magazine articles. Each section pays particular attention to texts specifically referencing the Connons and photography. Finally this survey provides an overview of the primary source material located at various archival, library, and private collections that was referenced for this thesis.

The History of the Panoramic Format and Camera Technology First, this section will investigate the history of popular optical illusions and spectacles beginning in the eighteenth century and continuing through the twentieth, focusing primarily on the panorama. As described in Panoramania!, this history begins with the invention of the panorama1 in painted form by Robert Barker (1739-1836) in 1787, and is further explained by Comment,2 Oettermann3 and Huhtamo4 who highlight its international popularity and begin to describe its integration with photography. In Daguerre's  manual  (1839),  a  new  interpretation of the large-scale version is described in the format of the

1

Ralph Hyde with introduction by Scott B. Wilcox, Panoramania!  :The  Art  and  Entertainment  of  the  "All Embracing"  View (London: Trefoil Publications, 1988). 2 Bernard Comment, The Panorama, trans. Anne-Marie Glasheen (London: Reaktion Books, 1999). 3 Stephen Oettermann, The Panorama: History of a Mass Medium, trans. Deborah Lucas Schneider (New York: Zone Books, 1997). 4 Huhtamo, Erkki, Illusions in Motion: Media Archeology of the Moving Panorama and Related Spectacles (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013).

4

diorama, an earlier invention by Daguerre that combined elements of image, light and three-dimensional space and contributed to his later invention of the daguerreotype5. This was the earliest link between the phenomenon of photography and the panoramic format I was able to find. Together, these sources provide a history of the panorama and an explanation of the desire to combine it with the medium of photography. Books focusing on the history of cameras, such as those by Lothrop6, Gustavson,7 Coe,8 and Auer9 provide useful timelines describing historical cameras used to create panoramic photography. None examine  Connon's  camera,  but  they  do  illustrate  the  capabilities  of  most  panoramic cameras during the time Connon was working on his invention, demonstrating where his invention fits into this history. These books all include the Wonder panoramic camera, a camera  based  on  Connon's  design, but descriptions of its history are inconsistent. Lothrop states: "Designed  by  J.R.  Connon,  and  patented  by  Carl  P.  Stirn,  New  York,  N.Y.  (U.S.  Patent  418,343,   December 31, 1889). Manufactured by Rudolf Stirn, Berlin, Germany, and marketed in America by  Stirn  &  Lyons,  New  York,  N.Y...  The  Wonder  Panoramic Camera is another example of the collaboration of Carl P. Stirn, New York, as patentee, though not always as inventor, and his brother,  Rudolf  Stirn,  Berlin,  Germany,  as  manufacturer  of  a  camera."6 Gustavson's  description  of  the  origins  of  this  camera is more general,  solely  crediting  its  creator  as  "made   by  Rudolf  Stirn  in  Berlin,  Germany."7 Coe  states  that  "on  6  May,  1887,  the  American  J.R.  Connon  was   granted an English patent for a rotating-camera design; his apparatus had a cord drive for turning the film rollers  as  the  camera  rotated.  Carl  P.  Stirn  patented  an  improved  version  of  Connon's  design  in  England   on  25  April,  1889.  Manufactured  by  Stirn  of  Berlin,  it  was  sold  as  the  Wonder  Panoramic  camera."8 However, Connon was in fact a Canadian, not an American. Michel Auer reiterates this statement.9
5

Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre, An Historical and Descriptive Account of the Various Processes of the Daguerreotype and the Diorama, (1839, repr., New York: Winter House, 1971) 81-86. 6 Eaton S. Lothrop, A Century of Cameras from the Collection of the International Museum of Photography at George Eastman House (Dobbs Ferry New York: Morgan & Morgan, 1982), 56. 7 Todd Gustavson, 500 Cameras: 170 Years of Photographic Innovation (Toronto: Sterling Publication Co., Inc., 2011), 318. 8 Brian Coe, Cameras: From Daguerreotypes to Instant Pictures (Gothenburg, Sweden: A.B. Norbrook, 1978), p. 169-176. 9 Michel Auer, The Illustrated History of the Camera from 1839 to the Present (Boston: New York Graphic Society, 1975), 261.

5

This section concludes with an examination of literature dedicated to the history of panoramic photography and its variant formats. Panoramic photography is often briefly noted in general photographic history texts. Rosenblum10 provides the most detailed account of the genre, with reference to well-known photographers such as Friedrich von Martens and Eadweard Muybridge. Harris11, in looking at the works of Eadweard Muybridge, describes the techniques of creating panoramic photographs using multiple images. Through 2002 to 2004 Brian Polden wrote a series of five short essays for Photographica World that outline the history of panoramic cameras. The most relevant is the fourth essay, which mentions Connon and  Stirn's  camera  designs  in  relation  to  other  similar  cameras.   Together the articles create an overview of the development of panoramic photography by means of examining specific examples of camera technology beginning in the 1860s and throughout the 1990s. Continuing this history, McBride12 discusses the development of the No. 10 Cirkut camera up to the 1940s. The sources in this section provide a description of the history of panoramic camera technology and  help  to  contextualize  Connon's  camera,  however  none discuss the connection between Connon and Stirn, or suggest that his ideas may have been misappropriated.

The Photographic Industry in North America During the Late Nineteenth Century In his book Early Photography in Canada13 Ralph Greenhill neglects to mention Connon, however in a later publication from 1979 by Greenhill and Birell two paragraphs are included which describe  the  photographer's  invention,  stating: "Eastman's  paper  stripping  film  was  used  by  John  Robert  Connon  (1862-1931) of Elora, Ont. in his  `whole-circle'  panoramic  camera,  which  he  patented  in  1887  in  Britain  and  the  United  States   (it was patented a year later in Canada). This camera was marketed in 1890 by Stirn & Lyon of

10 11

Naomi Rosenblum, A World History of Photography (New York: Abbeville Press, 2007), 97-98. David Harris, Eadweard Muybridge and the Photographic Panorama of San Francisco, 1850-1880 (Montreal, Quebec: Canadian Centre for Architecture, 1993) 38-51. 12 McBride,  Bill,  "Evolution  of  the  No.  10  Cirkut  Camera"   Graflex Historic Quarterly 4, no. 4 (fourth quarter 2009), 4-7. 13 Ralph Greenhill, Early Photography in Canada (Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1965).

6

New  York  (famous  for  their  `Concealed  Vest  Camera',  for  which,  incidentally, Connon made sample  photographs)  and  was  advertised  by  them  as  `The  Wonder  Camera'."14 Although brief, it is a relevant description of Connon and his panoramic camera and is followed by a short history of the Connon family. The text also briefly introduces business relationships Connon developed with George Eastman and C.P. Stirn. Jenkins provides a particularly useful background on the history of the photographic industry in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in his book Images and Enterprise15. This source provides an overview of the most successful photography companies at the time while also outlining major developments contributing to the evolution of the medium. Collins16 history of the Kodak Company complements and expands upon that described by Jenkins, while Brayer17 and Ackerman18 portray  the  story  from  Eastman's  point  of  view.  These  texts  help  to  situate  Connon's  invention  during  a   time when photographic technology was changing at breakneck speed. Additional books to note in this  section  include  MacKay's  America by the Yard: Cirkut Camera Images from the Early Twentieth Century19,  which  provides  a  detailed  history  of  the  evolution  of  Kodak's   Cirkut camera through the eyes of a panorama photographer. Also, Mina Hammer Fisher, niece of David H. Houston (1841-1906), one of the first patent holders for a roll film holder, provides a unique perspective  of  the  Kodak  Company  from  another  inventor  from  Connon's  time.20

Related Newspaper and Magazine Articles In a number of contemporary articles found in un-refereed publications John R. Connon does
14

Ralph Greenhill and Andrew Birell, Canadian Photography 1839-1920 (Toronto: Coach House Press, 1979) 116117. 15 Jenkins, Reese V. Images and Enterprise: Technology and the American Photographic Industry, 1839 to 1925 (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1975). 16 Collins, Douglas, The Story of Kodak, (New York: H. N. Abrams, 1990). 17 Brayer, Elizabeth, George Eastman: A Biography, (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1996). 18 Ackerman, Carl W., George Eastman (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1930). 19 Robert B. Mackay, America by the Yard: Cirkut Camera Images from the Early Twentieth Century (New York: W. Nortin, 2009), 8-24. 20 Mina Fisher Hammer, History of the Kodak and its Continuations: the First Folding Panoramic Cameras (New York: The House of Little Books, 1940) 34-35.

7

receive some mention suggesting his story has caught the attention of collectors, enthusiasts and amateur historians. Writers Steve Thorning21, Charles Long22, Claire Champ23 and Robert Lansdale24 have all written short articles about John R. Connon, in order to highlight his achievements as a Canadian photographer, inventor and historian in the Ontario area. One article in The Photo-Miniature25, discusses a timeline of the development of the panoramic  camera  and  Connon's  camera  is  listed  amongst  other   panoramic  cameras  of  the  time,  however  his  name  has  been  misspelled  as  "Cannon,".    Focus: A Journal of Photographic Interest26 featured  an  article  that  attempts  to  defend  Connon's  claim  to  the  kind  of   panoramic  camera  that  he  had  patented,  demonstrating  an  early  acknowledgement  of  Connon's  originality   and of how he lost out to improved versions of his camera patented shortly after his own.

Summary The source material listed above suggests strong interest in the topic of the panorama historically, but there are few published sources which look at panoramic photographic technology. There are many sources that discuss the No. 10 Cirkut camera, some that mention the Wonder panoramic camera, few that mention John R. Connon and even less that mention his 360-degree panoramic camera. The sources that approach  the  subject  of  Connon's  camera  tend  to  be  brief  and  factually  inconsistent.  Direct  references  to   Connon's  involvement  with  the  Wonder  panoramic  camera  occur less often. A void of information about Connon and his panoramic camera invention has been identified through the examination of secondary sources on the history of panoramic camera technology.

21

Steve  Thorning,  "Connon  became  a  full-time  photographer  after  European  trip,"  Elora Sentinel and Fergus Thistle, (March 22, 1994). 22 Charles  Long,  "In  the  Round,"  Beaver 80, no. 2 (April-May, 2000): 28-33. 23 Claire  Champ,  "Connon,  Thomas,"  Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online, vol. 12, (University of Toronto/Université Laval, 2003­) accessed 23 September 2013, http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/connon_thomas_12E.html. 24 Robert  Lansdale,  "Shean  Collection  Includes  History,"  Photographic Canadiana 28, no. 5 (March-April, 2003): 7. 25 "Panoramic  Photography,"  The Photo-Miniature, vol. 7 (October 1905): 1-12. 26 "Photography's  Advances,"  Focus: A Journal of Photographic Interest, vol. 3 no. 4 (April 1913, Montreal): 1014.

8

Archival Collections Most of the cited material has come from collections of primary sources that include textual records, photographic records, and pieces of photographic technology. The collections are housed at Archives of Ontario (Toronto, Ontario)27, Wellington County Museum & Archives (Elora, Ontario)28, Guelph University Library (Guelph, Ontario)29, Library and Archives Canada (Ottawa, Ontario)30 and George Eastman House (Rochester, New York)31. Some elements of private collections have also been included, such as the last known existing piece from John  Connon's  panoramic camera. The Connon family fonds is housed at Archives of Ontario and is made up of textual records, photographic slides, prints and negatives divided into six different series. Particularly important to this research are the twenty-six files of textual records that include letters, receipts, personal memoirs, and sketches  that  illuminate  the  story  of  John  R.  Connon's  invention.  The  letters  are  a  combination  of  both   personal and professional correspondence that provide documentation about the design and manufacture of the camera. There are also records and receipts which clearly illustrate how the camera was made, modified and operated. The photographs in this collection are very relevant to this thesis as there are both photographs  of  Connon's  panoramic camera as well as photographs made with the camera. Also significant to the Connon family fonds are the original Canadian, American, and British patents taken out by John Connon in 1887 and 1888. Another collection of Connon material can be found at the Wellington County Museum and Archives and includes: correspondence, prints and negatives. Most of this is personal and family correspondence,  but  some  does  refer  to  the  camera  invention  as  well  as  Thomas  Connon's  move  to   Canada and his decision to become a photographer by trade. Of particular importance is the collection of original panoramic prints and negatives, made by John R. Connon using both paper negatives and

27

Connon family fonds, 1887-1967, fonds 286, panoramic prints and negatives, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 28 Wellington County Museum & Archives, Connon correspondence, prints and negatives, record group A1977.67. 29 University of Guelph Library, Connon Collection. 30 Library and Archives Canada, Charles T. Corke Collection, R10027-0-9, John R. Connon fonds, MG30-D336. 31 George Eastman House, Technology Collection, Panoramic cameras.

9

nitrocellulose transparent negatives. Additional photographic prints and negatives created by the Connon Studio in Elora can also be found at Guelph University Library, as well as Library and Archives Canada. Guelph  University  Library  also  holds  a  vast  collection  of  material  related  to  John  R.  Connon's  later   professional pursuit as a historian for the village of Elora. While I quickly reviewed this material I discovered it was not relevant to this thesis and therefore, it is not referenced in this paper.

10

1. THE PANORAMA AND ITS ORIGINS

History of the Panoramic Format Prior to the first  public  announcement  of  photography's  invention  in  1839,  the  panorama  was  a   new and exciting format that had only recently been patented as an improvement on painting by Englishman, Robert Barker, in 1787. This idea grew out of the Age of Enlightenment, a time of a new interest and experimentation with optics and colour which lead to the development of numerous amusements  combining  light,  image,  movement  and  sound.  The  panorama's  ability  to  portray  reality  and   successfully incorporate three-dimensional elements in a way never seen before made it a spectacle that attracted large crowds32 comparable to that of the modern day motion picture. The fact that the panorama was deemed patentable at all suggests the idea was unique, marketable, and had monetary value. The type of panorama that Barker had patented was made with pre-photographic methods such as painting and engraving. Often the initial concept for the panorama would be drafted using the medium of engraving. Because of the large scale of the painted panorama, these engravings are the primary surviving documents that illustrate many of the spectacular panoramas built during the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.33 The  completed  panorama,  as  outlined  by  Barker's  patent,  was  in  the  form  of  a   large-scale painting that usually portrayed a landscape of a far-away place, or a scene from a recent event, war, or fictional story. Its exhibition required that the spectator enter a cylindrical room with a raised platform to become completely surrounded by the painting. The upper and lower margins were hidden, and skylight illumination fell onto the painting from behind an overhanging canopy, preventing shadows from  interfering  with  the  audiences'  view  of  the  image.34

32

Huhtamo, Erkki, Illusions in Motion: Media Archeology of the Moving Panorama and Related Spectacles (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013) 3-4. 33 Scott B. Wilcox, introduction to Panoramania!  :  The  Art  and  Entertainment  of  the  "All-Embracing"  View by Ralph Hyde (London: Trefoil Publications, 1988) 16. 34 Scott B. Wilcox, introduction to Panoramania!  :  The  Art  and  Entertainment  of  the  "All-Embracing"  View by Ralph Hyde (London: Trefoil Publications, 1988) 17-21.

11

Figure 1. Unknown, Section of the Rotunda, Leicester Square, in which is exhibited the Panorama. 1801. Hand-coloured aquatint etching ; 3.21 x 4.67 cm. © The Trustees of the British Museum.

In 1789, Mr.  Barker's  Interesting  and  Novel view of the City and Castle of Edinburgh, and the whole adjacent and surrounding country was  exhibited  in  Barker's  home  but  with  little  success,  as  it  was   of smaller scale and did not portray a full 360-degree circle. In order to fully recognize his vision, Barker erected a 250m² rotunda at Leicester Square in London, U.K. (see figure 1), where he exhibited London from the Roof of Albion Mills, which was an immediate success with the crowds. The format soon became an international craze, reaching New York by 1795 and Paris by 1800.35 The panorama remained popular throughout the nineteenth century and soon included new elements from other amusements like the diorama and the magic lantern, adding theatre, light, and movement to create a magical experience for the viewer. Alternative versions, such as the moving panorama, used a long roll of painted canvas advanced across a stage adding the illusion of seeing the image from a moving vehicle.36 As each new version was introduced the panorama quickly established itself as a form of entertainment which attracted large audiences as well as an opportunity for profit. This fascination with light and image created the perfect atmosphere  for  photography's  introduction,  by  means  of  the  daguerreotype,  the  first  commercially successful photographic process announced in 1839.
35 36

Ibid., 13. Huhtamo, Erkki, Illusions in Motion: Media Archeology of the Moving Panorama and Related Spectacles (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013) 5-7.

12

Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre (1787-1851), trained as painter and patent-holder for the daguerreotype was engrossed in a lifelong pursuit of optical amusements involving light and image. He had already contributed to this field of entertainment with his invention of the diorama in 1822, which like the panorama, was viewed in a specially designed auditorium to show the audience a standard painted landscape in a fresh and original way.37 Scenes hand-painted on linen were lit through coloured screens with natural light creating the illusion of depth and atmosphere in the scene. Showings of the diorama would present multiple scenes by rotating the audience platform to reveal a new scene.38 His announcement of the daguerreotype, a photograph captured on a surface of silver-plated copper, created an even larger phenomenon, as never before had such an image been captured on a two-dimensional plane.

The Incorporation of the Panorama into Photography With the public so entranced by both the larger-than-life panorama and the intricate photographic image of the daguerreotype, it is not surprising that a desire to combine the two arose immediately after photography was first introduced. The concept of a panorama had already proven itself complicated for painters, not only because of its large-scale and complicated construction, but also due to complex issues related to perspective. The artist was challenged to find a methodology that provided a believable image with accurate perspective on a curved canvas support. However, the photographer attempting to create a panoramic image was even more limited by his or her materials, especially during the nineteenth century. Early photographic processes capable of sharp and clear images included the daguerreotype and collodion wet-plate process, both of which required the use of inflexible emulsion supports of metal and glass respectively. Paper processes allowed for flexibility to bend the material and eliminate image distortion, but could not provide the detail of the preferred processes mentioned above. These particular qualities of

37

Helmut and Alison Gernsheim, L.J.M. Daguerre (1787-1851):  The  World's  First  Photographer  and  Inventor  of   the Daguerreotype (New York: World Pub., 1956) 15-18. 38 Louis Jacques Mandé Daguerre, An Historical and Descriptive Account of the Various Processes of the Daguerreotype and the Diorama, (1839, repr., New York: Winter House, 1971) 81-86.

13

photography presented additional challenges as artists and photographers attempted to create the panorama in photographic form. The available photographic processes seriously challenged anyone wanting to capture a panoramic image on a single plate. To make a photograph that is wider than the average focal plane without distortion, the camera lens needs to rotate while remaining an equal distance from a controlled area of the sensitized surface of the photographic plate (see figure 2). This rotation must occur at a specific pivot point to preserve the perspective of the final image.39 This point is particularly difficult to
Figure 2. Rotating-lens panoramic cameras. From:  Polden,  Brian.  "Photography  at  Length,   Part   1."   Photographica World 100 no. 2 (2002): 9.

find in a photographic lens which features multiple components precisely arranged and hidden within the lens barrel. In 1889, military engineer Paul Moëssard described a method for making a study of a photographic lens using an instrument  called  the  "Tourniquet"  that eased the construction of a panoramic camera. The method can be used to find the focal length and pivot point of the lens, as well as the ideal width of the exposure slit and the length and curvature of the arc.40 Prior to this date most photographers were working with the silver plated copper support of the daguerreotype, or glass plates sensitized with silver nitrate on collodion.  Without  knowledge  of  Moëssard's  "Tourniquet" identifying the ideal specifications for a panoramic camera lens while condoning to the restrictions caused by the rigid support of the photographic emulsion posed multiple obstacles that made combining the panorama with photography complicated, and with most camera systems, impossible. Methods for making photographic panoramas advanced with the photographic technologies available. Prior to the invention of any sort of specialized panoramic cameras, photographers seeking to create a panoramic image would do so by making separate exposures to create a sequence of individual images. The most basic version of this is exemplified by those made using the daguerreotype process, as
39

Brian Polden, Photography at Length - The Authentic History of Panoramic Cameras, (Unpublished manuscript, received March 25, 2014): 61-62. 40 Paul Moessard, Etudes des lentilles et objectifs photographiques, (Paris: Gaulthier-Villars, 1889): 24-27.

14

can be seen in the 1848 panorama of Cincinnati, made by Charles Fontayne and William Porter (see figure  3).  Using  a  standard  camera  on  a  tripod,  after  each  exposure  the  photographer  "would  turn  the   camera a predetermined amount before exposing the next plate, so that each image would maintain a continuous horizon line and overlap  slightly  with  the  image  of  the  preceding  plate."41 After development, these images could be cropped, trimmed, and mounted as desired, but with the daguerreotype format, the opportunity for editing was minimal. The daguerreotype, being a direct-positive process, also posed the issue that the captured images appear reversed. This meant that minor changes to the camera angle when attempting to take consecutive images would often result in a panorama that did not line up consistently. Yet, when done well, these segmented images would be displayed side by side, each with an individual frame, in a presentation often compared to looking through a window.

Figure 3. Fontayne and Porter, Daguerreotype View of Cincinnati. September 1848. 8 full-plate daguerreotypes; 16.5 x 21.6 cm. Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County.

As glass plate negatives and paper prints (typically albumen) became popular throughout the 1860s, the technique of making segmented panoramas continued with different methods of display. In his panoramas of San Francisco, photographer and inventor Eadweard Muybridge employed the segmented

Figure 4. Eadweard Muybridge, Panoramic San Francisco from California Street hill. 1877. 1 photomechanical print in booklet ; unfolds to 12.7 x 146 cm. Library of Congress.

photographic panorama and adapted it to new processes. Using a process that made it easier to reproduce photographs, and  no  longer  limited  by  the  boundaries  of  a  rigid  metal  support,  many  of  Muybridge's   views used the same method as the daguerreotype panoramas. However, with paper prints  Muybridge's  

41

David Harris, Eadweard Muybridge and the Photographic Panorama of San Francisco, 1850-1880 (Montreal, Quebec: Canadian Centre for Architecture, 1993) 40.

15

final presentations were realized as foldout sections of books and albums42 (see figure 4). This new process also allowed Muybridge to experiment with overlapping prints and/or negatives, cropping and rephotographing them to create continuous images pasted together to appear as a single panorama with a view capable of exceeding 360 degrees in a single print (see figure 5). This still took time and skill, as the photographer needed to be aware of light, shadow, angle, and spacing of the exposures. Although Muybridge went on to further expand the possibilities of photography in his time and motion studies, his panoramas  remain  noteworthy  as  examples  of  a  photographer  pushing  the  medium's  limits  using  early   photographic technologies.43

Figure 5. Eadweard Muybridge, Panorama of San Francisco from California Street - Hill. c. 1877. 1 photographic print : albumen silver ; image and sheet 19.2 x 28.2 cm. Library of Congress.

Assembling a number of negatives to create a single image was a labour intensive process and photographers continued to seek more efficient methods to create a photographic panorama in a single negative. The first concept to accomplish this required the use of a curved plate or support for the photosensitive emulsion with the use of a specialized panoramic camera. These cameras worked as scanning cameras, where the curved sensitized plate was placed inside a stationary camera box while the lens was made to swivel around  the  camera's  centre  of  perspective  (see  figure  6).  
Figure 6. Plan view of the design principle. From: Polden, Brian. "Photography  at  Length,  Part  1."  Photographica  World  100  no.   2 (2002): 9.
42 43

David Harris, Eadweard Muybridge and the Photographic Panorama of San Francisco, 1850-1880, 48-51. Robert Bartlett Haas, Muybridge: Man in Motion (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976): 84-88.

16

Left: Figure 7. Megaskop Panoramic Camera, ca. 1854. From: Auer, Michel. The Illustrated History of the Camera. (Boston: New York Graphic Society, 1975): 262 Right: Figure 8. Josef Puchberger and Wenzel Prokesch. Ellipsen Daguerreotype. Austrian Patent no. 42086, issued June  16,  1843.  From:  Polden,  Brian.  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  1."  Photographica  World  100  no.  2  (2002):  12.

This concept is exemplified by the Megaskop Panoramic Camera (see figure 7)44 and the Ellipsen Daguerreotype (see figure 8)45 panoramic camera. The daguerreotype image support used in both examples was flexed into a curved, circular shape so that the image would remain an equal distance from the lens as it turned, keeping it in focus. Another
Above: Figure 9. Thomas Sutton, View Camera. c. 1861. Panoramic camera ; 28 x 35 x 31 cm. Museum of Victoria, Australia.

camera that featured the use of a curved and rigid emulsion support was  Thomas  Sutton's  View  Camera  of  1861 (see figure 9). Sutton's  camera  used  specially  made  collodion  glass  plate  

negatives and rather than a swinging lens it instead used a unique globular water-filled lens to compensate for altered perspective. However, these efforts for creating photographic panoramas fell short of expectations due the limits of the camera and film technology of their time. Specifically, each of these

44

Brian  Polden,  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  2:  Martens,  the  Megaskop  and  beyond,"   Photographica World 102 no. 4 (2002): 33-36. 45 Brian  Polden,  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  1,"   Photographica World 100 no. 2 (2002): 11-16.

17

cameras did not rotate with the lens and thus, achieving a full circle was not possible making it rare to find a device that could capture more than 150 degrees.46 As the popularity of the collodion glass plate negative process increased, new concepts for capturing a panorama on a flat support appeared. The Pantoscopic (see figure 10) allowed for multiple focal lengths, but could only capture images up to 110 degrees. The Gem Panorama (see figure 11), a later example not patented until 1889, had a clever design that was capable of capturing a view of up to 360-degrees47 Yet it still had the issue of being large and cumbersome requiring the use of heavy glass plates half a meter in length, inconvenient for any photographer using recently introduced dry plates, hoping to travel with the camera to capture a landscape view.
Figure 11. Benoist brothers, Gem Panorama. Made by M. Molteni, 1889. From: Polden, Brian. "Photography   at   Length,   Part 3: Curved images on flat   plates."   Photographica   World 104 no. 2 (2003): 18. Figure 10. Johnson and Harrison, Pantoscopic Camera No 32. 1862. National Media Museum, Bradford, United Kingdom.

Despite the introduction of many cameras that attempted to combine the mediums of

panorama and photography, the photographic processes available prior to the 1880s prevented the successful realization of any full-circle panoramic camera. However, during this decade, advancements to the photographic medium provided photographers with new opportunities for making photographs, particularly panoramas. Flexible roll films produced by the Eastman Dry Plate and Film Company of Rochester, New York, soon to become the Eastman Kodak Company, allowed for small format cameras,

46

Brian  Polden,  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  3:  Curved  images  on  flat  plates,"   Photographica World 104 no. 2 (2003): 11-12. 47 Ibid. 13-19.

18

such as the Kodak, that could be easily transported to capture any desired view,48 beginning  the  `snapshot   movement. Ultimately, this new development would revolutionize photography, and the timeline of its improvements closely mirror the invention of what may be considered the first 360-degree panoramic camera for use with flexible film (see figure 12), by John R. Connon of Elora Ontario.

Figure 12. Thomas  or  John  R.  Connon,  [John  Connon's   whole   circuit   panorama  camera,  patented  in   Britain and the United States in 1887 and Canada in 1888. Camera set up on a river, likely the Elora Gorge.], ca. 1887. Whole circuit panoramic camera file, Prints, tintypes and documentary art series, Connon family fonds, C 286-5-0-9, Archives of Ontario.

48

Reese Jenkins Images and Enterprise: Technology and the American Photographic Industry, 1839-1925 (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1987): 96-122.

19

2. THOMAS & JOHN CONNON: EARLY PHOTOGRAPHIC INVOLVEMENT

Thomas  Connon's  Arrival  in  Canada Thomas Connon (see figure 13), the father of John Connon (see figure 14), was born on the farm of Tillyeve, in the Parish of Udny, Aberdeenshire, Scotland on September 14, 1832. At the age of 8, Thomas moved to the farm of Elfhill, near Stonehaven, which was where he received his education. While serving an apprenticeship in the City of Aberdeen at a wholesale grocery he dreamed of visiting Niagara Falls ­ his  son  John  later  described  him  as  having  "that  love   of adventure which has peopled the earth with Scotsmen"49. Thomas immigrated to Canada in 1852, first arriving in Beamsville, Ontario, and later settling in Elora in 1853 where he continued to pursue a merchant's  career,  going  in  and  out  of  partnerships  
Figure 13. [Portrait of Thomas Connon], ca. 1880. A1954.16.43, ph485, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

with other grocers in the area50. Eventually Connon resolved to set up his own business, operating a general store in Elora. The original building located at the corner of Mill and Metcalfe Streets still stands today (see figure 15).

49

John R. Connon, The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity, (Elora ON: Elora Express and Fergus News Record, 1906) 188-190. 50 Elizabeth Connon to Thomas Connon, 14 September 1852 - 28 September 1861, Connon family correspondence 1852-1930, Wellington County Museum and Archives, Elora, Ontario.

20

The transition from citizen of populated Scotland to early settler of Upper Canada was difficult for Thomas. The village of Elora, made up primarily of other immigrants from the Scottish council  area  of  Aberdeenshire,  was  then  "on  the   edge  of  civilization",  situated  northwest  of  the   small hamlet of Guelph, about equal distance from both Toronto and Hamilton, both rapidly growing cities at the time. He relied heavily on loans from his Aunt Elizabeth to help establish his business, and also kept in close contact with her for updates about his father and brothers still residing in Scotland. Despite his struggles, Thomas became an
Figure 14. [Portrait of John Robert Connon], ca. 1880. A1954.154.2, p3344, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

officer of the Elora Rifle Company and an active member of the community. In his early years,

painting and drawing were his favourite hobbies and Thomas considered pursuing a career as an artist ­ but later decided against this path having been warned about his poor prospects for income.51 Some of his landscape paintings are held in the collections of both the Wellington County Museum & Archives and Archives of Ontario. In an 1851 issue of Art Journal, Thomas had read about the Great London Exhibition of 1851 where advertisements for the latest improvements in photography caught his eye. He first began to experiment with the medium shortly after his arrival in Elora.52 During this time, Thomas also met Jean Keith (1835-1909),  who  was  described  as  the  "first  wh ite child born on the West side of

51

Elizabeth Connon to Thomas Connon, 12 January 1853, Connon family correspondence 1852-1930, Wellington County Museum and Archives, Elora, Ontario. 52 John R. Connon, The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity, 189.

21

the  Grand  River"53 and the daughter of John Keith, a carpenter who had also emigrated from Scotland. Jean and Thomas were married on November 4, 1854. Pursuing  an  Artist's  Dream through the Medium of Photography In 1859 Thomas began to make photographs for profit while running his general store. His topfloor studio was located in the back of the building and looked out over the Grand River of the Elora Gorge, an attraction of Elora that had drawn Thomas to settle there. He was the first photographer in the area and work from his studio is today referenced as significant documentation of  the  village's  early   history. In part of his regular correspondence from the spring of 1864 with his Aunt Elizabeth, Thomas
Figure 15. Thomas Connon, [The Connon Photography Studio in Elora], ca. 1863. Shop fronts file, Lantern slides series, Connon family fonds, C 286-3-0-16, Archives of Ontario.

described building this new studio as well as his intention to embark upon on the new trade full-time in the coming years.54 In August of 1867 Thomas left his wife and children in Elora and returned to Aberdeenshire for the last time. During his visit he spent time photographing his family before traveling to Paris, where he attended
Figure 16. John Robert Connon fonds, [Thomas Connon family home and studio], ca. 1872. Photographic print. Library and Archives Canada, accession number 1984-007NPC, MIKAN no. 3716059, R1872-0-5-E.
53

Gerald Noonan, Introduction to The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity by John R. Connon, reprint, (Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier Press, 1975) viii. 54 Thomas Connon to Elizabeth Connon, 21 June 1864, Connon family correspondence 1852-1930, Wellington County Museum and Archives, Elora, Ontario.

22

the Paris Exhibition. When finally returning to Elora, Thomas ended his career as a merchant, and dedicated himself to photography. The last letter that Thomas would ever receive from his father, in March of 1872, describes another request from Thomas for financial aid.55 Thomas was saving $400, which  was  the  amount  that  he  would  need  to  build  his  own  gallery,  "a  building  erected  for  the  purpose  at the  corner  of  Geddes  and  Moir  streets."56 It was completed in the spring of that same year (see figure 16). Meanwhile, as his photography business grew, so did his family. His marriage to Jean produced three children (see figure 17), Elizabeth Connon Grant (1855-1925), John Robert Connon (1862-1931), and Thomas George Connon (1869-1936).

Figure 17. [Connon family portrait], ca. 1880. A1978.154.1, ph3343, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

55

Thomas Connon to Thomas Connon, 20 March 1872, Connon family correspondence 1852-1930, Wellington County Museum and Archives, Elora, Ontario. 56 John R. Connon, The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity, 189.

23

John R. Connon Adopting the Family Trade Whilst his eldest and youngest children went on to pursue their own professions, Thomas Connon's  eldest  son,  John  R.  Connon, took up an interest in the photography trade at a young age (see figure 18). As John grew up he watched his father's  business  expand  and  actively  assisted  in   the picture room, making portraits of and getting to know many individuals from the local community (see figure 19). Living in an early Canadian settlement with the nearest photography supplier hours away in Hamilton, Ontario, Thomas learned to be self-sufficient while developing an indepth knowledge of his tools and trade. This was evident in the numerous cameras that Connon either built or modified for use in his studio. As outsourced developing and printing practices were expensive, Thomas also had to be very proficient in carrying out his own darkroom procedures. The elder Connon trained John in the popular photographic processes of the time, including daguerreotype and wet-plate collodion. Soon, John was accomplished enough  to  become  a  valuable  asset  to  the  family's   photography business, and the studio stamps on the cabinet card portraits from the Connon studio c hanged  from  "T.  Connon,  Photographer"  to  "Elora  
Figure 19. [Group of people standing on steps and looking out at photographer John Connon], ca. 1915. Portraits ­ informal file, Lantern slides series, Connon family fonds, C 286-3-0-12, Archives of Ontario. Figure 18. Thomas Connon, [Two images of John R. Connon, aged five], 1867. Connon family - portraits and family home file, Prints tintypes and documentary art series, Connon family fonds, C 2865-0-1, Archives of Ontario.

Art  Studio"  (see  figure  20). Like his father, John had an artistic eye and an appreciation for the Canadian landscape. In his

24

free time he would spend time travelling throughout Ontario, on trips both with and without his father, to make pictures (see figure 21). Between the time John first took an interest in photography as a child and his development into a professional, the medium of photography had advanced and grown at an overwhelming pace. New chemical processes, improved photographic products and innovations in lens and camera technology all contributed to photography's  explosive  growth  as  art  form,   application and enterprise in the latter part of the nineteenth century. For example, when John first took  an  interest  in  his  father's  photographic  business,  
Figure 20. [Connon studio cabinet], ca. 1870. Private collection, Ontario.

a newly introduced dry-plate process allowed him to hike down into the Elora Gorge and capture views of the local scenery. Using new photographic papers available through a number of recently established companies - he would sell these pictures as novelty items or postcards, eventually becoming acquainted with other photographers and manufacturers across the province. By the time John had taken up his fulltime role in the studio he had already created a method that combined both dry plate and a new camera shutter technology. This enabled the Connon studio to begin offering outdoor group portraiture (see figure 22) ­ a service that had been previously unavailable due to photography's  earlier  technical   limitations. As Thomas had followed photography's  evolution  from  the   cumbersome and complex daguerreotype to the easy-to-use dry-plate, John continued to follow  the  field's  endless  series  of  
Figure 21. John or Thomas Connon [Winter scene of Irvine River, Elora], ca. 1875. A1961.8.3, ph636, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

advancements and incorporate them into the family business.

25

Figure 22. John or Thomas Connon. [Young men in Elora Gorge], ca. 1880. A1957.18.1, ph636, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

26

3. CHALLENGING THE LIMITATIONS OF THE PHOTOGRAPHIC MEDIUM

Cameras & Roll-holders Prior to the success of the Eastman Kodak Company, the photographic industry was comprised of a number of moderately successful manufacturers and suppliers that shared the bulk of the market. It was a time of innovation and many inventors were acquiring patents for any idea which might prove successful in this rapidly growing market. During a time when photography was limited to professionals with the requisite equipment and understanding of chemical processes, both Thomas and John were optimistic that they might find additional ways to profit from their knowledge of photography, often times thinking beyond the scope of their small-town studio business. Noted in many letters between father and son were various ideas and inventions for their practice. A story told multiple times in the Connon family fonds57 is how, while building a stereoscopic camera, Thomas often spoke of painting photographic emulsion onto something like a spool of ribbon instead of a metal or glass plate. Thinking that a flexible film support would solve a number of the problems with his stereo camera, Thomas drew up a roll-holder design (see figure 23) and in 1881 mailed it to acquaintances at Lyon & Alexander of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, asking if it might be an idea worth pursuing. He received a reply stating that it was too expensive to manufacture with at the time. Some years later, shortly after reading an article in the October 17, 1885 issue of Scientific American about a new rollholder being manufactured by the Eastman Dry Plate and Film Company, Thomas contacted them again,
Figure 23. Thomas Connon, [Roll holder design], ca. 1881. Drawings and descriptions file, textual records series, Connon family fonds, C 286-6-0-23, Archives of Ontario.

57

Archives of Ontario, series 286-6, Connon family fonds, textual records, 1832-1967.

27

asking if they still had his letter.58 He received a reply from Alexander, stating that he recalled the letter, but that it had gone missing from their records.59 To his death John Connon insisted that this letter did not go missing accidentally, and that the idea was stolen for the Eastman-Walker roll-holder.60 He and Thomas are quoted as saying it was  an  invention  "lost  to  Canada  from  want  of  means  not   brains."61However, many other inventors, such as Leon Warnerke, proposed similar concepts that also did not achieve the success of George Eastman. As John continued to work in the studio, he watched his  father's  ongoing  work  to  improve  upon   the  business  he  had  built.  He  acquired  the  entrepreneurial  traits  of  his  father  and  by  watching  his  father's   dedication to his work; John was motivated to contribute to their common passion for photography. Because of his own feeling of loss with the roll holder, Thomas strongly encouraged John to pursue his own ideas and inventions rather than settle into the life of a small town photographer.

Shutters & Other Experimentation As Thomas continued to operate the studio in Elora, John began experimenting with the possibilities of photography while assisting his father. During the transition from wet to dry plate photography, in 1882 John began photographing group portraits outdoors by the river. However, he needed a method for making exposures while also keeping an eye on the group to ensure they remained still and in position. In a time when film
Figure 24. Thomas Connon, [John R. Connon posed in studio with camera], ca. 1885. Portraits file, Glass plate negatives series, Connon family fonds, C 286-1-0-11-9, Archives of Ontario.
58

Thomas  Connon  to  Mr.'s  Lyon  and  Alexander,  21  October  1885,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 59 Lyon and Alexander to Thomas Connon, 25 October, 1885, series 286-6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 60 John R. Connon, The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity, 189. 61 Thomas Connon to W. A. Lyon, 10 November 1886, series 286-6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

28

lacked high sensitivity and required long exposures photographers had to uncap the portrait lens to make a long time exposure. This method frustrated John who found he could not watch the group and take the photograph simultaneously because he was busy with the lens cap. He resolved this problem by creating a shutter  using  a  single  blade  that  "opened  and  closed  the  small  opening between the lenses, which was the shortest  distance  to  move".  He  used  this  style  of  shutter  in  his  work  for  three  years  before  building  a  set  of   shutters into a pair of lenses to use with a stereoscopic camera, the same camera Thomas had been working on when he conceived of his rollholder idea (see figure 24). In 1891, John was issued an American patent (see figure 25)62 for the idea he had been using for almost a decade, but he never expected this invention to be profitable outside of his own practice because it required that he make a customized shutter to fit each separate lens, meaning it could never be adapted to widespread use.63 The  story  of  John's  shutter   continued into September of 1885, when he took his stereoscopic camera with the new lenses to Rochester to visit his friend
Figure 25. John R. Connon, Slide Shutter for Photographic Camera. American Patent no. 451027, filed Jun. 13 1890, and issued Apr. 28 1891.

62

John R. Connon, 1891, Slide Shutter for Photographic Cameras. American Patent no. 451027, filed June 13 1890 and issued Apr. 28, 1891. 63 John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

29

James  Inglis,  who  was  then  employed  as  a  dry  plate  manufacturer.  During  John's  visit,  Inglis  had  been   working with a German optician, Mr. Ernst Gundlach, a well-known lens designer at the time who oversaw the development of the microscope division of Bausch & Lomb64 as well as the Gundlach Optical Company that later became the Rochester Lens Company. Inglis shared with John some photographs taken as part of his own experimentation. One image had been with a newly designed focal plane shutter that successfully stopped the motion of a bicyclist ­ the resulting photograph capturing the spokes of his moving wheels with almost perfect clarity. John was eager to try it out for himself, and after his return to Elora anxiously searched for an ideal opportunity. It soon came in the winter of 1886, when he learned the old wooden bridge over the Irvine River was to be replaced with a steel one. On the day of its demolition, John had prepared his own shutter and set-up his camera, ready to fire at the perfect moment. John was very pleased with the results (see figure 26),  stating  "when  shown  with  a  magic  lantern   and  greatly  enlarged  there  is  no  sign  of  movement  during  the  exposure."65 John had begun to successfully expand the Connon studio's  photographic  products and services as he familiarized himself with the progress of the photographic industry. He was positive and self-assured by his accomplishments and continued to explore what else could be achieved with the medium. Supported by his father, John found himself on a path of photographic discovery.
Figure 26. John R. Connon, [Construction of bridge over Elora Gorge in winter], February 26, 1886. Bridges file, Glass plate negatives series, C 286-1-0-1-6, Archives of Ontario.
64

"Edward  Bausch,"  The Optical Society, accessed 3 July 2014, http://www.osa.org/enus/history/biographies/edward-bausch/. 65 John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

30

Conceiving 360-Degree Panoramic Camera Engrossed in the  medium  of  photography  and  excited  by  the  field's  progressive  nature,  John   proceeded to test the boundaries of what he could capture in a photograph. In an account of his experience conceiving the idea for his most notable invention, a panoramic camera that could capture a full-circle in a single exposure, John described his frustration with the limitation of the standard frame sizes available  to  him.  "It  was  late  in  the  summer  of  1886  that  I  tried  to   secure a satisfactory picture of Elora from the hill overlooking the village from the east. The negative was quite good, what there was of it, but it only showed part of the village and it would require three such pictures to take in all that should be shown. This was the picture that set me thinking about the panoramic  camera."  The  tallest  building  in  the  area  at  this   time was a store that belonged to Lt. Colonel Clarke, a friend  of  John's. Having previously photographed from this location, Clarke had stated to John that "there  is  no  use  taking  a  picture  from  the  top  of  this  place   until  you  can  make  one  the  whole  way  `round."66 John then began investigating the possibility of capturing a panoramic image (see figure 27). At first, as  Moëssard's  "Tourniquet"   method was not yet published, Connon was
Figure 27. Top right, top left, bottom right, bottom left: John R. Connon, [Four sketches for the panoramic camera], ca. 1885. Drawings and descriptions file, textual records series, Connon family fonds, C 286-6-0-23, Archives of Ontario.
66

John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

31

uncertain  if  the  lens  could  be  rotated  around  a  pivot  point  without  jeopardizing  the  image.  "A  few   experiments showed that if the centre of rotation coincides with that point in a lens, or lenses where the light  crosses,  it  does  not  matter  how  fast  the  lens  may  spin  around,  the  picture  remains  quite  still."67 With this new understanding about the where the centre of rotation for his camera should be, John further described  his  first  attempts  at  making  a  photograph.  "Taking  an  empty  box  that  had  once  been  used  to   hold  tins  of  Keen's  Mustard,  I  arranged  a  support  against  which  to  place  some  bromide  paper  in  the  shape   of half a circle and in the centre of the semicircle was placed the lens, between which and the paper a narrow  box,  like  a  hollow  door  swung  on  centres  above  and  below  the  lens."68 Based upon this description it can be understood that John had made a camera comparable to the Megaskop or the Ellipsen Daguerreotype, both swivel lens type cameras,69 as well as the Kodak Panoram which was introduced at a later date. The lens of the camera swung in unison with the narrow slit box (the hollow door) whiles the curved bromide paper remained stationary in the camera. As the lens and slit box rotated, a tall, narrow image moved across the sensitized paper, making an undistorted exposure (see figure 28). Although John had yet to achieve a camera capable of capturing a full-circle image, with this camera he was able to achieve his first successful panoramic negative during the summer of 1886 (see figure 29), which gave him the confidence to pursue further panoramic experiments. "Having  loaded  [the  camera]  up  I  tried  a   picture with it in the centre of the village [of Elora]. It was quite as good as a paper negative would make it and worked perfectly. The negative...shows by the vacant lots where buildings now stand, the date of it---1886."  70 Unsatisfied with the capabilities of his simple revolving mustard box camera, which was incapable of capturing a view much greater than 150-degrees,
Figure 28. Formed by the narrowed end of the fishtail, the vertical   scan   line   `wipes'   the   image   round   the   cylindrical   focal   surface.   From:   Polden,   Brian.   "Photography   at   Length,  Part  1."  Photographica  World  100  no.  2  (2002):  10.

67 68

Ibid. Ibid. 69 As discussed in Chapter 1. 70 John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

32

John established a goal to capture a full circle with a single exposure. He considered the swinging hollow door of his first camera to be like the focal plane shutter and determined that he would need to find a way to feed the film past the barrel of the lens at the same rate it would take to make an exposure. In doing so, he would be able to capture a continuous 360-degree image on a single negative. Familiar with his father's  concept  for  the  roll-holder, as well as the similar Eastman-Walker model, conceiving a way to do this  wasn't  difficult  for  John.  Finding  an  effective  way  to  construct  it  proved  more  challenging.  He  first   tried using rubber rollers, about an inch in diameter, which he had custom made by the Toronto Rubber Company for $3.00 (75 cents each).71 But due to inconsistencies in the material and manufacturing, the rubber was not ideal and ultimately unsuccessful. He then tried to substitute the rubber with paper rollers. He described stringing the paper onto steel centres like washers after being clamped tight. John acknowledged a young man, Jamie Lister, who was learning the machinist's trade in Elora at the time John was making his camera. Lister helped John with the lathe work he needed to do to ensure that his paper rollers were perfectly circular. These rollers worked effectively72 and were used in the making of his first full-circle panoramas, but they were later substituted for custom brass rollers made by a company in Guelph for $7.1073 that John found to work even better.

Figure 29. John R. Connon, [Elora], 1886. Elora? file, Panoramic prints and negatives series, Connon family fonds, C 286-4-0-2, Archives of Ontario.
71

Canadian Rubber Company of Montreal to John R. Connon, receipt for custom rollers, 5 January 1887, series 286-6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 72 John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 73 Guelph Sewing Machine and Novelty Works to John R. Connon, receipt for custom brass parts, 3 March 1887 Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario..

33

John designed his fixed-focus camera to advance the roll of negative paper (purchased from a J. R. Moodie & Sons in Hamilton, Ontario)74 as the camera was turned around its optical centre on a tripod. With the assistance of Donald C. Ridout of Donald C. Ridout & Company, Engineers & Solicitors of Canadian, United States, and Foreign Patents75, Connon obtained American76, British77 and Canadian78 patents issued throughout 1887 and 1888.
Figure 30. [Original lens from panoramic camera], ca. 1886. Private collection, Port Colborne, Ontario.

The patented model used four rollers, one for holding the unexposed roll of film, one for holding the exposed film, and two used as friction-rollers that kept the exposed film held taut and at the proper distance from the lens. It used a crank-handle that connected to the bottom of the camera and was fixed to a wormpinion that attached to a spur-wheel forming the top of the tripod stand. Hence, when turning the crank, the camera would be made to rotate at the pivot point of
Figure 31. John R. Connon, [Whole circuit panoramic camera invented by John R. Connon], ca. 1887. Elora file, Panoramic prints and negatives series, Connon family fonds, C 286-4-0-4, Archives of Ontario.
74

J. Moodie & Sons to John R. Connon, receipts for rolls of negative paper, 12 March 1887 and 5 April 1887, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 75 Donald C. Ridout to J. R. Connon, re: cost of procuring patents for Canada, the United States and England, 7 December 1886, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 76 John R. Connon, 1887, Photographic Instrument. American Patent no. 369165, filed Apr. 2, 1887 and issued Aug. 30 1887. 77 John R. Connon, 1887, Photographic Instrument. British Patent no. 6673, filed Dec. 9, 1886 and issued May 6, 1887. 78 John R. Connon, 1888, Photographic Instrument. Canadian Patent no. 30143, filed Jan. 1, 1888 and issued July 11, 1888.

34

the lens. The top of the tripod stand, made up by the spur-wheel, featured a groove in which a cord was passed around and through pulleys that were attached to the spindles of the rollers. This caused them to revolve and advance the film with the rotation of the camera. John used a fishtail lens barrel (see figure 28) to control the amount of light reaching the sensitized surface and ultimately prevent distortion. He did this by creating a narrow vertical passageway of a specific width that, like the hollow door, allowed the light to travel through in a scanning motion before meeting with the film as it passed by, exposing the image (see figure 32). The final version of his camera shows some modifications to that illustrated in the patents. As opposed to using a handle-crank, John has replaced the spur-wheel with a clockwork system. There is now a wind-up key at the top of the camera used to begin the rotation and start the exposure. A complete model of this camera is yet to be discovered, but the lens shown in figure 30 is suspected to be original to Connon's  camera,  and  features  grooves  that   Connon would have used to slide it into place on the camera body before taking a photograph. On a sunny day in February of
Figure 32. John R. Connon, [Photography equipment], ca. 1887. Miscellaneous file, Glass stereograph negatives series, C 286-2-0-7, Archives of Ontario.

1887 John had procured some negative paper from the Eastman Dry Plate and Film Company, the only company  making  it  at  the  time,  and  went  back  to  the  top  of  his  friend's  store  where  he  made  his  first  full circle panoramic exposure with his newly built camera (see figure 31). John did some further experimentation to determine exposure and its relationship to camera rotation and once he solved these issues, was ready to take action with his invention and seek out a manufacturer.79

79

Archives of Ontario, series 286-6, Connon family fonds, textual records, 1832-1967.

35

Figure 33. John R. Connon, 1887, Photographic Instrument. American Patent no. 369165, filed Apr. 2, 1887 and issued Aug. 30 1887.

36

37

4. MANUFACTURING THE PANORAMIC CAMERA

The Photographic Industry during the 1880s The timeline of John Connon's  panoramic  camera  is  fascinating  in  relation  to  the  invention  of   George  Eastman's  first  flexible  roll  films,  both  paper  and  nitrocellulose.    It  was  Eastman's  innovations   with flexible films and a newly designed camera system that ultimately changed the course of the photographic  medium.    Eastman's  Kodak  camera  introduced  an  inexpensive  and  easy  to  use  photographic   system that democratized the technology making it available to all. Because John was so interested in this type of film, he was one of the first photographers to use it instead of the more common photographic glass  plate.  This  important  timing  and  history  made  John's  panoramic  camera  one  of  the  first  to  use   flexible film and it could be argued that his invention contributed to the later development and introduction of the Kodak Camera by the Eastman Dry Plate and Film Company in 1888. Already familiar with the ideas his father had proposed for the roll film holder, John had been considering the possibilities of a flexible film base for his panorama camera. The release of early Eastman flexible films allowed him to incorporate this technology into his own photographic invention at a time when most other  photographers  could  not  yet  see  the  future  possibilities  of  Eastman's  innovations.    It  should be noted that  Eastman's  first  versions  of  his  flexible  films  were  developed  for  professional  view  cameras  that  used   the Walker-Eastman roll film holder ­ and that these films were plagued with numerous problems that most professionals found unappealing. George Eastman (1854-1932), was born to the owner and administrator of a successful business school, the Eastman Commercial College, in Rochester, New York. As  the  result  of  his  father's  sudden   and unexpected death while he was still a boy, Eastman grew up watching his mother struggle to maintain the lifestyle their family had been accustomed to. After some years of both private and public education, Eastman found work as a clerk in an insurance office and later as an assistant bookkeeper in a bank. He

38

first began practicing photography in 1877 and quickly became a serious amateur.80 Inheriting the entrepreneurial spirit of his father, Eastman began the production of gelatin dry plates, soon gaining the financial backing of Henry A. Strong (1838-1919), a successful buggy-whip manufacturer.81 The professional experience and ambition of Eastman combined with the support of Strong are important factors that led to their ultimate success in the photography industry as the Eastman Kodak Company. Having achieved success as the Eastman Dry Plate Company, Eastman sought a replacement for the glass support of his gelatin dry plates. In 1881 the Eastman Dry Plate Company introduced gelatinbromide printing papers, a product Connon had mentioned using. Meanwhile, Eastman continued to seek more efficient manufacturing methods and higher quality products, while competing against new manufacturers.82 By 1885, in collaboration with William H. Walker, and after studying the Warnerke roll holder (a similar device invented circa 1875), the duo was issued a patent for the Walker-Eastman roll holder. With this system, a film consisting of a paper strip coated with regular dry plate emulsion was produced.83 "This  negative  paper  film  was  not  nearly  as  satisfactory  as  a  transparent  film because the printing had to be done through the base of the paper, giving the prints a washed-out, faded, or even grainy appearance. Treatment of the paper with light oils prior to printing helped increase the transparency, but the paper film was never  popular."84 Despite its lack of popularity, this description of Eastman's  early  negative  paper  best  matches  the  first  panoramic  negatives  produced  by  Connon (see figure 34), many of which have yellowed from apparent oiling (see figure 34). Another type of film, stripping film or American film, had also been introduced in 1885, but was delicate and required a complicated developing process, preventing Eastman from actively promoting it for use with the rollholder  system.  "The  company  policy  was  to  persuade photographers to purchase the roll holder and

80 81

Ackerman, Carl W., George Eastman (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1930). 25-28. Reese Jenkins Images and Enterprise: Technology and the American Photographic Industry, 1839-1925, 71. 82 Reese Jenkins Images and Enterprise: Technology and the American Photographic Industry, 1839-1925, 82. 83 Ibid., 108. 84 Ibid., 109.

39

acquaint themselves with its operation using negative paper and then hope to introduce them to American film  later,  when  they  already  knew  how  to  use  the  roll  holder."85

Figure 34. John R. Connon, [View of the Village of Elora?], ca. 1887. A1977.67.213, ph2763, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

Because  all  of  Connon's  existing  early negatives86 are on a paper base, it can be presumed that prior  to  the  release  of  nitrocellulose  films,  Connon  had  only  used  rolls  and  sheets  of  Eastman's  negative   paper  and  not  Eastman's  American  stripping  film.  The complex process of American stripping film is explained by Douglas Collins in the following passage: "American  film  was  a  three-ply film, consisting of an ordinary paper support and a layer of gelatin emulsion, which were separated by a middle layer of water-soluble gelatin. After the film was photographically exposed, the negative was taken from the camera and placed emulsion-side down upon a glass plate. Hot water was poured over the film, which melted and dissolved the inner layer of soluble gelatin. Paper and soluble gelatin were then carefully stripped away, leaving only the thin layer of exposed gelatin emulsion on top of the glass plate. Once the film had been peeled down to its thin emulsion layer, another piece of wet, sticky transparent gelatin was squeegeed on top of the emulsion. After this double layer had dried, the emulsion skin could be  lifted  from  the  glass  and  printed  in  the  usual  way."87

85 86

Ibid., 109. Examples  of  Connon's  paper  negatives  can  be  found  at  the  Wellington  County  Museum  &  Archives,  Archives  of   Ontario, and Library and Archives Canada. 87 Collins, Douglas, The Story of Kodak, (New York: H. N. Abrams, 1990) 52.

40

None  of  Connon's  negatives  exist  on  either  glass  plates  or  the  separately  purchased88 gelatin skins described for carrying the emulsion layer after the excess paper and gelatin had been stripped away. Although American film provided a more transparent alternative to Eastman negative paper, Connon chose not to use it when it was the only roll film available to him during a shortage of their later nitrocellulose transparent non-stripping film, released first in 1888.89 This choice may have been because of its complicated development process that would have been made even more so when processing larger panoramic images. However, despite  Connon's  preference for paper and nitrocellulose films, it was the availability of flexible films was what allowed Connon to design, build and continue to develop his panoramic camera.

Correspondences, Advice and Negotiations After completing the final touches and experiments to perfect his camera in order to determine additional details such as exposure and speed of camera rotation, John Connon needed to seek out a manufacturer.  He  was  wary  of  his  father's  loss  with  the  roll-holder idea and knew he needed to act fast if he wanted to find a market and receive recognition for his invention. Throughout the 1850s, 60s, and 70s, Scovill Manufacturing Company maintained its position as one of the top North American producers of photographic materials.90 "Yet,  the  leadership  of  Scovill and Anthony companies continued to depend upon external sources of invention. When an improvement was created, the managers of Scovill and Anthony sought to acquire it outright through purchase or to control it through a sole agency for its sale."91 This strategy resulted in a dramatic increase in the number of photographic patents issued in the United States throughout the 1880s and 1890s,92 which was likely observed by Connon and part of his motivation for pursuing profit from his invention after he received his patent. It was no surprise then that
88

Eastman Dry Plate and Film Co, Photographic Materials and Apparatus, (Rochester NY: Schlicht & Field Co., January 1888) 14. 89 Eastman Company to John Connon, 17 February 1890, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 90 Reese Jenkins Images and Enterprise: Technology and the American Photographic Industry, 1839-1925, 46-54. 91 Ibid., 61. 92 Ibid., 62.

41

Scovill was the first manufacturer Connon approached about his panoramic camera, immediately after receiving his American patent. From September of 1887 to March of 1888 John, under the guidance of his father, was in contact with a man named Mr. Fuller at Scovill. At first the correspondence was hopeful, and negotiations for a began almost immediately. The question of expectations for a royalty was met with an eager reply. A letter from Thomas Connon dated September  28,  1887  stated  "Being the value on which to seek royalty at the cost of the Camera written plus lens and tripod [John and I] think twenty percent a reasonable figure for the American patent. Plus a camera whose wholesale price is twenty-five dollars from you would yield twenty to [Scovill] and five to the patentee."93 Scovill was interested because of the potential advantages of the camera for use in landscape work; however, in the months following these negotiations, letters from Mr. Fuller described  an  increasing  number  of  delays  preventing  the  camera's  manufacture.   First Scovill needed to confirm the market for such a camera and then they needed to build a sample. The construction of this sample was again delayed because the company was so busy. In March of 1888 Mr. Fuller still had not been able to discuss constructing this sample model with his superintendent. While waiting to hear the results of this discussion, John and Thomas Connon were notified that Mr. Fuller was on leave for bereavement, another delay.94 Once Mr. Fuller had returned, he informed the father and son that the decision on his camera had been deferred again due to a snowstorm that had shut down their factory for a week.95 Finally, after several months of increasingly discouraging replies regarding the plans for his camera, John requested it be returned so that he could seek a manufacturer elsewhere. A receipt dates  the  camera's  return  to  John Connon as March 21, 1888. After his disheartening experience with Scovill, J. R. Connon sought the help of acquaintances in the field to assist him with the business aspects of marketing his camera. He discussed his invention with

93

Mr. Fuller to John Connon, 28 September 1887, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 94 R. I. Lewis to John Connon, 9 December 1887, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 95 Mr. Fuller to John Connon, 16 March 1888, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

42

friends who were involved in some successful North American photography companies at the time. These individuals included: James Inglis, Scottish born photographer and dry-plate manufacturer, as well as former photographer of St. Catharines, Ontario and Montreal, Quebec, who by then had settled in Rochester; Maurice Gennert, successor to the G. Gennert Company, Importer, Exporter and Manufacturer of Photographic Materials, located in New York City; and Joseph Platt, Special Agent, Berkshire Life Insurance Company in New York and active member of the New York Camera Club.96 Although none agreed to manufacture the camera themselves, Platt did put Connon in touch with an adventurous businessman, Carl P. Stirn, who owned a shop on Park Place and was interested in Connon's  camera.97 John Connon soon travelled from Elora to New York City to meet Stirn and pursue further negotiations (see figure 35).

Figure 35. John R. Connon, [Panoramic print of men standing on a ferry looking at the Brooklyn Bridge], ca. 1890. New York City file, Panoramic prints and negatives series, Connon family fonds, C 286-4-0-5, Archives of Ontario.

96 97

Information based upon Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. J. B. Platt to Mr. Connon, 10 October 1888, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

43

Figure 36. John R. Connon, [Agreement with C. P. Stirn], 1889. Agreements file, Textual records series, Connon family fonds, C 286-6-0-10, Archives of Ontario.

44

John's  Camera  Becomes  the  Wonder A telegram sent by John Connon from New York to his father in Elora on February 4 of 1889 excitedly  exclaimed,  "Successful,  Stirn  to  manufacture  for  Germany,  Britain,  America."98 The agreement, signed by Stirn & Connon on February 25, 1889 (see figure 36) was the first glimmer of hope Connon saw in the success story of his panoramic camera. It outlined that Connon would grant Stirn the sole right to manufacture panoramic photographic cameras under his patent for a royalty relative to the cost of the camera sold. Satisfied that his camera was finally going into production, John returned to Elora, where he continued work in the studio with his father. During this time he regularly prepared batches of panoramic prints and enlargements that he would send to Stirn to sell in his shop. He regularly received updates from Stirn's  builder, a German mechanic named Max Juruick. Juruick was assigned with the task of building a model  from  John's  patent  that would be more marketable. Meanwhile, Connon started to sell some of Stirn's  Concealed  Vest  Cameras99 for commission in the Canadian market. Throughout  1889  Connon  received  regular  updates  from  Stirn  regarding  Juruick's  progress  on  the   panoramic camera.  Stirn  began  advertising  the  remodeled  version  of  Connon's  camera  as  "The  Wonder   Camera",  despite  the  fact  that  he  had  no   stock and the finished model was far from ready for the market. Stirn had hoped to introduce the camera at the renowned Boston Exhibition that year but delays related to streaky image results prevented the camera from arriving in time.100.
Figure 37. Todd Gustavson, [Wonder panoramic camera], ca. 1889. Digital image, 2014. Technology collection, George Eastman House.
98

Another delay was created as the result

John Connon to Thomas Connon, 4 February 1889, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 99 Todd Gustavson, Camera: A History of Photography from Daguerreotype to Digital , (New York: Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 2009) 113. 100 C. P. Stirn to John Connon, 26 July 1889, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

45

of the factory receiving an order of the wrong size of lenses101, but Connon was comforted to know that his invention was in production and would soon be available for sale in an open market (see figure 37). Although originally designed by Connon, and built by Juruick, C.P. Stirn was issued the American patent for the camera on December 31 of the same year (see figure 38).102 Perhaps, it was this development

that that led to the many inaccuracies

Figure 38. Carl P. Stirn, 1889, Photographic Camera. American Patent no. 418343, filed April 15, 1889 and issued Dec. 31, 1889.

and exclusions of Connon in historical accounts of the camera.103 Marketed to landscape photographers, tourists, surveyors, explorers and military men (see figure 39), the camera was sold for
Figure 39. Carl P. Stirn, ca. 1890, C.P.  Stirn's  patent  photographic   concealed vest cameras, panoramic cameras, enlarging apparatus and photographic materials for use with C.P.  Stirn's patents. 5-8.

$30.00 pre-loaded with a roll of film long enough for five whole circuit pictures, a folding tripod, and a carrying case. Additional spools of film were sold for $1.00 and folding tripods $2.00 each. Instructions for use state:

101

C. P, Stirn to John Connon, 4 November 1889, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 102 Carl P. Stirn, 1889, Photographic Camera. American Patent no. 418343, filed April 15, 1889 and issued Dec. 31, 1889. 103 See literature survey page 8.

46

"In  the dark room a roll of sensitive film is placed inside the camera. When you wish to take a picture, the Camera attached to the tripod is set up in the position desired; then, pull the string which causes the camera to revolve. The sensitive film being brought to the focus of the lens as required  to  receive  the  picture  of  everything  that  the  camera  points  at."

Four different lengths of exposures could be made: a quarter circuit, producing a negative 4 ½ inches in length; a half circuit, producing a negative 9 inches in length; a three-quarter circuit, producing a negative 13 ½ inches in length; and a full circuit, for which the negative would measure 18 inches. The spring catch, located on the base of the camera, had four corresponding settings to select the desired format. Once ready to take the picture, the user would then uncap the lens and pull a string to revolve the camera and  advance  the  film,  using  the  same  principles  as  Connon's  original  design.104 The string was directed through the camera and featured a ring from which different weights could be hung to ensure an evenly paced exposure (see figure 40). Based upon examinations of the Wonder camera at the George Eastman House, the changes made to  John's  camera  appear to improve upon its functions making it easier for both amateurs and

104

Carl P. Stirn, C.P.  Stirn's  patent  photographic  concealed  vest  cameras,  panoramic  cameras,  e nlarging apparatus and  photographic  materials  for  use  with  C.P.  Stirn's  patents, (Santa Barbara, California: National Directory of Camera Collectors, 1973. Reprint. Originally published: New York: Stirn & Lyon, [189-?]) 5-8.

47

professionals to use. It is much smaller, measuring only 4x4x6 inches and the lens has been moved inside the camera. The spring catch mechanism on the base of the camera allowed the user to stop the exposure at different points in the 360 degree circle. A puncture device was also added to the back of the camera that would allow the user to mark each exposure on the film. It was made for use with 3-¼-inch American Stripping Film. Also, the weighted string was an alternative method to a wind-up key or crank designed by  Connon.    In  Stirn's  opinion  these  modifications  were  significant  enough  to  justify  an  application for his own patent, though Connon questioned them. In a letter to Connon, Connon Sr. suggested his own improvements were  superior  to  those  in  Stirn's  patent  asking,  "Do you think the camera is any improved by the movement as you describe it over the old? Of course it is out now and if it is in such a way that any intelligent person can work it perhaps it is just as well to let it be all that for a time, but I think I can make an automatic movement that will do the whole business in a very simple way without cogs."105 While there was some additional discussion about the best way forward, Connon ultimately accepted the modifications to his original camera design and January of 1890, moved to New York to go into business with Stirn.
Figure 40.[Wonder Panoramic Camera], ca. 1890. Miscellaneous file, Glass plate negatives series, Connon family fonds, C 286-1-0-10-6, Archives of Ontario.
105

Thomas Connon to John Connon, 14 February 1890, Connon family correspondence 1852-1930, Wellington County Museum and Archives, Elora, Ontario.

48

A Short-Lived Success Story It was only a few short months before prospects for the Wonder panoramic camera began to fade. Around the time of its release in February of 1890, Eastman had also begun to sell transparent celluloid film. This revolutionary film was a material that had long been sought out by photographers, as it had the flexibility of paper combined with the clarity of glass. Unfortunately, it was just  to ¼ of an inch too wide  to  fit  within  the  flanged  edges  of  the  Wonder's  roll  holders.  In  order  to  use  this  new  and  much   sought  after  material,  Connon  would  need  to  modify  his  camera  once  again.  "From  the  edge  of  the  film   which I used when making sample pictures with the new camera in New York during February and March 1890, I cut a strip with scissors. Of course, this had to be done in the dull red light of the dark room"106 (see figure 41). Even with this unfortunate modification that was necessary to be able to use transparent film with the Wonder, the new and popular material was still not readily available, making prospects for the camera less and less promising.

Figure 41. John R. Connon, [New York City], 1890. New York City file, Panoramic prints and negatives series, Connon family fonds, C 286-4-0-1-2, Archives of Ontario.

In a letter to his sister Lizzie, Connon described his plan to leave Stirn and return to Elora, "owing  to  scarcity  of  film  for  this  panoramic  camera  because  of  a  patent  lawsuit  which  the  Eastman  Co.   [had] got into; there [would] not be any film for a few months anyway. Without that the cameras [were]

106

John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

49

useless."107 In fact, Eastman had been working on this new transparent film throughout the time that the Wonder was manufactured, yet due to the patent infringement issues that had arisen from the historic Hannibal B. Goodwin108 case,  Eastman  had  "cloaked  the  new  film  and  its  production  in  secrecy."109 Once it was first available for public sale in August of 1889, production was slow and the film was hard to come by. Any requests John made for the film were met with replies from the Eastman Company stating there was a shortage and asking if John would have them ship American film instead.110 However, by the time the Wonder was ready for sale in February of 1980, the new celluloid-based film was popular enough to take over the market. Combined with the introduction of the Kodak box camera, the Wonder was both unusable and undesirable. After discussing the matter with Stirn, John took some time to visit the  sites  before  again  returning  to  Ontario.  He  went  back  to  work  in  his  father's  studio,  and  continued   selling prints and enlargements to Stirn and other acquaintances, as well as occasionally selling a camera. Despite the discouraging roll film situation, Stirn was not ready to give up on the Wonder and continued to market the product, placing ads in both European and North American photography journals. However, in 1893 his optimism died down. In a letter of that year just a month after their agreement had expired, Stirn wrote Connon for help stating: "I  am  very  sorry  to  say  that  the  outlook  for  our  Panoramic  Camera  is  not  very  encouraging;  I   would like myself to make something out of it, as I invested several thousand dollars in it, and do not see any prospects of making one cent out of the invention. The Cameras which Mr. Max. Juruick made for me are entirely worthless, unless somebody takes hold of them, and makes them all over, as they are now, it is impossible for an amateur or even an expert photographer to work with  them.  I  wish  you  could  find  some  way  of  making  them  over,  so  that  we  could  sell  them."111
107

John Connon to Lizzie Connon, 17 May 1890, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 108 See page 57 for more about Hannibal B. Goodwin. 109 Reese Jenkins, Images and Enterprise: Technology and the American Photographic Industry, 1839-1925, 130131. 110 The Eastman Company to John R. Connon, 17 February 1890, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 111 Carl P. Stirn to John R. Connon, 20 May 1893, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

50

In October of 1895, John received a similar letter from Gennert, again inquiring about the stock of Wonder  panoramic  cameras  that  had  been  left  unusable,  stating  "Mr.  Stirn  is,  we  believe,  selling  out  his   stock of Panoramic Cameras. Do you think that any of the parts of these cameras would be of any use to us? We have just received a notice and we believe the entire outfit will be sold at auction."112 Around this time,  "the  firm  of  Stirn  &  Lyon  became  involved  financially,  and,  sometime later, made an assignment. The camera business had nothing to do with this, so it was only a comparatively small side issued controlled by Mr. Stirn, but, owing to the failure of the toy business which they were engaged in, the camera  business  came  to  an  end."113 However, there is no indication within the textual records at either Archives  of  Ontario  or  the  Wellington  County  Archives  as  to  what  became  of  Stirn's  stock,  or  as  to   Connon's  reply  to  either  Stirn  or  Gennert. A final opportunity for John to contribute with his patent arose in 1895 when Gennert again contacted him regarding a request for a large-scale panoramic camera: "Mr.  Geo.  E.  Curtis  of  Niagara  Falls,  New  York  wants  a  Panoramic  Camera  to  use  10-inch film and 12 or 14-inch lens. He really wants two lenses with it but we have explained to him that he must have a camera for each focal length. Could you give me an idea of what it is worth to make such a camera? If Mr. Curtis wishes it will you kindly make the drawings for it? He really wants you to make it but of course, you have not the facilities. We can do it much better. We would want  to  have  you  make  the  drawings  so  as  to  avoid  any  errors."114 An interesting request Connon made drawings for the camera which Gennert proceeded to construct. However, Mr. Curtis was in contact with Connon multiple times throughout 1896 regarding issues with

112

G. Gennert to John R. Connon, 15 October 1895, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 113 John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 114 G. Gennert to John R. Connon, 6 August 1895, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

51

the camera, primarily streaky image results.115 Any further indication of what became of this camera is again absent from Connon family archival records.

115

G. E. Curtis to John R. Connon, 25 November 1896, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

52

5. THE QUEST FOR RECOGNITION

The Kamaret, Cycloramic, Cirkut and Others In 1891 Connon started to notice cameras using a technology similar to his own appearing on the market. He came across an advertisement for the Kamaret while working for Gennert (see figure 42), and recognized that the position of the roll-holders was a potential infringement of his own patent. John mailed  it  to  his  father  with  a  letter  stating  "I notice that the party who stole this from my panoramic camera patent knows so little about the practical part of photography that this roller would be placed emulsion side out so that it could not be handled without marking."
116

Despite this accusation, and suggestions

from his father to go to Ottawa to begin an

Figure 42. [Kamaret advertisement], ca. 1890. Drawings and descriptions file, textual records series, Connon family fonds, C 286-6-0-23, Archives of Ontario.

infringement case, Connon never took any action to defend his patent. Connon continued to find published articles and advertisements for panoramic cameras that he felt were encroachments on his design. He found himself in a dispute with another panoramic camera inventor, Marcellus, whose invention he read about in an issue of
Left: Figure 43. P. S. Marcellus, Panoramic Roll Holder Camera. American Patent no. 512512, filed July 27, 1893 and issued Jan. 9, 1894.
116

Thomas Connon to John Connon 5 April 1891, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

53

the Chicago Photo Beacon of 1894. Marcellus's  camera,  named  the  Cycloramic117, used many aspects of John's  patent,  but  offered  an  improved  design  allowing  the  user  to  change  the  focus  along  with  other  new   features that made it easier to use (see figure 43). Some of this discussion was featured in issues from October 1894 to January 1895 of the Photo Beacon. The Chicago publication refused to take sides and eventually notified Connon that they would no longer be pursuing the issue in their publication.118 Later in the
Figure 44. G. G. Rockwood and H. B. Shallenberger, Panoramic Camera. American Patent no. 441704, filed Feb. 28, 1890 and issued Dec. 2, 1890.

year of 1895, Connon came across another  article  titled  "New  Invention  

in  Photographic  Panoramic  Technology"  patented  by  G.  Rockwood  &  H.  B.  Shallenberger  in  1890119, and featured in the November 24 issue of the New York Herald (see figure 44). Connon immediately contacted the publication, as he had demonstrated his own camera to Rockwood four years prior, but received a response that they would not be making any corrections. Another camera that John found with similarities to his own included an invention that would become the Kodak Cirkut camera, patented by
Figure 45. William J. Johnston, Panoramic Camera. American Patent no. 776,403, filed Jan. 7, 1904 and issued Nov. 29, 1904.
117

P. S. Marcellus, Panoramic Roll Holder Camera. American Patent no. 512512, filed July 27, 1893 and issued Jan. 9, 1894. 118 Brian  Polden,  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  4:  The  Roll-Up (Set-Scale)  Panorama,"  Photographica World 106 no. 4 (2003): 29-30. 119 G. G. Rockwood and H. B. Shallenberger, Panoramic Camera. American Patent no. 441704, filed Feb. 28, 1890 and issued Dec. 2, 1890.

54

William J. Johnston (1856-1941), the Canadian founder of the Panoramic Camera Company of Canada in 1904 (see figure 45).120 Johnston had also been a founder of the Rochester Panoramic Company, along with David A. Reavill and Frederick W. Brehm. In 1905, Reavill left the company and it was sold for $5000 to the Century Camera Company, then owned by Eastman Kodak Company, which continued the manufacture of the Cirkut into the 1940s121. When the company was sold, Johnston, originally from a suburb near Kingston, Ontario, returned to Canada where he began the Canadian version of his company in Toronto, Ontario.122 Connon,  who  read  an  article  about  Johnston's  camera  in  the  Toronto  Daily  Star   from February 29, 1905, wrote to the editor for a correction, which was printed on March 8th of the same year, a small success story for John.123

Last Attempts to Sell the Patent During the years John was involved with Stirn he received updates about camera sales and requests for additional prints. He also corresponded with Maurice Gennert, who asked him to return to New York City to work for him. Connon agreed, and spent the spring of 1891 keeping track of stock in Gennert's  shop  as  well  as  assisting  amateur  customers.  Unhappy  with  this  position  and  concerned for his parents'  declining  health,  Connon  returned  to  Elora(in  1892?)  and  hired  broker  E.J.  Johnson  to  try  and   sell his patent during his travels through the states. He paid Johnson $15.00124 to find a buyer for his invention but in 1893 Johnson gave up his  broker's  position  and  passed  Connon's  patent  onto  Mr.   Williams who finally found a potential buyer in 1899. Mr. Clougher, from the Canadian Camera and Optical  Company,  showed  serious  interest  in  purchasing  John's  patent  for  $500  along  with $100 for two shares in the company. Originally, John was insulted by this offer, as he had hoped to make at least
120

William J. Johnston, Panoramic Camera. American Patent no. 776,403, filed Jan. 7, 1904 and issued Nov. 29, 1904. 121 Rudolf Kingslake, The Photographic Manufacturing Companies of Rochester, New York (Rochester: George Eastman House, 1997) 41. 122 Robert  Lansdale,  "The  Inventor  of  the  Cirkut  Camera  and  its  Parts,"   Photographic Canadiana 36, no. 1 (MayJune, 2010): 17. 123 John R. Connon to Editor of the Daily Star, 4 March 1905, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 124 E. J. Johnson to John R. Connon, 2 June 1893, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

55

$1000. But, after a decade of trying to make use of his camera, John was willing to take what he could get. Unfortunately, negotiations went sour and after an unfavourable investigation Clougher changed his company's  offer  to  only  $200  in  shares.125 Although his broker Mr. Williams discouraged Connon from accepting this low offer, John was tired of chasing what now appeared to be an impossible dream. On April 12,  1900,  just  over  a  year  after  his  father's  death,  he  wrote:  "I  do  not  feel  like  doing  any  more  with   it."

Seeking Acknowledgement After failed attempts to manufacture his camera and sell his patent, Connon began to spend a great deal of time scanning newspapers and science and photography journals for cases of infringement. Although never having the means to get into a serious legal battle, Connon wrote with dogged determination to editors demanding they correct articles stating that inventions similar to his own were described  as  "new"  and/or  "original".  Connon  often  claimed  many  later  camera  models  stole  the  position   of the roll holders from his patent, placing them in front of the focal plane, allowing for smaller sized cameras.126 He  felt  that  Eastman's small-sized Kodaks did this, but was never able to make a case for it.127 In a 1921 letter to George Eastman, John mentions this observation, to which Eastman replied that the idea had been purchased from another inventor, David H. Houston.128 Connon was one of many patentholders making accusations against Eastman during the time that the Eastman Kodak Company was growing exponentially. However, like the other inventors, Connon had neither the business savvy nor the financial and legal resources of the Eastman Kodak Company. As photography became accessible to the masses, everyone was searching for a faster, easier and less expensive way to make photographs, and

125

Mr. Clougher to John R. Connon, 10 April 1900, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 126 John R. Connon, The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity, (Elora ON: Elora Express and Fergus News Record, 1906) 189. 127 John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Kodak,"  April  1913,  series  286 -6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario. 128 George Eastman to John R. Connon, 16 August 1921, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

56

many inventors contributed pieces to this complex puzzle. Some were successful selling their patents while others secured positions in the growing research and development divisions of companies like Eastman Kodak Company. However, there were many inventors, like Connon, who poured their lives into their inventions and never received recognition or financial reward and these individuals inevitably developed a bitter attitude towards entrepreneurs like Eastman, a man who is often described as a modern day Steve Jobs, American entrepreneur and co-founder of Apple Inc. Like Jobs, Eastman was able to create products that were irresistible to consumers because he was successful in transforming a complex and expensive process practiced only by professionals and into a cheap, easy to use system that was available to all.

The Story of Hannibal B. Goodwin and Eastman Flexible Films John continued to try and make something of his invention well into the twentieth century, and carefully followed the case of Rev. Hannibal B. Goodwin for inspiration. Goodwin, an Episcopal minister from New Jersey, filed a patent application for a method of making transparent, flexible roll film out of a nitrocellulose film base in May of 1887. However, his patent was not granted until September of 1898. At the time there was a huge demand to find a transparent film base for holding a photographic emulsion, as, such  as  seen  in  Connon's  early  negatives,  because  this  new  flexible  support  eliminated  many  of   photography's  technological  limitations.  During  the  eleven  years  Goodwin  was  waiting  for  his  patent,   Eastman had begun production of roll film using his own process. Like Connon, Goodwin was from a small town, made a small salary, and had an amateur interest in chemistry. Once the patent was obtained it was eventually sold to the photographic company Ansco for a reasonable amount at the time. Ansco, realizing this patent was the key to the enormous success of the Kodak camera system, proceeded to sue the Eastman Kodak Company for infringement. In 1914, the courts ruled in favour of Ansco and awarded the company a settlement of five million dollars ­ an enormous sum of money at that time. Unfortunately, in the year 1900, Goodwin had been involved in a street accident and died from his injuries.

57

In  relation  to  these  events,  Connon  wrote:  "When  I  remember  that  in  1890  the  man  who  invented the process of making the transparent celluloid film which I was using so successfully was struggling to secure a patent for his invention and died a poor man while the United States Patent Office allowed Eastman Co. with their stolen millions to hold up his claims for eleven years, I feel that my father and I were  not  the  only  sufferers."129 This passage suggests that Connon saw his own life in the tragic story of Goodwin and perhaps this made it easier for him to accept his own fate. Regardless it was around this time that Connon abandoned his goal to secure recognition for his invention and decided to move on with his life and pursue other activities unrelated to his panorama camera.

Life for Connon after the Panoramic Camera The last thirty years of his life Connon continued photography as a hobby and became a historian (see figure 46). He published a book titled The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity, which is still today one of the most significant early histories of the area. He never could completely turn off his innovative mind and would correspond with friends about ideas he had for new inventions in the photographic field. In some letters from 1903 he mentioned an idea for a motion picture camera, but decided not to follow through with it. By this time, George Eastman and his Eastman Kodak Company were selling their Brownie cameras for $1 each to a global population, now making their own photographs. Perhaps Connon felt that opportunities for individual inventors like him were even scarcer than before, when he had struggled to gain recognition for his panoramic camera. Today historians continue to  revisit  the  medium's  history  and  revise  our  understanding  of  the  photography's  early  decades.     While John R. Connon and his father Thomas Connon were never able to secure widespread recognition for their contributions to the history of photographic technology, my hope is that this paper will provide an opening for future researchers and further investigations into a fascinating time of photographic innovation and the story of the Connon family and their contributions to the field of photography in

129

John  R.  Connon,  "History  of  the  Panoramic  Camera,"  April   1913, series 286-6, Connon family fonds, textual records, Archives of Ontario, Toronto, Ontario.

58

Canada.      John  Connon's  panoramic  camera  represents  the  beginning  of  360-degree panoramic photography captured in a single exposure on flexible film and its design inspired a succession of cameras that made the dream of capturing a full circle view in a photograph a reality.

Figure 46. [Outdoors portrait of John Connon, seated on a tree stump], ca. 1920. Photographic print. Connon portraits, University of Guelph Library.

59

APPENDIX: EVOLUTION OF MATERIALS USED BY JOHN AND THOMAS CONNON Timeline of Photographic Materials used by John & Thomas Connon 1840-1852 Painting & Drawing Thomas Connon was described to have thoroughly enjoyed drawing as a child; the best gift you could give him was a pencil and some drawing paper. That passion later expanded to oil painting. Prior to his engagement with photography, Thomas had often considered the career of an artist. Some of his paintings of the Ontario landscape are currently held at archives in Toronto and Elora. Daguerreotype Shortly after settling in Elora, Thomas Connon began his first experiments with the photographic medium, using the daguerreotype process. A handmade daguerreotype camera built by Thomas is part of a private collection located in Ontario. Collodion Wet Plate Demonstrated by the many cabinet cards made at the Connon studio, it is likely Thomas Connon began working with the wet plate collodion process relatively early, before building his second studio. If you look closely at figure 47, you will see sample cartes de visite on display at the location where Thomas later operated his own general store. Tintype Found in collections at Library & Archives Canada, Archives of Ontario, and Wellington County Museum & Archives are a few tintypes attributed to the Connons, demonstrating their use of the collodion on iron process. Collodion Dry Plate There are a number of examples from the Connon collections that demonstrate their use of the dry plate process, including various sizes of glass plate negatives. Sensitized Bromide Paper Mentioned in letters from John Connon is the use of sensitized bromide paper to make negatives. He may have been making this himself, or purchasing it from George Eastman, who had sold sheets of the material while his company's  primary  focus  was  still  producing  dry  plates. Paper Negatives In figure 48 is  an  example  of  one  of  John  Connon's  early  panoramic   negatives, with its corresponding print, for which he used paper negative roll film, manufactured by George Eastman. Transparent Film John Connon began using Eastman transparent roll film as soon as it was released and noted the trouble he had attaining it early on. Figures 49 and 50 show two different sized panoramic negatives he made using the medium and two different cameras. 60

1853- approx. 1860

1860-1880

1865-1875

1875-1900

1880-1887

1886-1890

1889-1936

Figure 47. [Cartes de visite in store window], ca. 1865. A1989.144, ph9293, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

Observations of Panoramic Prints & Negatives John Connon used three different sizes of paper negatives and two different sizes of nitrocellulose negatives to make his panoramic photographs. Examples of these can be found in the collections of the Archives of Ontario, Wellington County Archives and Library & Archives Canada. The Wellington County Archives feature a number of large paper prints and negatives that are 3 inches, 4 ¼ inches and 4 and ¾ inches in size. In the textual records, John  noted  that  he  had  been  using  Eastman  film  thus  allowing  his  camera's  development to closely mirror that of the Eastman flexible films, from paper to cellulose nitrate film bases. Although Connon did not date his photographs, the 3-inch paper negative (see figure 29, page 33) from the Archives of Ontario matches his description of his first panoramic photograph. As it does not reach more than 150-degrees, and shows a vacant lot in the centre of Elora, it is indicated that this specific negative was therefore made using his first panoramic camera that was described as having a motion similar to a swinging hollow door (see Chapter 3). The larger paper negatives were likely made with the camera model which incorporated brass rollers shown in the earlier photographs, prior to the release of transparent roll film (see figure 48). The cellulose nitrate negatives examined measured 4 ¾ inches and 2 ¾ inches. The larger (see figure  49)  were  again  likely  used  with  John's  completed  camera  model  with  the  brass  rollers  (the  rollers   61

on the model were not flanged), or could have been made at a later date using a panoramic camera such as the Kodak Cirkut purchased after the death of his father. The smaller negatives, featuring a view of New York City (see figure 50), have been described by John Connon as being trimmed prior to exposure with the Wonder panoramic camera. Although the Wonder is also described for use with American Stripping Film, no preserved panoramic negatives matching this description have been found thus far.

Figure 48. John R. Connon. [Panoramic paper negative and print], ca. 1885. A1977.67.203 and A1977.67.210, ph2760 and 2753, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

Figure 49. John R. Connon. [Panoramic transparent negative], ca. 1890. A1977.67.201, ph2751, Wellington County Museum and Archives.

Figure 50. John R. Connon, [New York City], 1890. New York City file, Panoramic prints and negatives series, Connon family fonds, C 286-4-0-1-1, Archives of Ontario.

62

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Archival Collections Connon family fonds, 1887-1890. Series 286-4. Panoramic prints and negatives. Archives of Ontario. Toronto, Ontario. Connon family fonds, 1860-1910. Series 286-5. Prints, tintypes, and documentary art. Archives of Ontario. Toronto, Ontario. Connon family fonds, 1832-1967. Series 286-6. Textual records. Archives of Ontario. Toronto, Ontario. George Eastman House. Technology Collection. Panoramic cameras. Library and Archives Canada, Charles T. Corke Collection, R10027-0-9. John R. Connon fonds, MG30D336. Library and Archives Canada, Frederick A. Curlyo collection, R10057-0-3. University of Guelph Library. Connon Collection. Wellington County Museum & Archives. Connon correspondence, prints and negatives. Record group A1977.67.

Patents Blair, T. H. 1890. Camera. American Patent no. 428448, filed July 8, 1889 and issued May 20, 1890. Brehm, F. W. 1905. Panoramic Camera. American Patent no. 780406, filed Oct. 17, 1904 and issued Jan. 17, 1905. Connon, John R. 1887. Photographic Instrument. British Patent no. 6673, filed Dec. 9, 1886 and issued May 6, 1887. Connon, John R. 1887. Photographic Instrument. American Patent no. 369165, filed Apr. 2, 1887 and issued Aug. 30 1887. Connon, John R. 1888. Photographic Instrument. Canadian Patent no. 30143, filed Jan. 1, 1888 and issued July 11, 1888. Connon, John R. 1891. Slide Shutter for Photographic Cameras. American Patent no. 451027, filed June 13 1890 and issued Apr. 28, 1891. Eastman, G. 1888. Camera. American Patent no. 388850, filed March 30, 1888 and issued Sept. 4, 1888. Green, G. F. 1886. Photographic Shutter. American Patent no. 342693, filed June 6, 1885 and issued May 25, 1886.

63

Goodwin, H. 1898. Photographic Pellicle and Process of Producing Same. American Patent no. 610861, filed May 2, 1887 and issued Sept. 13, 1898. Houston, D. H. 1881. Photographic Apparatus. American Patent no. 248179, filed June 21, 1881 and issued Oct. 11, 1881. Johnston, William J. 1904. Panoramic Camera. American Patent no. 776,403, filed Jan. 7, 1904 and issued Nov. 29, 1904. Marcellus, P. S. Panoramic Roll Holder Camera. American Patent no. 512512, filed July 27, 1893 and issued Jan. 9, 1894. Rockwood, G. G. and H. B. Shallenberger. Panoramic Camera. American Patent no. 441704, filed Feb. 28, 1890 and issued Dec. 2, 1890. Stirn, Carl P. 1889. Photographic Camera. American Patent no. 418343, filed April 15, 1889 and issued Dec. 31, 1889. Walker, W. H. and G. Eastman. Roll Holder for Photographic Films. American Patent no. 317049, filed Aug. 8, 1884 and issued May 5, 1885.

Contemporary Articles "A  Panoramic  Camera."  The American Amateur Photographer. Vol. 2. Brunswick, ME. The American Publishing Company, 1890: 143. Connon, John R. The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity. Elora ON: Elora Express and Fergus News Record, 1906. Eastman Dry Plate and Film Co. Photographic Materials and Apparatus. Rochester NY: Schlicht & Field Co., January 1888. Eastman Kodak Company, Century Camera Division. The Cirkut Method and Apparatus. Rochester, New York: Eastman Kodak Company, 1909. Moëssard, Paul. Etudes des lentilles et objectifs photographiques. Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1889. "Panoramic  Photography"  The Photo-Miniature, vol. 7 (October 1905): 1-12. "Photography's  Advances."  Focus: A Journal of Photographic Interest. Vol. 3 No. 4. (April 1913, Montreal): 10-14. Stirn, C.P. C.P.  Stirn's  patent  photographic  concealed  vest  cameras,  panoramic  cameras,  enlarging   apparatus  and  photographic  materials  for  use  with  C.P.  Stirn's  patents. Santa Barbara, California: National Directory of Camera Collectors, 1973. Reprint. Originally published: New York: Stirn & Lyon, [189-?]. Wilson, Edward Livingston. Wilson's  Cyclopedic  Photography:  A  Complete  Handbook  of  Terms,   Processes, Formulae and Appliances Available in Photography, Arranged in Cyclopedic Form for Ready Reference. New York: E. L. Wilson, 1894. 64

Books: The History of the Panoramic Format and Camera Technology Auer, Michel. The collectors guide to antique cameras. Monceaux-le-Compte, France: Editions Camera Obscura, 1981. ----------. The Illustrated History of the Camera from 1839 to the present. Boston: New York Graphic Society, 1975. Balzer, Richard. Optical Amusements: Magic Lanterns and Other Transforming Images - A Catalog of Popular Entertainments. Watertown, MA: Richard Balzer, 1987. Burleson, Clyde W and E. Jessica Hickman. The Panoramic Photography of Eugene O. Goldbeck. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1986. Coe, Brian. Cameras: From Daguerreotypes to Instant Pictures. Gothenburg, Sweden: A. B. Norbrook, 1978. Coe, Brian. Kodak Cameras: The First Hundred Years. Cincinnati, Ohio: Seven Hill Books, 1888. Comment, Bernard. The Panorama. Translated by Anne-Marie Glasheen. London: Reaktion Books, 1999. Daguerre, Louis Jacques Mandé. An Historical and Descriptive Account of the Various Processes of the Daguerreotype and the Diorama. Paris: Béthune et plon, 1839. Reprinted with illustrations and an introduction by Beaumont Newhall. New York: Winter House, 1971. Page references will be to the 1839 edition. Gernsheim, Helmut and Alison. L.J.M. Daguerre (1787-1851):  The  World's  First Photographer and Inventor of the Daguerreotype. New York: World Pub., 1956. Gustavson, Todd. Camera: A History of Photography from Daguerreotype to Digital. New York: Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 2009. ----------. 500 Cameras: 170 Years of Photographic Innovation. Toronto: Sterling Publication Co., Inc., 2011. Haas, Robert Bartlett. Muybridge: Man in Motion. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976. Hammond, John H. The Camera Obscura: A Chronicle. Bristol: Adam Hilger Ltd., 1981. Harris, David. Eadweard Muybridge and the Photographic Panorama of San Francisco, 1850-1880. Montreal, Quebec: Canadian Centre for Architecture, 1993. Huhtamo, Erkki. Illusions in Motion: Media Archeology of the Moving Panorama and Related Spectacles. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013. Hyde, Ralph. Panoramania!  :The  Art  and  Entertainment  of  the  "All-Embracing"  View. London: Trefoil Publications, 1988. Kingslake, Rudolf. A History of the Photographic Lens. Boston: Academic Press, 1989. 65

---------- . The Photographic Manufacturing Companies of Rochester, New York. Rochester: George Eastman House, 1997. Lothrop, Eaton S. A Century of Cameras from the Collection of the International Museum of Photography at George Eastman House. Dobbs Ferry, New York: Morgan & Morgan, 1982. MacKay, Robert B. America by the Yard: Cirkut Camera Images from the Early Twentieth Century. New York: W. W. Nortin, 2009. Meehan, Joseph. Panoramic Photography: Revised and Updated. New York: Amphoto Books, 1996. Meers, Nick. Stretch: The World of Panoramic Photography. Mies, Switzerland: Rotovision, 2003. Mulligan, Therese, and David Wooters. A History of Photography from 1839 to Today, George Eastman House. Rochester, N.Y.: Taschen, 1999. Oettermann, Stephen. The Panorama: History of a Mass Medium. Translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider. New York: Zone Books, 1997. Polden, Brian. Photography at Length - The Authentic History of Panoramic Cameras. Unpublished manuscript. Received March 25, 2014. Rosenblum, Naomi. A World History of Photography. New York: Abbeville Press, 2007.

Books: The Photographic Industry in North America During the Late Nineteenth Century Ackerman, Carl William. George Eastman. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1930. Brayer, Elizabeth. George Eastman: A Biography. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1996. Collins, Douglas. The Story of Kodak. New York: H. N. Abrams, 1990. Burstone, Ontario: General Store Publishing House, 1995. Commager, Henry Steele. The American Mind: An Interpretation of American Thought and Character Since  the  1880's. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1950. Culbert, Terry. County Roads: Around Ontario with Global Television`s Terry Culbert. Edwards, Elizabeth. The Camera as Historian: Amateur Photographers and Historical Imagination, 1885-1918. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press, 2012. ---------- and Janet Hart. Photographs Objects Histories: On the Materiality of Images. New York: Routledge, 2004. Ford, Collin and Karl Steinorth. You Press the Button We Do the Rest: The Birth of Snapshot Photography. London: Dirk Nishen in association with the National Museum of Photography Film and Television, 1988. Greenhill, Ralph. Early Photography in Canada. Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1965. 66

---------- and Andrew Birell. Canadian Photography 1839-1920. Toronto: Coach House Press, 1979. Hammer, Mina Fisher. History of the Kodak: Unrolling the Roll-Film. New York: House of Little Books, 1940. Jenkins, Reese. Images and Enterprise: Technology and the American Photographic Industry, 1839-1925. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1987. ----------. The Photographic Manufacturing Companies of Rochester, New York. Rochester, New York: George Eastman House, 1997. Koltun, L.A., and members of the National Photography Collection Public Archives of Canada. Private Realms of Light, Amateur Photography in Canada 1839-1940. Markham, Ontario: Fitzhenry & Whiteside, 1984. Ledger, Sally and Roger Luckhurst. The Fin de Siècle: A Reader in Cultural History, c. 1880-1900. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. Luckhurst, Roger and Josephine McDonagh. Transactions and Encounters: Science and Culture in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Manchester University Press, 2002. Noonan, Gerald. Introduction to The Early History of Elora, Ontario, and Vicinity by John R. Connon. Reprint. Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier Press, 1975. Nostbakken, Janis, and Jack Humphrey. The Canadian Inventions Book: Innovations, Discoveries and Firsts. Toronto: Greey de Pencier Books, 1976. Phillips, Glen C. The Ontario Photographers List Volume 1 (1851-1900). Milton: Global Heritage Press, 2010. Sternberger, Paul Spencer. Between Amateur and Aesthete: the Legitimization of Photography as Art in America, 1880-1900. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2001.

Newspaper, Magazine and Journal Articles Belier,  Bill.  "Bigshots:  Eastern  Canada's  Only  Panoramic  Specialists."  Photographic Canadiana 24, no. 5 (March-April, 1999): 12-13. Champ, Claire. "Connon,  Thomas."  Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online. Vol. 12. University of Toronto/Université Laval, 2003­. Accessed 23 September 2013. http://www.biographi.ca/en/bio/connon_thomas_12E.html. Kerr,  Douglas  A.  "The  Proper  Pivot  Point  for  Panoramic  Photography."  The Pumpkin, Issue 3 (3 February 2008): 1-15. Accessed 9 April 2014. http://dougkerr.net/Pumpkin/articles/Pivot_Point.pdf. Lansdale,  Robert.  "Shean  Collection  Includes  History."  Photographic Canadiana 28, no. 5 (March-April, 2003): 7.

67

---------- .  "The  Inventor  of  the  Cirkut  Camera  and  its  Parts."  Photographic Canadiana 36, no. 1 (MayJune, 2010): 17-19. Long,  Charles.  "In  the  Round."  Beaver 80, no. 2 (April-May, 2000): 28-33. "Made  in  Canada:  Patent  no.  30143.  Filing  year  1888."  Last  modified  11  May  2006.  Library  and  Archives   Canada. http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/innovations/023020-2350-e.html Acccessed 23 September 2013. McBride,  Bill.  "A  Timeline  of  Panoramic  Cameras."  PanoramicPhoto.com.  Accessed  24  October  2013.   http://www.panoramicphoto.com/timeline.htm. McBride, Bill.  "Evolution  of  the  No.  10  Cirkut  Camera."  Graflex Historic Quarterly 4, no. 4 (fourth quarter, 2009): 4-7. http://www.graflex.org/GHQ/GHQ-14-4.pdf. Polden,  Brian.  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  1."  Photographica World 100 no. 2 (2002): 8-16. ----------.  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  2:  Martens,  the  Megaskop  and  beyond."  Photographica World 102 no. 4 (2002): 33-39. ----------.  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  3:  Curved  images  on  flat  plates."  Photographica World 104 no. 2 (2003): 11-19. ----------.  "Photography  at Length, Part 4: The Roll-Up (Set-Scale)  Panorama."  Photographica World 106 no. 4 (2003): 22-30. ----------.  "Photography  at  Length,  Part  5:  The  Roll-Up (Variable-Scale)  Panorama."  Photographica World 109 no. 3(2004): 20-31. Schneider,  Richard.  "Historic  Panoramas."  Panorama (Sept 1998): 17. Silversides,  Brock  V.  "Panoramic  Photography."  Photographic Canadiana Vol. 10-6 (Mar.-Apr. 1985): 11-13. "The  Connons  of  Elora:  Pioneers  in  the  art  of  Photography,  Thomas  and  John,  Father  and  son."   Photographic Canadiana Vol. 21-3 (Nov.-Dec. 1995): 4-8. Thorning,  Steeve.  "Connon  became  a  full-time  photographer  after  European  trip."  Elora Sentinel and Fergus Thistle, March 22, 1994. ----------.  "John  Connon  remembered  for  photography  and  his  history  book."  Elora Sentinel and Fergus Thistle, April 5, 1994. ----------.  "Photographer  and  artist  Thomas  Connon  had  a  tough  time  surviving  in  early  Elora."  Elora Sentinel and Fergus Thistle, March 8, 1994. ----------.  "Thomas  Connon  struggled  to  earn  a  living  ­ then suddenly left for  Europe."  Elora Sentinel and Fergus Thistle, March 15, 1994. ----------.  "Thomas  Connon  was  first  honoured  for  his  work  with  the  library  and  temperance."  Elora Sentinel and Fergus Thistle, March 29, 1994. 68


