   A  Hygrothermal  Comparative  Analysis  of  Split-Insulated,  High- RSI  Wall  Assemblies  in  Three  Canadian  Climates  
   Andrew  Stiffman   Ryerson  University               A  Major  Research  Project     presented  to  Ryerson  University     in  partial  fulfillment  of  the     requirements  for  the  degree  of     Master  of  Building  Science     in  the  Program  of  Building  Science  

     
  
   Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014   ©  Andrew  Stiffman,  2014  

  
AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  MRP   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  MRP.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  MRP,   including  any  required  final  revisions.     I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by  other   means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose   of  scholarly  research.   I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.

2     

  

Abstract  
As  consciousness  grows  regarding  the  negative  impacts  most  buildings  have  on  the   Earth's  environment,  techniques  to  mitigate  this  impact  must  emerge  in  mainstream  design   practices.  A  calibrated  hygrothermal  simulation  was  conducted  using  WUFI®  Pro  to  assess   predicted  hygrothermal  performance  of  a  variety  of  wall  assemblies  that  are  likely  to  enter   into  mainstream  design  practices.  The  results  of  these  simulations  reveal  the  importance  of   designing  assemblies  that  are  resilient  to  field  conditions  that  introduce  more  severe   hygrothermal  loads  than  standard  vapour  diffusion.  It  is  clear  that  in  order  for  a  wall   assembly  to  perform  adequately  under  moisture  ingress  conditions,  it  must  be  able  to  dry   freely  to  at  least  one  side  of  the  building  enclosure.  High-RSI  assemblies  with  exterior  XPS   exhibited  far  diminished  resiliency  to  driving  rain  penetration  as  compared  to  those   without  exterior  insulation  and  those  with  exterior  mineral  wool.    

3     

  

  

Acknowledgements  
I  would  like  to  thank  my  supervisor,  Dr.  Russell  Richman,  for  his  guidance  and  mentorship   throughout  my  research  process  and  the  entirely  of  my  graduate  education.  As  well,  I'd  like   to  thank  the  entirety  of  the  Department  of  Building  Science  faculty  and  staff  for  their   dedication  and  growth  that  they  have  facilitated  for  all.   I'd  like  to  extend  my  gratitude  to  Graham  Finch  and  the  rest  of  RDH  Building  Engineering   for  the  professional  expertise  and  support  provided  throughout  the  research  process,  as   well  as  for  generously  sharing  the  field  data  necessary  to  calibrate  my  models.     I'd  also  like  to  thank  my  friends  and  colleagues  in  the  Building  Science  Department,   particularly  M  Steven  Tokarik,  Maddie  Craig,  Denver  Jermyn,  Cassandra  Kani-Sanchez,  Pat   Andres,  Robin  Urquhart  and  Matt  Carlsson.   Finally  and  most  importantly,  I'd  like  to  thank  my  family,  Patricia,  David  and  Julia  Stiffman,   without  whose  support  none  of  this  would  be  possible.    

4     

  

  

Table  of  Contents  

  
5        

  

6     

  

Tables  and  Figures    

  

  

7     

  

   1.0  Introduction  
In  recent  years,  understanding  of  the  significant  contribution  of  buildings  in   greenhouse  gas  emissions  has  grown  in  Canada.  In  response,  building  codes  have   progressed  greatly,  and  advanced  performance  standards  have  entered  the  mainstream.  At   the  scale  of  the  single-family  home,  designers  have  gravitated  towards  more  highly   insulated,  thicker  wall  assemblies  than  those  that  have  traditionally  been  constructed,  in   efforts  to  reduce  the  energy  required  for  mechanical  heating  and  cooling.     Attention  to  effective  RSI,  which  describes  the  actual  thermal  resistance  of  the  wall   assembly  as  opposed  to  simply  the  resistance  of  the  installed  insulation,  and  reduction  of   thermal  bridging  has  been  shown  to  reduce  energy  use  intensity  substantially  in  a  typical   Canadian  home  (Stiffman  and  Fung,  2014;  Suresh  et  al,  2011).  This  a  very  promising  design   strategy  for  designers  in  challenging  climates,  especially  where  space  is  limited  and  wall   thickness  becomes  a  critical  factor.  But  while  high  RSI  wall  assemblies  are  known  to  be   extremely  effective  at  reducing  heating  and  cooling  energy  consumption,  variations  on   building  envelope  designs  (i.e.  component  choice  and  placement)  affect  moisture   management  in  both  positive  and  negative  ways.  At  the  single-family  residential  scale   particularly,  some  high  RSI  assemblies  have  an  observed  tendency  to  experience  interstitial   condensation,  which  can  lead  to  mould  and  other  failure  mechanisms.  As  Canadian  building   codes  shift  towards  legislating  higher  effective  RSI  values,  new  envelope  strategies  will   inevitably  surface  in  order  to  fulfill  these  requirements.  It  is  important  to  understand  the   hygrothermal  performance  of  assemblies  designed  to  increase  overall  thermal   performance  of  the  building  envelope.   This  research  used  calibrated  simulation  to  examine  the  hygrothermal  implications   of  high  RSI  design  strategies  that  are  being  used  with  increased  frequently  in  order  to  meet   more  stringent  thermal  performance  requirements  published  in  Canadian  building  codes.   In  order  to  test  the  abilities  of  the  hygrothermal  analysis  procedure,  attention  will  be  paid   to  three  different  climates,  using  Vancouver,  Toronto  and  Edmonton  as  case  studies  in   order  to  develop  a  climate-sensitive  risk  assessment  matrix  with  relevance  in  three  of   Canada's  most  important  economic  sectors.    
8        

     

1.1  Objectives  
This  objectives  of  this  research  are:   · Use  hygrothermal  simulation  to  assess  durability  risks  associated  with  high  RSI  wall   assemblies  employing  different  insulation-split  allocations  (%  exterior  vs  %  interior   of  sheathing  plane)  and  insulating  materials,  in  two  different  Canadian  climates.     · Develop  climate-sensitive  design  recommendations  that  reflect  the  relative   moisture  risks  of  selected  high-RSI  assemblies  that  are  useful  to  designers,  builders,   and  legislators  across  Canada.  
  

1.2  Research  Questions  
To  achieve  the  objectives,  the  following  research  questions  will  be  answered:   1. What  is  the  impact  of  split  insulation  on  the  hygrothermal  performance  of  high  RSI,   wood  framed  wall  assemblies  in  Toronto,  Vancouver,  and  Edmonton?     2. What  are  the  effects  of  air  leakage  and  driving  rain  penetration  on  the  hygrothermal   performance  of  each  of  the  investigated  assemblies?   3. How  sensitive  is  this  performance  to  the  configuration  (%  exterior  RSI  vs  %  interior   RSI)  and  material  properties  of  different  insulating  materials?  
     

1.3  Background  
The  debate  around  hygrothermal  performance  of  high  RSI  assemblies  is  complicated   by  building  codes  that  do  not  always  support  or  address  hygrothermal  best  practices   different  enclosure  design  strategies.  For  instance,  despite  expert  suggestions  (Hutcheon   and  Handegord,  1995)  that  38mm  x  89  mm  (2x4)  walls  with  insulating  sheathing  (or  `split'   insulated  walls)  tend  to  be  hygrothermally  superior  to  38mm  x  140mm  (2x6)  walls  without   exterior  insulation  (or  `interior'  insulated  walls),  and  better  still  are  walls  with  entirely   exterior  insulation  (or  `exterior'  insulated  walls),  a  continuous  layer  of  rigid  foam   insulation  outboard  of  the  building's  sheathing  often  requires  an  architectural  or  engineer's  
9        

approval  in  order  to  gain  acceptance  by  local  municipal  building  departments  (Lstiburek  et   al,  2014).  This  requirement  is  created  by  building  code  guidelines  for  the  amount  of   insulation  that  is  required  to  be  outboard  of  the  building  sheathing,  as  a  function  of  heating   degree  days  (OBC,  2012).    However,  many  experts  have  vigorously  challenged  the   legitimacy  of  this  legislation,  and  have  called  for  closer  consideration  of  the  issue   (Karagiozis  et  al,  2014).     While  the  analyses  necessary  to  optimize  the  effective  thermal  performance  of  high   RSI  wall  assemblies  are  well  understood,  accurate  assessment  of  hygrothermal   performance  is  more  complex,  and  has  not  yet  entered  into  the  mainstream  design  process,   especially  at  the  single-family  scale  (Karagiozis,  2001).  It  is  therefore  important  to  assess   the  hygrothermal  behaviour  of  high  RSI  wall  assemblies  in  order  to  ensure  that  designing   for  high  thermal  resistance  does  not  create  inadvertent  durability  concerns.  Because  field   testing  and  experimental  investigation  is  expensive  and  limited  in  relevance  to  the  specific   location  and  assembly  being  scrutinized,  heat,  air  and  moisture  simulation  is  a  promising   technique  for  assessing  the  hygrothermal  performance  of  a  variety  of  assemblies  in   different  climates  (Karagiozis,  2001).  Using  hygrothermal  simulation,  we  can  begin  to   develop  design  guidelines  for  climate-specific  wall  assemblies  that  are  resilient  to  common   stressors  and  moisture  loadings,  as  well  as  the  effects  of  construction  deficiencies.  
  

10     

  

   2.0  Literature  Review    
This  Chapter  focuses  on  the  mechanisms  governing  the  interaction  of  moisture  and   relevant  elements  in  wood  framed  buildings  leading  to  potential  assembly  failure,  as  well   as  best  practices  in  hygrothermal  analysis,  especially  with  regards  to  the  selection  and   verification  of  appropriate  simulation  boundary  conditions.    
  

  

2.1  Enclosure  Design  and  Control  Layers  
The  building  envelope  will  be  defined  throughout  this  research  as  the  system  of   components  that  separates  the  exterior  environment  from  controlled,  indoor  space.  It   therefore  must  perform  certain  critical  functions  in  order  to  effectively  maintain  indoor   environmental  conditions  that  are  suitable  for  human  occupancy.    Contemporary  building   envelopes  are  designed  to  perform  the  following  four  functions,  listed  in  order  of   importance  (Lstiburek,  2007):   1. Control  the  penetration  of  bulk  water  from  weather  events,  such  as  driving  rain  or   snow   2. Control  the  infiltration  and  exfiltration  of  air     3. Control  the  transfer  of  heat  both  into  and  out  of  the  building   4. Control  the  diffusion  of  water  vapour,  both  from  the  interior  and  exterior       
                       
     

  

Figure  2.1.1:  "The  Perfect  Wall  

Enclosure",  conceptual  diagram.  In  

11     

  

this  assembly,  all  control  layers  are  continuous  and  outboard  of  the  building  structure,  forming  a  `perfect'   separation.  (Building  Science  Corporation,  2008)  

   Figure  2.1.1  depicts  an  enclosure  concept  commonly  referred  to  as  the  "Perfect   Wall."  In  this  approach,  all  control  layers  are  located  outboard  of  the  building  structure  and   are  continuous,  allowing  the  envelope  to  most  effectively  separate  the  structure  from  the   elements  that  it  is  designed  to  control  (Straube  and  Burnett  2005).   In  the  "Perfect  Wall,"  the  cladding  serves  to  protect  the  control  layers  from  wind  and   ultraviolet  exposure,  as  well  as  deflecting  the  vast  majority  of  water  from  driving  rain.   Behind  the  cladding  is  an  air  cavity,  designed  to  be  free  flowing  so  that  the  pressure  is   moderated  with  regards  to  the  exterior  air  pressure.  Behind  the  air  cavity  is  the  weather   resistive  barrier  (WRB),  which  exists  based  on  the  assumption  that  some  water  will   inevitably  penetrate  the  cavity.  Any  penetrating  liquid  water  is  able  to  drain  down  the  WRB   and  exit  the  assembly  via  the  bottom  of  the  air  cavity.  When  sealed,  the  WRB  will  also  form   the  air  barrier,  controlling  the  unwanted  infiltration  and  exfiltration  of  air  (Lstiburek,   2007).  Behind  the  WRB  is  the  thermal  insulation  layer,  which  regulates  the  rate  at  which   heat  may  enter  and  leave  the  building.  Finally,  the  vapour  control  layer  is  present  outboard   of  the  structure,  ensuring  that  humid  air  does  not  penetrate  the  assembly  and  cause   moisture  accumulation  on  cold  surfaces.  Typically,  a  contemporary,  timber  building  will   utilize  a  single  layer  of  oriented  strand  board  (OSB)  or  plywood  as  structural  sheathing,   which  is  mechanically  fastened  to  a  wood-framed,  stud  wall  inboard  of  the  sheathing.     Critically,  the  `Perfect  Wall'  design  may  not  always  be  feasible  to  achieve  in  practice;   for  example,  zoning  issues  such  as  minimum  setbacks  frequently  exert  pressure  on   designers  to  relocate  some  or  all  thermal  insulation  to  be  in  plane  with  the  building   structure,  in  an  effort  to  achieve  a  thinner  wall  assembly.  This  results  in  high  RSI  wall   assemblies  with  `split'  insulation  designs  (Refer  to  Figure  2.1.2),  which  have  demonstrated   decreased  resiliency  to  hygrothermal  stressors  when  compared  to  exterior  insulated  walls,   and  even  interior  insulated  walls  in  certain  instances  (Finch  and  Ricketts,  2012).    

12     

  

  
Figure  2.1.2:  Insulation  allocation  techniques.  Note  that  the  Split-insulation  strategy  permits  the  greatest   effective  thermal  resistance  over  the  lowest  required  thickness  (exterior  is  right;  interior  is  left)  (RDH  2012).  

   Split  insulation  assemblies  result  in  unique  temperature  and  moisture  profiles   across  the  wall  assembly  that  are  different  that  are  different  than  the  traditional  assemblies   (i.e.  interior  and  exterior  insulated  assemblies).    The  long  term  hygrothermal  performance   of  split  insulation  assemblies  is  not  well  understood  or  documented  (Arena,  2013).    As   such,  a  detailed  understanding  of  the  physics  governing  the  split-assembly's  hygrothermal   performance  is  required  as  building  codes'  prescriptive  requirements  push  designers  into   the  realm  of  split-insulation  assemblies.    The  occurrence  of  interstitial  moisture   accumulation  and  the  associated  failure  mechanisms  have  been  observed  with  increased   frequency  (Arena,  2013).    The  reasons  for  this  observed  deterioration  are  complex  and   interrelated,  but  perhaps  are  driven  in  part  by  design  practices  that  do  not  permit  the  rapid   drying  of  wetted  components  that  are  susceptible  to  water-induced  deterioration   mechanisms.       Canadian  building  codes  do  make  mention  of  these  effects,  prescribing  minimum   thermal  resistance  ratios  (outboard  vs  inboard)  based  on  heating  degree  days  as  shown  in   Table  2.1.1    (Canadian  Commission  of  Building  and  Fire  Codes,  2010).  However,  these   ratios  do  not  account  for  the  various  hygrothermal  regimes  that  split-insulation  wall   assemblies  frequently  have,  and  may  result  in  requirements  for  wall  assemblies  without   any  diffusive  drying  pathway  for  wetted  components  (OBC,  2012;  Karagiozis  et  al,  2014).      
13        

  

Table  2.1.1:  Minimum  split  insulation  allocation  ratio  as  a  function  of  heating  degree  days  under  the   Canadian  National  Building  Code  (CCBFC,  2010).    

  

   2.2  Moisture  Accumulation,  Storage  and  Transport  within  Porous  Media  
Most  building  enclosures  of  single  family  homes  in  Canada  are  constructed  with   wood  based  and  other  hygroscopic  materials.  As  such,  it  is  important  to  understand  the   mechanisms  by  which  water  interacts  with  porous,  hygroscopic  materials,  as  the  attributes   of  this  interaction  determine  whether  or  not  a  building  enclosure  will  experience  moisture- induced  deterioration.  The  four  major  sources  of  moisture  in  building  envelope  assemblies   are  (Schumacher  and  Straube,  2007):  1)  Bulk  water  from  precipitation,  2)  Water  vapour   stored  in  air,  either  interior  or  exterior,  3)  Built-in  or  stored  moisture,  either  from   manufacturing  and/or  construction  processes,  and  4)  liquid  or  bound  water  from  soil.  In  a   typical  enclosure,  bulk  water  penetration  (e.g.  rain)  accounts  for  over  95%  of  the  water   available  to  a  building  enclosure  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).         Generally  speaking,  timber  materials  such  as  plywood  and  oriented  strand  board   (OSB)  are  composed  of  particles  of  irregular  shapes  and  sizes,  creating  complex,  porous   cross-sectional  matrices  (Morris,  1999).  This  porosity  and  associated  pore  connectivity   directly  affects  the  quantity  of  water,  either  bound,  free,  or  vapour  that  may  be  transported   through  the  medium  of  interest;  for  the  purposes  of  analysis,  this  complex  structure  is   simplified  under  the  assumption  that  an  overall,  effective  porosity  may  be  determined  from  
14        

standardized  test  methodology  (ASTM,  2010).  From  this  understanding  of  the  material   composition  of  wood,  intrinsic  material  properties  have  been  developed  in  order  to  assist   in  the  calculation  and  prediction  of  moisture  transport  through  wood  (ASTM,  2010).   The  gaseous  form  of  moisture  present  in  an  air  mixture,  water  vapour,  is   transported  through  wood  through  the  combined  processes  of  convection  and  diffusion,   together  called  `advection.'  It  is  important  to  note  that  in  practice  vapour  diffusion  is  rarely   a  large  contributor  to  net  vapour  transport  through  an  assembly;  rather,  the  ability  of  air  to   hold  and  transport  large  amounts  of  water  vapour  frequently  results  in  convective   moisture  accumulation  causing  serious  concern  in  the  hygrothermal  design  process   (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).  In  order  to  calculate  the  mass-flow  rate  at  which  water   vapour  shall  pass  through  a  sample  media  of  a  fixed  area,  a  derivation  of  Fick's  law  can  be   used  as  shown  in  Equation  1  (Hutcheon  and  Handegord,  1995):      dwx  /  d  =  -  µ  *  A  *  dPw  /dx         Where:    dwx  /  d  =  the  quantity  of  water  vapour  per  unit  time  (ng/s),     µ=  average  vapour  permeability  of  the  sample  (ng/mPas),     A  =  the  sample's  cross-sectional  area  (m2),  and     dPw  =  the  vapour  pressure  gradient  (Pa/m)  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).        Standard  test  methodology,  ASTM  E96,  is  widely  used  to  accurately  capture  the   average  vapour  permeability  of  most  materials  under  typical  conditions  (ASTM,  2010).   Karagiozis  and  Salonvaara  (2001)  note  that  at  very  high  relative  humidities,  hysteresis   effects  may  alter  the  average  vapour  permeability  as  compared  to  dry  conditions;   quantitative  hygrothermal  analysis  is  challenging  under  very  high  RH  conditions  for  this   reason  (Peuhkuri,  2003).   Particularly  relevant  to  the  case  of  split  insulation,  designing  with  materials  that   have  low  vapour  permeance  present  an  interesting  balancing  act  of  positive  and  negative   durability  effects;  in  the  case  of  exterior  insulation  with  a  low  vapour  permeance  (e.g.   commonly  extruded  polystyrene  (XPS)  in  Canada),  an  assembly  that  has  accumulated   moisture  inboard  of  this  layer  will  be  inhibited  in  its  ability  to  dry  to  the  exterior  through  
15        

  

  

  

  

[1]  

vapour  diffusion  or  convective  drying.  However;  this  same  wall  will,  conceptually,  be  more   resilient  to  moisture  accumulation  in  the  first  place,  because  the  temperature  of  the   sheathing  will  be  elevated  and  thus  further  from  the  sheathing's  dew  point  temperature.     Perhaps  more  important  than  vapour  diffusion,  water  vapour  can  also  be   transported  to  susceptible  layers  through  the  bulk  transport  of  unmanaged  air  leakage  into   an  assembly.  This  air  can  originate  either  from  indoors  or  outdoors,  and  has  the  potential   to  deliver  dangerously  high  amounts  of  water  in  a  short  period  of  time,  orders  of   magnitude  more  than  through  vapour  diffusion  alone  (Hutcheon  and  Handegord,  1995).   Straube  and  Burnett  (2005)  have  quantified  the  amount  of  water  than  can  be  transported   from  the  interior  of  a  building  to  a  given  layer  in  the  assembly,  layer  j,  by  the  convective   flow  of  air  as  shown  in  Equation  2:      Qcondensation  =  V  *  (Pw,in  ­  Pws,j)  /  Rv  *T        Where:  V  =  the  volume  flow  rate  of  air  (m3/s),     Pw,in  =  the  interior  vapour  pressure,     Pws,j  =  saturation  vapour  pressure  at  the  temperature  of  layer  j,     Rv  is  the  gas  constant  for  water  vapour  (461.5  J/kg*K)  and     T  =  air  temperature  (K).        Note  that  this  one-dimensional  equation  assumes  that  air  leakage  has  no  effect  on   temperature  of  the  layer  upon  which  moisture  is  accumulating,  which  is  reasonable  only   for  low  air  leakage  rates  due  to  air's  relatively  low  heat  capacity  (Glass,  2013).  It  also   assumes  that  the  entirety  of  the  moisture  content  of  air  that  comes  in  contact  with  the   condensing  surface  will  accumulate  on  this  surface;  in  laboratory  testing,  a  maximum  of   70%  of  this  moisture  has  been  found  to  accumulate  on  the  condensing  surface,  therefore   this  equation  will  by  definition  overestimate  the  magnitude  of  convective  accumulation  of   water  vapour  (Ojanen  et  al,  1994).   The  transportation  of  water  within  a  porous  material  becomes  quite  complex  when   examined  in  depth;  the  distinction  between  the  driving  forces  influencing  free  water,   bound  water,  and  water  vapour  transport  are  critical  to  accurate  numerical  representation.    
16        

  

  

  

  

  

[2]  

However  for  the  purposes  of  this  research,  Darcy's  equation  (refer  to  Equation  3)  will  be   used  to  represent  the  flow  of  free  water  through  wood,  under  the  reasonable  assumption   that  its  flow  is  free  and  laminar  (McClung,  2013):      Q  =  K*A*P         Where,  Q  =  the  air  flow  rate  (kg/s),     K  =  air  permeance  (measured  by  ASTM  E2178-13,  expressed  in  µm/Pa*s,     A  =  cross  sectional  area  (m2),  and    
P  =  driving  air  pressure  difference  (Pa)  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).       

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

[3]  

2.3  Drying  Mechanisms  of  High  RSI  Wall  Assemblies  
After  any  wetting  event,  moisture  may  be  transported  within  (i.e.  re-distributed)  and/or   removed  by  an  assembly  by  a  combination  of  four  mechanisms.  These  are:  1)  evaporation   of  water  transported  by  capillary  action  to  the  surface  of  the  wet  material,  2)  vapour   transport  by  diffusion  and/or  air  leakage,  3)  drainage  due  to  gravity,  or  4)  ventilation   drying  as  represented  in  Figure  2.3.1  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).    

  
Figure  2.3.1:  Conceptual  illustration  of  drying  mechanisms,  including  vapour  diffusion,  convection  drying,  and   gravity-driven  drainage  drying.  (Straube,  2007)    

The  efficacy  of  each  of  these  drying  mechanism  depends  on  a  combination  of  design   factors  such  as:  ambient  climate  conditions  and  material  properties  of  relevant  control  
17        

layers  in  the  wall  assembly  (e.g.  permeance  and  hygroscopy)  (Arena,  2013).    Generally,   drainage  of  bulk  water  due  to  gravity  is  expected  to  remove  water  at  the  greatest   volumetric  rate;  however,  a  significant  amount  of  moisture  will  typically  remain  absorbed   into  materials  by  capillary  and  surface  tension  forces  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).This   interstitial  moisture  will  not  be  substantially  dried  by  gravity-driven  drainage,  therefore   provisions  for  other  drying  mechanisms  (such  as  diffusion  and  cavity  airflow  drying)  must   be  engaged  (Ge  and  Ye,  2006).     The  efficacy  of  diffusive  drying  depends  on  the  configuration  of  vapour  resistance   within  control  layers  of  the  assembly,  as  well  as  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  vapour   drive  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).  If  a  layer  of  sheathing  has  accumulated  moisture,  and   control  layers  outboard  of  the  sheathing  have  a  low  vapour  permeance,  the  ability  of  that   sheathing  to  dry  to  the  exterior  will  be  low,  implying  that  for  an  assembly  with  this   characteristic  to  avoid  deterioration  and  potential  failure,  the  sheathing  must  either  remain   dry,  or  have  an  effective  inward  drying  pathway.  However,  research  has  suggested  that   vapour  diffusion  rarely  accounts  for  a  large  volume  of  water  vapour  transport;  therefore   neither  drying  nor  wetting  via  diffusion  is  of  critical  concern  in  most  circumstances,  though   extremely  cold  climates  may  require  closer  consideration  of  the  psychrometric  factors   governing  this  risk,  such  as  the  dewpoint  of  indoor  air  and  surface  temperature  of  envelope   components  exposed  directly  to  this  air  (Saber  et  al,  2010).     Most  modern  assemblies  employ  a  vented  airspace/drainage  cavity  between  10- 50mm  in  thickness,  separating  the  cladding  from  the  control  layers,  commonly  known  as  a   `vented  rainscreen'  approach  (Straube  and  Schumacher,  2007).  The  intention  of  this  design   feature  is  to  promote  the  convective  transport  of  moisture  from  wetted  elements  away   from  the  enclosure  using  the  ventilation  air's  capacity  to  hold  additional  moisture.  This   airspace  will  also  provide  for  a  capillary  break,  and  when  properly  detailed  with  a   supported,  continuous  WRB  inboard,  a  drainage  plane  for  bulk  water  penetrating  the   cladding  plane  to  dry  due  to  gravity  drainage  (Ge  and  Ye,  2006).  However,  recent  research   has  shown  that  merely  providing  for  a  free  flowing  airspace  may  not  guarantee  that   substantial  flow  of  air  will  occur,  and  thus  convective  drying  of  water  will  not  necessarily   occur  at  a  consistently  adequate  rate  (Falk  and  Sandin,  2012).    The  flow  of  this  air  is  largely   dependent  upon  the  detail  design  of  the  cavity  (e.g.  whether  horizontal  or  vertical  battens  
18        

are  used),  the  force  of  friction  acting  on  the  ventilation  air,  and  the  pressure  gradient   between  the  intake  and  exhaust  orifices,  which  is  governed  by  the  stack  pressure  acting  on   the  wall  (Falk  and  Sandin,  2012).    Straube  and  VanStraaten  (2010)  measured  a  mean  air   flow  rate  of  89  ACH  for  a  20mm,  vertically  furred  cavity;  however,  a  range  of  3  ACH  to  468   ACH  was  observed  during  the  measurement  period  and  correlated  closely  to  wind  speed   and  direction  (Straube  and  VanStraaten,  2010).    Ge  and  Ye  (2006)  have  created  a  validated   numerical  model  demonstrating  that  an  average  ACH  of  93  may  appropriately  describe   most  residential,  vented  rainscreens  with  `lap'  siding  as  the  water  shedding  surface.  The   approximate  rate  of  100  ACH  has  been  corroborated  by  RDH  (2012),  which  enables  users   to  iteratively  calculate  cavity  airflow  based  on  cavity  design  and  environmental  conditions   such  as  hourly  solar  radiation  incident  on  a  vertical  plane.     The  potential  variability  of  airflow  could  potentially  be  addressed  during  a   modelling-based  analysis,  and  correlated  to  the  relative  windiness  of  each  of  the  three   cities;  however,  the  close  correlation  of  measured  drying  to  simulations  using  constant   airflow  rates  suggest  that  idiosyncratic  fluctuations  may  be  empirically  insignificant  to  the   aggregated  rate  of  drying  in  an  assembly  (Ge  and  Ye,  2006).   Furthermore,  when  convection  occurs  at  design  rates  within  the  cavity,  the  drying   capacity  of  cavity  ventilation  depends  on  the  psychrometric  conditions  of  intake  air,  and  it   has  been  shown  that  outdoor  air  in  with  a  high  humidity  load  (such  as  the  marine  climate   of  Vancouver)  may  even  contribute  to  additional  wetting  of  susceptible  enclosure  elements,   even  under  the  assumption  that  the  OSB  or  plywood  sheathing  is  saturated,  thereby   maximizing  the  vapour  pressure  at  the  layer  to  be  dried  (Ge  and  Ye,  2006).  Furthermore,   the  idealized  drying  situation  assumes  that  the  saturated  sheathing  is  exposed  directly  to   the  ventilation  airstream;  in  reality,  a  WRB  membrane  such  as  spun  bonded  polyolefin  will   typically  be  applied  to  the  exterior  face  of  the  sheathing.  Further,  in  exterior  or  split   insulated  assemblies,  some  thickness  of  insulation  that  also  has  a  vapour  resistance  may   further  inhibit  the  drying  potential  of  wetted  sheathing  (Saber  et  al,  2010).  Therefore,  the   effective  vapour  resistance  of  the  layers  outboard  of  the  sheathing  directly  govern  the   efficacy  of  drying  into  the  ventilation  airstream,  and  in  practice,  airflow  within  the  cavity   has  been  measured  to  be  significantly  less  able  to  extract  moisture  from  the  sheathing  than   under  the  idealized  assumptions  of  the  drying  potential  equation  (Ge  and  Ye,  2006).  Most  
19        

validated  hygrothermal  analysis  software  have  developed  appropriate  factors  based  on   relevant  material  properties  in  order  to  account  for  this  needed  correction.          

  
Figure  2.3.2:  Moisture  balance  in  a  typical  vented-rainscreen  wall  cavity.  Note  that  the  velocity  of  air   flow,  v¸  directly  influences  the  rate  of  moisture  removal  from  the  wall  assembly.  In  humid  climates,  P1   Outdoor  conditions  can  greatly  compromise  the  efficacy  of  drying  through  this  mechanism,  sometimes  even   comprising  the  source  of  moisture  for  a  wetting  event  (Ge  and  Ye  2007).  

  

  

2.4  Moisture  Related  Damage  to  the  Building  Envelope  
There  are  five  criteria  that  must  be  satisfied  in  order  for  a  building  envelope  to   experience  moisture-related  deterioration:  1)  a  moisture  source  must  be  available,  2)  a   route  must  be  available  for  that  moisture  to  travel  into  the  envelope,  3)  a  force  must  be   present  to  drive  this  moisture  into  the  envelope,  4)  the  moisture  must  come  into  contact   with  a  material  that  is  susceptible  to  moisture  damage,  and  5)  the  moisture  content  must   remain  in  excess  of  the  susceptible  material's  `safe-storage  capacity'  for  a  sufficient  length   of  time  (Straube,  2007).  If  any  of  these  five  criteria  can  be  eliminated,  there  is  no  risk  of   moisture-related  damage.  In  practice,  the  elimination  of  a  moisture  source  is  particularly  

20     

  

infeasible  in  practice,  due  to  the  hyper-abundance  of  various  forms  of  water  in  the   environment,  and  the  other  constraints  are  also  difficult  to  manage  through  design.     Building  materials  may  experience  moisture-related  damage  due  to  physical,   chemical  or  biological  phenomena  (Viitanen,  2010).  In  the  case  of  wood-framed  structures,   biological  deterioration  in  the  formation  of  mould  is  of  particular  concern  (Viitanen,  2010).   This  is  largely  because  the  criteria  necessary  to  avoid  surface  mould  growth  are  more   stringent  than  the  performance  criteria  for  other  failure  and  deterioration  mechanisms   (TenWolde,  2008).  In  order  for  mould  deterioration  to  occur,  certain  psychrometric   thresholds  must  be  exceeded  for  a  sufficient  period  of  time.     After  a  thorough  review  of  extant  standards  and  publication,  the  parameters  derived   in  ASHRAE  Standard  160P  (1996),  as  well  as  those  developed  in  Viitanen's  Mould  Growth   Index  (2010)  are  well  regarded  as  criteria  which  must  be  avoided  in  order  to  eliminate  the   possibility  of  mould  growth  and  further  structural  decay.     ASHRAE  (1996)  has  identified  the  following  failure  criteria  for  framed  assemblies:   1)  30-day  running  average  surface  RH  >  80%  when  the  average  surface  temperature   during  this  time  is  between  5C  and  40C,  2)  7-day  running  average  surface  RH>98%  when   the  average  surface  temperature  during  this  time  is  between  5C  and  40C,  or  3)  1-day   running  average  surface  RH  =  100%  when  the  average  surface  temperature  is  between  5C   and  40C.    Reaching  any  of  these  upper  limits  represents  a  failure  as  defined  by  ASHRAE   (1996).   Viitanen's  Index  (VTT)  is  somewhat  less  conservative,  and  seems  to  be  more  widely   accepted  by  design  experts  who  are  able  to  draw  upon  collected  field  data  and  professional   experience.  The  VTT's  failure  criteria  are  highly  complex  mathematically,  and  take  into   account  everything  from  climate  factors,  to  building  material,  to  duration  and  timing  of   hygrothermal  exposure  (Krus  et  al,  2010).  VTT  also  has  the  ability  to  predict  the  growth   rate  and  severity  of  mould,  which  is  useful  especially  for  projects  wherein  some  mould   growth  might  be  unavoidable,  such  as  wine  cellars  or  retrofits  of  older  homes  in  humid   climates.  The  calculation  algorithm  is  able  to  assign  a  rating  of  0-6  to  the  selected  input   boundary  conditions,  with  0  indicating  an  instance  predicted  to  experience  no  mold   growth,  and  6  representing  `dense  coverage  100%'  for  a  wood-based  material.  Note  that   the  scale  of  this  index  changes  slightly  with  changing  substrate  class;  for  instance,  a  stone  
21        

substrate  only  ranges  from  0-5,  with  5  indicating  100%  coverage  (Viitanen  and  Ritschkoff,   1991).   Sedlbauer  (2001)  has  also  developed  a  biohygrothermal  model  with  the  goal  of   predicting  mould  growth  in  susceptible  assemblies  under  non-static  boundary  conditions   (Krus  et  al,  2010).  His  methodology,  similar  to  Viitanen's,  also  uses  a  complex  algorithm  in   order  to  predict  the  onset  of  sporulation,  as  well  as  the  rate  and  extent  of  growth  likely  to   occur.  Sedlbauer's  model  has  been  integrated  into  a  post-processor  for  WUFI,  called   WufiBio,  which  has  been  validated  against  field  data  as  well  as  Viitanen's  index  to  show   universally  close  agreement  (Krus  at  al,  2010).  That  said,  it  is  important  to  note  that  these   are  all  `surface'  based  indexes;  because  of  the  challenge  in  quantifying  interstitial  oxygen   levels,  the  accurate  prediction  of  mould  within  the  building  material  based  on  relative   humidity  at  its  boundary  conditions  is  challenging  (Karagiozis,  2001).   Also  useful  to  performance  evaluation  of  moisture-accumulation  conditions  is  the   study  of  the  equilibrium  moisture  content  (EMC)  for  wood,  with  water  content  expressed   as  a  percentage  of  density.  This  is  because  critical  engineering  properties  of  wood,  such  as   shrinkage  and  swelling,  strength,  and  thermal  conductivity  all  depend  on  the  wood's  EMC   (Glass,  2013).  The  literature  frequently  references  what  is  known  as  "safe  storage  capacity   of  wood,"  and  seems  to  agree  that  EMC  less  than  20%  -  28%,  depending  on  the  source   consulted,  by  mass  should  be  strived  for  during  the  hygrothermal  design  process  (Glass,   2013;  Straube  and  Burnett,  2005;  Arena,  2013).     Based  on  the  mechanics  of  moisture  transport  through  wood  media,  a  relationship   between  the  surface  relative  humidity  of  a  sample  and  its  EMC  at  a  given  temperature  has   been  derived  numerically  and  widely  verified  experimentally  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005);   this  relationship  is  known  as  a  `sorption  isotherm,'  and  has  been  rigorously  calculated  for   wood  at  different  temperatures.  In  field  conditions  of  less  than  50C,  it  has  been  found  that   temperature  dependence  of  sorption  is  insignificant,  and  analyses  may  occur  under  the   assumption  of  temperature  independence  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).  At  high  relative   humidifies,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sorption  profile  of  wood  has  been  found  to  vary   significantly;  this  will  be  discussed  at  length  in  Section  2.5.    

22     

  

  
Figure  2.4.1:  Sorption  isotherm  of  solid  wood  and  OSB  at  room  temperature.  Note  the  point  of  inflection   occurring  at  approximately  80%  RH,  wherein  the  rate  of  moisture  content  accumulation  increases  rapidly   due  to  the  local  saturation  of  wood-cells  and  the  transition  to  abundant  liquid  water  in  the  specimen's  cross- sectional  matrix  (Glass,  2013).  

  

In  practice,  wall  assemblies  typically  experience  periods  of  time  wherein  moisture   accumulates  on  the  sheathing  by  one  or  all  of  the  wetting  mechanisms  described  above,  as   well  as  periods  of  time  during  which  the  assembly  is  drying,  by  one  or  all  of  the   mechanisms  described  above.  The  magnitude  and  rate  of  these  processes  determines  what   is  referred  to  as  the  wall's  `moisture  balance,'  and  is  a  critical  factor  in  comparing   hygrothermal  performance  over  time,  under  different  environmental  stressors  and  in   different  climates  (McClung,  2013).   Critical  performance  issues,  such  as  mould  sporulation,  rapid  mould  growth,  and   likely  decay  of  plywood  and  OSB  sheathing  each  have  been  the  subject  of  a  great  amount  of   scientific  research  and  debate  (Treschel,  2001;  TenWolde,  2008).    It  is  therefore  difficult  to   conceive  of  establishing  metrics  for  assessing  the  likelihood  of  occurrence  for  specific   deterioration  phenomena  that  are  universally  accepted  within  the  scientific  community.   That  said,  for  practical  applications,  threshold  values  for  potential  for  mould  onset  (slow  
23        

growth),  as  well  as  structural  decay  may  be  established  relative  to  hours  above  specific   moisture  content  thresholds.  Those  established  by  P.I.  Morris  (1998)  represent  well  the   various  failure  criteria  found  throughout  the  literature:     
Table  2.4.1:  Guide  to  moisture  conditions  for  various  development  criteria  for  mould  and  fungi  in   wood.  (Morris,  1999)  

                 

2.5  Assessment  of  Hygrothermal  Performance  
After  reviewing  the  published  literature  regarding  the  complex  heat,  air  and   moisture  regimes  associated  with  high-RSI  wall  assemblies  it  is  clear  that  there  exists  a  
24        

significant  gap  in  terms  of  rigorous  studies  seeking  to  systematically  assess  hygrothermal   performance  of  wood  based  structures.  In  practice,  this  assessment  could  take  the  generic   form  either  of  physically  testing  specific  wall  assemblies  under  prescribed  environmental   regimes,  or  simulating  these  effects  using  computer  models  (Straube  and  Schumacher,   2006).    In  order  to  analyze  most  effectively  the  extent  to  which  hygrothermal  boundary   conditions  improve  or  worsen  the  moisture  balance  of  wall  assemblies,  hygrothermal   simulation  presents  the  opportunity  for  researchers  and  design  practitioners  to  perform   heat  and  moisture  quantification  that  is  accurate,  but  also  cost  and  time  effective,  and  able   to  be  applied  efficiently  to  unique  designs  in  different  climates  (Karagiozis,  2001).  When   simulations  are  validated  against  measured  field  data,  researchers  may  use  simulation  to   calculate  with  a  high  degree  of  confidence  the  anticipated  result  of  manipulating  variables   that  would  be  challenging  to  test  in  the  field.  This  approach  is  useful  in  order  to  make   recommendations  regarding  the  relative  risk  of  various  exposure  regimes  and  envelope   designs;  however,  caution  must  be  exercised  and  care  taken  not  to  place  undue  confidence   in  the  precision  of  these  results.  Because  of  the  assumptions  and  limitations  of  the   simulation  software,  issues  such  as  gravity  driven  drainage  can  potentially  be  overlooked   by  the  model.  In  instances  where  components  reach  critical  points  of  saturation,  drainage   of  liquid  water  becomes  a  critical  factor  in  the  moisture  management  of  the  assembly.  In   these  instances,  engineering  judgement  must  be  exercised  to  gain  an  accurate   understanding  of  the  impact  of  this  drainage  on  the  performance  of  the  whole  assembly,   and  to  understand  likely  sources  of  model  error.     A  variety  of  hygrothermal  simulation  software  packages  are  available  to  the  building   science  community;  broadly,  these  may  be  classified  into  three  categories:  simplified   numerical  models,  hygrothermal  design  tools,  and  advanced  hygrothermal  models.  With  a   recent  improvement  of  user-friendliness  of  hygrothermal  design  tools,  the  usefulness  of   simplified  models  (such  as  the  Glaser  method  popular  in  the  1990's)  is  relatively  low,  and   their  prevalence  has  decreased  (Karagiozis,  2001).  The  critical  distinction  between   hygrothermal  design  tools  and  advanced  models  is  in  their  ability  to  directly  predict   durability  based  on  the  strength,  frequency,  magnitude,  and  duration  of  heat,  air  and   moisture  stressors;  for  example,  advanced  models  are  written  with  the  intention  of   predicting  phenomena  such  as  the  occurrence  of  corrosion  on  a  steel  member  under  air-
25        

leakage  condensation  conditions  (Karagiozis,  2001).In  comparison,  specific  failure  criteria   (such  as  ASHRAE  160P  or  Viitanen  Mould  Growth  Index)  must  be  determined  by  the   researcher  for  hygrothermal  design  tools,  and  the  simulated  moisture  content/relative   humidity  data  given  by  the  design  tool  reconciled  with  these  criteria.     Of  the  hygrothermal  design  software  available,  WUFI®  Pro  is  most  widely-used  in   both  the  research  community  as  well  as  the  design  industry  for  its  user-friendly  interface   and  range  of  custom  material  properties,  and  has  been  validated  through  field   measurements  to  ensure  accurate  results  given  appropriate  inputs  (Kunzel,  1995).  WUFI®   Pro  is  a  hygrothermal  model  for  the  analysis  of  building  envelope  constructions;  it  is  a   transient,  one  dimensional  model  that  has  been  validated  for  a  wide  variety  of  materials   and  climatic  conditions,  and  is  designed  to  lend  itself  both  to  design  verification  and   development,  as  well  as  detailed,  hygrothermal  research  (Karagiozis,  2001).  Its  usage  has   also  been  described  in  depth  in  ASTM  MNL  40,  Moisture  Analysis  for  Buildings,  which  aides   in  the  selection  of  appropriate  input  boundary  conditions  (Treschel,  2001).     WUFI  does  have  specific,  well-documented  limitations;  for  instance,  at  high  relative   humidities  (>95%),  the  behaviour  of  OSB  and  plywood  becomes  somewhat  eccentric  (non- Fick's  law  compliant)  due  to  hysteresis  effects  explained  above  in  this  Chapter.  WUFI   assumes  a  single  moisture  storage  function  (i.e.  sorption  isotherm)  for  each  material,  and   does  not  allow  for  the  user  to  modify  the  time  required  for  EMC  to  be  reached.  It  rather   assumes  instantaneous  equilibration  of  local  relative  humidity  with  RH  in  the  pore   structure  of  the  material  (Peuhkuri,  2003).  However,  it  is  important  to  note  that  based  on   most  published  failure  criteria,  RH  levels  elevated  to  this  extent  will  by  definition  qualify  as   a  failing  assembly;  it  is  just  the  specific  mechanisms  of  deterioration  that  may  be   challenging  to  comment  on  accurately.  By  and  large,  the  literature  (Kunzel,  1995)  seems  to   suggest  that  WUFI's  limitations  are  restricted  to  instances  of  exceedingly  high  relative   humidity,  and  tend  to  cause  overestimation  of  wetting  under  high  moisture  loads,  which  in   theory  trends  towards  conservative  recommendations  for  design  practitioners.    For  this   research,  WUFI® Pro  was  utilized  to  simulate  the  hygrothermal  performance  of  the  chosen   wall  assemblies  due  to  its  proven  accuracy  and  acceptance.     

26     

  

2.6  Quantification  of  Hygrothermal  Risk    
A  critical  challenge  inherent  in  hygrothermal  simulation  involves  the  establishing  of   failure  criteria/damage  models  for  the  assembly  in  question.  Deleterious  effects  such  as   efflorescence  of  brick,  corrosion  of  steel  elements,  and  freeze-thaw  damage  to   concrete/masonry  all  are  influenced  differently  by  hygrothermal  loadings,  and  therefore   each  must  be  examined  closely  wherever  applicable.  For  the  purposes  of  wood-framed   construction,  the  relative  risk  of  moisture  damage  to  plywood/OSB  sheathing  is  generally   regarded  as  the  strongest  indicator  of  assembly  performance.  This  is  because  experience   has  shown  this  element  to  be  most  prone  to  accumulate  moisture  due  to  vapour  diffusion,   air  leakage  as  well  as  bulk  water  penetration,  and  is  generally  highly  susceptible  to   biological  deterioration  (Finch  and  Ricketts,  2012).  While  OSB  and  plywood  do  have   slightly  different  hygrothermal  properties,  they  behave  similarly  enough  that  conclusions   from  this  research  of  one  are  commonly  accepted  to  apply  to  the  other,  and  are  classified   by  Viitanen  in  the  same  Substrate  Class,  indicating  similar  hygrothermal  risk  (Viitanen,   2010).    For  detailed  research  investigations  focussing  on  specific  material  properties,   however,  it  is  advisable  to  focus  on  each  material  separately.     After  a  review  of  similar  studies  (Straube  and  Schumacher,  2012;  Fox,  2013;  Finch   and  Ricketts,  2012),  the  literature  contains  specific  metrics  and  simulation  test  procedures   that  are  used  as  proxies  to  quantify  the  risk  of  wood  sheathing  that  is  accumulating   moisture  at  an  unsafe  rate  as  well  as  to  understand  an  assembly's  ability  to  dry.  One  of  the   more  widely  used  metrics  for  comparing  the  risk  of  condensation  between  assemblies   under  different  hygrothermal  boundary  conditions  is  referred  to  as  `hours  of  potential   condensation'  (Straube  and  Schumacher,  2010;  Fox,  2013).    Simply  stated,  hours  of   potential  condensation  is  equal  to  the  number  of  hours  per  year  during  which  the   sheathing  is  at  a  temperature  lower  than  the  psychrometric  dewpoint  temperature  of  air   that  it  is  in  contact  with,  thereby  being  at  100%  relative  humidity.     It  should  be  noted  that  this  allows  us  to  compare  the  frequency  of  potential   condensation,  however  it  does  not  provide  insight  on  the  magnitude  or  timing  of  moisture   accumulation.    In  order  to  understand  the  magnitude  of  wetting,  examination  of  moisture   content  within  the  sheathing  is  necessary.  From  a  modeling-practice  perspective,  measures  
27        

must  be  taken  to  reflect  the  different  exposure  regimes  at  different  depths  in  the  sheathing.   That  is,  when  exposed  to  driving  rain,  the  exterior  half  of  the  sheathing  will  wet  more   drastically  than  the  interior  half,  increasing  the  likelihood  that  deterioration  begins  in  the   exterior  of  the  sheathing.  Quartering  a  sheet  of  12.5mm  (½")  plywood  sheathing  into  four,   3.125mm  (0.125")  plywood  components  within  the  simulation  model  can  be  an  effective   analytical  method  for  measuring  moisture  content  across  the  sheathing.  The  researcher   must  use  judgement  to  understand  instances  wherein  the  exterior  sheet  will  likely  be  most   critical,  such  as  when  evaluating  driving-rain  performance,  but  evaluating  the  interior   sheet  will  be  most  conservative  when  evaluating  air-leakage  based  condensation,  for   instance.   In  summary,  it  is  apparent  that  the  long-term  hygrothermal  performance  of  split   insulation  is  not  fully  understood  or  documented  within  the  building  science  community.   The  mechanisms  of  drying  and  wetting  that  are  most  commonly  experienced  by  a  wall   assembly  are  likely  to  cause  previously  unseen  durability  effects  for  split  insulated   assemblies  because  of  their  different  water  management  mechanisms  as  compared  to  an   interior-insulated  assembly.  While  few  studies  have  explicitly  addressed  these  issues,  the   tools  to  accurately  assess  durability  performance  are  certainly  available,  and  a  process   using  field  testing  to  calibrate  hygrothermal  simulation  can  represent  a  cost-effective   manner  of  accurately  comparing  hygrothermal  performance  of  assemblies  in  different   climates,  under  different  moisture  loadings.  Because  hygrothermal  simulation  software   does  not  have  the  ability  to  predict  biodeterioration  under  different  hygrothermal   conditions,  commonly  accepted  failure  parameters  were  accepted  in  this  research  in  order   to  identify  assemblies  that  are  more  likely  to  experience  problems  during  their  service  life.       

28     

  

   3.0  Methodology  
In  this  Section,  a  technique  for  using  a  validated  WUFI  simulation  to  assess  high-RSI   wall  assemblies  in  different  climate  zones,  under  different  hygrothermal  loadings,  will  be   developed.  An  analytical  procedure  for  evaluating  the  effects  of  specific  loadings  on   interstitial  condensation,  envelope  deterioration  and  potential  mould  growth  will  be   explored  and  a  method  for  concisely  interpreting  these  results  will  be  presented.   Throughout  this  paper,  the  term  high  RSI  was  used  broadly  to  describe  the  advanced   assemblies  that  are  currently  being  designed  and  constructed  in  order  to  achieve   contemporary  performance  requirements,  particularly  EnerGuide  80,  in  continuation  of   previous  research  by  others  (Finch  and  Ricketts,  2012).    

   3.1  Selection  of  Test  Assemblies  
In  continuation  of  research  conducted  by  Finch  and  Ricketts  (2012)  "Hygrothermal   Assessment  of  Acceptable  Assemblies  for  EnerGuide  80  in  Part  9  Construction,  2012  BCBC,"   the  following  assemblies  were  selected  for  assessment  in  this  research1:    
   Table  3.1.1:  Guide  to  test  assemblies  used  within  this  paper.  

  
                                                                                                                          
1

  Insulation  thicknesses  in  assemblies  1-9  were  chosen  to  ensure  that  each  assembly  had  a  minimum  R22  effective   thermal  resistance  (RSI  3.88),  as  required  for  EnerGuide80  and  this  paper's  definition  of  high-RSI.  Assemblies  10-13   were  selected  as  part  of  a  sensitivity  analysis  for  air  leakage  condensation.  

29     

  

Assessment  of  the  above  thirteen  walls  will  enable  analysis  of  a  representative  sample   of  assemblies  that  depict  design  concepts  likely  to  enter  mainstream  relevance  as  building   codes  shift  towards  effective  RSI  requirements  as  explained  in  Chapter  1.  Thicknesses  of   exterior  insulation  were  selected  based  on  the  minimum,  commonly  available  thickness   that  would  meet  RSI  3.88  (R22),  and  increased  incrementally  based  on  commonly   manufactured  and  distributed  construction  materials.  Furthermore,  rigid  mineral  wool  and   XPS  were  selected  to  represent  commonly  used  exterior  insulation  materials  with  very   different  vapour  permeance;  XPS  representing  the  lower  end  of  the  permeance  spectrum,   and  mineral  wool  as  a  relatively  vapour-permeable  insulating  material.  The  performance  of   the  above  split-insulated  assemblies  is  well  contextualized  when  compared  to  that  of  a   38mm  x  140mm  (2"x  6"),  interior-insulated  assemblies,  which  are  currently  the  minimum   performing  assemblies  as  required  under  most  Canadian  building  codes,  and  whose   performance  under  various  hygrothermal  loadings  is  well  documented.       

3.2  Material  Properties  
A  substantial  barrier  to  accurate  hygrothermal  simulation  is  the  complexity  of   material  data  needed  to  effectively  predict  moisture  transport  through  porous  media  such   as  wood,  especially  at  the  elevated  relative  humidities  observed  at  hygrothermal  failure   (Arena,  2013).  WUFI's  reliance  on  a  single  sorption  isotherm  for  each  material,  rather  than   one  describing  free  water,  one  describing  water  vapour,  and  one  describing  bound  water,   for  instance,  implies  that  effects  such  as  gravity  drainage  may  be  underestimated,  and   overly  conservative  results  generated  (Treschel,  2001).     However,  because  the  assemblies  that  this  research  project  will  be  evaluating  do  not   use  nonstandard  materials  (rather,  they  use  typical  materials  in  nonstandard   configurations),  the  included  ASHRAE  1018-RP  [REF]  sorption  curves  will  suffice,  as  these   databases  are  likely  the  most  validated,  well-benchmarked  profiles  in  the  world  for   hygrothermal  modeling  (Karagiozis,  Kunzel,  and  Holm,  2001).  Furthermore,  because  the   literature  defines  failure  criteria  that  are  well  within  the  range  in  which  WUFI's  sorption   curves  are  known  to  be  most  accurate,  the  eccentric  phenomena  occurring  at  extremely  

30     

  

high  RH  will  likely  not  affect  whether  or  not  an  assembly  is  expected  to  fail  (ASHRAE,  2006;   Krus  et  al,  2010).     

3.3  Definition  of  Baseline  Boundary  Conditions  
In  order  to  provide  a  basis  for  comparison,  all  of  the  above  assemblies  will  be  tested   under  standard,  climate  conditions  for  Vancouver,  Edmonton,  and  Toronto.  Additionally,   simulations  of  both  the  Southern  exposure  (primary  solar)  and  primary  driving  rain   exposure  (orientation  varies  by  location  and  is  determined  as  per  ORNL  climate  analyzer)   will  be  conducted  as  appropriate  in  order  to  explore  differing  extreme  boundary   conditions.     

3.4  Air  leakage  Condensation    
The  rate  and  source  of  air  leakage  into  an  assembly  can  vary  substantially  between   assemblies,  and  is  largely  a  function  of  construction  quality,  indoor  psychrometric   conditions  and  air  pressure  differential.  Due  to  its  varied  nature,  this  research  does  not   attempt  to  describe  one  discrete  occurrence  of  air  leakage  in  various  assemblies;  rather,  it   compares  the  overall  resilience  of  split-insulated,  high-RSI  strategies  with  that  of  a   baseline,  38mm  x  140mm  interior  insulated  assembly  that  has  been  proven  to  generally  be   successful  in  field  conditions.     In  order  to  analyze  the  resilience  of  a  split-insulated  assemblies  to  air  leakage,  a   reasonable  test-rate  of  air  leakage  was  developed  using  the  baseline  38mm  x  140mm   assemblythat  is  generally  accepted  not  to  fail  when  properly  constructed.  To  achieve  this,   parametric  analysis  was  performed  for  all  climate  locations  in  order  to  identify  an  air   leakage  regime  that  elevates  sheathing  moisture  content  to  above  30%  for  approximately   three  weeks  during  the  winter  season;  this  load  therefore  represents  a  tolerable  leak  for   the  baseline  wall,  as  it  elevates  moisture  conditions  to  meet  ASHRAE  160P  failure   conditions  in  winter,  but  allows  the  wall  to  dry  out  during  the  summer  months  (ASHRAE,   2006).  The  flow  and  psychrometric  conditions  describing  this  air  leak  was  then  introduced   to  each  of  the  twelve  split-insulated  assemblies,  and  the  results  compared  to  those  of  the  

31     

  

baseline  wall  assembly  in  order  to  compare  the  resilience  of  newer  strategies  with  that  of   the  accepted  baseline  (Finch  and  Ricketts,  2012  and  TenWolde  2008).  

   3.5  Driving  rain  penetration     
A  similar  comparative  procedure  was  used  to  analyze  the  resilience  of  split- insulated  assemblies  to  moisture  damage  due  to  driving  rain  penetration.  An  additional   parametric  analysis  was  completed  using  the  baseline,  interior  insulated  38mm  x  140mm   (2"x6")  framed  wall  at  each  location  in  order  to  determine  the  fraction  of  driving  rain  that   must  reach  the  exterior  face  of  the  plywood  sheathing  in  order  to  achieve  a  moisture   content  of  over  30%  for  approximately  three  weeks  during  the  winter.  This  leak  is  then   deemed  to  be  the  maximum  tolerable  by  the  baseline  assembly  based  on  field  experience  as   well  as  the  published  literature,  so  the  split-insulated  walls  of  interest  must  theoretically   outperform  the  baseline  in  order  to  be  acceptable  for  each  test  location  (Finch  and  Ricketts,   2012  and  TenWolde  2008).       

3.6  Validation  of  WUFI  Boundary  Conditions  
In  order  to  ensure  accurate  simulation  of  real-world  situations,  a  WUFI  model  was   constructed  for  comparison  with  measured  field  data  collected  by  students  in  at  BCIT,  and   provided  for  the  purposes  of  advancing  this  research  (BCIT,  2012).  The  BCIT  study  was   conducted  over  a  two  month  period  in  the  spring  of  2012,  using  an  experimental  setup  in   Vancouver  (Higgins,  2012).  The  researchers  tested  two  different  split-insulated  assemblies;   one  assembly  used  75  mm  of  exterior  rigid  mineral  wool,  while  the  other  used  89  mm  of   exterior  XPS  board.  Both  assemblies  were  vented  rainscreen-type  walls,  using  cedar  siding   and  19mm  x  64mm  (1x3)  vertical  furring  strips.  The  WRB  was  achieved  with  a  standard   spunbonded  polyolefin  (SBPO)  material,  and  89mm  (3.5")  of  batt  insulation  was  included   between  the  38mm  x89mm  (2x4)  studs.  Finally,  a  6  mil,  continuous,  polyethylene  vapour   retarder  was  placed  between  the  stud  wall  and  the  interior  environment  as  per  local   building  code  requirements.  The  interior  environment  was  a  semi-detached,  single  family   house  in  downtown  Vancouver.    

32     

  

Figure  3.6.1:    BCIT  2012  Test  Assemblies  (BCIT,   2012)  

   event,  the  researchers  strived  to  wet  the  plywood  sheathing  to  35%  MC  by  mass,  or  120   kg/m3.  This  is  reflective  of  the  highest  level  of  moisture  that  plywood  may  store  as  water   vapour.    Moisture  pins  were  placed  through  the  plywood  sheathing  of  the  wall,  and  

  

In  order  to  quantify  the  ability  of  these  assemblies  to  dry  diffusively  after  a  wetting  

hygrometers  installed  at  the  exterior  interface  of  the  sheathing  and  the  stud  cavity  in  order   to  record  the  relative  humidity  within  the  vented  rainscreen.  This  process  was  repeated  on   both  the  North  and  South  elevations  of  the  building  in  order  to  capture  the  effects  of   maximum  rain  exposure,  as  well  as  maximum  radiation  exposure,  respectively.     As  shown  on  the  below  charts,  actual  wetting  achieved  was  closer  to  30%.  However,   in  an  attempt  to  construct  WUFI  models  as  objectively  as  possible,  this  study  simulated  the   precise  conditions  that  were  described  to  us,  prior  to  analyzing  field  data  of  any  kind.  Only   after  constructing  these  simulations  were  results  compared  with  measured  field  data,   which  was  generously  shared  by  the  BCIT  research  team  and  RDH  Building  Engineering  for   our  usage.    

33     

  

  
Figure  3.6.2:  Photograph  of  BCIT  experimental  set-up.  (BCIT,  2012)  

As  part  of  this  research,  a  WUFI  model  was  created  using  matching  boundary   conditions  of  the  four  constructed  cases;  mineral  wool  (south),  mineral  wool  (north),  XPS   (south),  and  XPS  (north).  Initial  simulations  were  run  using  ASHRAE  standard  material   properties,  with  the  moisture  content  of  the  plywood  sheathing  increased  to  120  kg/m3   (i.e.  30%  of  400  kg/m3;  the  density  of  plywood)  to  reflect  the  wetted  sheathing  in  the  field   test.  Building  rain  load  calculation  was  also  performed  to  ASHRAE  160-P,  using  the  FE  and   FD  values  of  1.0  and  0.25,  respectively  (Higgins,  2012).  Surface  transfer  coefficients  were   chosen  based  on  values  for  the  silver-gray  spruce  cladding  that  made  up  the  water   shedding  layer  of  the  assembly,  and  the  ORNL  Vancouver  "cold  year"  climate  data  was  used.   Indoor  climate  data  was  generated  as  dependent  on  outdoor  conditions,  as  per  EN  15026   (Fraunhofer,  2012).    

34     

  

Simulations  were  conducted  with  a  constant  cavity  air  flow  rate  of  50  ACH;  this   value  is  approximately  50%  of  the  93  ACH  calculated  by  Ge  and  Ye's  (2006)  discussed  in   Section  2.  The  lower  airflow  is  a  function  of  the  122cm  (4')  cavity  length  constructed  as   part  of  the  experiment.  Each  1.2m  (4')  test  assembly  was  separated  with  respect  to  airflow   contamination  from  the  one  adjacent  to  it.  Based  on  Equation  4  for  calculating  the  pressure   difference  due  to  stack  effect,  a  smaller  cavity  length  causes  a  smaller  pressure  differential   between  the  intake  and  exhaust  openings  in  the  cavity,  which  thereby  reduces  the  volume- flow  rate  of  air  through  the  cavity  (Hutcheon  and  Handegord,  1995).       
P  =  C  *  a  *  h  (1/T0  ­  1/Ti)     

  

  

  

  

  

[4]  

   Where:  P  =  potential  stack  pressure  difference,  Pa;     C  =  0.0342;     a  =  atmospheric  pressure,  Pa;     h  =  stack  height,  m;  To  =  outside  temperature,  K;  and     Ti  =  inside  temperature,  K.    

  

  

The  measured  field  data  was  then  compared  to  the  results  of  the  WUFI  simulation  files,  as   shown  in  Figures  3.6.3  through  3.6.6  below:    

WUFI  vs  Measured  XPS_North  
40   35   30   25   20   15   10   5   0   23-02-2012   25-02-2012   27-02-2012   29-02-2012   02-03-2012   05-03-2012   07-03-2012   09-03-2012   11-03-2012   13-03-2012   16-03-2012   18-03-2012   20-03-2012   22-03-2012   24-03-2012   27-03-2012   29-03-2012   31-03-2012   02-04-2012   04-04-2012   07-04-2012   09-04-2012   11-04-2012   13-04-2012   16-04-2012   18-04-2012   20-04-2012  

MC  (%)  

Date  
measured_xpsn   wufi_xps_n  

  

Figure  3.6.3:  WUFI  vs  Measured  MC  of  sheathing  with  exterior  XPS  on  North  elevation  

35     

  

  
MC  (%)  
40   35   30   25   20   15   10   5   0   40   35   30   25   20   15   10   5   0  

  
MC  (%)  
measured_mwn   measured_xpss  

  

Date  

Date  

  

  

wufi_Mw_N  

WUFI  vs  Measured  Min  Wool_North  

WUFI  vs  Measured  XPS_South  

wufi_xps_s  

Figure  3.6.5:  WUFI  vs  Measured  MC  of  sheathing  with  exterior  XPS  on  South  elevation  

Figure  3.6.4:  WUFI  vs  Measured  MC  of  sheathing  with  exterior  mineral  wool  on  North  elevation  

36  

23-02-2012   25-02-2012   27-02-2012   29-02-2012   02-03-2012   05-03-2012   07-03-2012   09-03-2012   11-03-2012   13-03-2012   16-03-2012   18-03-2012   20-03-2012   22-03-2012   24-03-2012   27-03-2012   29-03-2012   31-03-2012   02-04-2012   04-04-2012   07-04-2012   09-04-2012   11-04-2012   13-04-2012   16-04-2012   18-04-2012   20-04-2012  

23-02-2012   25-02-2012   27-02-2012   29-02-2012   02-03-2012   05-03-2012   07-03-2012   09-03-2012   11-03-2012   13-03-2012   16-03-2012   18-03-2012   20-03-2012   22-03-2012   24-03-2012   27-03-2012   29-03-2012   31-03-2012   02-04-2012   04-04-2012   07-04-2012   09-04-2012   11-04-2012   13-04-2012   16-04-2012   18-04-2012   20-04-2012  

  

  

  

WUFI  vs  Measured  Min  Wool_South  
40   35   30   25   20   15   10   5   0   23-02-2012   25-02-2012   27-02-2012   29-02-2012   02-03-2012   05-03-2012   07-03-2012   09-03-2012   11-03-2012   13-03-2012   16-03-2012   18-03-2012   20-03-2012   22-03-2012   24-03-2012   27-03-2012   29-03-2012   31-03-2012   02-04-2012   04-04-2012   07-04-2012   09-04-2012   11-04-2012   13-04-2012   16-04-2012   18-04-2012   20-04-2012  

MC  (%)  

Date  
measured_mws   wufi_mw_s  

  

Figure  3.6.6:  WUFI  vs  Measured  MC  of  sheathing  with  exterior  mineral  wool  on  South  elevation     

The  close  agreement  between  this  measured  data  with  the  results  of  the  WUFI   analysis  indicate  that  the  boundary  conditions  provided  to  WUFI  can  be  used  on  other   simulations  of  wall  assemblies  with  one  or  more  design/exposure  variables  being   manipulated,  while  the  remaining  are  held  constant.  Interestingly,  note  that  WUFI  seems  to   over  anticipate  drying  for  the  mineral  wool,  northern  exposure  wall  assembly,  despite   being  simulated  with  identical  boundary  conditions  as  the  other,  well-correlated   simulations.  This  could  reflect  different  weather  occurring  during  the  experiment  than   predicted  by  the  ORNL  weather  file  for  Vancouver,  and  will  be  kept  in  mind  when  analyzing   the  simulations  to  come.     Furthermore,  it  appears  that  during  the  experimental  set-up,  an  average  margin  of   error  of  14%  was  experienced  when  attempting  to  wet  the  sheathing  to  35%  MC  by  mass,   based  on  the  data  obtained  from  moisture  sensors  implanted  in  the  sheathing.  These   results  remain  acceptable  for  the  purposes  of  this  calibration,  because  of  the  close   correlation  of  drying  trends.  Finally,  the  lack  of  drying  of  the  XPS  in  both  orientations,  in   field  data  and  simulation  data,  should  be  taken  into  consideration  when  critically   evaluating  the  results  of  simulations  that  do  not  have  corresponding  field  data.          
37        

4.0  Results  
After  completing  the  calibrated  models  described  in  Section  3,  modified  models  were   created  to  analyze  each  assembly  in  terms  of  the  described  failure  metrics:  (i)  hours  of   potential  condensation,  (ii)  hours  of  potential  mould  onset,  and  (iii)  hours  of  potential   decay  and  deterioration.  All  13  assemblies  were  analyzed  in  Edmonton,  Vancouver,  and   Toronto  climates  for  south  and  wind-driven  dominant  elevations.    Results  are  presented   below.     

4.1  Vancouver    
Vancouver,  British  Colombia,  as  the  third  most  populous  metropolitan  area  in   Canada,  represents  an  important  economic  zone  and  a  challenging  climate  in  which  to   construct  durable  buildings.  Categorized  by  the  International  Energy  Conservation  Code   (IECC)  (IECC,  2009)  as  a  marine,  mixed  climate,  Vancouver  falls  into  IECC  Zone  4  and  is   therefore  representative  of  the  largest  temperate,  humid  climate  zone  found  in  Canada.   After  performing  sensitivity  analyses  for  both  driving  rain  and  air  leakage,  rates  of  0.1%   penetration  and  1ACH  were  selected;  the  results  of  the  analyses  leading  to  selection  of   these  values  are  presented  in  the  Appendices.  The  primary  orientation  of  driving  rain   exposure  was  determined  to  be  the  Western  elevation.  For  baseline  and  air  leakage  tests,   the  Southern  face  was  analyzed.     Figures  4.1.1  to  4.1.6  show  present  moisture  content  under  baseline,  air  leakage,   and  driving  rain  penetration  regimes  and  are  plotted  below  in  order  to  gain  a  qualitative   understanding  of  the  various  assemblies'  comparative  hygrothermal  performances:  

38     

  

  
Figure  4.1.1:  Baseline  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool.       

  
Figure  4.1.2:  Baseline  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

39     

  

  
Figure  4.1.3:  Air  Leakage  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool  

  

  
Figure  4.1.4:  Air  leakage  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

40     

  

  
Figure  4.1.5:  Driving  rain  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool  

  

  
Figure  4.1.6:  Driving  rain  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

   It  is  evident  from  these  charts  that  certain  trends  can  be  observed;  to  start,  it  is  clear   that  moisture  conditions  for  every  assembly  remain  below  20%  MC  in  the  absence  of   hygrothermal  loading  by  air  leakage  or  driving  rain  penetration,  indicating  that  none  of  the  
41        

test  assemblies  will  experience  any  potential  mould  onset  under  baseline  conditions.  Under   air  leakage  into  the  assembly,  the  baseline  assembly  experiences  MC  of  well  over  30%  for   what  appears  to  be  a  few  weeks  during  the  winter;  that  said,  only  the  experimental,  non   high-RSI  assemblies  appear  to  experience  elevated  MC  under  this  regime.  Finally,  driving   rain  penetration  is  clearly  the  most  severe  hygrothermal  loading  experienced  by  any  of  the   assemblies  with  respect  to  moisture  content  elevation;  virtually  every  XPS  assembly   experiences  MC  that  appears  to  meet  all  failure  criteria,  and  seems  to  worsen  as  time  goes   on,  as  opposed  to  mineral  wool  assemblies  that  appear  to  indicate  adequate  drying  ability.        

4.1.1  Condensation  Risk  Assessment  
The  relative  humidity  at  both  the  interior  and  exterior  faces  of  plywood  sheathing   was  monitored  hourly  in  WUFI,  and  all  hours  during  which  the  sheathing  experienced  RH   at  or  above  95%  were  considered  to  have  the  potential  for  condensation.    A  threshold  of   95%  was  chosen  in  order  to  conservatively  provide  a  margin  for  simulation  error.  Rather   than  quantifying  hours  at  or  over  100%  RH,  the  5%  margin  of  error  is  intended  to  serve  as   a  conservative  strategy  grounded  in  WUFI's  well-documented  lack  of  precision  at  elevated   relative  humidities  (Kunzel,  1995).     After  compiling  all  relative  humidity  data,  analysis  did  not  reveal  any  relative   humidity  values  over  85%  for  any  assembly  tested,  under  baseline,  air  leakage,  or  even   driving  rain  conditions.    This  was  a  highly  unanticipated  result,  especially  given  the   intuitive  MC  performance  that  will  be  demonstrated  throughout  the  results  sections  to   follow.  Plausible  explanations  for  this  will  be  provided  in  the  Discussion  section,  as  well  as   recommendations  for  further  research  to  understand  more  concretely  the  specific   limitations  of  WUFI  in  analyzing  this  variable.  

            4.1.2  Potential  for  Mould  Growth  Onset  
42        

Based  on  criteria  found  in  the  literature,  the  threshold  for  the  onset  of  mould  in   plywood  was  a  moisture  content  above  20%  occurring  at  temperatures  above  5  C.  Because   mould  spores  may  form  in  localized  areas  of  the  wall  assembly  and  spread  biologically,   both  the  interior  and  exterior  quartiles  of  the  plywood  sheathing  were  analyzed.  Results   are  presented  below  in  Figure  4.1.2  in  the  form  of  annual  risk  hours  for  each  of  the  thirteen   assemblies,  under  baseline,  air-leakage,  and  driving-rain  penetration  conditions.   It  is  noteworthy  that,  under  the  baseline,  ORNL-defined  climate  conditions,  every   split-insulated  wall  tested  outperformed  the  38mm  x  140mm  (2x6),  interior  insulated,   base-case  assembly.  This  indicates  the  resilience  associated  with  increasing  the   temperature  of  plywood  sheathing  in  Vancouver's  wet  climate.        Looking  closely  at  the  results  of  the  air-leakage  testing,  it  is  important  to  note  that,   with  the  exception  of  experimental  assemblies  10-13,  only  Wall  4,  which  is  a  38mm  x   140mm  (2x6)  split-insulated  wall  with  51mm  (2")  of  exterior  XPS,  experienced  any   potential  for  mould  growth.  This  indicates  that  the  temperature  regime  in  the  assembly   was  such  that  the  plywood  sheathing  experienced  hours  below  its  dewpoint  temperature,   and  condensation  occurred  at  the  sheathing.  Because  of  the  low  vapour  transmission  of   XPS,  this  condensation  was  unable  to  dry  to  the  exterior,  which  is  the  direction  that  the   vapour  drive  exists  for  most  of  the  year  in  Vancouver.    This  is  supported  by  the  higher  risk   hours  measured  at  the  exterior  of  the  sheathing  as  compared  to  the  interior,  indicating  that   the  vapour  was  being  driven  outwards  but  was  unable  to  exit  the  assembly  into  the   ventilation  airstream.  It  is  evident  that  the  experimental  walls  10-13  experienced  a  similar   inhibition  of  drying  potential  into  the  airstream  by  the  vapour  transmission  resistance   factor  associated  with  even  the  relatively  thin  exterior  insulation.     Also  of  note  is  that  the  mineral  wool  assemblies  experienced  relatively  superior   hygrothermal  performance  as  compared  to  interior  insulated  and  XPS  split-insulated   assemblies  under  all  loading  regimes.  Even  with  a  rate  of  driving  rain  penetration  that   resulted  in  potential  mould  onset  for  nearly  35%  of  the  year  in  the  baseline  assembly,  the   split-mineral  wool  assemblies  (2,3,6  and  7)  experienced  virtually  no  potential  for  mould   onset.  This  is  likely  because  any  adhering  bulk  water  was  driven  outwards  into  the   ventilation  airstream  by  the  large,  vapour  pressure  gradient  occurring  at  the  sheathing,  and   was  not  inhibited  by  layers  with  high  resistance  to  vapour  transmission.  
43        

Note  that  throughout  these  charts,  as  well  as  all  similar  analyses,  the  generic   nomenclature  "Assembly_int"  and  "Assembly_ext"  will  be  used  to  distinguish  results   obtained  from  moisture  sensors  placed  in  the  inner  and  outer  quartiles  of  plywood,   respectively.    

  
Figure  4.1.7:  Potential  for  mould  onset  under  baseline  hygrothermal  conditions  

44     

  

  
Figure  4.1.8:  Potential  for  mould  onset  under  air  leakage  regime    

45     

  

  
Figure  4.1.9:  Mould  onset  risk  under  driving  rain  penetration.      

  

4.1.3  Potential  for  Decay  
The  notion  of  precise  criteria  necessary  for  the  decay  of  plywood  sheathing  is   heavily  debated  in  the  literature;  in  order  to  provide  a  conservative  basis  for  comparison,   decay  has  been  defined  to  potentially  occur  in  any  hour  during  which  the  moisture  content   is  at  or  above  30%  by  mass,  and  to  continue  lasting  until  its  MC  has  fallen  below  20%(Fox,   2013).  Additionally,  for  any  period  to  meet  the  standards  of  `decay,'  temperature  must  be  at   or  above  5  degrees  Celsius,  as  mould  growth  is  highly  unlikely  at  lower  temperatures   (Sedlbauer,  2010).   The  results  of  the  potential  decay  analysis  are  presented  for  Vancouver  in  Figures   4.1.10  through  4.1.12  below:    

46     

  

  
Figure  4.1.10:  Potential  decay  risk  under  baseline  hygrothermal  conditions  

47     

  

  
Figure  4.1.11:  Potential  decay  risk  under  air  leakage  regime.  Air  leak  is  introduced  to  inner  face  of  sheathing.    

48     

  

  
Figure  4.1.12:  Potential  decay  risk  under  driving  rain  penetration.  Leak  is  introduced  to  exterior  face  of   sheathing.          

  

Of  immediate  note  is  the  lack  of  decay  potential  for  any  of  the  13  assemblies  under  

baseline  conditions.  This  implies  that,  if  moisture  is  not  introduced  to  the  sheathing  from  a   source  other  than  vapour  diffusion  (i.e  either  through  air  leakage  or  driving  rain   penetration),  the  assemblies  are  unlikely  to  experience  any  potential  decay.  However,   eliminating  moisture  ingress  is  unlikely  to  occur  in  practice  (Straube  and  Burnett,  2005).   Under  an  air  leakage  regime  resulting  in  potential  decay  for  approximately  35%  of  hours  in   one  year,  all  high-RSI  assemblies  perform  well,  exhibiting  no  potential  decay  hours.  Only   the  experimental,  split-insulated  assemblies  show  potential  for  decay,  which  is  intuitive  for   the  same  reasons  described  in  section  4.1.2.  Finally,  under  a  rate  of  driving  rain  penetration   that  results  in  significant  potential  decay  in  the  exterior  quartile  of  the  plywood  and  
49        

moderate  hours  of  decay  risk  in  the  inner  quartile,  assemblies  4,5,8  and  9  all  experience   substantially  elevated  hours  of  potential  decay  as  compared  with  the  baseline  assembly,   while  assemblies  2,3,6  and  7  experience  no  risk  of  decay.  Of  the  experimental,  non-high-RSI   assemblies,  numbers  10  and  11  (split-insulated  with  mineral  wool  exterior)  perform   significantly  better  than  12  and  13  (split-insulated  with  exterior  XPS).          

50     

  

  

4.2  Toronto    
Toronto,  Ontario,  which  is  Canada's  largest  metropolitan  area,  was  also  analyzed  in   order  to  provide  data  for  a  highly  relevant  geographical  area  of  the  Canadian  economy.   With  a  booming  small-building  construction  sector  in  the  areas  surrounding  the  Downtown   core,  the  economic  impact  of  Toronto's  housing  market  is  enormous.  Therefore,  so  too  are   the  effects  of  improved  durability  in  high-RSI  assemblies.  Toronto's  climate  is  far  more   extreme  than  Vancouver's,  both  in  heating  and  cooling  seasons,  and  is  typically  categorized   under  IECC  Zone  5  or  6,  depending  on  the  specific  year  of  analysis.  Note  that  the  rates  of  air   leakage  and  driving  rain  penetration  were  found  to  be  0.75  ACH  and  0.1%  penetration,   respectively.  The  primary  driving  rain  exposure  was  found  to  be  the  Northwest  face,  while   air  leakage  and  baseline  simulations  were  conducted  for  the  South  façade.  The  results  of  all   three  hygrothermal  loads  are  presented  graphically  below  in  figures  4.2.1  through  4.2.6  in   order  to  facilitate  a  qualitative  understanding  of  performance  predicted  for  each  assembly   under  various  hygrothermal  loadings:  

  
Figure  4.2.1:  Baseline  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool  

51     

  

  
Figure  4.2.2:  Baseline  MC  with  exterior  XPS     

  
Figure  4.2.3:  Air  leakage  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool  

52     

  

  
Figure  4.2.4:  Air  leakage  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

  

  
Figure  4.2.5:  Driving  rain  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool  

53     

  

  
Figure  4.2.6:  Driving  rain  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

   Again,  certain  trends  can  be  extrapolated  from  these  charts;  to  start,  it  is  clear  that   only  the  baseline  and  experimental,  mineral  wool  assemblies  exceed  20%  MC  in  the   absence  of  hygrothermal  loading  by  air  leakage  or  driving  rain  penetration,  indicating  that   none  of  the  high-RSI  test  assemblies  will  experience  potential  mould  onset  under  baseline   conditions.  Under  air  leakage  into  the  assembly,  the  baseline  assembly  again  experiences   MC  of  well  over  30%  for  what  appears  to  be  a  few  weeks  during  the  winter;  once  again,   only  the  experimental,  non-high-RSI  assemblies  appear  to  experience  elevated  MC  under   this  regime.  Finally,  driving  rain  penetration  represents  the  most  dangerous  hygrothermal   loading  experienced  by  any  of  the  assemblies  with  respect  to  moisture  content  elevation;   virtually  every  XPS  assembly  experiences  MC  that  appears  to  exceed  failure  criteria,  and   seems  to  worsen  as  time  goes  on,  as  opposed  to  mineral  wool  assemblies  that  appear  to   indicate  adequate  drying  ability.  Interestingly,  the  high-RSI  XPS  assemblies  do  not  appear   to  wet  as  substantially  as  they  did  in  Vancouver,  a  result  which  will  be  examined  in  the   Discussion  section.              
54        

4.2.1  Condensation  Risk  Assessment  
Using  the  same  criteria  as  described  in  Vancouver,  a  condensation  risk  assessment  was   performed  for  each  of  the  thirteen  wall  assemblies,  under  baseline,  air-leakage,  and  driving   rain  penetration  conditions  in  Toronto's  climate.  Once  again,  a  surface  relative  humidity   reading  greater  than  85%  was  not  recorded  at  either  the  inner  or  outer  plywood  RH   sensors  for  any  period  of  time,  therefore  the  results  of  condensation  risk  assessment  were   again  null.       

4.2.2  Potential  for  Mould  Growth  Onset  
Again,  the  potential  for  mould  growth  onset  was  studied  for  the  13  different  assemblies,   under  similar  exposure  regimes  in  Toronto.  This  has  the  ability  to  provide  valuable,   climate-sensitive  data  regarding  the  factors  influencing  the  mould  growth  potential  in  split- insulated,  high-RSI  assemblies.  Toronto's  relatively  more  extreme  temperatures,  and  lower   wintertime  moisture  loads  will  provide  an  interesting  basis  for  comparison  to  assembly   performance  in  Vancouver's  climate  as  in  Section  4.1.2.  These  results  were  plotted  in  the   form  of  annual  risk  hours  based  on  Mould  Growth  Onset  parameters  of  >20%  MC  and  5   degrees  C.  Again,  both  the  inner  and  outer  quartile  of  the  sheathing  were  monitored.     Results  describing  the  annual  hours  of  potential  mould  onset  can  be  found  below  in   figures  4.2.7  through  4.2.9:  

55     

  

  
Figure  4.2.7:  Mould  onset  risk  under  baseline  hygrothermal  conditions  

56     

  

  
Figure  4.2.8:  Mould  onset  risk  hours  under  air  leakage  

57     

  

  
Figure  4.2.9:  Mould  growth  risk  house  under  driving  rain  regime.      

      It  is  noteworthy  that,  under  baseline  conditions,  the  only  high-RSI,  split-insulated  

assembly  that  experienced  any  periods  wherein  mould  could  potentially  develop  was   Assembly  2,  which  is  the  baseline  wall  with  51mm  (2")  of  exterior  mineral  wool.  Likely,  this   captures  the  inward  vapour  drive  of  summer  sun-driven  moisture,  either  from  the  backside   of  the  cladding,  the  SPBO,  stored  in  the  mineral  wool  itself,  or  even  from  the  outdoor  air   itself  as  a  moisture  source.  The  relatively  high  vapour  permeance  of  the  mineral  wool  likely   permits  more  inward  transmission  of  water  vapour,  and  because  this  phenomena  is  likely   to  occur  in  the  summertime,  surface  temperatures  will  tend  to  be  above  5  degrees  C  in  this   climate.     Under  a  rate  of  air-leakage  that  causes  periods  of  dangerously  elevated  MC  in  the   baseline  assembly,  the  only  high-RSI  split-insulated  assembly  to  experience  potential  for   mould  growth  is  Assembly  4,  with  a  full  140mm  (5.5")  of  batt  insulation,  and  only  51mm   (2")  of  exterior  XPS.  This  indicates  that  the  temperature  regime  in  the  assembly  
58        

experiences  periods  of  sheathing  surface  temperature  below  the  relevant  dewpoint   conditions,  and  the  exterior  XPS  restricts  drying  outwardly  into  the  ventilation  airstream.     Lastly,  it  is  apparent  that  the  mould-growth  potential  for  driving  rain  is  highly   elevated  in  split-insulated  assemblies  with  exterior  XPS,  but  largely  absent  in  those  with   equivalent  RSI  allocations  using  exterior  mineral  wool.  As  a  relatively  vapour-permeable   material,  mineral  wool  warms  the  sheathing  (therein  reducing  its  susceptibility  to  moisture   accumulation)  and  permits  substantial  drying  through  outward  vapour  diffusion  drying   into  the  ventilation  airstream,  where  it  is  convectively  removed  from  the  assembly.  In   practice,  mineral  wool's  ability  to  drain  freely  due  to  gravity  likely  also  facilitates   substantial  drying,  provided  the  assembly  is  properly  detailed;  however,  this  effect  cannot   be  simulated  in  WUFI.  XPS  on  the  other  hand,  likely  creates  upward  capillary  forces  at  the   interface  of  the  insulation  and  SBPO  membrane,  and  does  not  permit  a  substantial  amount   of  outward  diffusion  drying  due  to  its  low  vapour  permeance.    

59     

  

   4.2.3  Potential  for  Decay  
Consistent  with  observed  performance,  baseline  walls  (assembly  1)  experience  less   than  100  hours  annually  of  potential  decay,  without  substantial  hygrothermal  loading.   Again,  decay  has  been  defined  as  MC  >  30%,  counting  hours  until  MC  <  20%,  T  >5C.     Interestingly,  none  of  the  high-RSI  assemblies  show  signs  of  potential  decay  under  a  rate  of   air  leakage  that  causes  the  baseline  assemble  to  experience  about  35%  of  the  year  as  `at- risk.'  This  can  be  explained  by  the  surface  temperature  at  the  sheathing  exceeding  the   dewpoint  temperature  for  the  entire  sampling  period.  Again,  driving  rain  is  predicted  to   create  an  alarming  portion  of  the  year  that  can  be  categorized  as  `potentially  decaying'  for   XPS  split-insulated  assemblies,  and  no  potential  decay  in  mineral  wool  split-insulated   assemblies;  however,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that,  as  opposed  to  the  results  obtained  in   Vancouver,  simulation  of  the  high-RSI  assemblies  under  driving  rain  penetration  does  not   suggest  that  XPS  performs  substantially  worse  than  the  baseline  assembly  in  Toronto's   climate.     Results  describing  the  annual  risk  of  hygrothermal  decay  for  all  assemblies  under   baseline,  air  leakage  and  driving  rain  penetration  are  presented  below  in  figures  4.2.10   through  4.2.12:    

60     

  

  
Figure  4.2.10:  Potential  decay  risk  under  baseline  hygrothermal  conditions  

  
61        

Figure  4.2.11:  Potential  decay  risk  under  air  leakage  delivered  to  interior  face  of  plywood  

  
Figure  4.2.12:  Potential  for  decay  under  driving  rain  penetration.  Leak  is  delivered  to  exterior  face  of   sheathing.  

  

  

62     

  

  

4.3  Edmonton  
Edmonton,  Alberta,  as  the  fifth  most  populous  municipality  in  Canada  and  hub  of   rapid  economic  growth  and  expansion,  is  an  important  economic  zone  and  a  challenging   climate  in  which  to  construct  durable  buildings.  Categorized  by  the  International  Energy   Conservation  Code  (IECC)  as  climate  zone  7B,  Edmonton  has  over  10,500  heating  degree   days  and  is  therefore  representative  of  one  of  the  coldest,  population  and  construction   centres  in  Canada  (IECC,  2009).  Figures  4.3.1  through  4.3.6  show  present  moisture  content   under  baseline,  air  leakage,  and  driving  rain  penetration  regimes  and  are  again  presented   below  to  gain  a  qualitative  understanding  of  the  various  assemblies'  performances.   After  performing  sensitivity  analyses  for  both  driving  rain  penetration  and  air   leakage,  rates  of  0.25%  penetration  and  0.2ACH  were  selected,  respectively;  the  results  of   the  analyses  leading  to  selection  of  these  values  are  presented  in  the  Appendices.  The   primary  orientation  of  driving  rain  exposure  was  determined  from  ORNL  climate  data  to  be   the  North-Western  elevation.  For  baseline  and  air  leakage  tests,  the  Southern  face  was   analyzed.    

  
Figure  4.3.1  Baseline  MC  with  exterior  Mineral  Wool  

63     

  

  
Figure  4.3.2:  Baseline  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

  
Figure  4.3.3:  Air  leakage  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool  

64     

  

  
Figure  4.3.4:  Air  leakage  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

  
Figure  4.3.5:  Driving  rain  MC  with  exterior  mineral  wool  

65     

  

  
Figure  4.3.6:  Driving  rain  MC  with  exterior  XPS  

  
  

4.3.1  Condensation  Risk  Assessment    
Similar  to  the  case  studies  in  Vancouver  and  Toronto,  none  of  the  hygrothermal  loadings   yielded  any  surface  RH  result  of  over  85%,  therefore  each  assembly  once  again  did  not   experience  any  potential  condensation.  This  result  will  be  examined  closely  in  the   Discussion  section,  and  possible  explanations  will  be  proposed.  Edmonton  represents   perhaps  the  most  reasonable  case  study  wherein  even  air  leakage  would  not  result  in   elevated  surface  relative  humidities,  as  the  leaking  air  has  a  lower  absolute  moisture   content  than  in  the  other  cities  based  on  the  interior  state  point  from  which  the  air  leak   originates.                            
66        

4.3.2  Potential  for  Mould  Growth  Onset  
Using  the  same  criteria  as  in  the  other  two  case  studies  (MC  >  20%,  T  >5  C),   potential  for  mould  growth  onset  was  quantified  for  each  hygrothermal  loading  for  all  13   test  assemblies  in  Edmonton.    Interestingly,  under  baseline  conditions,  only  the  interior   insulated  assembly  experienced  potential  mould  growth,  with  less  than  100  hours   annually.  Additionally,  air  leakage  introduced  to  the  interior  face  of  the  sheathing  failed  to   create  any  mould  risk  for  all  of  the  high-RSI  assemblies,  only  yielding  positive  results  for   the  interior-insulated  and  experimental  25.4mm  mineral  wool  assembly.  Driving  rain   penetration  as  described  in  Section  4.3  created  dramatic  instances  of  potential  mould  onset   for  every  XPS  assembly;  however,  as  evinced  in  Figure  4.3.9,  only  assembly  2  (with  51mm   of  exterior  mineral  wool)  experienced  significant  hours  of  potential  mould  onset  out  of  the   high-RSI,  mineral  wool  assemblies.     Charts  describing  the  mould  onset  risk  for  each  assembly  under  all  three  loadings   are  presented  below  in  figures  4.3.7  through  4.3.9:  

  
Figure  4.3.7:  Mould  onset  risk  under  baseline  hygrothermal  conditions  

67     

  

  
Figure  4.3.8:  Potential  for  mould  growth  onset  under  air  leakage  regime  

68     

  

  
Figure  4.3.9:  Potential  for  mould  growth  onset  under  driving  rain  penetration  

69     

  

  

4.3.3  Potential  Decay  
As  defined  in  previous  sections  (MC  >  30%,  counting  until  MC  <  20%  is  reached,  T  >   5C)  potential  decay  hours  were  quantified  on  an  annual  basis  for  all  assemblies  under   baseline,  air  leakage,  and  driving  rain  penetration  loadings.  Similarly  to  the  other  case- study  cities,  it  is  driving  rain  penetration  that  creates  the  greatest  potential  for  decay  and   the  associated  bio-hygrothermal  failure  mechanisms.  Interestingly,  as  compared  to  Toronto   and  Vancouver,  Edmonton  appears  to  show  the  greatest  resilience  to  air-leakage  induced   decay,  despite  much  lower  wintertime  temperatures  and  an  overall  colder  climate.  One   potential  explanation  for  this  phenomenon  is  that  Edmonton  has  much  lower  interior   moisture  loads  as  defined  by  EN  1025,  both  in  absolute  and  relative  terms.     The  results  of  all  analyses  of  potential  decay  for  the  thirteen  test  assemblies  are   presented  below  in  figures  4.3.10  through  4.3.12:  

  
Figure  4.3.10:  Potential  decay  risk  under  baseline  hygrothermal  conditions.    

70     

  

  
Figure  4.3.11:  Potential  for  decay  under  air  leakage  regime.  Leak  is  introduced  to  interior  surface  of   sheathing.    

71     

  

  
Figure  4.3.12:  Potential  for  decay  under  driving  rain  penetration.  Leak  is  introduced  to  exterior  surface  of   sheathing.    

72     

  

   5.0  Discussion       
After  assessing  the  hygrothermal  performance  of  a  sample  of  thirteen  split-insulated   assemblies,  nine  of  which  are  highly  likely  to  enter  into  mainstream,  residential  envelope   design,  several  critical  points  of  interest  have  been  elucidated.  This  Section  will  capture   these  concepts  as  well  as  propose  potential  ways  in  which  resiliency  may  be  improved  in   certain  assemblies  without  compromising  thermal  performance.            The  most  obvious  trend  found  through  this  research  is  that  virtually  every  high-RSI,   split-insulated  assembly  substantially  outperforms  the  baseline,  interior-insulated  wall   under  baseline  exposure  conditions  that  is  typically  constructed  today.  This  points  to  the   importance  of  designing  to  keep  hygrothermally  susceptible  elements  at  a  warm   temperature,  thereby  reducing  the  relative  humidity  that  experience  in  practice.    That  said,   because  the  quantity  of  moisture  that  can  be  transported  by  vapour  diffusion  (assumed  to   be  the  primary  mechanism  of  transport  under  baseline  conditions)  is  quite  low,  these   results  are  not  surprising  and  must  be  viewed  in  concert  with  the  performance  effects  of   air  leakage  and  driving  rain  penetration  if  design  recommendations  are  to  be  made.      As  explained  in  the  Section  3,  air  leakage  was  simulated  by  identifying  a  constant   flow  regime  of  air  leakage  that  causes  sheathing  MC  to  elevate  to  over  30%  for   approximately  three  weeks  in  the  winter,  and  then  return  to  safer  conditions  for  the  rest  of   the  year.    Applied  to  the  eight  high-RSI,  split-insulated  assemblies,  this  rate  of  leakage  did   not  cause  any  hours  of  potential  decay,  and  only  created  potential  mould  growth  onset  in   Assembly  4  in  Edmonton,  Toronto  and  Vancouver,  which  is  the  assembly  with  the  least   advantageous  allocation  of  exterior  insulation  and  outward  drying  potential,  with  51mm   (2")  of  XPS  outboard  of  a  38mm  x  140mm  (2x6),  batt-filled  wall.  The  experimental   assemblies  10-13  were  selected  to  identify  the  minimum  thickness  of  insulation  required   to  avoid  sheathing  condensation  under  a  reasonable  air  leakage  regime.    While  all  four   assemblies  did  experience  a  significant  amount  of  hours  wherein  mould  growth  onset  is   possible,  only  assemblies  10  and  12  experience  any  potential  decay  (in  both  cities)  under   the  air-leakage  regime  selected.  These  assemblies  each  had  only  13mm  (0.5")  of  mineral  

73     

  

wool  and  XPS  exterior  insulation,  respectively,  which  is  thinner  than  any  insulation  board   available  commercially  and  represents  a  theoretical  minimum  split  insulated  assembly.       These  results  indicate  that  under  extreme  cold  such  as  Edmonton  experiences   during  winter,  the  sheathing  can  easily  be  kept  above  dewpoint  temperatures  for  indoor  air   at  relative  humidities  of  up  to  60%,  and  should  be  kept  in  mind  when  designing  any   enclosure  in  cold  climates.  That  said,  in  wood-framed  buildings  with  higher  than  average   moisture  loads  (such  as  cafes,  multi-generational  homes,  buildings  with  mechanical   humidification,  etc.)  the  risk  of  air  leakage  condensation  problems  can  be  significantly   elevated,  especially  when  split-insulated  assemblies  use  exterior  insulation  that  is  not   sufficiently  vapour  permeable  to  permit  outward  drying  (such  as  XPS  has  shown  to  be   under  sufficient  moisture  loadings).     Perhaps  more  saliently,  the  results  must  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  WUFI's  ability   to  model  air  leakage.  Because  air  leakage  in  WUFI  is  defined  by  an  air-change  rate,  it  is   likely  that  the  software  assumes  an  equal  volumetric  flowrate  of  air  exiting  the  destination   to  which  it  is  flowing  into.  That  is,  if  a  rate  of  leakage  of  1  ACH  is  introduced  into  the   plywood  sheathing,  a  rate  of  1ACH  will  also  be  exhausted  back  into  the  indoor  space.   Therefore,  when  the  temperature  of  the  inner  face  of  plywood  is  above  the  dewpoint   temperature  of  that  plywood,  the  airstream  will  not  deposit  any  significant  quantity  of   moisture  and  the  plywood  will  show  a  safe  level  of  moisture  performance.  In  reality,   however,  the  leaking  air  is  likely  to  remain  in  contact  with  the  sheathing  for  a  longer  period   of  time,  and  could  even  pressurize  the  areas  abounding  the  void  through  which  it  leaked,   therefore  depositing  more  moisture  into  the  sheathing  than  WUFI  is  able  to  account  for.   It  is  possible  that  this  phenomenon  plays  a  factor  in  the  abnormal  RH  readings  at  the   interior  and  exterior  faces  of  the  plywood.  With  a  constant  exchange  of  air  that  is  defined   by  indoor  psychrometric  conditions,  the  sensor  could  be  partially  inundated  with   infiltrating  and  exhausting  air,  which  would  simply  be  at  whatever  statepoint  the  indoor  air   mixture  is  assumed  to  be  at,  which  is  RH  of  70%  as  a  summertime  maximum.     Driving  rain  penetration  was  observed  to  cause  the  most  hours  of  potential  mould   growth  in  every  assembly  in  both  climates  by  a  significant  margin;  this  is  unsurprising   given  that  the  quantity  of  water  that  is  introduced  by  rain  is  orders  of  magnitude  greater   than  through  diffusion  or  even  air  leakage.  It  is  the  XPS,  split-insulated  assemblies  that  
74        

exhibit  by  far  the  most  severe  potential  for  failure;  while  this  trend  is  intuitive,  the  factors   influencing  the  enormous  separation  by  which  hours  of  mould  potential  under  driving  rain   penetration  with  split-insulated,  XPS  assemblies  exceed  all  other  loading  scenarios  is   important  to  understand.  It  is  clear  that  in  both  Canadian  climates,  given  the  design  of  a   split-insulated  wall  with  all  mechanisms  for  drying  situated  outboard  of  the  sheathing   (reflecting  the  ubiquitous,  large,  outward  vapour  drive  in  Winter  as  compared  to  the   smaller,  inward  vapour  drive  in  Summer),  the  only  place  for  bulk  water  that  has  penetrated   the  critical  control  layers  to  drain/dry,  is  to  the  exterior  of  the  sheathing,  into  the   ventilation  cavity.  This  cavity  becomes  the  drainage  plane  for  free  water  in  the  case  that   moisture  accumulation/ingress  is  severe,  such  as  with  driving  rain  penetration.     In  the  case  of  walls  with  exterior  XPS,  its  ability  to  resist  liquid  water,  as  well  as  its   low  vapour  permeance  of  XPS  (43  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1    or  0.755  PERM/Inch  as  per  ASTM  E-96)   greatly  inhibits  the  potential  for  any  of  the  mechanisms  for  drying  mentioned  in  the   literature  review  to  occur  outwardly  into  the  vented  cavity.  Because  it  is  assumed  to  be  in   direct  contact  with  the  sheathing  membrane,  capillary  forces  are  likely  to  prevent  even   gravity-driven  drainage  down  the  sheathing  membrane.  It  is,  however,  important  to   understand  the  critical  mechanisms  of  drying,  and  WUFI's  ability  to  model  these   mechanisms  accurately.   Generally,  WUFI  simulates  drying  by  means  of  water  vapour  diffusion  through  the   assembly,  but  does  have  the  ability  to  describe  the  effects  of  convective  drying  using  tools   such  as  the  introduction  of  an  air  change  rate  as  completed  in  this  research.  While  the   combination  of  vapour  diffusion  drying  as  well  as  convective  drying  can  account  for  a  high   portion  of  the  total  drying  experienced  in  an  assembly,  designers  should  take  care  to   understand  the  potential  for  pathways  of  bulk,  gravity-driven  drainage  (such  as  gaps  and   voids  in  materials)  if  model-based  assessments  are  to  accurately  describe  real-world  data.     Interestingly,  many  exterior-insulated  XPS  assemblies  have  shown  resilience  to   hygrothermal  deterioration  that  is  not  explained  by  the  modeling/testing  results  and   assumptions  typically  accepted  by  researchers.  One  notion  that  has  recently  been   informally  discussed  in  the  building  science  community  is  that  during  the  construction   process,  XPS  is  installed  with  a  relatively  large  amount  of  void  area  between  panels,  and   may  not  sit  entirely  flush  on  to  the  WRB  membrane  immediately  outboard  of  the  sheathing.  
75        

That  is,  there  could  be  an  effective  ~1mm  gap  between  the  inner  face  of  the  XPS  and  the   exterior  face  of  the  WRB  membrane,  that  would  vent  with  outdoor  air  and  remove  some   quantity  of  moisture  from  the  wetted  sheathing  via  convective  drying  into  the  airstream.  Of   course,  this  void  would  also  be  a  significant  drainage  pathway  for  liquid  water,  but  as  noted   above,  this  type  of  drying  is  difficult  to  model  with  WUFI.  To  test  this  theory,  four  `drained   XPS'  assemblies  were  modeled  in  WUFI:        1)  38mm  x  140  mm  (2x6)  with  51mm  (2")  of  drained  XPS,     2)  38mm  x  140mm  (2x6)  with  102mm  (4")  of  drained  XPS,     3)  38mm  x  89mm  (2x4)  with  76mm  (3")  of  drained  XPS,  and   4)  38mm  x  89mm  (2x4)  with  127mm  (5")  of  drained  XPS.        Each  `drained  assembly'  had  a  1mm  airstream  between  the  XPS  and  the  WRB,   venting  at  1ACH  to  the  outdoor  air,  as  shown  in  the  below  figure:       

    
Figure  5.1.1:  Illustrated  depiction  of  `drained  XPS'  assembly  as  modeled  in  WUFI  

   The  results  of  this  analysis  are  presented  below  in  Figure  5.1.2,  both  in  the  form  of   each  assembly's  moisture  content  over  time,  as  well  as  annual  hours  of  potential  mould   growth  onset  (defined  as  MC  >20%  and  temperature  >5  degrees  C)  

76     

  

  

  
Figure  5.1.2:Moisture  content  and  potential  mould  growth  of  drained  XPS  when  exposed  to  driving  rain  in   Vancouver  

77     

  

The  results  of  this  analysis  clearly  indicate  that  this  small  airstream  venting  at  1ACH   does  not  have  sufficient  drying  capacity  to  prevent  the  plywood  from  dangerously   accumulating  moisture  (nearly  90%  of  the  year  experiences  potential  for  mould  growth   onset).  Therefore,  increased  rates  of  venting  were  tested  for  the  split-insulated  assembly   with  51mm  (2")  of  exterior  XPS,  results  presented  in  the  chart  below.  It  can  be  noted  that,   when  the  airstream  was  modeled  to  vent  at  a  rate  greater  than  10ACH,  which  may  be   unreasonably  high  given  the  configuration  of  this  assembly,  the  drained  XPS  assembly   experiences  adequate  drying,  and  moisture  accumulation  does  not  substantially  enter  into   the  range  of  failure  criteria  presented  throughout  this  paper.  Combined  with  the  gravity- driven  drainage  potential  of  this  void,  it  seems  important  that  future  research  validate  the   rate  of  airflow  behind  the  XPS  insulation,  in  order  to  gain  a  more  accurate  understanding  of   the  psychrometric  interactions  governing  this  situation.     Charts  of  the  drying  trends  predicted  at  various  airflow  rates  (all  using  a  split- insulated,  2"  exterior  XPS  assembly  exposed  to  driving  rain),  as  well  as  an  analysis  of   potential  hours  of  mould  onset  (defined  again  as  MC  >20%  and  Temperature  >  5  degrees  C)   are  presented  in  figures  5.1.3  and  5.1.4  below:  

  
Figure  5.1.3  Moisture  content  with  drained  XPS  under  different  1mm  cavity  ventilation  rates  and  driving  rain   penetration  delivered  to  exterior  face  of  sheathing  

78     

  

  
Figure  5.1.4:  Potential  for  mould  growth  onset  of  drained  XPS  under  different  air  exchange  flowrates   in  the  1mm  cavity  

While  sufficient  airflow  rates  in  the  drained  XPS  assemblies  are  simulated  to  dry  the   assembly,  it  is  unlikely  that  this  procedure  fully  captures  the  phenomenon  discussed  above,   wherein  exterior  XPS,  split  insulated  assemblies  are  able  to  dry  out  after  significant  wetting   in  the  field.  Airflow  of  50  ACH  in  a  cavity  that  shouldn't  experience  a  large  degree  of   thermal  stratification  is  quite  unlikely.  A  more  likely  explanation  for  the  enhanced  drying  of   XPS  insulated  assemblies  is  that  gravity-driven  drainage  down  the  1mm  cavity  is  able  to   remove  a  sufficient  mass  of  liquid  water  to  avoid  hygrothermal  issues.  However,  because   WUFI  is  unable  to  account  for  bulk  drainage  of  liquid  water  due  to  gravity,  this   phenomenon  would  go  unnoticed.  In  future  studies,  field  testing  of  bulk  water  drainage   could  be  conducted  in  order  to  enhance  the  accuracy  of  hygrothermal  simulation.     Additionally,  because  mineral  wool,  which  has  a  rated  vapour  permeance  of   approximately  5721  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1  (100  PERM  Inch)  with  slight  variations  based  on  density   requirements  of  product,  has  shown  superior  hygrothermal  performance  under  virtually   every  loading  scenario,  a  sensitivity  analysis  was  undertaken  in  order  to  determine  the   optimal  permeance  of  foam  insulation  for  exterior  application  in  split-insulated  assemblies   with  different  thicknesses  of  exterior  insulation,  when  exposed  to  driving  rain  penetration   as  described  in  Section  3.  A  list  of  the  various  insulation  combinations  can  be  found  in   Table  5.1.1  below:  
79        

Table  5.1.1:  Guide  to  assembly  number  and  corresponding  thickness  and  permeance  values  tested    

      Due  to  the  ease  of  comparison  and  universal  importance,  hours  of  potential  mould   onset  were  again  tracked  using  the  same  criteria  as  in  the  Edmonton,  Vancouver,  and   Toronto  analyses  (i.e.  >20  %  MC  and  >5  degrees  C).  Results  have  been  plotted  nominally   and  logarithmically  for  ease  of  understanding,  and  a  plot  of  changing  moisture  content  over   time  has  been  included.  For  ease  of  qualitative  interpretation,  results  have  been  separated   graphically  into  two  charts,  one  containing  exterior  thicknesses  of  25.4mm  and  51mm  as   well  as  one  containing  thicknesses  of  76mm  and  102mm.   The  results  of  this  analysis  are  quite  interesting,  and  have  been  presented  in  Figures   5.1.4  through  5.1.7  below:  

80     

  

  
Figure  5.1.5:  Sheathing  MC  under  driving  rain  penetration  with  varied  permeance  of  exterior  insulation,  25.4   and  51mm  thicknesses  

  
Figure  5.1.6:  Sheathing  MC  under  driving  rain  penetration  with  varied  permeance  of  exterior  insulation,  76   and  102mm  thicknesses  

  

81     

  

  
Figure  5.1.7:  Potential  for  mould  growth  under  driving  rain  penetration  with  varied  permeance  of  exterior   insulation  

  
  

  
Figure  5.1.7:  Potential  for  mould  growth  (plotted  logarithmically)  as  modeled  for  each  assembly  of  different   thickness  and  vapour  permeance  

82     

  

As  shown  in  the  above  charts,  for  exterior  insulation  thicknesses  ranging  between   25mm  (1")  and  102mm  (4")  XPS  at  its  current  vapour  permeance  of  43  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1     (0.755  PERM  *  Inch)  performs  worse  than  the  baseline  assembly,  with  more  annual  hours   of  potential  mould  growth.  At  a  permeance  of  285  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1  (5  PERM  Inch,)  all   thicknesses  of  insulation  experience  fewer  hours  of  potential  mould  onset  as  compared  to   the  baseline  assembly;  however,  the  greatest  drop,  again  consistent  for  every  thickness  of   insulation,  occurs  at  1425  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1  (25  PERM  Inch.)  This  result  is  most  clearly   elucidated  in  the  logarithmically  expressed  results.  Also  of  note,  while  it  seems  the  `critical   tipping  point'  of  1425  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1    (25  PERM  Inch)  results  in  the  greatest  marginal   performance  gain,  walls  appear  to  perform  better  with  greater,  exterior  insulation   thicknesses,  which  is  intuitive  based  on  the  higher  average  sheathing  temperature  that  this   creates.   After  analyzing  both  the  instance  of  a  1mm  vented  space  behind  the  exterior  XPS,  as   well  as  adjusting  the  permeance  of  the  exterior  foam  insulation,  it  is  clear  that   opportunities  exist  (in  concept)  to  reduce  the  risk  potential  of  hygrothermal  damage   arising  from  exterior  foam  insulation.  As  noted,  further  analysis  is  necessary  before   considering  either  of  these  analyses  to  be  proofs  of  concept,  particularly  verification  of  the   airflow  rate  possible  in  the  1mm  cavity  behind  the  exterior  XPS,  and  more  likely,  the  ability   of  the  1mm  plane  to  support  gravity  driven  drainage.  That  said,  if  such  a  plane  is  situated   behind  foam  insulation  with  greater  permeance  than  is  typical  of  XPS  or  expanded   polystyrene  (EPS),  it  is  conceivable  that  assemblies  with  higher  RSI  per  inch  as  well  as   increased  tolerance  to  hygrothermal  loadings  may  be  designed.  Naturally,  advances  in   insulating  materials  must  occur  in  order  for  these  products  to  become  available,  but  this   information  ought  to  be  valued  by  the  manufacturing  industry  as  an  opportunity  to  create   higher  performing,  more  resilient  split-insulated  assemblies.     Finally,  the  question  as  to  whether  a  three  year  simulation  period  is  sufficient  time   in  order  to  analyze  the  drying  potential  of  these  assemblies.  In  order  to  assess,  10  year   WUFI  simulations  were  conducted  for  both  50mm  by  150  mm  (2x6)  with  50mm  (2")  XPS   and  50mm  by  100mm  (2x4)  with  75mm  (3")  XPS  assemblies  under  driving  rain  in   Vancouver.  As  shown  in  the  below  graphs  of  moisture  content  (%),  it  is  clear  that  these   assemblies  continue  to  accumulate  moisture  until  reaching  an  EMC  of  just  below  60%.    
83        

  
Figure  5.1.8:  Moisture  content  at  plywood  sheathing  of  a  50mm  x  150mm  (2x6)  assembly  with  50mm   (2")  of  exterior  XPS  under  driving  rain  conditions  in  Vancouver.       

   Figure  5.1.9:  Moisture  content  at  plywood  sheathing  of  a  50mm  x  100mm  (2x4)  assembly  with  75   mm  (3")  of  exterior  XPS  under  driving  rain  conditions  in  Vancouver.  

84     

  

  

6.0  Recommendations  for  Future  Research  
It  should  be  noted  that  due  to  feasibility  constraints,  the  Toronto  simulations  were   not  able  to  be  calibrated  to  measured  field  data  in  order  to  validate  boundary  conditions   and  surface  transfer  coefficients;  rather,  surface  transfer  coefficients  and  other  relevant   boundary  conditions  were  taken  from  ASHRAE  (ASHRAE,  2006).    These  results  should   therefore  be  valued  for  their  comparative  accuracy,  rather  than  their  likelihood  to  be   accurate  predictions  of  performance.  That  is,  it  is  reasonable  to  put  confidence  in  the  result   that  an  XPS,  split-insulated  assembly  in  Toronto  has  a  much  higher  risk  of  decay  than  a   mineral  wool,  split-insulated  assembly  in  Toronto  when  exposed  to  a  reasonable  rate  of   driving  rain.  The  precise,  moisture  content  and  surface  RH  of  the  plywood  at  a  given  date   and  time,  however,  must  be  field-monitored  if  to  be  predicted  with  confidence.  It  is   therefore  recommended  for  future  researchers  to  validate  the  WUFI  models  produced   herein  to  Toronto's  climate  through  simple  field  experimentation  as  was  conducted  in   Vancouver.     Additionally,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  limitations  of  the  calibrated  loading   process,  particularly  with  respect  to  driving  rain  ingress.  The  calibrated  loading  process   essentially  exposes  a  constant  rate  of  bulk  water  ingress  or  air  leakage  to  the  sheathing  for   the  duration  of  the  simulation  time  period.  This  rate  varies  by  climate,  based  on  the   procedure  outlined  in  the  methodology  section.  In  a  field  exposure  setting,  it  is  unlikely   that  all  wall  assemblies  in  Vancouver  will  experience  a  constant  rate  of  0.1%  of  all  incident   driving  rain  penetrating  the  control  layers  and  reaching  the  sheathing.  More  likely  is  that   certain  homes  will  experience  periodic  driving  rain  penetration  that  is  much  higher,  while   others  will  experience  no  bulk  water  loading,  or  an  extremely  low  amount,  due  to  site   exposure  conditions  that  vary  dramatically  between  buildings.     In  reality,  the  constant  rate  of  loading  describes  an  idealized  situation,  unlikely  to   occur  in  field  conditions,  that  allows  us  to  make  comparative  statements  between  the   relative  resiliency  of  different  assemblies  to  driving  rain  penetration  and  air  leakage.   Further  research  should  be  conducted  in  order  to  expose  wall  assemblies  to  the  more  

85     

  

variable  driving  rain  penetration  and  air  leakage  regimes  that  are  likely  to  be  experienced   in  field  exposure  situations.     Findings  presented  in  the  Discussion  section  of  this  paper  also  have  important   implications  in  terms  of  assembly  design  and  insulation  manufacturing.  Suggestions  that   vapour  permeance  of  approximately  1425  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1  (25  PERM  inch)  is  sufficient  to   allow  outward  drying  under  even  a  high  driving  rain  penetration  load  could  be  capitalized   on  by  manufacturers  to  develop  a  new  product  that  is  more  vapour  permeable  than  XPS,   but  has  a  higher  RSI  value  than  mineral  wool.  This  product  would  ostensibly  yield  valuable   energy  savings,  as  well  as  increased  resiliency  for  split-insulated  envelopes.  A  critical  step   in  achieving  this  idea  would  be  to  gain  a  more  astute  understanding  of  the  manufacturing   parameters     Another  important  parameter  that  had  a  major  effect  on  model  behavior  is  the  rate   of  airflow  in  the  vented  rainscreen  cavity.  Assumed  for  feasibility  reasons  to  average  a   constant  rate  of  93  ACH,  based  on  Ge  and  Ye  (2006),  the  major  driver  of  this  flow  is  the   stack  pressure  differential  within  the  cavity.  This  differential  is  influenced  heavily  by  the   amount  of  solar  radiation  experienced  by  a  building  façade,  thereby  affecting  the   temperature  stratification  regime,  and  in  the  dense  cities  of  Toronto,  Edmonton,  and   Vancouver,  one  home  may  experience  vastly  different  UV  exposure  regimes  on  different   faces,  in  different  seasons.  While  there  have  been  a  multitude  of  high  quality  studies   investigating  this  rate,  no  open-source  files  describing  more  realistic  flow-rates  over  time   were  found.  This  could  have  a  beneficial  impact  on  simulation  accuracy  especially  in   longer-term  studies,  as  the  effects  of  seasonal  drying  and  wetting  become  more   pronounced.   Finally,  the  hygrothermal  effects  of  different  interior  vapour  control  strategies  could   be  explored  in  greater  detail.  Innovative  vapour-retarder  paints  and  membranes  such  as   the  "smart"  vapour  retarder,  which  experiences  changing  permeance  based  on  surface   relative  humidity,  have  recently  gained  popularity  as  alternatives  to  the  6mil  polyethylene   sheet  that  is  typically  incorporated  at  the  interior  face  of  the  structural  stud  wall  in  North   American,  cold-mixed  climate  assemblies.  The  literature  does  not  currently  contain  peer- reviewed  studies  isolating  the  effects  of  these  products,  leaving  an  opportunity  to  verify  

86     

  

that  homes  incorporating  alternative  vapour-control  strategies  are  not  increasing  their   likelihood  of  hygrothermal  failure.    

  

87     

  

   7.0  Conclusions  
     The  following  conclusions  are  based  on  the  author's  interpretation  of  outcomes   generated  throughout  the  course  of  this  original  research  project.  Recommendations   generated  herein  should  be  considered  when  evaluating  potential  design  options  and   legislature  governing  wood-frame  enclosures  in  a  variety  of  Canadian  climates.        In  general,  it  is  clear  that  regardless  of  the  allocation  configuration  of  split  insulation   (%  exterior  RSI  vs  %  interior  RSI)  provision  for  an  effective  pathway  for  diffusive  and   convective  drying  to  the  exterior  of  the  structure  is  a  prudent  strategy  for  Canadian   designers  to  always  keep  in  mind.  This  largely  depends  on  the  permeance  of  the  exterior   insulation  material,  as  supported  by  mineral  wool  assemblies  outperforming  XPS   assemblies  under  both  air  leakage  and  driving  rain  penetration  conditions.  While  XPS   slightly  outperformed  the  mineral  wool  assemblies  under  baseline  conditions,  perhaps  due   to  its  resistance  to  moisture  transport  from  a  summer  inward  vapour  drive,  none  of  the   split  insulated  high-RSI  assemblies  experienced  potential  failure  in  any  climate  under   baseline  conditions.        Thus,  it  can  be  said  that  in  general,  splitting  insulation  can  have  beneficial   hygrothermal  impacts  when  compared  to  an  interior  insulated  assembly,  provided  the   insulating  material  has  sufficient  vapour  permeance  to  permit  drying  after  a  reasonable   wetting  event.  With  XPS  assemblies  containing  far  more  thermal  resistance  outboard  of  the   sheathing  than  inboard  of  it,  a  modest  rate  of  driving  rain  penetration  that  was  well- managed  by  the  baseline  assembly  showed  definitive  failure  in  comparison  to  the  baseline   and  mineral  wool  assemblies.  While  draining  this  XPS  at  a  high  air  change  rate  did  show   very  good  hygrothermal  performance,  factors  necessary  to  naturally  create  this  flow  must   be  studied  further  to  determine  whether  the  required  air  exchange  rate  is  even  feasible.     As  supported  by  virtually  every  potential  vapour  drive/moisture  ingress  scenario,   rock  wool  has  shown  hygrothermally  superior  performance  to  XPS  when  used  as  an   exterior  insulation  product.  It  is  clear  that  the  marginal  losses  in  summer-inward  vapour   drive  performance  are  far  outweighed  in  the  Canadian  climate,  with  its  massive  outward   vapour  drive  in  winter,  by  its  ability  to  permit  plywood  drying  to  the  exterior  when  wet.    
88        

That  said,  it  is  also  possible  that  the  ultra-high  permeance  of  5721  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1   (100  PERM  *  Inch)  of  common  rock  wool  products  is  excessive  from  a  hygrothermal   management  perspective;  reducing  permeance  up  to  1425  s-1  *  m-2  *  Pa-1  (25  PERM  *  Inch)   could  be  explored  by  manufacturers  if  it  were  able  to  improve  the  RSI  /  inch  of  rock  wool  to   a  level  closer  to  that  of  XPS.     Finally,  this  research  suggests  that  requirements  for  minimum  RSI  outboard  vs   inboard  of  the  building  sheathing  may  be  misguided;  the  results  of  this  study  clearly   indicate  that  split-insulated  envelopes  with  undrained,  vapour-impermeable  exterior   insulation  will  tend  to  fail  when  exposed  to  driving  rain  penetration  regardless  of  the   insulation  allocation  strategy.    

89     

  

  

Appendix:  Calibrated  Loading  Analysis;  Edmonton;  Driving  Rain  
Below  are  results  from  the  calibrated  loading  analysis  performed  in  order  to  identify  the   upper  limit  of  driving  rain  penetration  tolerance  of  the  interior  insulated,  baseline   assembly  in  Edmonton.  Note  that  0.25%  penetration  was  selected  as  the  maximum   acceptable  load  of  water-ingress,  and  was  therefore  exposed  to  all  assemblies  in  Edmonton.       

   0.1%  Plywood  MC  (%)  under  0.1%  Driving  Rain  Penetration  in  Edmonton  

90     

  

   Plywood  MC  (%)  under  0.5%  driving  rain  penetration  in  Edmonton  

   Plywood  MC  (%)  under  0.25%  driving  rain  penetration  in  Edmonton.    

  
91        

Works  Cited  
Arena,  Lois.  (2013)  Actual  vs  Predicted  Moisture  Performance  of  a  Highly  Insulated  Wall.   Energy  Design  Update.  33.9:  1-15.     ASHRAE  160P.  (2009)  Criteria  for  Moisture-Control  Design  Analysis  in  Buildings.  American   Society  of  Heating,  Refrigerating,  and  Air-Conditioning  Engineers.     ASTM  E96  -  (2010).  Standard  Test  Methods  for  Water  Vapor  Transmission  of  Materials.   American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials.     Brun,  C.  (2013).  Vapour  Diffusion  Open  Arctic  Wall:  A  Comparison  of  Moisture  Accumulation   Potential  Versus  Other  Cellulose  Superinsulation  Strategies.  Ryerson  University.   Canadian  commission  on  building  and  fire  codes,  &  National  research  council  of  Canada.   (2005).  National  building  code  of  Canada  2005.  National  research  council  of  Canada.   Falk,  J.,  &  Sandin,  K.  (2013).  Ventilated  rainscreen  cladding:  Measurements  of  cavity  air   velocities,  estimation  of  air  change  rates  and  evaluation  of  driving  forces,  59,  164­176.   Finch,  G.  &  Ricketts,  D.  (2012)  Hygrothermal  Assessment  of  Acceptable  Assemblies  for   Energuide  80  in  Part  9  Construction,  2012  BCBC.  RDH  Building  Engineering  for  British   Columbia  Ministry  of  Energy  and  Mines.   Fox,  M.  J.  (2013).  HYGROTHERMAL  PERFORMANCE  OF  HIGHLY  INSULATED  WOOD  FRAME   WALLS  WITH  AIR  LEAKAGE.  Ryerson  University.     Ge,  H.,  &  Ye,  Y.  (2006).  Investigation  of  Ventilation  Drying  of  Rainscreen  Walls  in  the  Coastal   Climate.  Thermal  Performance  of  Exterior  Envelopes  of  Whole  Buildings  ASHRAE   International  Conference.   Glass,  S.  V.  (2013).  Hygrothermal  Analysis  of  Wood-Frame  Wall  Assemblies  in  a  Mixed-Humid   Climate.  US  Department  of  Agriculture,  Forest  Service,  Forest  Products  Laboratory.   Haughton,  L.,  &  Murphy,  C.  (2003).  Moisture  Exchange  -  Performance  of  OSB  and  Plywood   Structural  Panels.  (June),  6­13.   Higgins,  J.  (2012)  Exterior  Insulation  Retrofits:  Drying  of  Sheathing  with  Rigid  Stone  Wool   Versus  Extruded  Polystyrene.  British  Colombia  Institute  of  Technology.   Hutcheon,  N.  B.,  &  Handegord,  G.  O.  (1995).  Building  science  for  a  cold  climate.  Wiley.   Karagiozis,  A.  N.  (2001).  Advanced  Hygrothermal  Models  and  Design  Models  Oak  Ridge   National  Laboratory  Building  Technology  Center  BACKGROUND:  WUFI-ORNL  /  IBP.   Karagiozis,  A.,  Ph,  D.,  &  Holm,  A.  (2001).  WUFI-ORNL  /  IBP  --  A  North  American   Hygrothermal  Model.  Performance  of  Exterior  Envelopes  of  Whole  Buildings  VIII  :  2-7.  

92     

  

Karagiozis,  A.,  &  Salonvaara,  M.  (2001).  Hygrothermal  system-performance  of  a  whole   building.  Building  and  Environment,  36(6),  779-787.   Karagiozis,  Achilles,  John  Straube,  and  Joe  Lstiburek.  Vapor  Barriers  --  Building  Science   Conversations.  Building  Science  Corporation,  10  Jan.  2014.  Web.  1  Feb.  2014.   Kesik,  T.,  Rose,  D.  De,  &  Melnichuk,  S.  (2006).  HYGROTHERMAL  PERFORMANCE   CLASSIFICATION  METHODOLOGY  FOR  WOOD-FRAME  WALL  ASSEMBLIES.  University  of   Toronto  Halsall  Associates  Limited  ,  Toronto  ,  Ontario  ,  Canada  Department  of  Civil   Engineering  ,  University  ,  73­80.   Krus,  M.,  Michael,  S.,  &  Sedlbauer,  K.  (2010).  Comparative  Evaluation  of  the  Predictions  of   Two  Established  Mold  Growth  Models.  Thermal  Performance  of  the  Exterior  Envelopes  of   Whole  Buildings  XI  International  Conference.   Künzel,  H.  M.  (1995).  Simultaneous  heat  and  moisture  transport  in  building  components.   IRB-Verlag.   Lstiburek,  Joseph  W.  (2004)  Understanding  vapor  barriers.  ASHRAE  journal  46:  40-51.   Lstiburek,  J.  W.  (2007).  Standing  Columns-Building  Sciences-The  Perfect  Wall.  ASHRAE   Journal,  49(5),  74-79.   Mcclung,  V.  R.  (2013).  Field  Study  of  Hygrothermal  Performance  of  Cross    Laminated   Timber  Wall  Assemblies  with  Built    In  Moisture  by  moisture  removal  mechanisms.  Ryerson   University.  Print.   Morris,  P.I.  (1999)  Understanding  Biodeterioration  of  Wood  in  Structures.  British  Columbia   Building  Envelope  Council  (BCBEC)  and  Forintek  Canada  Corp.  Print.     Ontario  Building  Code.  (2012).  Ontario  Buildings  Branch,  Ministry  of  Housing.  Print.   Pavlik,  Z.,  Pavlik,  J.,  Jirickova,  M.,  &  Cerny,  R.  (2002).  System  for  Testing  the  Hygrothermal   Performance  of  Multi-Layered  Building  Envelopes.  Journal  of  Building  Physics,  25(3),  239­ 249.     Peuhkuri,  R.  (2003).  Moisture  dynamics  in  building  envelopes.  Technical  University  of   Denmark  (Danmarks  Tekniske  Universitet).  ISSN  1601-2917.     Ojanen,  T.,  Kohonen,  R.,  &  Kumaran,  M.  K.  (1994).  Modeling  heat,  air  and  moisture  transport   through  building  materials  and  components.  Moisture  control  in  buildings,  18-34.   Saber,  H.  H.,  Lacasse,  M.  A.,  Swinton,  M.  C.,  &  Kumaran,  M.  K.  (2010).  Benchmarking  of   hygrothermal  model  against  measurements  of  drying  of  full-scale  wall  assemblies.  NRCAN   NRCC-53573.  1-14.     Sedlbauer,  K.  (2001).  Prediction  of  mould  fungus  formation  on  the  surface  of  and  inside   building  components.  Holzkirchen:  Fraunhofer  Institute  for  Building  Physics.  
93        

Smegal,  J.,  &  Straube,  J.  (2011).  Hygrothermal  Analysis  of  Exterior  Rockwool  Insulation.   Building  Science  Press.     Stiffman,  A.  &  Fung,  A.  (2014)  The  Case  for  External  Insulation  in  Low-Rise  Buildings;  A   Toronto  Case-Study.  Canadian  Society  for  Mechanical  Engineering  (CSME)  International   Congress.     Straube,  J.  F.,  &  Burnett,  E.  F.  (2005).  Building  science  for  building  enclosures.  Building   Science  Press.   Straube,  J.,  &  Schumacher,  C.  (2006).  Assessing  the  Durability  Impacts  of  Energy  Efficient   Enclosure  Upgrades  using  Hygrothermal  Modeling.  Building  Science  Press.  197-222.   Straube,  J.,  &  Schumacher,  C.  (2007).  Interior  insulation  retrofits  of  load-bearing  masonry   walls  in  cold  climates.  Journal  of  Green  Building,  2(2),  42-50.   Suresh  B.  Sadineni,  Srikanth  Madala,  Robert  F.  Boehm.  (2011)  Passive  building  energy   savings:  A  review  of  building  envelope  components.  Renewable  and  Sustainable  Energy   Reviews.  Volume  15,  Issue  8.      Tenwolde,  A.  (2008).  ASHRAE  Standard  160P;  Criteria  for  Moisture  Control  Design  Analysis   in  Buildings,  167­172.   Trechsel,  H.R.  (2001).Moisture  Analysis  for  Buildings.  Manual,  American  Society  for  Testing   and  Materials.   Van  Straaten,  R.  A.,  Kopp,  G.  A.,  &  Straube,  J.  F.  (2010).  Testing  Water  Penetration  Resistance   of  Window  Systems  Exposed  to  "Realistic"  Dynamic  Air  Pressures".  In  International   Conference  on  Building  Envelope  Systems  and  Technologies  (ICBEST  2010),  Vancouver,   Canada.   Viitanen,  H.,  Vinha,  J.,  Salminen,  K.,  Ojanen,  T.,  Peuhkuri,  R.,  Paajanen,  L.,  &  Lahdesmaki,  K.   (2010).  Moisture  and  Bio-deterioration  Risk  of  Building  Materials  and  Structures.  Journal  of   Building  Physics,  33(3),  201­224.   Viitanen,  H.,  &  Ritschkoff,  A.  C.  (1991).  Brown  rot  decay  in  wooden  constructions.  Effect  of   temperature,  humidity  and  moisture.  Rapport-Sveriges  Lantbruksuniversitet,  Institutionen   foer  Virkeslaera  (Sweden).     

94     

  


