     

   UNDERSTANDING  COMPLETE  STREETS:   A  LOOK  INTO  HOW  A  COMPLETE  STREET  PROJECT  IS  DEFINED  AND  INFLUENCED  WITHIN   THE  GREATER  GOLDEN  HORSESHOE  REGION         by         Anne  Winters   BSc,  St.  Francis  Xavier  University,  2009                     An  MRP  presented  to  Ryerson  University      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the      requirements  for  the  degree  of      Master  of  Planning  in  the      Program  of  Urban  Development                              Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2015         ©  Anne  Winters  2015  

  

  

  

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION        I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  MRP.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  MRP,   including  any  required  final  revisions.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for   the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by   other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.                                                                                                      ii  

UNDERSTANDING  COMPLETE  STREETS  AT  THE  GROUND  LEVEL:   A  LOOK  INTO  HOW  A  COMPLETE  STREET  PROJECT  IS  DEFINED  AND  INFLUENCED  WITHIN   THE  GREATER  GOLDEN  HORSESHOE      ©  Anne  Winters,  2015      Master  of  Planning   In  Urban  Development      Ryerson  University      ABSTRACT      The  Complete  Streets  movement  has  become  popular  throughout  North  America  as   street  renewal  projects  have  begun  to  re-prioritize  road  users  within  the  public  right-of- way  (ROW).  Although  the  concepts  and  overall  objectives  of  a  Complete  Street  are   becoming  increasingly  recognized  in  the  transportation-planning  field,  a  level  of   ambiguity  exists  when  defining  such  projects  through  the  existing  built  infrastructure.   This  major  research  paper  has  collected  and  presented  data  gathered  from  local   transportation  planning  experts  through  the  means  of  telephone  interviews  and  a  focus   group,  to  understand  how  a  Complete  Street  can  be  defined  at  the  project  level,  and   what  factors  might  influence  this  definition.  The  findings  of  this  paper  show  that  the   definition  of  a  Complete  Street  can  be  largely  dependent  on  surrounding  context,  as   well  as  the  various  considerations  taken  during  the  Complete  Street's  planning  process.        Key  Words:  Complete  Streets,  project-level,  definition,  contextual  sensitivities                              iii  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS      I  would  like  to  thank  my  supervisor  Dr.  Raktim  Mitra,  whose  knowledge  and  expertise  in   the  field  of  active  transportation  has  guided  me  throughout  my  final  year  and  has   helped  me  work  through  this  graduate  milestone.        I  would  also  like  to  thank  my  second  reader,  Nancy  Smith  Lea,  whose  research  and  work   with  the  Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation  has  contributed  so  much  to  further   improve  the  sustainability  and  vitality  of  our  public  streets.      A  thank  you  to  all  those  involved  in  the  project,  including  the  focus  group  participants   and  the  phone  call  interviewees.  You  have  all  showed  dedication,  passion,  and   enthusiasm  to  help  further  the  understanding  of  Complete  Streets  throughout  our   region.      Data  for  this  study  was  collected  as  part  of  a  research  project  undertaken  by  Nancy   Smith  Lea  at  Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation  (TCAT),  Dr.  Raktim  Mitra  at   Ryerson  University  and  Dr.  Paul  M.  Hess  at  the  University  of  Toronto,  titled   "Understanding  Complete  Streets  in  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe".  The  study  was   made  possible  by  financial  support  from  the  Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing   through  the  Places  to  Grow  Implementation  Fund.        Finally  I  would  like  to  thank  all  faculty  members  who  have  contributed  to  furthering  my   knowledge  in  urban  development,  as  well  as  to  all  of  my  classmates  who  came  on  this   journey  with  me.  We  did  it!                                                                  iv  

      TABLE  OF  CONTENTS      1.0  INTRODUCTION  .....................................................................................................................  1   2.0  A  LOOK  AT  THE  COMPLETE  STREETS  CONCEPT   ................................................................  6   2.1  SHARED  STREETS  .........................................................................................................................  7   2.2  THE  COMPLETE  STREETS  MOVEMENT  ...................................................................................  9   2.3  BENEFITS   .....................................................................................................................................  11   2.4  THE  DESIGN  OF  A  STREET   .......................................................................................................  13   3.0  METHODS   ............................................................................................................................  16   3.1  TELEPHONE  INTERVIEW  WITH  LOCAL  EXPERTS  .............................................................  17   3.2  THE  FOCUS  GROUP  ....................................................................................................................  19   4.0  COMPLETE  STREETS:  THE  AMBIGUOUS  DEFINITION  ...................................................  21   5.0  DEFINING  A  COMPLETE  STREET   .......................................................................................  24   5.1  CONTEXTS  THAT  INFLUENCE  A  COMPLETE  STREET  .......................................................  25   5.1.1  Surrounding  Land  Uses  ..................................................................................................................  27   5.1.2  Roadway  Typologies  and  Street  Hierarchy  ...........................................................................  28   5.1.3  The  Age  of  ROWs  and  their  Existing  Widths  .........................................................................  29   5.1.4  Quality  of  Roadway  Infrastructure  ............................................................................................  31   5.2  PLANNING  PROCESSES  THAT  INFLUENCE  A  COMPLETE  STREET  ................................  33   5.2.1  Form,  Function  and  Feel  ................................................................................................................  33   5.2.2  Age,  Mode,  and  Ability  ....................................................................................................................  35   6.0  CONCLUSION  ......................................................................................................................  37   6.1  IMPLICATIONS  FOR  POLICY  AND  PRACTICE  ......................................................................  40   Appendix  1:  Complete  Street  Survey  Responses  from  the  27  Growth  Centres  .............  43   Appendix  2:  Focus  Group  Discussion  Questions  .................................................................  44   7.0  REFERENCES   ........................................................................................................................  45                                                   v  

   LIST  OF  TABLES      Table  1:  Potential  benefits  of  Complete  Streets....................................................................  12   Table  2:  List  of  jurisdictions  represented  in  the  focus  group  ...............................................20                                                                                                                        vi  

   LIST  OF  FIGURES      Figure  1:  The  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe  and  its  urban  growth  centres  ...........................17                                                                                                                                 vii  

   LIST  OF  APPENDICES      Appendix  1:  Complete  Streets  Survey  Responses  From  the  27  Growth  Centers  ..............43   Appendix  2:  Focus  Group  Discussion  Questions  ....................................................................44           

  

  

viii  

1.0  INTRODUCTION

  

The  purposes,  designs,  and  uses  within  our  city  streets  and  public  right-of-ways  (ROWs)   have  evolved  over  time  in  response  to  the  demand  of  the  predominant  users   (Karndacharuk,  Wilson,  Dunn,  2014).  Each  street's  unique  characteristics  have  been  a   result  of  the  local  integration  of  social,  political,  technical,  and  artistic  forces  that  have   ultimately  created  each  city's  transportation  network's  form  (Celik,  Favro,  Inersoll,   1994).  Urban  streets  and  public  ROWs  therefore  reveal  a  narrative  of  a  city's  history,  its   evolution  and  of  the  societies  that  have  created  it.        The  dominant  functions  of  urban  streets  have  historically  been  the  driving  forces  of  how   our  ROWs  are  designed  and  therefore,  have  reflected  various  eras  of  social  expectations   (Celik,  et  al.,  1994).  During  the  pre-automobile  era,  streets  not  only  served  as  access  to   buildings  on  a  city  block,  they  also  functioned  as  places  for  various  groups  to  congregate   (Karndacharuk  et  al.,  2014).  Beginning  with  Baron  Haussmann's  renovation  of  the   Parisian  network  of  wide  boulevards  (built  to  accommodate  military  uses),  the  street's   major  purpose  began  to  shift  towards  favouring  the  movement  of  people  and  goods   (Barnett,  1982).  Once  the  automobile  was  invented  and  became  widely  popular,  public   ROWs  were  re-designed  to  cater  to  the  higher  speeds  of  travel.  After  the  Second  World   War,  a  steep  rise  in  automobile  ownership  was  seen,  as  was  a  sharp  decline  of  railroads   and  mass  transit  (Norton,  2008).  These  trends  led  to  extensive  changes  on  our  roadway   infrastructure  as  entire  street  networks  were  re-engineered  to  make  way  for  a   "vehicular  nation"  (Karndacharuk  et  al.,  2014,  p.  193).  The  term  mobility  came  to  be  

  

  

1  

understood  as  the  movement  of  motor  vehicles  and  the  priorities  of  ROWs  were   focused  on  increasing  capacity  and  safety  of  this  mobility  type  (Homburger,  2002).  As   these  priorities  reflected  the  social  expectation  and  demands  at  the  time,  all  political   decisions  on  transportation  policies  and  infrastructure  investments  were  made  to   enhance  roadways  to  fundamentally  serve  the  private  automobile  (Ministry  of   Transport,  1963).        This  shift  in  transportation  planning  not  only  changed  the  way  streets  and  the  roadway   networks  were  designed,  it  also  fundamentally  changed  the  way  entire  cities  were   formed  as  expansive  highway  networks  paved  the  way  for  car  dependent  suburban   lifestyles  and  expansive  urban  sprawl  (Karndacharuk  et  al.,  2014).  While  the  design  of   civic  streets  began  to  heavily  prioritize  the  automobile,  the  comfort  and  safety  of  other   modes  of  transportation  began  to  steadily  decline  (Hamilton-Ballie,  2008).  Uses  of  active   transportation  (i.e.  walking  and  bicycling)  became  minimal  with  these  observations   running  parallel  to  the  overall  decline  in  activity  of  city  streets  (Hamilton-Ballie,  2008).      Today,  we  are  in  the  midst  of  another  paradigm  shift  as  the  turn  of  the  twenty-first   century  saw  a  re-emergence  of  prioritizing  city  centres  through  neo-traditional  planning   and  designing  practices  (Karndacharuk  et  al.,  2014).  The  decline  in  civic  streetscapes   became  interconnected  with  a  number  of  global  concerns  garnering  wide  spread   attention  (Hamilton-Ballie,  2008).  Such  concerns  ranged  from  environmental   degradation,  economic  decline,  reduced  levels  of  the  physical  and  mental  health  of  

  

  

2  

citizens,  as  well  as  the  overall  "quality  of  civic  life  and  community  cohesion"  (Hamilton- Ballie,  2008,  163).  Street  designs  that  prioritized  motor-vehicles  became  related  to  the   decline  in  public  safety  (through  higher  rates  of  collision  and  roadway  fatality   frequencies),  and  finally  the  overall  quality  of  life  in  cities  seemed  to  be  dwindling  as   there  appeared  to  be  a  severe  lack  of  inclusiveness,  demonstrated  anti-social   behaviours  and  overall  poor  trends  in  civility  (Hamilton-Ballie,  2008).        The  premise  of  a  Complete  Street  is  to  ensure  a  public  ROW  is  safe  for  every  traveller   who  uses  it.  The  Complete  Streets  movement  is  an  example  of  contemporary  planning   practices  that  has  brought  attention  to  the  issues  of  the  vehicle  centric  ROW  and  has   spread  across  the  United  States,  (Moreland-Russell,  Eyler,  Barbero,  Hipp,  Walsh,  2013),   and  Canada  (Whitney  et.  al,  2012),  with  similar  concepts  seen  in  the  United  Kingdom,   Australia,  New  Zealand,  The  Netherlands,  Germany,  and  Denmark  (Karndacharuk  et  al.,   2014).  There  has  been  observed  movement  towards  re-prioritizing  roadway  users  to   better  accommodate  for  the  pedestrian  and  cyclist  as  well  as  improved  advancements  in   creating  safe  and  accessible  environments  for  users  of  all  ages  and  abilities.  We  have   seen  this  movement  through  current  transportation  planning,  designing,  and   engineering  that  has  been  led  by  many  local  policies  in  jurisdictions  across  the  continent   (Sears,  2014).  Contemporary  planning  practices  have  been  steadily  moving  away  from   the  "vehicular-nation"  (Karndacharuk  et  al.,  2014)  and  have  been  focused  on  producing   safe,  accessible,  and  active  streets  throughout  all  levels  of  government.         

  

  

3  

A  Complete  Street's  guiding  principle  is  meant  to  transform  ROWs  into  spaces  that  are   "safe  for  drivers;  bicyclists;  transit  vehicles  and  users;  and  pedestrians  of  all  ages  and   abilities"  (LaPlante  et.  al.,  2008,  24).  Complete  Streets  are  meant  to  accommodate  the   needs  and  expectations  of  the  travellers  who  wish  to  use,  pass  through,  or  visit  the   surrounding  neighbourhoods  or  regions  through  its  built  infrastructural  components   (Smith,  Reed,  Baker,  2010).  While  urban  planning  practice  is  rapidly  adapting  to   integrate  elements  into  streets  that  have  not  traditionally  been  accounted  for  in  the   past,  there  appears  to  be  some  lack  of  clarity  around  the  conceptual  understanding  of   the  components  that  make  a  street  complete.        This  research  study  builds  on  a  larger  project  that  was  designed  to  understand  Complete   Streets  examples  within  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe  (GGH)  region,  which  is  located  in   Southern  Ontario  (Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation,  Mitra,  Hess,  2014).  The   research  found  that  there  is  an  inconsistency  in  how  transportation  planners  and   engineers  are  qualitatively  identifying  Complete  Street  projects  within  the  region.     Many  regard  the  Complete  Streets  as  a  broad  policy  level  concept  (McCann,  2013).   While  this  policy-focused  approach  is  extremely  important  to  the  success  of  the  overall   movement,  the  implementation  of  street  (re)designs  are  typically  carried  out  on  a   project-by-project  basis.  The  existence  of  ambiguity  at  the  ground-level  could   potentially  alter  the  implementation  processes  of  such  ROW  improvement  projects.  The   understanding  of  what  a  Complete  Street  looks  like  at  the  project  level  could  further   advance  this  movement.  This  Major  Research  Paper  (MRP)  will  therefore  focus  on  of  the  

  

  

4  

lack  of  clarity  regarding  the  definition  of  a  Complete  Street  project.  In  particular,  it  will   explore  the  following  research  questions:  (1)  How  is  a  Complete  Street  defined  at  the   project  level?  and  (2)  what  are  the  factors  that  influence  this  definition?        The  paper  will  start  with  a  review  of  Complete  Streets  presented  through  the  available   literature  and  focus  on  how  other  academics  and  transportation  professionals  view   Complete  Street  projects  and  concepts.  It  will  proceed  to  present  the  methodology  of   this  MRP  through  the  primary  research  gained  through  the  insight  of  local   transportation  planning  professionals.  The  results  will  be  presented  as  a  two-part  series   as  the  findings  from  part  one  (phone  interviews  with  local  experts)  heavily  informed  and   structured  a  focus  group  discussion  with  other  transportation  professionals  (Part  II).                                          5  

2.0  A  LOOK  AT  THE  COMPLETE  STREETS  CONCEPT

  

The  Complete  Streets  movement  began  in  North  America  by  a  federal  coalition,  America   Bikes.  These  advocates  wanted  a  directive  in  federal  law  for  bicycle  facilities  to  be  a   routine  part  of  the  planning  process  in  all  future  street  projects  (McCann,  2013).  This   advocacy  group  led  to  the  formation  of  the  National  Complete  Streets  Coalition  (NCSC)   who  defines  the  term  Complete  Streets  as:   "Complete  Streets  are  streets  for  everyone.  They  are   designed  and  operated  to  enable  safe  access  for  all  users.   People  of  all  ages  and  abilities  are  able  to  safely  move   along  and  across  streets  in  a  community,  regardless  of   how  they  are  traveling.  They  allow  buses  to  run  on  time   and  make  it  safe  for  people  to  walk  to  and  from  train   stations."  (National  Complete  Streets  Coalition,  2010).  

  

Since  its  North  American  beginnings  in  2003,  the  Complete  Streets  movement  has  swept   the  United  States  with  712  jurisdictions  now  with  their  own  Complete  Streets  policy   (National  Complete  Streets  Coalition,  2015).  The  movement  has  continued  to  spread   where  we  see  a  number  of  Canadian  municipalities  implementing  similar  policies  and   others  recognizing  the  importance  of  the  Complete  Streets  ideals  (Whitney,  Toronto   Centre  for  Active  Transportation,  2013).  Although  the  term  Complete  Streets  has  grown   increasingly  popular  throughout  the  last  decade,  the  notion  of  creating  safe  and   comfortable  roadways  is  nothing  new.  European  cities  have  been  creating  streets  based   on  similar  concepts  of  safety,  and  pedestrian  orientation  for  over  half  of  a  century  that   was  ultimately  started  by  the  Shared  Streets  theory  introduced  by  Sir.  Colin  Buchanan  in   the  early  1960's.            6  

2.1  SHARED  STREETS      For  decades  it  has  been  argued  by  a  number  of  authors  (Jackson,  1980;  Jacobs,  1961;   Jacobs,  1995;  Lynch,  1960)  that  the  street  is  a  physical  and  social  part  of  the  living   environment  that  should  be  used  not  only  for  motor  vehicle  movement,  but  also  for   social  contacts  and  civic  activities  (Ben-Joseph,  1995).  These  authors,  along  with  others,   have  supported  this  argument  since  the  early  sixties,  but  the  contemporary  designs  of   North  American  streets  have  caused  a  severe  disconnect  for  places  of  social  interactions   (Ben-Joseph,  1995).        In  a  number  of  European  countries  however,  the  concept  of  integrating  traffic  and  social   activity  to  create  safe  and  pedestrian-promoting  roadways  has  simulated  a  series  of  new   and  creative  design  concepts  for  safe  and  accessible  streets.  These  integration  concepts   originated  in  a  publication  by  Sir  Colin  Buchanan  in  his  1963  report  "Traffic  in  Towns"   (Ministry  of  Transport,  1963).  It  is  here  where  Buchanan  identifies  the  conflict  between   the  provision  of  easy,  smooth  traffic  flow  and  maintaining  the  social  fabric  of  the  street.   In  an  attempt  to  mitigate  this  conflict,  Buchanan  suggested  a  re-design  of  urban  traffic- ways  to  allow  for  environmental  areas  that  would  provide  character  and  places  for   social  interaction,  while  various  levels  of  traffic  would  travel  according  to  the  streets'   functions.  Buchanan  envisioned  that  street  evaluations  would  begin  to  not  just  examine   traffic  capacity,  but  also  measure  the  noise,  pollution,  social  activity,  visual  aesthetics   and  level  of  comfort  and  safety  for  pedestrians  (Ministry  of  Transport,  1963).  Portions  of   the  roadway  would  be  redesigned  to  allow  for  vehicles  and  pedestrians  to  share  and  to  

  

  

7  

mix  safely  in  the  street  area,  ultimately  reclaiming  the  entire  ROW  as  a  public  and  social   domain  (Ben-Joseph,  1995).        Unfortunately  for  Buchanan  and  his  supporters,  the  report's  concepts  of  traffic  calming   and  pedestrian  integration  failed  to  find  acceptance  with  British  policy  makers,  as  ideas   to  stimulate  economic  growth  by  the  creation  of  urban  freeways  ran  counter  to  his   socially  oriented  policy  (Ben-Joseph,  1995).  Although  these  ideals  failed  to  take  hold  in   Britain  at  the  time,  urban  planners  in  The  Netherlands  (such  as  Niek  de  Boer  and  Joost   Váhl)  were  inspired  by  Buchanan's  report  and  began  experimenting  "with  techniques  to   enable  pedestrian  movements,  children's  play  and  social  activities  to  be  combined  with   traffic  movement"  (Hamilton-Ballie,  2004,  50).  These  experiments  were  primarily   applied  to  quiet  residential  streets  where  urban  design  and  landscaping  techniques   were  meant  to  give  motorists  the  feeling  of  driving  through  a  garden  setting,  and  to   force  them  to  take  notice  and  consideration  towards  other  street  users  (Ben-Joseph,   1995).  These  shared  streets  were  given  the  name  "Woonerf"  (or  residential  yard)  and   soon  became  a  success  with  the  concept  adopted  around  the  world  as  other  countries   such  as  Germany  (1976),  The  Netherlands  (1976),  England  (1977),  Sweden  and  Denmark   (1977),  France  (1979),  Japan  (1979),  Israel  (1981)  and  Switzerland  (1982)  began   including  Woonerf  concepts  into  their  guidelines  and  policies.        Although  these  initial  concepts  were  meant  for  quiet  residential  ROWs,  their  intention   of  breaking  down  the  barriers  between  roadway  and  public  realm  began  to  be  

  

  

8  

manifested  in  larger  changes  that  would  move  traffic-engineering  concepts  away  from   user  segregation  towards  user  integration  (Hamilton-Ballie,  2004).  One  of  the  most   influential  practitioners  in  this  field  was  Han  Monderman,  who  took  the  principles  of   user  integration  in  Woonerf  Streets  to  demonstrate  "how  urban  design  and  traffic   engineering  might  work  together  in  a  new  paradigm"  (Hamilton-Ballie,  2004,  51).        While  the  user  integration  concepts  from  influential  traffic  practitioners  (such  as   Buchanan,  Boer,  Váhl,  and  Monderman)  quickly  took  off  in  many  areas  around  the   world,  North  American  cities  remained  focused  on  segregation  designs  and   accommodating  for  the  use  of  the  automobile  (Karndacharuk  et  al.,  2014).  It  wasn't  until   the  end  of  the  twentieth  century  were  the  heightened  concerns  of  the  environment,   health,  safety,  economy  and  citizen/city  well-being  began  to  influence  the  shift  of   reintroducing  safe  and  accessible  street  designs  back  into  these  public  North  American   ROWs  (McCann,  2013).      2.2  THE  COMPLETE  STREETS  MOVEMENT      Streets  provide  vital  links  throughout  the  urban  realm  creating  essential  connections   between  homes,  work,  school,  and  businesses.  They  are  also  critical  in  providing  the   network  of  that  links  public  spaces  and  places  of  gathering  for  individual   neighbourhoods,  communities  and  cities  as  a  whole.  As  the  rise  of  the  auto  industry   took  place  in  North  America  after  the  Second  World  War,  streets  became  heavily   focused  on  vehicle  mobility,  while  simultaneously  shifting  away  from  providing  

  

  

9  

comfortable  places  to  live  (Schlossberg,  Rowell,  Amos,  Sanford,  2013).  Today,  many   urban  arterials  in  the  US  (and  comparatively  in  Canada  as  well)  severely  lack  the   infrastructure  needed  to  accommodate  for  modes  of  active  transportation  such  as  bike   lanes,  comfortable  bus  stops  and  adequate  sidewalks  and  pedestrian  crossings   (McCann,  2011).  It  is  because  of  the  priority  placed  on  automobiles  over  the  last  half   century  that  these  roads  have  neglected  to  provide  for  non-driver  users.  The  2009   National  Household  Transportation  Survey  (US)  found  that  67%  of  all  trips  three  miles  or   less  are  travelled  by  the  private  vehicle  (McCann,  2011).  This  statistic  is  more  than  likely   due  to  40%  of  US  citizens  (over  the  age  of  50)  reporting  inadequate  sidewalks,  55%   reporting  a  lack  of  bicycle  lanes,  and  48%  claiming  uncomfortable  bus  stops  (McCann,   2011).      Since  the  year  2000,  per  capita  motor  vehicle  travel  has  been  stagnant  in  growth,  and   the  total  distance  of  automobile  travel  is  projected  to  be  flat  for  the  majority  of  North   America  in  the  foreseeable  future  (Burden,  Litman,  2011).  Now  with  an  expansive   automobile-centric  roadway  system,  North  American  planners  and  engineers  must  look   to  redefine  the  transportation  system  by  moving  away  from  the  once  desired  "fast  and   cheap  mobility"  (Burden  et  al.,  2011,  38)  and  focus  on  creating  safety  and  effective   means  of  accessibility  (the  ability  for  users  to  reach  their  desired  goods,  services  and   activities  in  comfortable  and  safe  environments).  The  Complete  Streets  movement  was   created  to  challenge  the  automobile-focused  paradigm  and  bring  recognition  and   importance  to  other  transportation  choices  that  go  beyond  the  private  vehicle  

  

  

10  

(Schlossberg  et  al.,  2013).  Creating  multimodal  transportation  corridors  (and   surrounding  street  networks),  will  serve  both  drivers  and  non-drivers  by  providing  a   choice  of  travel  for  each  trip  taken.  Burden  et  al.  (2011)  point  out  that  offering  modal   choice  is  at  the  "heart  of  the  Complete  Streets  movement"  and  that  "[c]hoice  is   fundamental  to  improving  safety,  service,  comfort  and  performance  for  all."  (Burden  et   al.,  2011,  36).        Although  still  a  relatively  new  concept,  the  Complete  Streets  movement  is  expected  to   reflect  a  number  of  benefits  across  entire  regions.  Complete  Streets  are  expected  to   benefit  not  just  the  immediate  street  user,  but  should  also  also  contribute  to  the   improvement  of  the  wider  social,  environmental,  economic,  and  overall  wellbeing  of  a   given  region.        2.3  BENEFITS      Studies  examining  the  potential  benefits  that  Complete  Streets  projects  have  on  the   immediate  users,  the  surrounding  communities,  as  well  as  for  the  entire  regions  is   various  in  scope.    Complete  Streets  are  intended  to  safely  accommodate  users  through   multi-faceted  ROWs  designed  to  serve  diverse  functions  including  mobility,  accessibility,   recreation,  business,  and  community  activities  (Litman,  2013).  They  are  meant  to  create   safe  and  accessible  environments  for  pedestrians,  cyclists,  transit-riders,  drivers,  as  well   as  to  accommodate  for  users  of  all  ages  and  abilities  (Litman,  2013).  With  street  design   changes  that  encourage  and  safely  provide  for  pedestrian  and  active  transit  use,  the   following  potential  benefits  listed  below  in  Table  1  could  be  experienced:  

  

  

11  

Table  1:  Potential  benefits  of  Complete  Streets        Improved   Transport   Options   Potential   · Improved   Benefits   user   convenience   and  comfort   · Improved   accessibility,   particularly   for  non- drivers   · Option  and   choice  value   · Increased   local   property   value   Source:  (Litman,  2013)   While  these  potential  benefits  for  Complete  Streets  are  numerous  and  are  expected  to   positively  affect  the  immediate  environment,  as  well  as  the  surrounding  region  (Burden   et.  al.,  2011),  evidence  linking  a  Complete  Street  to  these  hypothesized  benefits  is  rare.   Additionally,  at  a  more  conceptual  level,  there  is  a  lack  of  understanding  around  the   infrastructural  components  (or  what  combination  of  components)  might  be  needed  to   effectively  provide  these  potential  benefits.  In  other  words,  what  should  a  Complete   Street  look  like  at  the  project  level?            Increased  Use  of   Alternative   Modes   · User   enjoyment   · Improved   public  fitness   and  health   · Increased   community   cohesion   (increased   social   interactions   among   neighbours)   which  tends  to   increase   security   Reduced   Automobile   Travel   · Reduced   congestion   · Road  and   parking  savings   · Consumer   savings   · Reduced  traffic   crashes   · Energy   conservation   · Reduced  air   and  noise   pollution   Smart  Growth   Development   · Improved  land   use  accessibility   · Transport  cost   savings   · Infrastructure   savings   · Open  space   preservation   · Improved   aesthetics   · Urban   redevelopment   · Support  for  local   businesses  

  

  

12  

2.4  THE  DESIGN  OF  A  STREET      In  his  book  Great  Streets,  Allan  Jacobs  (1995)  examines  what  components  and  what   elements  (both  designed  and  not  designed)  make  a  street  the  "great  or  fine  place  that  it   is"  (Jacobs,  1995,  6).  To  Jacobs,  a  Great  Street  is  a  ROW  where  social  interactions  can   take  place,  memories  are  formed,  relationships  are  made,  and  pedestrian  safety,   comfort,  and  vibrancy  are  prevalent.  In  short,  Great  Streets  are  overall  places  that   "people  want  to  be"  (Jacobs,  1995,  3).  Although  he  does  not  speak  to  Complete  Streets   (as  this  movement  had  not  yet  started),  many  of  the  values  Jacob's  Great  Streets  hold   are  comparable  to  those  illustrated  in  the  Complete  Streets  movement.  Jacobs  argues   that  the  "interplay  of  human  activity  with  the  physical  place  [i.e.  the  built  form]  has  an   enormous  amount  to  do  with  the  greatness  of  a  street"  (Jacobs,  1995,  6).  Designing  a   street  for  greatness  however,  tends  to  be  a  difficult  task  as  every  ROW  holds  a   complicated  relationship  with  the  physical,  political,  economic,  and  social  contexts  that   influence  how  it  is  built,  operated,  and  maintained  (Jacobs,  1995).        Moughton  (2003)  seems  to  agree  with  Jacobs,  and  says  that  planning  for  a  street  and  its   physical  factors  come  under  tremendous  influences  given  the  contexts  of  surrounding   densities,  land-use  mix,  pedestrian-vehicular  interaction  and  overall  ROW  configuration.   Although  streets  have  been  identified  by  many  (Jacobs,  1995,  Lynch,  1960,  Ministry  of   Transport,  1963,  Moughton,  2003,  etc),  as  critical  components  of  a  city's  make-up  and   its  most  "vital  organs"  (Jacobs,  1961,  39),  very  little  has  actually  been  done  to  analyze   the  physical  form  and  configuration  of  successful  (i.e.  great)  streets  (Moughton,  2003).    

  

  

13  

Smith  et  al.  (2010)  considers  the  definition  of  a  Complete  Street  (as  provided  by  the   National  Complete  Streets  Coalition  (2010)),  and  recognizes  that  while  most  examples   will  have  the  same  guiding  principles  in  its  design  and  creation,  each  needs  to  be   "customized  to  the  characteristics  of  the  area  [that]  the  street  serves"  (Smith,  2010,  13).   However,  while  a  rural  Complete  Street  will  differ  in  physical  form  when  compared  to  an   urban  Complete  Street,  the  movement's  overall  guiding  principles  should  provide  the   two  examples  with  a  "common  denominator"  of  prioritizing  safety  over  convenience  for   everyone  who  uses  the  ROW  (Smith,  2010,  13).      Today,  the  street  is  beginning  to  reemerge  into  the  planning  world  through  recognition   as  playing  important  roles  in  the  social,  physical,  functional,  and  economic  fabric  of  the   city  (Burden  et  al.,  2011).  The  Complete  Streets  movement  has  worked  to  prioritize  the   pedestrian,  cyclists,  active  transit  user  within  the  public  ROW  by  shifting  focus  away   from  the  automobile  (McCann,  2013).  While  many  great  streets  have  been  individually   admired,  described,  and  photographed,  the  available  literature  lacks  analyses  of  how  to   appropriately  define  these  successful  ROW  through  its  built  forms  (Moughton,  2003).      Overall,  there  is  an  apparent  ambiguity  around  how  these  projects  physically  look  at  the   ground  level.  This  research  paper  begins  to  provide  insights  on  the  project-level   definitions  of  Complete  Streets,  focusing  particularly  on  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe   Region  in  Ontario,  Canada.  This  insight  will  improve  our  understanding  of  the  concept,  

  

  

14  

and  may  improve  municipal  capacity  in  planning  and  implementing  Complete  Streets   projects  in  future.                                                                                                                         

  

  

15  

3.0  METHODS

  

The  focus  of  this  project  has  been  to  understand  the  definition  of  Complete  Streets  at   the  project-level,  (as  well  as  what  aspects  influence  these  definitions),  within  the   context  of  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe  (GGH).  The  selected  region  is  located  in   Southern  Ontario  and  is  the  most  populous  region  in  the  country  with  25  urban  growth   centres  (Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing,  2008)  and  8.6  million  people   (Statistics  Canada,  2013).  In  2006,  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing   released  the  Growth  Plan  for  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe.  This  25-year  plan  has  been   created  to  implement  policies  that  ensure  a  number  of  sustainable  planning  objectives.   With  regards  to  transportation,  this  Plan  aims  to  "reduce  traffic  gridlock  by  improving   access  to  a  greater  range  of  transportation  options"  (Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and   Housing,  2013).  As  such,  the  GGH  was  deemed  as  a  suitable  and  supportive  region  for   this  research,  as  it  will  contribute  to  furthering  the  understanding  of  Complete  Streets   projects  within  the  local  context.      The  research  for  this  project  builds  on  a  previously  conducted  survey  designed  to  collect   data  on  current  Complete  Street  projects  in  the  GGH  (Toronto  Centre  for  Active   Transportation,  et  al.,  2014).  The  findings  from  this  survey  found  that  there  is  an   inconsistency  in  how  transportation  planners  and  engineers  are  qualitatively  identifying   Complete  Street  projects  within  the  region.  This  research  used  semi-structured  phone   interviews  and  a  focus  group  discussion,  both  with  a  group  of  local  transportation   experts  who  participated  in  the  previously  conducted  survey  mentioned  above.  

  

  

16  

Combined,  the  information  gathered  gives  a  directive  towards  providing  a  better  project   level  definition  of  Complete  Streets.      3.1  TELEPHONE  INTERVIEW  WITH  LOCAL  EXPERTS      In  efforts  to  produce  a  catalogue  of  Complete  Streets  projects  within  the  GGH,  the   Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation  (TCAT)  conducted  an  online  survey  in  2014.   Participants  for  the  survey  were  key  contacts  representing  the  urban  growth  centres   (see  Figure  1)  as  identified  in  the  Growth  Plan  for  the  GGH  (Ministry  of  Infrastructure,   2006).    

   Figure  1:  The  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe  and  its  urban  growth  centres  (Ministry  of   Infrastructure,  2006,  65)     

  

  

17  

These  growth  centres  were  targeted  because  they  are  the  areas  that  would  more  likely   have  street  improvement  upgrades  due  to  intensification  mandates  for  accommodating   new  growth  in  the  region.  In  total,  27  surveys  were  completed  with  each  participant   being  asked  to  identify  one  example  of  a  Complete  Street  project  that  existed  within   their  municipality.  Of  these  27  completed  surveys,  19  participants  indicated  that  their   municipalities  did  have  a  Complete  Street  project.         These  19  participants  were  then  asked  to  provide  qualitative  descriptions  of  the  project   by  describing  the  physical  components  of  each  Complete  Street.  The  other  8   participants  identified  that  their  region  did  not  have  a  Complete  Street  project  and  as  a   result,  were  brought  to  an  alternative  question  that  asked  them  to  identify  if  any  of  the   following  upgrades,  (that  are  typically  believed  to  be  representative  of  a  Complete   Street  project),  had  been  carried  out  on  a  single  street  in  their  municipality:   1. Streetscape  improvements  (i.e.  planters,  street  furniture,  public  art,  character   enhancements).      2. Bike  infrastructure  improvements  (i.e.  painted,  buffered  or  protected  bike  lanes,   bike  boxes,  bicycle  activated  lights).      3. Pedestrian  infrastructure  improvements  (i.e.  widened  sidewalks,  curb   extensions,  crosswalk  markings,  leading  pedestrian  intervals,  pedestrian   scrambles).      4. Accessibility  improvements  (i.e.  curb  cuts,  tactile  paving  materials).      5. Upgraded  transit  infrastructure  (I.e.,  transit  stop  upgrades,  dedicated  transit   lanes,  priority  signals).  

     

  

  

18  

From  these  eight  participants,  one  had  identified  that  a  single  streetscape  improvement   (#1)  had  been  made,  while  five  others  had  indicated  that  at  least  three  of  these   improvements  had  taken  place  on  an  individual  ROW  (See  Appendix  1  for  a  break  down   of  growth  centre  responses).  Follow-up  phone  interviews  were  conducted  to  learn  more   about  the  projects  identified  by  these  five  municipal  planners/  engineers.  After  they  had   done  so,  these  interviewees  were  asked  why  they  had  not  identified  these  projects  as   "Complete  Streets"  on  the  initial  on-line  survey.  Conversations  lasted  anywhere  from  7- 12  minutes  in  length  and  their  answers  and  points  of  interest  were  noted.      3.2  THE  FOCUS  GROUP      In  January  2015,  a  focus  group  was  organized  to  further  investigate  the  identified   research  questions.  Ethics  approval  was  secured  from  the  Ryerson  University's  Research   Ethics  Board.  To  identify  potential  focus  group  members,  the  list  of  all  27  survey   participants  was  reviewed  and  a  selection  of  individuals  (based  on  professional   knowledge,  occupation,  and  expertise)  were  contacted  and  asked  to  participate  in  a   focus  group  where  they  would  discuss  Complete  Streets  concepts  (see  Appendix  2  for   the  discussion  guide  that  was  used  during  the  focus  group).  Eleven  participants   attended  the  focus  group  (Table  2),  all  of  whom  represented  a  different  growth  centre   in  the  GGH.  Discussions  with  the  group  were  focused  on  what  they  thought  a  Complete   Street  project  looked  like,  and  what  influences  existed  in  the  planning  context  of  their   respective  growth  centres.  Semi-structured  conversations  were  held  where  each  expert   gave  their  opinions,  insights  and  knowledge  based  on  their  own  professional  

  

  

19  

experiences  within  the  context  of  their  municipality.  The  group  of  11,  (6  transportation   engineers  and  5  transportation  planners),  discussed  these  concepts  as  one  large  group.   The  session  was  recorded  with  an  audio  device  that  was  later  used  to  review  and   identify  the  key  themes  from  the  discussion.        Table  2:  List  of  jurisdictions  represented  in  the  focus  group   1. City  of  Burlington   7. City  of  Toronto  ­  North  York   2. City  of  Cambridge   8. City  of  Vaughan   3. City  of  Guelph   9. Town  of  Ajax   4. City  of  Kitchener   10. Town  of  Newmarket   5. City  of  Oshawa   11. York  Region   6. City  of  Toronto  -  Downtown  

                                         

  

  

20  

4.0  COMPLETE  STREETS:  THE  AMBIGUOUS  DEFINITION

  

Discussions  with  local  experts  revealed  that  determining  whether  or  not  a  project  is  a   "Complete  Street"  through  its  built  components  is  challenging.  The  follow-up  phone   interviews  conducted  with  those  who  answered  that  they  did  not  have  a  Complete   Street  in  their  municipality  indicated  that  there  is  a  lack  of  clarity  around  the  term  itself.   They  felt  that  determining  which  infrastructure  pieces  created  a  Complete  Street  was   difficult  due  to  the  vagueness  associated  with  the  term.  These  interviewees  indicated   that  it  was  because  of  this  ambiguity  surrounding  the  Complete  Streets  definition  (at  the   project  level)  that  they  were  hesitant  or  resistant  to  identify  their  local  ROWs  as   Complete  Street  projects  on  the  initial  survey  performed  by  TCAT.        Discussions  with  this  group  also  ran  through  a  number  of  examples  of  roadway   improvement  projects  that  they  had  in  their  municipalities  (i.e.,  dedicated  bike  lanes,   improvements  to  the  pedestrian  realm,  landscaped  boulevards,  etc.),  however,  when   asked  if  they  would  consider  these  to  be  Complete  Streets,  they  still  displayed  hesitance   to  give  the  improved  ROWs  the  title.  One  interviewee  questioned  how  many  Complete   Street  components  were  required  before  the  street  could  be  considered  complete?   Another  indicated  that  the  term  was  still  relatively  new  in  the  transportation  planning   and  designing  industry,  and  that  the  concept  of  a  "Complete  Street"  may  still  need  to   gain  more  exposure  amongst  transportation  professionals  to  acquire  more  consistency   and  confidence  with  how  it  is  defined  and  used.  

  

  

21  

Others  pointed  out  that  the  term  "Complete  Streets"  lacked  the  ability  to  determine   community  needs  and  what  components  or  designs  would  in  fact  be  of  true  benefit  to   the  surrounding  land  uses  as  well  as  to  the  people  that  used  a  given  ROW.  This  general   awareness  for  who  (or  where)  the  street  is  meant  to  serve  was  an  important  factor  that   the  experts  identified  as  a  reason  that  they  were  resistant  to  utilize  it.  Street   improvement  projects  will  vary  from  community  to  community  and  although  one  set  of   roadway  elements  may  serve  a  neighbourhood  in  a  "complete  manner"  the  same  set  of   elements  may  not  be  appropriate  for  a  different  community.        Finally,  the  group  identified  that  the  term  may  not  be  applicable  when  looking  to  define   a  single  project.  Similar  to  McCann's  (2013)  theory  of  the  Complete  Streets  movement,   the  experts  felt  that  the  term  acted  more  as  a  concept  and  an  overall  strategy  to   support  the  improvement  of  existing  ROWs,  (as  well  as  to  better  the  planning  process  of   creating  new  ones).  The  interviewees  felt  that  the  term  was  more  appropriate  in   identifying  the  overall  policy  changes  associated  with  Complete  Streets  rather  than   defining  a  street  based  on  its  newly-improved  infrastructure  components.  This   resonates  with  McCann's  (2013)  point  of  view  that  Complete  Streets  should  not  be   focused  on  a  single  project  design,  but  rather  on  the  entire  movement  away  from   automobile-centric  street  designs  and  towards  safe,  accessible  and  multi-modal  ROWs.      Overall,  the  interviewees  found  that  this  relatively  new  planning  concept  came  with  a   "buzz  word"  that  holds  high  levels  of  ambiguity  and  a  lack  of  definitive  rigour  has  been  

  

  

22  

associated  with  it.  They  felt  that  the  Complete  Streets  concept  is  still  something  that  is   not  well  understood  and  that  defining  a  Complete  Street  based  on  a  project's  built  form   was  difficult  to  do  based  on  the  overall  vagueness  of  the  term.        The  information  gathered  from  these  interviews  gave  reason  to  further  investigate  what   other  transportation  professionals  thought  of  the  term  "Complete  Street",  how  it  may   be  defined  on  the  ground  level  and  what  factors  influenced  how  a  street  is  physically   built.                                              

  

  

23  

5.0  DEFINING  A  COMPLETE  STREET  

  

Through  the  semi-structured  discussions  held  with  the  focus  group,  the  participants   presented  a  number  of  concepts  and  ideas  regarding  how  Complete  Streets  are   conceived  and  defined  in  the  field  of  transportation  planning,  as  well  as  what  influences   their  built  forms.  Although  various  thoughts  and  opinions  were  presented,  two  main   themes  around  the  definition  of  Complete  Streets  emerged  during  the  focus  group   discussion.    The  first  theme  centres  on  the  various  context  dependencies  that  a  ROW  is   subjected  to  and  how  these  influences  would  significantly  alter  the  way  a  Complete   Street  is  designed  and  built  at  the  ground  level.  These  contextual  issues  were  identified   as  not  only  determining  how  a  Complete  Street  is  defined  physically  (i.e.,  through  the   existence  of  bicycle  lanes,  active  commercial  street  fronts,  transit  access,  traffic  calming   measures,  sidewalks  on  both  side  of  the  ROW,  etc.),  but  also  how  it  is  defined   functionally  (i.e.  the  movement  of  high  volume  traffic  flows  versus  pedestrian  only   ROWs).  Surrounding  land  uses,  the  surrounding  street  network,  geographic  locations   and  overall  quality  of  infrastructural  pieces  were  identified  as  factors  that  all  played  a   role  in  how  a  Complete  Street  is  defined  on  the  project-level.        The  second  theme  centres  on  the  planning  process;  some  argued  that  a  Complete  Street   should  be  defined  not  by  the  physical  components  of  the  street,  but  by  considering  how   a  street  was  planned,  designed  and  implemented.  Since  design  trade-offs  are  routine  in   most  street  upgrades,  including  Complete  Street  projects,  the  experts  looked  at  the   various  considerations  that  are  taken  when  entering  the  planning  processes  for  these  

  

  

24  

improved  ROWs.  They  began  to  explore  the  idea  of  defining  a  Complete  Street  based  on   what  considerations  are  taken  into  account  before  the  physical  components  are  actually   built.      5.1 CONTEXTS  THAT  INFLUENCE  A  COMPLETE  STREET      The  focus  group  identified  that  context  played  an  important  role  when  trying  to  define  a   Complete  Street  through  its  physical  components.  By  identifying  a  Complete  Street  at   the  ground  level,  a  number  of  factors  were  identified  as  being  significantly  influential   when  determining  which  characteristics  the  "complete"  ROW  will  have,  as  well  as  to   what  standards  and  qualities  these  elements  are  able  to  meet.  There  were  four  broad   context  sensitivities  that  were  identified  by  the  group  as  being  heavily  influential  on   how  a  Complete  Street  is  defined  through  physical  form.  Although  the  first  three   contextual  issues  are  dependent  on  the  geographical  location  within  the  city,  each  were   identified  individually  by  the  local  experts  and  as  such,  have  been  presented  in  this   paper  as  their  own  independent  factor.      Surrounding  land  uses  was  the  first  contextual  issue  identified  and  perhaps  the  most   influential  of  the  four.  The  local  experts  felt  that  ROWs  were  typically  designed  to  serve   the  surrounding  land  uses  whether  they  are  located  in  a  downtown  commercial  area  or   in  a  city's  industrial  lands.  The  second  contextual  issue  identified  was  the  roadway   topology  that  the  street  was  classified  under,  as  well  as  where  it  stood  on  the  overall   street  network  hierarchy.  The  focus  group  indicated  that  the  design  and  definition  of  a  

  

  

25  

Complete  Street  would  change  depending  on  how  it  was  classified  (i.e.,  major  arterial   versus  collector)  and  that  since  each  classification  served  different  purposes  and   functions  in  the  overall  roadway  network,  each  would  need  to  take  on  different  built   form.  The  third  contextual  sensitivity  identified  was  the  age  or  the  maturity  of  the  road   and  what  built  forms  currently  existed  on  either  side  of  the  ROW.  The  local  experts  also   acknowledged  that  the  existence  of  adjacent  built  forms  (versus  building  a  new  ROW   with  no  surrounding  built  form)  would  significantly  influence  how  a  Complete  Street  is   defined  as  design  trade-offs  will  often  be  required  during  the  planning  processes.  The   final  context  sensitivity  identified  as  influential  to  how  a  Complete  Street  project  is   defined  was  the  quality  of  infrastructure.  The  focus  group  acknowledged  that  although   a  ROW  may  seem  like  a  Complete  Street  to  one  type  of  user,  it  might  not  necessarily   meet  another's  expectations  or  standards  due  to  the  lower  level  of  infrastructural   quality  provided.  The  group  drew  on  personal  experiences  with  roadway  infrastructures   and  agreed  that  just  because  a  Complete  Street  element  existed  on  (or  beside)  a  ROW,   did  not  mean  it  serves  its  intended  user  to  an  acceptable  level.  The  group  felt  that   because  of  the  various  levels  of  quality  of  the  street's  elements  that  the  definition  of  a   Complete  Street  is  dependent  on  how  well  its  infrastructural  pieces  are  delivered  to   each  intended  user.        The  following  sections  will  examine  these  four  contextual  issues  individually  and   summarize  how  each  affects  the  definition  of  a  Complete  Street  at  the  ground  level.               26  

5.1.1  Surrounding  Land  Uses      Surrounding  land  uses  was  the  first  contextual  issue  identified  as  heavily  influencing  the   definition  of  a  Complete  Street  at  the  project  or  street  level.    The  focus  group  indicated   that  often  times,  many  of  the  most  commonly  thought  of  Complete  Street  elements   (i.e.,  bicycle  lanes,  active  commercial  street  fronts,  transit  access,  traffic  calming   measures,  sidewalks  on  both  side  of  the  ROW,  etc.),  are  not  appropriate  for  a  given   ROW  when  considering  a  street's  surrounding  land  uses.  For  example,  while  the   downtown  commercial  areas  may  require  the  commonly  thought-of  components  for  a   Complete  Street,  not  all  of  these  elements  may  be  appropriate  or  needed  for  streets  in   the  suburban  residential  land  context.  Similarly,  industrial  lands  will  often  require  other   street  elements  that  better  suit  the  area's  needs.  Industrial  land  uses  often  need  ROWs   that  will  allow  access  and  ease  of  travel  for  large  vehicles  (unlike  downtown   neighbourhoods  or  suburban  residential  land  uses).        While  Complete  Streets  located  in  all  areas  of  the  city  would  presumably  have  similar   goals  (i.e.,  to  increase  the  safety  and  comfort  of  its  users,  as  well  as  increase  levels  of   walking,  cycling  and  active  transportation  use),  considerations  needed  to  be  taken   regarding  how  the  street  serves  the  surrounding  parcels  of  land.  Streets  are  the  access   points  to  our  cities'  built  form  and  land  designations,  and  as  such,  they  need  to   appropriately  accommodate  for  them  through  their  designed  components.  As  one   participant  put  it,  "what's  the  point  of  putting  [in]  more  sidewalks  if  you  have  nowhere   to  go?"  Before  implementing  a  Complete  Street,  planners  must  consider  what  the  

  

  

27  

current  and  desired  community  use  is  and  how  the  street  could  cater  to  each  area's   needs.  In  doing  this,  Complete  Streets  will  take  on  different  forms  through  a  variety  of   combined  elements  that  best  fits  the  community  it  resides  in.  Due  to  this  significant   variation,  the  definition  of  a  Complete  Street  at  the  ground  level  will  vary  considerably.      5.1.2  Roadway  Typologies  and  Street  Hierarchy        According  to  participants,  road  typology  and  the  position  a  street  holds  in  the  overall   hierarchy  of  the  street  network  will  also  determine  what  elements  should  be  included   into  a  street  design,  and  ultimately  change  how  a  Complete  Street  is  defined.  As   indicated  in  the  first  contextual  issue,  Complete  Streets  that  serve  downtown   commercial  districts  will  not  be  defined  the  same  as  ones  serving  industrial  lands  or  as   streets  that  provide  access  for  residential  areas.  Surrounding  land  uses  and  roadway   typologies  tend  to  have  a  direct  relationship  to  one  another  based  on  the  municipal   zoning  standards.  However,  within  these  areas  of  different  land  uses,  streets  may  be   further  subcategorized  into  different  typologies  that  relate  to  the  function  they  serve  for   the  areas  that  they  reside  in.  This  too  will  also  change  how  a  roadway  is  designed  and   ultimately  how  a  Complete  Street  becomes  physically  defined.        Such  subcategories  of  streets  can  be  illustrated  through  the  City  of  San  Francisco's   Better  Streets  Plan  (2010).  A  given  set  of  ROWs  may  be  intended  to  serve  a  commercial   area,  however  within  this  designated  land  use,  streets  can  vary  in  function,  size,  and   shape.  While  neighbourhood  commercial  roads  need  to  provide  for  high  levels  of  

  

  

28  

pedestrian  activity,  access  to  local  businesses  and  an  overall  enhanced  public  realm,  a   commercial  throughway  should  be  providing  for  higher  volumes  of  pedestrian  and   traffic  movement  as  well  as  public  transit  needs.  With  each  roadway  sub-categorization   for  a  given  area,  a  combination  of  different  design  elements  are  needed  and  will  greatly   influence  how  a  Complete  Street  is  defined  at  the  project  level.      The  position  that  a  specific  street  serves  in  the  overall  hierarchy  of  a  city's  network  will   also  affect  how  a  Complete  Street  is  defined.  While  a  city's  major  arterials  function  to   efficiently  move  high  volumes  of  travellers  (for  longer  distances),  a  collector  road  is   designed  to  move  lower  volumes  of  travellers  (for  shorter  distances)  and  typically   focuses  to  only  serve  users  specific  to  a  given  area  (Eppell,  Bunker,  McClurg,  2001).  The   focus  group  indicated  that  the  position  a  street  holds  on  the  city's  roadway  network   hierarchy  will  determine  the  ROW's  overall  function,  and  as  such,  influence  the  physical   components  included  into  (re)designing  these  projects  to  create  a  Complete  Street.   These  considerations  will  result  in  diverse  combinations  of  Complete  Street  elements   and  will  also  ultimately  influence  how  a  Complete  Street  is  defined  at  the  ground  level.      5.1.3  The  Age  of  ROWs  and  their  Existing  Widths      The  age  of  the  city,  and  specifically  the  age  of  the  street  (including  the  built  form  on  it)  is   another  context  dependent  feature  that  may  influence  how  a  Complete  Street  project   will  look.  Every  given  ROW  has  boundaries  that  are  physically  defined  by  the  built  form   that  lies  directly  next  to  it.  Since  buildings  are  rarely  moved  or  taken  away,  a  ROW  with  

  

  

29  

existing  set  boundaries  is  typically  restricted  by  the  given  width  of  the  street  and   sidewalks  provided  (as  set  by  the  surrounding  built  forms).  The  focus  group  agreed  that   downtowns  of  cities  often  have  older  and  narrower  ROWs  (as  set  by  the  compact   manner  of  the  built  forms  and  land  uses)  compared  to  the  newer,  and  more  spread-out   suburban  areas.  Because  of  this,  there  are  often  challenges  associated  when  retrofitting   an  older  street  that  may  not  exist  when  doing  the  same  to  a  newer  (and  wider)  one.     For  streets  with  existing  built  forms,  the  focus  group  identified  that  since  a  set  width  is   provided,  a  question  that  most  planners  and  designers  must  answer  is  what  exactly  will   be  (or  could  be)  done  with  that  set  space  to  improve  the  street?  Due  to  the  limited   widths  provided,  transportation  experts  must  often  result  to  prioritizing  transportation   modes  (based  on  the  intended  function  through  designated  roadway  typologies   addressed  in  the  preceding  section)  as  not  every  use  can  be  improved  upon.  For   example,  if  cycling  is  a  priority  then  on-street  parking  may  be  a  required  trade-off  due  to   the  lack  of  room.  Similarly,  if  the  pedestrian  realm  has  been  decided  as  a  priority,  then   the  widened  sidewalks  or  expanded  commercial  space  may  cause  a  trade-off  with  a   desired  set  of  bicycle  lanes  due  to  the  lack  of  space.  To  contrast  with  older  and  narrower   ROWs  however,  improving  a  street  that  is  newer  and  wider  provides  more  flexibility  to   accommodate  and  improve  upon  design  features  without  having  to  make  as  many   trade-offs.  To  further  this  point,  building  a  new  street  would  allow  for  the  inclusion  of   even  more  Complete  Street  components  without  making  many  trade-offs  at  all  as  the   restrictions  of  existing  built  forms  would  not  exist.    

  

  

30  

Although  these  streets  have  the  ability  to  accommodate  for  multiple  design  features  on   a  single  ROW,  a  downside  to  this  type  of  Complete  Street  project  is  that  the  surrounding   land  uses,  (see  the  first  contextual  situation  identified  above),  may  not  be  conducive  to   walking,  cycling,  or  active  transportation.  Many  of  these  new  streets  that  lack  adjacent   built  form  restrictions  often  also  lack  the  surrounding  land  uses  and  densities  that   accommodate  walking,  cycling  and  active  transit  infrastructure.  Therefore  a  conceptual   component  associated  with  new  suburban  ROWs  will  require  the  planner  and/or   designer  to  look  beyond  what  can  be  built  and  towards  what  should  be  built.           5.1.4  Quality  of  Roadway  Infrastructure      The  final  contextual  issue  acknowledged  by  the  focus  group  was  identified  through  a   participant's  personal  experience  of  bicycling  on  a  multi-use  trail  that  lay  adjacent  to  a   6-lane  major  arterial  road.  The  participant  said  that  the  experience  of  riding  a  bicycle   over  the  gradual  inclined  crest  (at  <  20  kilometres  per  hour)  was  "torturous"  as  the   design  of  the  trail  was  just  not  meant  to  be  utilized  at  slower  paces.  This  experience  led   the  group  to  identify  the  fourth  contextual  issue  that  determined  how  a  Complete   Street  project  was  defined.  The  qualities  of  built  infrastructure  that  exist  on  a  road  will   greatly  determine  whether  or  not  a  street  could  in  fact  be  considered  complete.  This   multi-use  trail  that  had  been  created  for  active  transportation  purposes  was  delivered  in   such  a  way  that  users  found  it  to  be  uncomfortable  or  "torturous"  to  use.  This  example   gave  the  group  means  to  consider  that  just  because  a  piece  of  infrastructure  existed  on   (or  next  to)  a  ROW,  does  not  necessarily  mean  the  street  is  complete.    

  

  

31  

   Depending  on  the  street  typology,  and  its  placement  on  the  street  network  hierarchy,   the  level  of  quality  delivered  in  ROW  infrastructural  components  will  certainly  vary.  The   focus  group  acknowledged  that  the  term  Complete  Streets  seemed  to  paint  an  image  of   a  ROW  that  serves  every  travel  mode  to  the  highest  standard.  However  often  times   streets  are  under  a  number  of  restrictions  and  influences  (i.e.,  set  widths,  intended   functions,  etc.)  that  prevent  the  ability  of  a  ROW  to  meet  such  high  standards  for  every   user  and  every  travel  mode.  Because  of  these  given  contexts  and  previously  set   priorities,  the  level  of  quality  delivered  for  each  travel  mode  is  often  done  so  on  a   gradient,  where  one  mode  may  be  better  accommodated  for  than  another.  Similar  to   the  restrictions  that  the  surrounding  built  form  places  on  a  Complete  Street  project,   design  trade-offs  must  be  made  when  taking  function  and  user  priority  into  account.   The  levels  of  quality  delivered  by  the  street's  infrastructure  need  to  be  prioritized  and   balanced  depending  on  the  ROW's  purpose,  intended  function  and  set  objectives.  These   balances  are  where  Complete  Streets  element  trade-offs  need  to  be  made,  and  where   we  see  another  aspect  of  how  the  definition  of  a  Complete  Street  project  changes.        Taking  these  various  context  sensitivities  into  consideration  helps  us  begin  to   understand  why  such  ambiguity  exists  when  identifying  specific  Complete  Streets   projects.  Participants  however,  also  discussed  the  importance  of  looking  beyond  the   physical  features  of  the  ROW  and  towards  identifying  these  projects  based  on  the   processes  they  are  planned  and  implemented  under.  

  

  

32  

5.2  PLANNING  PROCESSES  THAT  INFLUENCE  A  COMPLETE  STREET  

  
Instead  of  focusing  on  the  physical  elements  that  Complete  Street  projects  have,  some   participants  pointed  out  that  the  processes  and  considerations  taken  during  a  street's   initial  planning  and  designing  phases  could  be  an  alternative  way  when  trying  to  define  a   Complete  Street.  In  other  words,  this  conceptualization  focuses  on  a  definition  that  is   informed  by  how  a  street  is  created  (perhaps  through  policy  or  guideline   implementation)  instead  of  what  it  looks  like.        Within  this  conceptualization,  the  focus  group  identified  two  planning  processes  and   primary  considerations  a  Complete  Street  project  may  take  that  will  change  how  it  is     defined.  The  first  process  was  to  plan  for  the  overall  form,  function  and  feel  of  the   ROW.  The  focus  group  indicated  that  if  these  three  aspects  were  appropriately  thought   out  and  planned  for,  then  the  street  could  be  considered  complete.  Similarly,  planning   for  the  ages,  modes,  and  abilities  of  users  on  a  street  provided  a  second  process  that   would  lead  towards  building  an  inclusive  ROW,  as  well  as  provide  a  new  way  to  define  a   Complete  Street.  Although  these  processes  do  not  provide  definitive  answers  of  what   physical  elements  define  a  Complete  Street,  they  do  offer  alternative  ways  in  thinking   about  these  projects  that  go  beyond  the  physical  form.      5.2.1  Form,  Function  and  Feel      Although  a  Complete  Street  can  provide  a  number  of  feelings  and  perceptions  for  the   public  (i.e.  inclusive,  social,  active,  vibrant,  etc.)  the  focus  group  said  one  of  the  biggest  

  

  

33  

priorities  for  a  Complete  Street  should  be  to  provide  a  perception  of  safety  and  comfort.   By  going  through  the  processes  and  considerations  of  what  other  feelings  a  ROW  should   provide  the  public,  the  street  planner/  designer  can  begin  to  consider  what  physical   components  help  create  these  desired  feelings  or  perceptions.        Identifying  the  street  function  is  the  second  component  of  the  planning  process  that   helps  to  further  influence  and  define  the  Complete  Street.  A  primary  consideration  for   street  renewal  is  the  overall  intended  function  of  the  road.  As  identified  previously,  this   function  can  be  determined  through  the  context  dependencies  of  roadway  typologies   and  the  location  within  the  overall  street  hierarchy  network.  By  determining  the  street's   intended  function  the  planner  can  begin  to  visualize  the  priorities  of  the  street  where   the  design  considerations  can  begin  to  take  shape.  By  understanding  the  function  of  a   street,  attention  is  brought  to  the  user  and  travel  mode  priorities,  which  ultimately   leads  to  the  physical  roadway  trade-offs  that  are  often  required.      The  consideration  of  street  form  was  the  third  component  to  the  planning  process  that   might  influence  a  Complete  Street's  definition.  Although  appropriate  urban  forms  will   ultimately  be  sourced  through  a  municipality's  urban  design  guidelines,  the  focus  group   pointed  out  that  undergoing  this  planning  process  was  critical  to  understand  the   influences  that  the  street  forms  have  on  the  overall  level  of  comfort,  safety,  and  general   activity.       

  

  

34  

Although  resulting  projects  will  vary  in  size  and  shape  (given  the  variety  of  contextual   sensitivities  described  previously),  the  focus  group  felt  that  having  gone  through  the   appropriate  planning  process  by  considering  the  desired  form,  function,  and  feel  could   provide  a  definition  of  a  Complete  Street  that  goes  beyond  the  physically  implemented   pieces.        5.2.2  Age,  Mode,  and  Ability      The  second  process  that  may  help  define  a  Complete  Street  is  similar  to  the  first.     However  instead  of  considering  the  street's  form,  function,  and  feel,  this  concept   focuses  on  accommodating  for  the  citizens  of  different  ages,  modes  and  abilities.  The   focus  group  discussed  the  "eight  to  eighty"  concept,  which  emphasizes  that  if  a  street  is   safe  and  comfortable  for  an  8  year  old  or  an  80  year  old,  it  will  also  be  suitable  for  all   other  users  (8-80  Cities,  n.d.).        In  addition  to  planning  for  the  user's  age,  planning  for  various  travel  modes  is  also   important.  The  focus  group  identified  that  a  ROW  should  take  into  consideration  the   primary  modes  of  travel  including  walking,  cycling,  public  transit  (if  available)  and   driving.  Finally,  planning  for  different  levels  of  user  mobility  and  ability  is  also  an   important  part  of  this  planning  process.  Such  considerations  would  include  provisions   for  users  dependent  on  mobility  assistant  devices,  strollers/carriages,  or  users  who  may   be  hearing  or  visually  impaired.  By  properly  planning  for  these  aspects  in  a  street's  

  

  

35  

(re)design,  the  focus  group  suggested  that  this  could  lead  to  how  a  Complete  Street  is   ultimately  defined.        These  processes  and  ways  to  define  a  complete  ROW  help  us  look  beyond  what  has   been  physically  implemented  on  the  street,  as  well  as  to  understand  what  quality   standard  each  component  has  been  provided  for.  As  identified  in  the  contextual  issues   we  have  begun  to  understand  that  not  every  component  can  be  delivered  to  the  highest   and  best  quality  as  some  criteria  may  also  be  directly  conflicting  with  others.  This  is   where  the  planners  and  engineers  of  a  ROW  need  to  make  appropriate  trade-offs  based   on  the  intended  purpose,  function,  and  user  priority  of  the  street.  An  example  provided   by  the  focus  group  was  that  an  objective  of  a  Complete  Street  might  be  to  reduce  the   turning  radii  on  a  ROW  intersection  (to  slow  motor  vehicle  turning  speeds  to  provide  for   a  safer  pedestrian  crossing).  However,  if  this  consideration  is  in  direct  conflict  with  other   ROW  functional  uses  (i.e.  it  is  a  primary  route  used  for  emergency  response  vehicles),   then  that  reduced  turning  radii  may  not  be  possible  to  implement.  A  problem  with   defining  a  Complete  Street  through  its  physical  elements  is  that  we  are  not  aware  as  to   why  a  street  project  lacks  certain  components  (i.e.  bike  lane,  roll  over  curbs,  traffic   calming  measures)  and  why  some  elements  have  been  built  while  others  have  not.  By   understanding  the  processes  of  planning  and  designing  for  ROWs,  we  may  be  able  to   define  a  Complete  Street  based  on  the  elements  that  have  been  considered  rather  than   those  that  have  been  implemented.                    36  

6.0  CONCLUSION

  

Defining  a  single  project  as  a  Complete  Street  is  difficult.  While  much  of  the  literature   seems  to  agree  that  a  Complete  Street  should  safely  accommodate  for  all  users   regardless  of  travel  mode,  age,  or  ability,  (8-80  Cities,  n.d.)  a  gap  remains  in  the   consistency  of  qualitatively  identifying  what  physical  components  (or  combination  of)   should  be  included.        In  this  study,  phone  interviews  and  focus  group  methodologies  were  used  to  explore  the   use  of  the  term  "Complete  Street"  to  define  projects  at  the  ground  level.  The  focus   group  provided  two  main  take-aways  for  this  research  study.  The  first  was  identifying   the  difficulty  of  defining  a  Complete  Street  on  the  ground  due  to  the  number  of   contextual  sensitivities  a  street  design  is  influenced  by.  Such  contextual  sensitivities   included  the  surrounding  land  uses,  roadway  typologies  and  functional  responsibilities   on  the  overall  street  hierarchy,  the  age  of  the  street  (as  well  as  the  surrounding  built   forms),  and  the  level  of  qualities  that  infrastructural  components  provide  for  the   intended  users.  These  aspects  were  all  identified  as  playing  significant  influences  into   how  a  street  renewal  project  is  defined  at  the  ground  level.  Although  they  have  been   presented  in  this  paper  as  independent  contextual  issues,  the  reality  is  that  they  are   often  dependent  and  relatable  to  one  another.  These  contexts  along  with  other  external   factors  (i.e.,  political  influence,  community  needs,  wants,  and  diversities,  environmental   factors,  budget  constraints,  etc.)  will  all  influence  the  built  forms  we  see  in  today's  city   streets.    

  

  

37  

These  contextual  forces  influence  a  streetscape  in  a  much  more  complex  manner  than   what  has  been  presented  in  this  paper.  Each  street  is  impacted  by  a  unique  combination   of  surrounding  contexts  as  well  as  at  varying  degrees.  Further  research  for  this  topic   could  examine  more  context  sensitivities  that  influence  the  project-level  definition  of  a   Complete  Street,  as  well  as  how  these  context  sensitivities  work  when  in  combination   with  one  another.        The  second  main  take-away  was  the  importance  of  the  street's  planning  process.  The   focus  group  suggested  that  a  Complete  Street  could  be  defined  based  on  how  a  street  is   created  rather  than  what  it  looks  like.  In  other  words;  can  we  begin  defining  a  Complete   Street  project  based  on  the  planning  and  designing  processes  and  considerations   instead  of  through  the  physically  built  infrastructures?  By  taking  these  initial  processes   into  consideration  we  are  able  to  gain  an  understanding  of  what  Complete  Street  ideals   were  reviewed  but  perhaps  not  necessarily  built  due  to  other  restrictive  factors  (i.e.   design  trade-offs,  political  influence,  budget  constraints,  etc.).  The  focus  group  provided   two  planning  processes  that  could  be  utilized  before  the  built  form  is  decided  on.  The   first  was  to  plan  for,  and  understand  the  intended  ROW's  form,  function,  and  feel.  If   these  aspects  are  planned  for  appropriately  (regardless  of  the  design  trade-offs  made  in   the  final  product),  then  perhaps  we  can  call  the  project  a  Complete  Street.  The  second   planning  process  was  to  plan  for  the  ages,  modes,  and  abilities  of  all  intended  users.   Similar  to  the  first  planning  process,  the  focus  group  suggested  that  if  the  initial  planning   phases  of  a  street  gave  consideration  to  providing  for  all  ages,  modes  and  abilities  

  

  

38  

(regardless  of  what  design  trade-offs  were  needed),  then  that  too  could  be  a  Complete   Street.        By  understanding  the  planning  processes  of  streets,  we  are  presented  with  the   opportunity  of  looking  beyond  what  is  physically  on  the  street  and  towards   understanding  what  considerations  were  taken  as  well  as  what  contexts  influenced  the   final  product.  The  focus  group  spoke  about  the  different  considerations  that  could  be   accounted  for  during  the  planning  processes  (i.e.  planning  for  age,  mode  and  mobility,   or  form,  function  and  feel)  however  other  processes  and  considerations  could  be  further   investigated.  For  example,  if  all  users  (i.e.  walkers,  cyclists,  transit  users,  and  drivers)  are   considered  during  the  design  phases,  but  selected  ROW  elements  are  not  included  in   the  final  road  design  (due  to  enhancement  of  the  overall  safety  and  comfort  of   pedestrians  and  cyclists),  can  the  final  product  in  fact  be  considered  a  Complete  Street?   Planning  processes  that  operate  under  roadway  user  prioritization  is  another  influential   method  of  designing  ROWs  that  could  greatly  alter  the  final  product  and  ultimately  the   project-level  definition.  More  research  could  be  done  in  this  regard  to  understand  what   other  planning  processes  Complete  Street  projects  are  built  through,  and  how   surrounding  contexts  influence  the  final  decisions  made  regarding  what  is  built  and   what  is  not.    

  
     

  

  

39  

6.1  IMPLICATIONS  FOR  POLICY  AND  PRACTICE      Complete  Streets  advocacy  organizations  and  local  municipalities  have  taken  steps  to   help  further  understand  the  contextual  issues  of  how  a  Complete  Street  project  may   look  as  well  as  and  how  it  should  perform  at  the  ground  level.  Locally,  the  City  of   Toronto  is  currently  creating  their  own  set  of  Complete  Streets  guidelines  that  will  work   with  currently  standing  policy  frameworks  (i.e.  the  Official  Plan,  Streetscape  Manual,   Accessibility  Design  Guidelines,  Bike  Plan,  Walking  Strategy,  Vibrant  Streets,  etc.)  (City  of   Toronto,  2014).  In  addition  to  these  frameworks,  the  City  has  identified  that  they  will   also  work  to  further  understand  contextual  sensitivities  that  affect  street  design  (such  as   land  uses  and  street  functions)  to  produce  a  comprehensive  set  of  Complete  Street   Guidelines  for  the  City  (City  of  Toronto,  2014).        Evaluation  tools  that  aim  to  understand  the  overall  performance  of  a  Complete  Street   have  also  furthered  the  cause  in  understanding  what  a  Complete  Street  may  look  like  at   the  ground  level.  A  report  published  by  the  Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation   (2015)  provides  a  tool  for  municipalities  in  the  GGH  to  help  improve  their  capacities  in   planning  and  measuring  the  success  of  Complete  Street  projects.  When  looking  to   evaluate  such  projects,  this  report  recognizes  the  various  contextual  sensitivities  that   influence  a  ROW  design  including  roadway  typologies,  geographic  locations  and   surrounding  land  uses.  (Mitra,  Winters,  Smith  Lea,  Hess,  2015).  Similarly,  a  Complete   Streets  evaluative  guide  released  by  the  National  Complete  Streets  Coalition,  Smart   Growth  America,  and  AARP  (2015)  also  provides  a  framework  and  methods  to  analyze  

  

  

40  

and  measure  Complete  Streets.  The  findings  in  this  report  confirm  the  importance  of   defining  and  measuring  Complete  Streets  based  on  community  needs,  surrounding  land   uses,  and  in  consideration  of  the  overall  project  scope  (AARP  Government  Affairs,  State   Advocacy  &  Strategy  Integration,  Seskin,  Kite,  Searfoss,  2015).        Within  this  context,  this  Major  Research  Paper  has  contributed  to  the  transportation   planning  policy  and  practice  by  delivering  insight  to  how  a  Complete  Street  project  is   defined  and  influenced,  particularly  within  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe  region.   Results  from  this  research  will  enable  planners  within  (and  beyond)  the  region  to  gain   awareness  regarding  how  a  Complete  Street  project's  built  form  can  change  under   different  contexts.  The  findings  presented  in  this  research  also  emphasizes  that  the   definition  of  a  Complete  Street  project  may  be  informed  and  influenced  by  not  only   what  the  street  looks  like,  but  also  how  it  was  planned  and  implemented.  Expected   benefits  for  planning  practitioners  include  improved  understanding  of  the  complexities   of  a  "Complete  Street"  and  the  context-  and  planning  process-  related  considerations   that  should  be  made  when  planning  for  one.        The  Complete  Streets  movement  is  still  a  relatively  new  concept  in  the  fields  of  urban   transportation  planning  in  the  GGH  region  and  more  broadly,  in  Canada.  With  many   newly  developed  planning  ideals,  there  is  always  an  extent  of  ambiguity.  Whether   looking  at  the  scope  of  a  single  project,  or  examining  the  over  arching  concepts,  further   conceptual  research  on  Complete  Streets,  such  as  the  one  presented  here,  will  

  

  

41  

contribute  to  the  successes  and  overall  desired  changes  to  our  transportation  systems   and  behaviours.                                                                                                                         

  

  

42  

Appendix  1:  Complete  Street  Survey  Responses  from  the  27  Growth  Centres     
   Bicycle   Pedestrian   Infrastructure   Infrastructure   Improvements   Improvements   RESPONDENTS  THAT  ANSWERED  "YES"  ON  THE  SURVEY   City  of  Barrie      X   City  of  Brantford   X   X   City  of      X   Burlington   City  of   X   X   Cambridge   City  of  Guelph   X      City  of  Hamilton   X   X   City  of  Markham   X   X   City  of      X   Mississauga   City  of  Oshawa   X      City  of   X   X   Peterborough   City  of  Toronto  ­   X   X   Downtown   City  of  Toronto  ­   X   X   Etobicoke   City  of  Toronto  ­   X   X   North  York   City  of  Toronto  ­   X   X   Scarborough   City  of  Toronto  ­   X   X   Yonge  Eglinton   City  of  Vaughan   X   X   City  of  Waterloo     X   X   Town  of  Ajax   X      Town  of         Newmarket   RESPONDENTS  THAT  ANSWERED  "NO"  ON  THE  SURVEY   County  of      X   Simcoe   City  of  Brampton      X   Town  of  Whitby         City  of  Kitchener   X   X   Town  of  Oakville   X      Town  of  Pelham   X      City  of  Pickering         Niagra         Region/St.   Catherines   Upgraded  transit   infrastructure   Accessibility   Improvements   Streetscape   Improvements  

                  X                        X              

X   X            X   X   X   X      X   X   X            X        

X   X   X      X      X   X      X         X   X   X   X   X        

X            X           

   X         X   X        

X   X   X   X   X   X        

              

  

  

43  

Appendix  2:  Focus  Group  Discussion  Questions  
1. Do  any  of  you  have  initial  thoughts  as  to  why  this  inconsistency  exists  when  defining   what  a  "Complete  Street"  is?      2. Does  your  municipality  use  the  term  "Complete  Street"  and  does  it  have  a  definitive   answer  as  to  what  a  Complete  Street  is  or  is  not?   a. If  there  is  a  definitive  answer,  what  is  your  municipality's  definition?   b. If  no  definitive  answer,  do  you  believe  there  is  an  overall  general  understanding   of  what  a  "Complete  Street"  is  among  employees  in  your  department?  In  other   departments?   i. Has  there  been  a  process  or  instruction  to  set  this  understanding  (i.e.   information  sessions  held)?   c. Do  you  believe  the  term  Complete  Streets  is  somewhat  ambiguous  in  your   city/department?   i. Has  this  ambiguity  ever  been  addressed  or  has  it  caused  confusion  at   any  particular  time?   d. If  your  municipality  does  not  use  the  term  "Complete  Street",  is  there  another   term  that  holds  similar  meaning  that  is  used  instead?     i. If  yes,  what  is  it?     ii. Is  it  defined  and  how?      3. Currently  there  are  five  Complete  Streets  policies  in  Canada,  two  of  which  belong  to   cities  within  the  GGH.  Do  you  think  policy  has  an  important  role  to  play  to  help  define   the  term?      4. Although  there  are  only  two  Complete  Street  policies  within  the  GGH,  many   municipalities  have  identified  that  their  jurisdictions  have  a  Complete  Streets  project.   Do  you  think  having  a  Complete  Streets  policy  is  important  for  implementing  these   projects?        a. Do  these  policies  play  active  roles  when  determining  the  overall  success  of   these  projects?   b. Do  you  think  not  having  a  Complete  Streets  policy  can  act  as  a  barrier  when   trying  to  implement  a  Complete  Streets  project?   i. Have  there  been  any  instances  that  you  can  share  where  such  barriers   have  occurred  that  could  have  been  avoided  if  the  jurisdiction  had  a   supporting  piece  of  Complete  Streets  legislation?      5. Are  there  any  other  barriers  that  you  can  think  of  (beyond  the  absence  of  Complete   Street  policies)  that  would  pose  as  threats  to  the  success  of  Complete  Street  projects?   Have  you  encountered  any  circumstances  where  a  Complete  Streets  plan  was   terminated  before  it  got  to  the  implementation  stages?  Why  did  this  happen?  Would   this  have  been  preventable  and  how?  

  

  

  

44  

7.0  REFERENCES      8-80  Cities.  (n.d.).  Our  Philosophy.  About  Us.  Retrieved  at:  http://www.8- 80cities.org/who-we-are      AARP  Government  Affairs,  State  Advocacy  &  Strategy  Integration,  Seskin,  S.,  Kite,  H.,   Searfoxx,  L.  (2015).  Evaluating  Complete  Streets  Projects:  A  guide  for   practitioners.  AARP,  Washington:  DC.      Barnett,  J.  (1982).  An  introduction  to  urban  design.  New  York:  Harper  &  Row.      Ben-Joseph,  E.  (1995).  Changing  the  Residential  Street  Scene:  Adapting  the  Shared   Street  (Woonerf)  Concept  to  the  Suburban  Environment.  Journal  of  the  American   Planning  Association,  61(4),  504-515.      Burden,  D.,  Litman,  T.  (2011).  America  Needs  Complete  Streets.  Institute  of   Transportation  Engineers.  ITE  Journal,  81(4),  36-43.      Celik,  Z.,  Favro,  D.,  Inersoll,  R.  (1994).  Streets:  Critical  perspectives  on  public  space.   Berkley:  University  of  California  Press.      City  of  San  Francisco  (2010).  Better  Streets  Plan:  Policies  and  Guidelines  for  the   Pedestrian  Realm.  Retrieved  March  22,  2015  at:  http://www.sf- planning.org/ftp/BetterStreets/index.htm      City  of  Toronto  (2014).  Approach  to  Developing  Complete  Streets  Guidelines.  City  of   Toronto.  Retrieved  from:   http://www1.toronto.ca/wps/portal/contentonly?vgnextoid=4339e30dfc638410 VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD      Eppell,  V.A.T.,  Bunker,  J.M.,  McClurg,  B.A.  (2001).  A  four  level  road  hierarchy  for   network  planning  and  management.  In  Jaeger,  Vicki,  Eds.  Proceedings  20th  ARRB   Conference.  Melbourne,  AUS.      Hamilton-Baillie,  B.  (2004).  Urban  Design:  Why  don't  we  do  it  in  the  road?  Modifying   traffic  behaviour  through  legible  urban  design.  Journal  of  Urban  Technology,   11(1),  43-62.      Hamilton-Baillie,  B.  (2008).  Shared  Space:  Reconciling  People,  Places  and  Traffic.  Built   Environment,  34(2),  161-181.       

  

  

45  

Homburger,  W.  S.  (2002).  Burton  W.  Marsh  distinguished  service  award:  Transportation   engineering  in  a  changing  world  ­  whence  have  we  come  and  whither  will  we   go?  ITE  Journal,  72(10),  28-30.      Jackson,  J.B.  (1980).  The  Necessity  for  Ruins,  and  Other  Topics.  Amherst:  The  University   of  Massachusetts  Press.  pp.  55-66.      Jacobs,  A.  (1995).  Great  Streets.  United  States  of  America:  MIT  Press.      Jacobs,  J.  (1961).  The  Death  and  Life  of  Great  American  Cities.  New  York,  NY:  Random   House      LaPlante,  J.,  McCann,  B.  (2008).  Complete  Streets:  We  Can  Get  There  from  Here.  ITE   Journal,  78(4),  24-28.      Litman,  T.  (2013).  Evaluating  Complete  Streets:  The  Value  of  Designing  Roads  for  Diverse   Modes,  Users  and  Activities.  Victoria,  BC:  Victoria  Transport  Policy  Institute.      Lynch,  K.  (1960).  The  Image  of  the  City.  United  States  of  America:  MIT  Press.      McCann,  B.  (2011).  Perspectives  from  the  Field:  Complete  Streets  and  Sustainability.   Environmental  Practice,  13(1),  63-64.      McCann,  B.  (2013).  Completing  Our  Streets:  The  Transition  to  Safe  and  Inclusive   Transportation  Networks.  Washington,  DC:  Island  Press.      Ministry  of  Infrastructure.  (2006).  Growth  Plan  for  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe,  2006.   Province  of  Ontario.  Retrieved  March  20,  2015  at:   https://www.placestogrow.ca/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3 59&Itemid=12#1      Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing  (2008).  Size  and  Location  of  Urban  Growth   Centres  in  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe.  Places  to  Grow.  Retrieved  at:   https://www.placestogrow.ca/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=3 72&Itemid=15#2.1      Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing  (2014).  Growth  Plan  for  the  Greater  Golden   Horseshoe,  2006.  Places  to  Grow.  Retrieved  at:   https://www.placestogrow.ca/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=9 &Itemid=14      Ministry  of  Transport.  (1963).  Traffic  in  Towns:  A  study  of  the  long  term  problems  of   traffic  in  urban  areas.  London:  Her  Majesty's  Stationary  Office.            46  

Mitra,  R.,  Winters,  A.,  Smith  Lea,  N.,  Hess,  P.  M.  (2015).  Complete  Streets  Evaluation:   Understanding  Complete  Streets  in  the  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe.  Toronto   Centre  for  Active  Transportation,  Clean  Air  Partnership.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.tcat.ca/wp- content/uploads/2015/03/Complete_Streets_Evaluation_19Mar2015.pdf      Moreland-Russell,  S.,  Eyler,  A.,  Barbero,  C.,  Hipp,  A.,  Walsh,  H.  (2013).  Diffusion  of   Complete  Streets  Policies  Across  US  Communities.  Journal  of  Public  Health   Management  &  Practice.  19(3),  S89-S96.      Moughton,  C.  (2003).  Urban  Design:  Street  and  Square  Third  Ed.  Oxford,  UK:   Architectural  Press.      National  Complete  Streets  Coalition.  (2010).  Fundamentals.  Smart  Growth  America.   Retrieved  January  2015,  from:  http://www.smartgrowthamerica.org/complete- streets/complete-streets-fundamentals      National  Complete  Streets  Coalition.  (2014).  The  Best  Complete  Streets  Policies  of  2013.   Smart  Growth  America.  Retrieved  September  2014,  from:   http://www.smartgrowthamerica.org/complete-streets-2013-analysis      Norton,  P.  D.  (2008).  Fighting  traffic.  The  dawn  of  the  motor  age  in  the  American  city.   Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Press      Schlossberg,  M.,  Rowell,  J.,  Amos,  D.,  Sanford,  K.  (2013).  Rethinking  Streets:  An   Evidence-based  Guide  to  25  Complete  Street  Transformations.  Sustainable  Cities   Initiative,  University  of  Oregon.      Sears,  B.  (2014).  Incorporating  complete  streets  into  transportation  master  plans.  ITE   Journal.  84(4),  32-36.      Siemiatycki,  M.,  Smith,  M.,  Walks,  A.  (2014).  The  Politics  of  Bicycle  Lane  Impleentation:   The  Case  of  Vancouver's  Burrard  Street  Bridge.  International  Journal  of   Sustainable  Transportation.  8(6).      Smith,  R.,  Reed,  S.,  Baker,  S.  (2010).  Complete  STREETS.  Public  Roads.  74(1),  12-17.      Statistics  Canada,  (2013).  Table  3.3:  Population,  Greater  Golden  Horseshoe,  1971,2001   and  2011.  Censuses  of  Population.  Retrieved  at:   http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/16-201-x/2013000/t003-eng.htm           

  

  

47  

Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation,  Mitra,  R.,  Hess,  P.M.  (2014).  The  Complete   Streets  Catalogue:  Understanding  Complete  Streets  in  the  Greater  Golden   Horseshoe.  Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation,  Clean  Air  Partnership.   Retrieved  March  21,  2015  at:  http://www.tcat.ca/project/understand-complete- streets-in-the-greater-golden-horseshoe/      Whitney,  R.  A.,  Toronto  Centre  for  Active  Transportation.  (2012).  Complete  Streets  Gap   Analysis:  Opportunities  and  Barriers  in  Ontario.  Clean  Air  Partnership.  Retrieved   September  2014,  from:  http://www.tcat.ca/knowledge-centre/complete-streets- gap-analysis-opportunities-and-barriers-in-ontario/                 

  

  

48  

