Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Geography Publications and Research Geography

1-1-2006

Eye Movements in Map Comparison - Preliminary Results and Lessons Learned
Claus Rinner
Ryerson University, crinner@ryerson.ca

Susanne Ferber
University of Toronto

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/geography Recommended Citation
Claus Rinner, Susanne Ferber (2006) Eye Movements in Map Comparison - Preliminary Results and Lessons Learned. Abstract and presentation at the Canadian Cartographic Association's annual meeting (in conjunction with GeoTec conference), 18-21 June 2006, Ottawa, Canada

This Conference Presentation is brought to you for free and open access by the Geography at Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Geography Publications and Research by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

Eye Movements in Map Comparison - Preliminary Results and Lessons Learned
Claus Rinner, Department of Geography, University of Toronto Susanne Ferber, Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Comparing maps of different geographic phenomena, or maps of the same phenomenon at different points in time, is an important task in spatial data analysis and decisionmaking. The process of map comparison has been studied occasionally by cartographers since the 1970s, but recent improvements in neuropsychological testing equipment and GIS technology had us review this topic in a new light. In a pilot experiment, we presented pairs of maps to volunteer participants and recorded their eye movements while judging the maps' similarity. We analysed average values of eye movement parameters such as fixation duration and proportions of saccades between the two maps in relation to three factors: the participant's experience in reading maps; the type of map presented; and the actual similarity between the two maps. We found, for example, that different map types engaged viewers in different comparison strategies while we did not find behavioural differences between expert and novice map readers. We will speculate about implications of experimental cartography for GIS design and report on challenges encountered with this approach.

