The Painter Who Uses A Camera: An Analysis of the Photographs of Frank "Franz" Johnston PROVIDING A COMPREHENSIVE CATALOGUE FOR THE COLLECTION HOUSED AT THE ARCHIVE OF MODERN CONFLICT by Cassandra L. Zeppieri, BFA in Photography, Ryerson University, 2009

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the program of Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2015 © Cassandra L. Zeppieri 2015

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A THESIS
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

Cassandra L. Zeppieri

  

ii  

  

ABSTRACT
Master of Arts, 2015 Cassandra L. Zeppieri Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management Ryerson University

This thesis analyzes the archive of Frank "Franz" Johnston, a prolific Canadian painter and founding member of the Group of Seven. Johnston, known predominantly to the public as a painter, was also an amateur photographer who used photography as visual aids for his paintings. Johnston's production and use of photography was extensive, yet it has been relatively ignored until recently. The focus of this thesis is the interrelation between Johnston's paintings and photographs in an attempt to understand his artistic practice. Furthermore, this thesis includes a practical component; the substantial documentation of all items pertaining to the Johnston Archive, housed at the Archive of Modern Conflict (AMC) Toronto, Ontario, in the form of a catalogue. The assorted materials of photographs, postcards and ephemera, generally depict images of aboriginal life and the Canadian landscape. This catalogue will facilitate future access to the collection to both AMC personnel and future researchers.

  

iii  

  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS To my first reader and thesis advisor, Dee Psaila, Senior Conservator at Archives of Ontario, whose guidance and advice has been invaluable in the development of this project. I would also like to thank my second reader Maia-Mari Sutnik, Curator of Photographs and Special Projects at the Art Gallery of Ontario for sharing her knowledge and passion for Canadian art history and photography; her expertise has been vital to the development of this thesis. A special thanks goes to the institutions that graciously gave me access to their collections and those who helped me delve into their depths: Jill Offenbeck, Neil David MacDonald and Andrea Raymond at the Archive of Modern Conflict, Toronto; Sharona Adamowicz-Clements, Assistant Curator at the McMichael Canadian Art Collection, Kleinberg, and to Genevieve Carter, Curator of the Huronia Museum, Midland. I'm also grateful to David Harris who supported me in my decision to pursue my Masters degree and who has been an inspiration throughout my academic career. To Marta Braun who pushed me to focus on a Canadian photographic collection, which has led to a fascination with Canadian landscape painters. I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to all those who assisted me throughout this process. To Hope Nicholson who brought to light the stories Johnston brought back from the Arctic, which inspired the creation of Nelvana. To researchers Nancy Lang and Rebecca Middleton for their time and insight during the initial stages of development of this project. To Laura Gentili for her support and encouragement throughout all stages of this tremendous process. Finally, to all my parents, whose support has always been integral to my success.

  

iv  

  

To Matt, for his love and support.

  

v  

  

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments Table of Contents List of Illustrations Chapter 1 Introduction Chapter 2 Literature Review A. B. C. D. Life and Artistic Practice of Frank "Franz" Johnston The Relationship Between Photography and Painting The Materiality of Photographic Images Practical Guides 10 18 iv vi vii 1 4

Chapter 3 The Life and Work of Frank "Franz" Johnston Chapter 4 The Collection 4.1 Provenance 4.2 Attribution 4.3 Description of the Collection Chapter 5 The Photography of Frank "Franz" Johnston 5.1 Photography as Source Material 5.2 A Shift to Realism Chapter 6 Catalogue Development 6.1 Methodology 6.2 Intellectual Order 6.3 Accession Numbers 6.4 Digitization 6.5 Preservation and Re-housing Chapter 7 Conclusion Bibliography Appendices

31

47

53 56 59

  

vi  

  

List of Illustrations
Figures Figure 1. Unknown, Portrait of Frank Johnston at the Arts & Letters Club, c. 1918-1932. Courtesy of the Arts and Letters Club, Toronto. Figure 2. Unknown, ACR #10557 with JEH Harris and Johnston, c. 1918-1924. Courtesy of Library and Archives Canada. Figure 3. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Fire-Swept Algoma, c. 1920, oil on canvas, 127.5 x 167.5 cm. Franz Johnston Collection, National Galley of Canada. Figure 4. Unknown, OSA Exhibition with Harris and Johnston, 1919, gelatin silver print. Courtesy of Library and Archives Canada. Figure 5. Unknown, Portrait of Johnston in the Snow, c. 1939, gelatin silver print, 18.8 x 19.9 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 6. JPR (Unknown), Johnston painting Tiny Lake, 1939, gelatin silver print, 7.8 x 9.7 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 7. Attributed to: Pollard, Harry (1880-1968), American Natives Burning Grass, c. 1910-1949, gelatin silver print, 20.5 x 25.3 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 8. Attributed to an El Dorado engineer, The Midnight Sun June 21st 1939, 1939, gelatin silver print, 6.8 x 11.4 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 9. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Clouds over trees, 1939, gelatin silver print, 12.5 x 17.6 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 10. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Handwritten note written by Frank H. Johnston, c. 1918-1922. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 11. Unknown, Warplane, c. 1914-1919, gelatin silver print. Library and Archives Canada, Mary Bishop Rodrik and Franz Johnston fonds. Figure 12. Frank "Franz" Johnston, The Rendezvous, c. 1918-1949, oil on canvas, size unknown. Courtesy of Artiques Roadshow.    vii      Page 10

12

13

13

21

21

22

23

24

26

31

32

Figure 13. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Men in canoes at water's edge, c. 19181949, gelatin silver print, 8.8 x 11.6 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 14. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Golden Glade, c. 1944, oil on board, 60 x 75 cm. Courtesy of Invaluable Auction House. Figure 15. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Photograph of Golden Glade, c. 1942, gelatin silver print, 20.3 x 25.4 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Collection at the Huronia Museum. Figure 16. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Trees reflected in water, c. 1930-1949, gelatin silver print, 13.1 x 19.8 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. Figure 17. Frank "Franz" Johnston, unfinished canvas, date unknown, pencil on board. Library and Archives Canada, Mary Bishop Rodrik and Franz Johnston fonds. Figure 18. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Moose Pond, 1918, oil on canvas, 26.5 x 33.8 cm. McMichael Canadian Art Collection, Gift of the Founders, Robert and Signe McMichael. Figure 19. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Building the Breakwater, oil on board, 76.2 x 109.2 cm. Courtesy of Heffel online auction house. Figure 20. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Birth of a Navy, c. 1944, tempera on canvas. Library and Archives Canada, Mary Bishop Rodrik and Franz Johnston fonds. Figure 21. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Birth of a Navy, c. 1942, gelatin silver print, 8 x 11 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Collection at the Huronia Museum.

32

34

34

35

36

40

41

43

44

      viii     

Chapter 1 Introduction
With the public introduction of photography in 18391, painting drastically changed. There was now a tool that could be used to recreate a moment in time with far more exactness than any painter could reproduce. This development allowed for moments to be captured more accurately than a hand drawn sketch, thus replacing the traditional form of the pencil sketch and changing the painter's relationship to their canvas infinitely.2 The role of the painter changed from the creator of romanticized subject matter to a recorder of nature, in all its exactitude.3 The camera became an integral part to many painters' artistic practice, yet it was a controversial method denounced by many critics. This is surprising, since the availability of numerous optical devices, among them the substantiated use of the Camera Obscura, shows that painters since the sixteenthcentury have applied picture-making aids for the rendering of nature.4 The new medium could not be ignored by the painter and therefore the camera vision influenced painterly vision considerably.5 It is only in recent years that this relationship between photography and painting has been re-examined to learn more about how each creative practice complements the other and benefited the artist. One such artist was Frank "Franz" Johnston, whose collection at the Archive of Modern Conflict provides important insight into the practice of an early twentieth                                                                                                                 1  Photography was commercially introduced in 1839 and presented to the Académie des Sciences in Paris by François Arago.  
2

Easton, Elizabeth Wynne and Clément Chéroux. Snapshot: Painters and Photography, Bonnard to Vuillard. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012. Pg. 5 3 Coke, Van Deren. The Painter and the Photograph; from Delacroix to Warhol. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1972, Pg. 1 4 Scharf, Aaron. Art and Photography. London: Allan Lane, The Penguin Press, 1968, revised 1974, Pg. 19-23 5 Ibid. Pg. 127  

  

1

century Canadian artist. Comprising of 590 items, the collection predominantly depicts the Canadian landscape, spanning from 1905 to 1949. Johnston, known as one of the founding members of the Group of Seven, has been unknown within the history of photography until recently. Through my close examination of this collection I have uncovered a number of photographs that were used by Johnston as visual aids for his paintings. This discovery has complimented a much-needed investigation into the use of photography by Canadian painters in the early twentieth-century. Johnston's archive has been divided between three known institutions, two public and one private: the Huronia Museum in Midland, Library and Archives Canada (LAC) in Ottawa and the Archive of Modern Conflict (AMC) in Toronto, respectively. These divisions highlight the difficulty of understanding an artist's archive when it cannot be viewed in its entirety. Although researchers have had access to the photographs found in the collections of the public institutions, there has not been any substantial documentation written about them or a realization of the connection between the Huronia museum and LAC collections. It is essential that the relationship between these three collections, especially their provenance, be investigated. My observations note a shift in Johnston's style of painting, which originally bore similarities to other members of the Group, who were influenced by the aesthetic of Art Nouveau, emphasizing its use of decorative natural forms and vibrant colours. Yet Johnston's later works suggest a shift to Realism and a fascination with the effects of light. I will argue that this shift to Realism was a consequence of his use of photography. My intention is to examine the effects that the camera, had on the construction of

  

2

Johnston's paintings, while also exploring the artist's attitude toward the medium of photography. This thesis addresses the topic both analytically and practically. The analytical portion will explore the history and artistic practice of Johnston and his use of photography, whereas the practical component will take the form of a catalogue to facilitate future access to the collection for researchers interested in Johnston's photographic practice. Essential to this project was the cataloguing of each print and the compiling of data to develop a resource of study into the artistic practices of Johnston. This thesis seeks to analyze the photographs created by Johnston, and in doing so will illustrate the relationship between his paintings and photographs, with specific emphasis on paintings that clearly demonstrate the influence of photography.

  

3

Chapter 2 Literature Survey
This survey examines publications that cast some light on the artistic practice of Frank "Franz" Johnston and provides an examination of literature on archival management. A. Life and Artistic Practice of Frank "Franz" Johnston Little has been written about the life and work of Frank "Franz" Johnston, but the two following texts successfully describe this largely disregarded figure. Firstly, A Grand Eye for Glory: A Life of Franz Johnston, by biographer Roger Burford Mason, details Johnston's career and family life from before his first acquaintance with some of the future Group members at Grip Limited6, to his death and neglect in Canadian Art History. Many are unaware that Johnston was a prolific painter and had considerable financial success as a member of the Group, and yet subsequently has been forgotten and disregarded by historians. Mason seeks to rectify this oversight by giving us an in-depth look into the life of this notable Canadian artist. The article Double Exposure: Photography and the Great War Paintings of Frank Johnston, Arthur Lismer, and Frederick Varley by Laura Brandon, a historian at the Canadian War Museum, concentrates on the paintings created by members of the Group of Seven for the Canadian War Memorials Fund (CWMF) during the First World War. Brandon's research notes the importance that photography had on the construction of paintings for many artists, whether they acknowledged it or not.7 The research also highlights the role photography played as a recording device for painters, and replaced                                                                                                                 
6 7

A commercial design studio based in Toronto. Brandon, Laura. Double Exposure: Photography and the Great War Paintings of Frank Johnston, Arthur Lismer, and Frederick Varley. RACAR, XXXIX No. 2 2014, p. 14

  

4

the traditional pencil sketch.8 The photographs that Brandon refers to in Johnston's paintings have not been authenticated as his, but rather are thought to be produced by pilot trainees. This lack of authorship may one the reason that Johnston's photography has not been further investigated. The texts reviewed in this section offer valuable information regarding the life and artistic practice of Johnston the painter. However these texts show that nothing has been written on Johnston's own photographic practice. B. The Relationship Between Photography and Painting Painting and photography have always had a complicated relationship, yet they continue to be inexorably linked. Right from its inception, photography was both revered and scrutinized by the art world. Aaron Scharf's book titled Art and Photography traces the links between painting and photography, demonstrating the degree to which nineteenth-century painters relied on photography. The most significant chapter in this book is titled "The Dilemma of Realism", which discusses the effect the emergence of photography had on painting, focusing particularly on how the camera affected the painters way of seeing. Furthermore, this text gives insight into the artistic practices of Delacroix and Courbet, the former's interest in photography is well known while the latter denied any association with the practice. While British, American and particularly French art and photography historians have analyzed the correlation between photography and painting, this topic has been relatively ignored in relation to Canadian painting. Ann Thomas, curator of photography at the National Gallery, examines the ways photography has influenced painters, in her                                                                                                                 
8

Brandon, Laura. Double Exposure: Photography and the Great War Paintings of Frank Johnston, Arthur Lismer, and Frederick Varley. RACAR, XXXIX No. 2 2014, Pg. 14

  

5

essay, Canadian Painting and Photography, 1860-1900. Thomas describes how the process of creating images through the operating of the camera, the developing of the prints, the making of composites and the painting of photographs, has affected composition, tone and overall detail of painters work.9 Johnston was not the only member of the Group of Seven to experiment with photography. In his essay Photographs by Tom Thomson, Dennis Reid, historian and former Director of Collections and Research at the Art Gallery of Ontario, examines a collection of forty photographs produced by Thomson in 1912. Reid argues that photographs made by an artist capture what the artist sees. There is no evidence that Thomson used his photographs as visual aids for his paintings, but rather the process of viewing photographs influenced his artistic process. The influence of photography on members of The Group of Seven becomes clearer as the friendship between John Vanderpant and Fredrick Varey is realized. Charles C. Hill, Curator of Canadian Art at the National Gallery of Canada takes note of the reflective relationship between the paintings of Varley and Vanderpant's photography in his book the Photographs of John Vanderpant. Additionally, this text provides valuable perspective on the history of Canadian twentieth-century photography. The interrelation between photography and painting is a topic that has been discussed since photography's introduction in 1839, yet only minimally in Canada. This research provides a necessary investigation into how photography has been used by painters in the past in order to apply that understanding to the photographic work of Johnston.                                                                                                                 
9

Thomas, Ann. Fact and Fiction: Canadian Painting and Photography: From June 20 to August 12, 1979. Montreal: McCord Museum, 1979. Pg. 2

  

6

C. The Materiality of Photographic Images Elizabeth Edwards and Janice Hart have assembled and edited twelve essays in their book Photographs Object Histories: On the Materiality of Images. The essays discern that photographs are objects and their materiality is a fundamental part of understanding their meaning.10 The chapters successfully demonstrate how images should be read and understood through an analysis of their intention, creation, distribution and consumption.11 Each shows the methodological strategies they have developed in order to fully exploit the idea of the materiality of photographic images.12 Edwards and Hart recognize that to successfully understand the materiality of photographs, one must analyze its technical and physical properties such as its medium and paper type, and to examine how the image was presented.13 Edwards and Hart argue that "photographs are both images and physical objects that exist in time and space, thus in social and cultural experience."14 They outline that the physical and technical characteristics of the photographic object are just as important as the content and subject of the image. Both of these forms combine to convey a clear message: the importance of physical traces and the object's usage over time.15 The authors have selected each case study to explore the trajectory of a photograph and how its value and understanding is affected by changes in ownership, location, and material changes.16                                                                                                                 
10

Edwards, Elizabeth and Janice Hart Photographs Objects Histories: On the Materiality of Images. 2004. Pg. 1 11 Ibid. Pg. 1 12 Ibid. Pg. 3 13 Ibid. Pg. 3 14 Ibid. Pg. 1 15 Ibid. Pg. 3 16 Ibid. Pg. 3  

  

7

Few texts adequately discuss how to properly read and analyze photographic objects in order to write histories based on images. This literary gap is filled by the efforts of Edwards and Hart who have compiled essays that specifically focus on using images as historical evidence. This text helped provide insight into how image histories should be written and emphasizing how to properly read photographs in order to conduct image based research more effectively. D. Practical Guides In addition to examining the connection between the painter and the photographer, this literature survey also investigates the best practices in creating a catalogue. Through the process of developing this catalogue, a greater understanding of Johnston's photographic practice will be realized. For knowledge on the topic of cataloguing I referenced the text Photographs: Archival Care and Management in order to grasp more current and standardized forms of cataloguing practices. The chapters Accessioning and Arrangement by Brett Carnell and Description and Cataloging by Helena Zinkham outline the current best practices when deciding upon arrangement and descriptions for archival materials. The goal of these chapters is to implement standards that will permit for greater accessibility to collections. This text was applicable to my research as it provides archivists, librarians, and cultural resource managers the tools with which to create standards within their own institution that will allow for improved accessibility to a collection. As the Frank "Franz" Johnston photographs collection is housed within the AMC, I will be using the AMC's style guide as a basis for my catalogue. The style guide is central to creating a catalogue with a controlled vocabulary and arrangement. This guide

  

8

ensures that there will be fewer inconsistencies during the process of cataloguing. The style guide is organized in an accessible format and covers the standards utilized by the AMC within their LAVIS database system. In order to expand on the standards implemented by the AMC, I decided that it was necessary to reference Cataloging Cultural Objects: A Guide to Describing Cultural Works and Their Images (CCO) this resource allowed me to adapt my initially designed catalogue in order to comprehend archival practices used within a variety of institutions. The sources outlined in this section provides information that allowed for the development of a standardized catalogue. The development of this comprehensive catalogue will better user access to improve physical and intellectual control by AMC personnel. In summary, this literature survey establishes that there are adequate resources about the artistic practices of Frank "Franz" Johnston, however nothing has specifically focused on his photographic practice. This is a disconcerting prospect as the photographs of Johnston have been housed in public institutions that clearly state Johnston as their creator, yet little or no investigation has been done on them. It is my expectation that the development of this catalogue will promote further research on the photographic practices of Canadian painters.

  

9

Chapter 3 Life and Work of Frank "Franz" Johnston
Francis Hans Johnston was born to Hans Hamilton Johnston, an Irish immigrant, and Elizabeth Roderick on June 19th, 1888 (Fig. 1). Johnston, along with his two brothers, was educated at the Givens Street Public School, in Toronto. Johnston's interest in painting begun at a young age and was nurtured and influenced by his father, a painter on staff at Toronto City Hall.17 By the age of 18, Johnston had begun working at Brigden Ltd. a design and photography studio in Toronto, where he did illustrations for catalogues. He enrolled in classes at both Central Technical School on Harbord Street and at the Ontario College of Art. During this time, Johnston left Brigden Ltd. to work at
Fig 1: Unknown, Portrait of Frank Johnston at the Arts & Letters Club, c. 1918-1932. Courtesy of the Arts and Letters Club, Toronto.

Grip Ltd.18 It was at Grip Ltd. that five future members of the Group of Seven would meet, including Fredrick Varley, Arthur Lismer, J.W.H. MacDonald and Franklin Carmichael. Tom Thomson, who also worked at Grip Ltd. would unfortunately die before the official formation of the Group, but whose work was a source of inspiration for the other Group members. In 1910, Johnston married his childhood sweetheart Florence Jamieson, a fifth generation Canadian, and together they had four children. Their marriage was a long and                                                                                                                 
17

Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Pg. 16 18 Ibid. Pg. 18  

  

10

happy one, as Florence was devoted to Johnston and she supported her husbands' artistic endeavors even through the financial difficulties that he experienced. Their devotion to each other was clearly presented in the numerous correspondences they shared throughout their marriage. In 1910 and 1911 while still working for Grip Ltd. Johnston exhibited with the Ontario Society of Artists (OSA). In 1912 he left Toronto for the United States where he continued his studies, and later attended the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Art. He moved to New York where he worked in the Carleton Illustrators Studios, a firm that was associated with the Carleton Studios in London, England. While in the United States, Johnston continued to exhibit with the OSA and also joined the Arts and Letters Club, of which he would continue to be a member until 1932. Upon his return to Toronto, Johnston continued working as a commercial artist reconnecting with the future Group members at the Arts and Letters Club. It was around this time the Johnston explored and painted Toronto, creating paintings of the Don River valley and York Mills area. Then by the urging of friends and public interest in the paintings, Johnston and his colleagues from Grip Ltd. began to explore and paint northern Ontario.

  

11

As WWI took a stronger hold of Europe, painting the Canadian wilderness was put on hold. Johnston was not fit for the army, but in 1918 he was commissioned by the Canadian War Memorials to record the activities of the Royal Flying
Fig. 2: Unknown, ACR #10557 with JEH Harris and Johnston, c. 1918-1924. Courtesy of Library and Archives Canada.  

Corps, at their training camps in Ontario. Johnston created dozens of sketches during this time, some from photographs obtained from pilot trainees and others from his own experiences as a passenger.19 In the fall of 1918 on a break from the War Memorials commission, Johnston, along with Lawren Harris, J.E.H. MacDonald and their patron Dr. James MacCallum (1860-1943), a successful ophthalmologist and fellow Arts and Letters Club member, left for Algoma to take part in the first of four famous Boxcar-painting trips (Fig. 2). The trips involved renting a boxcar from the Canadian Pacific Railway Company, where it was carried by train to rest at the Agawa Canyon. Here, they were left to their own devices and were undisturbed by anyone other than the occasional railway worker and lumberjack passerby. The trips took place in the fall of four successive years from 1918 ­ 1922. It was during these trips that the young men bonded with one another and, in some cases, healed from the tragedies they experienced during the war.

                                                                                                                
19  Brandon,

Laura. Double Exposure: Photography and the Great War Paintings of Frank Johnston, Arthur Lismer, and Frederick Varley. RACAR, XXXIX No. 2 2014, P. 14  

  

12

The paintings created during the first Boxcar trip gave a taste of the majestic Canadian landscape. Johnston's paintings were not uniformly excellent and tended to be inconsistent, an issue that would
Fig. 3: Frank "Franz" Johnston (1888 ­ 1949), FireSwept Algoma, c. 1920, oil on canvas, 127.5 x 167.5 cm. Franz Johnston Collection, National Gallery of Canada.

plague his paintings throughout his career.20 That being said, many of his best works were created during the

Boxcar trips, in particular Fire-Swept Algoma, 1919, (Fig. 3) which is now housed at the National Gallery of Canada. During those four years various future Group members would take part in the Boxcar trips and the boxcar itself would travel north and south along the tracks to places such as Hubert and Batchawana Station. Johnston's work was predominantly created using tempera as the paint medium, which is a mixture of dry colour pigment, egg yolk and water for a binder.  Tempera is a challenging medium to use and, unlike with oil paints, it is harder to blend the colours. It was not widely popular during this time period and fellow painters were more inclined to use oil paints. Johnston became proficient in tempera and used the medium's inherent qualities in order to create subtle patterns of colour and form. Though he did experiment with other paints, such as oil and watercolours, his finest paintings typically were created using tempera.21

                                                                                                                
20

Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Pg. 35 21 Ibid. Pg. 36  

  

13

The paintings from the first Boxcar trip were exhibited in April 20th 1919 at The Grange and the Art Museum of Toronto22 and received positive reviews (Fig. 4). That following September the original Boxcar artists along with A.Y. Jackson went on a second Boxcar trip and, upon their return, an exhibition was held at the Art Gallery of Toronto, which included 144 new works, 60 of which were created by Johnston. Following these two exhibitions in March 1920, Arthur Lismer announced that the "Group of Seven" which included Lawren Harris, A.Y. Jackson, Frank "Franz" Johnson, J.EH. MacDonald, Franklin Carmichael, Fredrick Varley and himself would be putting on a show at the Art
Fig. 4: Unknown, OSA Exhibition with Harris and Johnston, 1919, gelatin silver print. Courtesy of Library and Archives Canada.  

Gallery of Toronto in May 1920.23 Their goal was to demonstrate a style of painting that was uniquely Canadian and separate from the work being done by European artists at the time. The exhibition received mixed reviews since many critics were unhappy with the artists' complete division from the European style of painting, while others lauded the new nationalistic character and spirit seen in their paintings. That same year Johnston, confident of his work's reception, held an independent exhibition at Eaton's of Canada Gallery, Toronto.24 The exhibition was successful and received positive reviews since

                                                                                                                
22

The Art Museum of Toronto officially changed its name in 1918 to the Art Gallery Of Toronto, but the exhibition brochure printed the old name. The Art Gallery Of Toronto would change its name again in 1966 to the Art Galley of Ontario. 23 Ibid. Pg. 38 24 Ibid. Pg. 41

  

14

Johnston's paintings were seen as less radical than the work of his fellow Group members. In the summer of 1921 Johnston was appointed principal of the Winnipeg School of Art. Johnston continued to paint while in Winnipeg and travelled through Western Canada as often as he could. As a result from his separation from the Group, Johnston's style of painting shifted becoming more realistic and, in the opinion of Roger B. Mason, "almost photographic."25 He was still very popular during this period and exhibited his work in both Winnipeg and Toronto. However, while his technique was exceptional, his ability to capture the raw and savage beauty of the Canadian landscape left something to be desired compared to the work being created by his fellow Group members. In the fall of 1924, owing to a lack of financial funding by the government, Johnston stepped down as principal of the Winnipeg School of Art and returned to Toronto to teach at the Ontario School of Art along with J.E.H. MacDonald until 1927, when he would then become principal of the school until 1929. Johnston announced his separation from the Group in 1924, his opinion being that he wanted to create work independently from his colleagues. He was concerned that the paintings created as a group looked too similar and wanted his work to be known and not overshadowed or misidentified. However many, including A.Y. Jackson, took his departure from the Group as a financial move due to the fact that Johnston was unable to make money as a part of the Group. This seems to be a harsh criticism, as Johnston sold

                                                                                                                
25

Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Pg. 47  

  

15

many of his paintings at great costs during his association with the Group, indicating that his departure had to more with personal growth as an artist instead of financial gains.26 In 1926, due to the suggestion of a numerologist friend from New York, Johnston changed his name from Frank to Franz because his friend alleged that the name Frank would never bring him success; his change of name signifies his separation from the Group.27 Hence, Johnston would sign each new painting and some old ones with his new name. Over the following years Johnston would have financial highs and lows, but his works were consistently shown in galleries such as Eaton's of Canada Gallery, Robert Simpson's and the Roberts Gallery, all of which were located in Toronto. The onset of the depression meant that Johnston as an artist was unable to support a Toronto lifestyle and moved his family to Palm Beach, off the shores of Georgian Bay. It was there that he opened his own private art school, which he named Skitiwaboo. In the early 1930s Johnston had begun to travel through the Nipigon area, more specifically Onaman Lake, where he was commissioned to paint dogsled teams consisting of only white huskies. Johnston stayed at the fishing cabin of his friend Jack McCurdy where during the winter months he would create paintings that captured the effect of light and shadow on snow.28 Johnston had always been fascinated by the Arctic and in late 1938, Gilbert LaBine, founder and vice-president of the Eldorado Gold Mines, offered to fly Johnston to his radium mine in Eldorado on Great Bear Lake in the Northwest Territories, in order for him to paint. He took him up on the offer and spent five months painting, sketching                                                                                                                 
26

Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Pg. 54 27 Ibid. Pg. 62 28 Ibid. Pg. 63  

  

16

and taking photographs. His images from this time depicted the northern landscape, the mines, mine workers and the aboriginal people  living and working there. This experience was one of the most profound of his life and the paintings he created were considered some of the finest of the Canadian Arctic.29 In 1946 Johnston took his last trip to the Nipigon area with his son Paul Rodrik.30 It was during this trip that Johnston had a serious accident with his sled dogs. Johnston never fully recovered; he continued to paint southern Georgian Bay, pleasing the public with his depictions of peaceful Ontario landscapes. 31 In July 1949, after being diagnosed with a heart condition, Johnston died of a cerebral hemorrhage at the age of 61. He was buried at the Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto. In 1963 his body was moved to the grounds of the McMichael Canadian Collection in Kleinberg to be buried alongside other members from the Group of Seven.

                                                                                                                
29

Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Pg. 76 30 Paul Rodrik was the eldest son of Johnston he was also an artist and in order to separate himself from his famous father he changed his surname to that of his paternal grandmother. 31 Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Pg. 81  

  

17

Chapter 4 The Collection 4.1 Provenance
The entirety of the archive of Frank "Franz" Johnston gives an understanding of the artistic practice of this Canadian painter, however a practical problem with his archive is that it is housed in three institutions, fragmenting an archive that needs to be understood comprehensively. Johnston's archive is stored in three cultural repositories, one private and two public, the Archive of Modern Conflict (AMC) in Toronto, the Huronia Museum in Midland and the Library and Archives Canada (LAC) in Ottawa. Each collection highlights the importance of establishing the relationships between them. In order to accomplish this it is best to recognize the provenance of each collection. Upon Johnston's death his estate was divided between his family, the majority of which came into the possession of his eldest son Paul Rodrik (1915-1983). After Rodrik's death, the archive was cared for by Rodrik's widow Mary Bishop Rodrik (1919-2006). When she became widowed a second time around 1995, Rodrik instructed her the housekeeper, Reta Evans, to clean out their house and dispose of anything left behind, in preparation for moving from her home in Gilmour, Ontario. She explains to the Peterborough Examiner in 2010, "That when I saw what was left, I couldn't do that... here were these paintings in the garage and all these pictures that Frank Johnston had taken. I just couldn't take them to the landfill." Therefore, she took many of the discarded items home with her.32 In 1998 Rodrik donated her personal archive, along with what was left from Johnston's archive to Library and Archives Canada (LAC). This selection of Johnston's archive is mostly made up of written documentation about Johnston's life.                                                                                                                 
32

Peterborough Examiner, 2010

  

18

There are number of photographs that were attributed to Johnston, but the selection of photographs does not illustrate the extent of his experimentation with photography. In 2002 Reta Evans donated over 20,000 negatives and many of their corresponding prints along with films, letters and other ephemera to the Huronia Museum. This collection contains the majority of Johnston's photographic work. In 2010 the AMC acquired roughly 600 items from the Apsley North Kawartha Community Centre Auction, which I was able to link to Reta Evans. Unfortunately the archive was split into hundreds of unorganized lots and not all were purchased by the AMC, therefore as the auction record indicates pieces of Johnston's archive are still divided throughout multiple private collections such as letters, sketches, and some photographs. It is unclear why Evans did not donate the whole of Johnston's collection that was in her possession to the Huronia Museum, but it is feasible she realized their monetary value and waited to put them up for auction. It can be concluded that there are still missing pieces of Johnston's original archive, but that a majority of it is located in public and private intuitions that are generally accessible to researchers.

  

19

4.2 Description of the Collection
The Frank "Franz" Johnston collection at the AMC consists of a rich assortment of materials, created between 1905-1949. The majority of the items are photographs that range in subject matter, but primarily depict the Canadian landscape. The photographs range in size and include a few test strips,33 which suggest that Johnston was not only getting his negatives and prints commercially processed, but that he was working in a darkroom. During a visit by Johnston's granddaughters to the AMC, who fondly remember their grandfather always snapping pictures of family and friends, they were able to confirm that Johnston indeed worked in his own darkroom, signifying he was not reliant on the commercial development of his prints. Numerous photographs in the collection were taken by a variety of unknown photographers opening up questions of provenance and authorship. It is difficult to determine how Johnston came in procession of these photographs, but it can be presumed that like many other personal collections he collected them over time from a number of different sources. The photographs that have been attributed to Johnston relate closely to the themes represented in his painting. While the themes of Canadian landscape and, in particular, his photographs taken of aboriginal people during his time in Great Bear Lake are exceptionally executed, the images that capture the many aspects of light seem to be his most prevalent subject. Johnston was fascinated with light in both his painting and photography; with his camera he captured photographs of the inherent nature of light. His camera studies caught the play of light on the snow, the cast of long dark shadows, and                                                                                                                 
33

Test strips are simply strips of light sensitive photographic paper that are exposed to different amounts of time in order to determine the correct exposure time when making an enlargement of a photograph within a darkroom.

  

20

the mirror-like surface of water reflecting the surrounding trees. He was particularly captivated by clouds and studied their formations. Before the introduction of the camera painters were unable to accurately reproduce clouds since their formations were fleeting, therefore the camera afforded the painter to capture and reproduce cloud formations that were previously unattainable.34 Johnston was likewise interested in pastoral scenes, which he created typically in the Nipigon territory and in Baie St. Paul, Quebec. These photographs, which range in size from 5 x 7 to 11 x 14 inches, incorporate scenes of farming such as berry picking, cow milking and wood hauling. The prints show signs of Johnston's deficiency as technician, compared to the professionally printed commercial photographs present in the rest of the collection.

Figure 5. Unknown, Portrait of Johnston in the Snow, c. 1939, gelatin silver print, 18.8 x 19.9 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict.   

Fig. 6: JPR (Unknown), Johnston painting Tiny Lake, 1939, gelatin silver print, 7.8 x 9.7 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict.

                                                                                                                    34  Scharf, Aaron. Art and Photography. London: Allan Lane, The Penguin Press, 1968, revised 1974, pp. 114-115.      21

The collection is comprised of photographs taken by unknown photographers that were given to, or collected by, Johnston. There are two established portraits of Johnston in the collection, both which are taken by unidentified photographers. This photograph (Fig. 5) has no information indicating creator, or where it was taken. It depicts Johnston attired in warm winter gear standing in the barrenness of a snowy landscape with a camera around his neck. A classic photograph of a man on an adventure in the middle of the wilderness, it is possible that due to his age and the landscape that this image may have been taken at Great Bear Lake in 1939. The second photograph (Fig. 6) is of Johnston sitting by a river's edge sketching a painting, the verso specifies that the photograph was taken by JPR, his initial appears several times through the archive yet I have been unable to
Fig. 7: Attributed to Pollard, Harry (1880-1968), American Natives Burning Grass, c. 1910-1949, gelatin silver print, 20.5 x 25.3 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict.  

ascertain who JPR may be. I did however uncover that the painting Johnson is sketching is entitled Tiny Lake, which was painted during his time in Great Bear Lake. Although I have not been able to identify the name of the photographer, there are approximately six photographs I have attributed to the same creator within the three divisions of the archive.

  

22

The photographs attributed to JPR are, in all probability, gifts. It appears that Johnston similarly enjoyed collecting photographs in particular from the Canadian Railways, which tended to be photographed commercially as promotional material for the railway. There are two other photographs that are important to reference. The first is a photograph of two aboriginals standing with their horses in the middle of buffalo grasses (Fig.7). The photograph shows an advanced photographic skill of a professional. This suggests that Johnston would not have been the photographer, but possibly Harry Pollard

Fig. 8: Attributed to an El Dorado engineer, The Midnight Sun June 21st 1939, 1939, gelatin silver print, 6.8 x 11.4 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict.

   (1880-1968), according to AMC staff. Pollard was a Canadian photographer who worked as a press photographer for the Associated Screen News, a subsidiary of the Canadian Pacific Railway. The other photograph entitled The Midnight Sun June 21st 1939 (Fig. 8) depicts a time-lapse photograph of the midnight sun over Great Bear Lake. It shows multiple sun(s) dipping close to the horizon thus showing its trajectory in a multi-hour period. The photograph was taken by an El Dorado engineer between the hours of 11pm

  

23

and 2:30am.35 These two photographs, while not created by Johnston, illustrate his appreciation of a well-executed photograph. Johnston's use and collection of photography was not limited to the purposes of painting. The collection contains one photograph by Johnston, which he entered into the Scientific American Photographic Contest in 1939 (Fig. 9), unfortunately he did not win the competition and currently there is a lack of further documentation on his entry. Although there has been extensive analysis of painters who have used photography as visual aids, there has been little discussion on those who may have considered themselves a  practitioner of both painting and photography.

  
Fig. 9: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Clouds over trees, 1939, gelatin silver print, 12.5 x 17.6 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict.

There are 131 postcards in the archive, the earliest being from 1905. It is probable that Johnston collected these for their subject matter, being intrigued by the northern landscapes and its occupants for some time before they begun to appear on his canvases. Though most of the postcards creators remain unidentified, some contain information that opens up future research possibilities.

                                                                                                                
35

"Artist Back From Arctic Thrilled By Life In North." Ottawa Citizen (Ottawa), July 12, 1939.

  

24

The collection includes twenty postcards that are signed by E.C. Everett (18951984), who was a commercial photographer based in Nipigon, Ontario from about 19131980. Johnston travelled to the Nipigon area many times from 1930-1946 possibly collecting these postcards as reference material for his painting or perhaps for his photography. So far I have been unable to establish a personal connection between Johnston and Everett, but it is likely that they met on one of Johnston's frequent visits to the area. It seems that these postcards made a strong impression on Johnston since their subject matter is reminiscent of his photography. Johnston did not just collect photographs as reference for his painting, but other materials, such as newspaper clippings depicting animals and landscapes, as well as some reproductions of other artists' work, like Lionel Edwards (1878-1966). Furthermore, there are a few other items in the collection such as a manuscript relating to the unpublished biography of Franz Johnston by Paul and Mary Rodrik and related research material, multiple copies of an essay about Johnston by J.E. Middleton, several maps of Canada, autobiographical notes giving a rough chronology of Johnston's career and the manuscript of a semi-autobiographical unpublished book. One particular fascinating find buried in this assortment of documents is a handwritten note by Johnston where he describes members of the Group of Seven as well as other artists and friends (Fig. 10). This card reveals the whimsical side of Johnston's character.

  

25

  

26

  
Fig. 10: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Handwritten note written by Frank H. Johnston, c. 1918-1922. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict.

  

27

4.3 Attribution of the Photographs by Frank "Franz" Johnston
In determining the attribution of the Frank "Franz" Johnston collection was a difficult endeavour. While many photographers clearly marked their photographs with their name or other relevant information; this unfortunately was not the case with the majority of photographs produced by Johnston. Therefore it was necessary to identify many of his photographs through stylistic features; composition, subject matter and technical features.36 The initial description of the AMC collection specified that Johnston produced all the photographs, which was based on the information provided from Aplsey Auction House at the time of purchase. Upon closer examination, this information appeared inaccurate and required further scrutiny before I felt comfortable with proceeding with my research. To accurately attribute the photographs, I decided initially to analyze the collection more closely by dissembling the original arrangement, which allowed for a further understanding of the contents of the collection. Through the analysis of the AMC's, collection in conjunction with the research I have done at the LAC and Huronia Museum, I was able to attribute approximately 255 photographs to Johnston. The attributing of the photographs was accomplished by using three photographs that contained inscriptions, which were written in Johnston's handwriting. These photographs, while unique to the AMC collection are similar to examples, which exist at the Huronia Museum. This in conjunction with the stylistic information provided on the rectos allowed for me to determine Johnston as the creator of many other photographs in the collection.                                                                                                                 
36

Turner, Ian. "Forensic Science and the Attribution of 19th Century Stereoviews." Forensic Science and the Attribution of 19th Century Stereoviews. 2010. Accessed July 20, 2015. https://www.academia.edu/214297/Forensic_science_and_the_attribution_of_19th_century_stereoviews.

  

28

Other methods of attribution were determined through research. For instance, on the verso of sixteen photographs `McCutchon's Quality Service Edmonton, ALTA' was stamped. In a letter sent from Great Bear Lake in 1939, Johnston mentions to his son Paul that he'd be sending his negatives to be processed in Edmonton; therefore we can ascertain these photographs are one in the same. Additionally, stamped on the verso of three other photographs is the title `MARGARET BALD'S Developing & Printing Service (opposite Post Office) MIDLAND - ONT.' and on another three `J.W. BALD'S Studio MIDLAND.' It is known that Johnston lived in Midland for an extended period of time and the images are of similar subject matter such as snow covered hills, clouds and pastoral scenes, which seem to be a characteristic subject matter choice for Johnston. The makers of the rest of the photographs and postcards in the collection are unidentified. Some of these postcards bare marks or signatures, but unfortunately I have yet to identify the creators. For example, twenty-six of the postcards are inscribed with FD, and another twenty-six have the matching handwritten inscriptions so it can be presumed that they were also created by FD. Originally the postcards were attributed to Johnston, whoever made this attribution was incorrect since the photographs are mostly taken in Alaska and there is no record of Johnston ever travelling there. One final issue in the attribution of these photographs is a result of the merging of Johnston and his son's archive; it is possible that some of the photographs are actually Paul Rodrik's. This issue arose during the course of my research at LAC where I found one photograph, which depicted similar characteristics to photographs that I had attributed to Johnston, but written on the verso was the date 1951, specifying Johnston couldn't have taken this photograph since he had died in 1949. Originally this concerned

  

29

me, but since it was the only one of its kind and compared to the number of photographs that have Johnston's signature on the verso, I decided that there may indeed be a selection of Rodrik's photographs mixed in with his fathers, but this does not affect the attribution of the individual photograph.

  

30

Chapter 5 The Photography of Frank "Franz" Johnston 5.1 Photography as Source Material
Photography has long been used as a tool for painters. In the late nineteenthcentury with the introduction of Kodak's first handheld camera, artists began to capture various moments of family life and exploration that would then, in some cases, translate to their canvases. Johnston collected and created photographs at first for the distinct purpose of using them as visual aids for his paintings. He was a highly accomplished painter whose interest in photography stemmed from his aesthetic appreciation of photographic images; evident from the large collection he amassed.   In 1888, the year the Kodak Camera was introduced, the slogan "you press the button, we do the rest", made photography accessible, to the middle class. Though it is unlikely Johnston had access to a camera at a young age, he was born into a world that was soon to be saturated in photographic imagery. There is little evidence when Johnston began to use photography,
Fig. 11: Unknown, Warplane, c. 1914-1919, gelatin silver print. Library and Archives Canada, Mary Bishop Rodrik and Franz Johnston fonds.   

   however Laura Brandon's research suggests that Johnston's paintings for the War Memorials Fund show that these photographs appear to be the earliest examples of his use of photography as compositional aids for his paintings. The photographs examined in her essay are mainly from the Mary Bishop Rodrik and Franz Johnston fonds located at

  

31

LAC. The photographs were produced not by Johnston, but most likely pilot trainees. They are out of focus and compositionally mediocre (Fig. 11), nevertheless, they provided Johnston with details of planes in flight that he was not able to produce accurate sketches of from either the ground or in the air. The three institutions that contain parts of Johnston's archive have each established him as an amateur photographer; but remarkably his photographs have stayed buried and generally ignored. The AMC is was the first institution to have made a clear correlation between the photographs present in their collection with a subsequent painting. The Rendezvous37 (Fig. 12) was discovered to correspond with this photograph (Fig. 13) found in the AMC's collection; the indisputable similarities between the two works make it apparent that Johnston was using photography to supplement his sketches in order to gain more visual information.

Fig. 12: Frank "Franz" Johnston, The Rendezvous, c. 1918-1949, oil on canvas, size unknown. Courtesy of Artiques Roadshow.   

Fig. 13: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Men in canoes at water's edge, c. 1918-1949, gelatin silver print, 8.8 x 11.6 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at the Archive of Modern Conflict.

                                                                                                                
37

The Rendezvous is a painting that was attributed to Frank Johnston by the Artiques Roadshow in 2008. Its location and owner have not been identified and the only reference made to this work can be found on the Artiques Roadshow website.

  

32

In order to confirm that there were more examples of Johnston's use of photography in his painting, my first step was to closely examine his photographs alongside his paintings to determine the interrelation between the two. Fortunately, Sharona Adamowicz-Clements, the associate curator at the McMichael Canadian Art Collection, was in the process of curating an exhibition of Johnston's photographs juxtaposed with his paintings. Adamowicz-Clements shared with me examples of several paintings predominantly from the McMichael collection that she was able to compare to the photographs in the AMC collection. By using these comparisons as a precedent, I started the process of locating online auction records of his paintings and comparing them to the photographs in the three divisions of his archive. The correlation between Johnston's photographs and paintings was instantly apparent; many of the photographs he had taken were artist studies of streams with trees reflecting in the moving water, clouds, the effects of light, dogsleds, farming and northern scenes. I have been able to identify eight photographs that Johnston copied as sources for paintings, while others were used for a few elements for composition or subject matter.

  

33

Through a comparison of Johnston's paintings and their photographic sources, a better understanding of how the camera affects a painter's work is determined.38 The painting entitled Golden Glade for example (Fig. 14) is compositionally a
Fig. 14: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Golden Glade, c. 1944, oil on board, 60 x 75 cm. Courtesy of Invaluable Auction House.  

close representation of the photograph

(Fig.15). The painting provides a view of birch trees along a sloping shoreline, their leaves slowly changing colour to indicate the start of fall. Johnston did not use the photograph in its entirety but cropped the image to focus on the desired subject matter. Cropping is a characteristic of the camera, a compositional method that
Fig. 15. Frank "Franz" Johnston, photograph of Golden Glade, c. 1942, gelatin silver print, 20.3 x 25.4 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Collection at the Huronia Museum.  

Johnston would have used when creating his photographs and which therefore translated to his painting process. Through this process of editing much is revealed about the artist

                                                                                                                 38  Coke, Van Deren. The Painter and the Photograph; from Delacroix to Warhol. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1972, Pg  1      34

through what he omits and modifies.39 The challenge of photography is its capacity to only capture what the photographer sees. This of course is not the case with painting because the painter has control of what appears on the canvas. It therefore comes as no surprise that Johnston shifted the placement of the trees and added more foliage to produce a more visually composed artwork. In the interest of completing the painting, Johnston needed to add details that were not present in the photograph. For instance the cloud filled sky and the reflections in the water. These elements would have come from other photographic studies created. There are numerous examples of cloud and water studies in the collections, which Johnston seems to have sought out; these are obvious indictors for his need to amass photographs that would help with difficult-toproduce imagery (Fig. 16). There were limitations of using black and white
Fig. 16: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Trees reflected in water, c. 1930-1949, gelatin silver print, 13.1 x 19.8 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at the Archive of Modern Conflict.  

photography since it was devoid of colour, which was an essential element to many of Johnston's paintings. Johnston seems to have experimented with reversal film40 found at the Huronia Museum, but none of the transparencies appear to resemble any of Johnston's paintings. This may be a result of the process of viewing the projected images,                                                                                                                  39  Coke, Van Deren. The Painter and the Photograph; from Delacroix to Warhol. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1972, Pg  1  
40

A type of photographic film that creates a positive image on a transparent base.

  

35

which could be cumbersome and not conducive to working in a small painters studio. The camera provided Johnston with visual information, yet the paintings he produced were achieved in combination with his artistic imagination. Through further examination of the three collections, it can be assumed that Johnston used the physical photographs when painting. Ann Thomas outlines three ways that photographs can be reproduced as paintings. One method involves the projection of a photographic negative onto a canvas that has been coated with light-sensitive emulsion. This allowed for a faint image to appear on the canvas, then the paint could be applied overtop. A variation of this method was achieved by projecting the negative onto the canvas so that the image could be traced using a
Fig. 17: Frank "Franz" Johnston, unfinished canvas, date unknown, pencil on board. Library and Archives Canada, Mary Bishop Rodrik and Franz Johnston fonds.  

pencil. Another option was to draw a grid on both the

photograph and the canvas, to allow the artist to painstakingly begin to fill in each square. In the collection at the LAC, is an unfinished canvas created by Johnston (Fig. 17). Grid lines have been drawn on the canvas, but I have been unable to find a corresponding photograph. This canvas can indicate one of two things: either Johnston used a photograph as reference or he was using the grid method in order to enlarge a small sketch. It is difficult to ascertain this information, due to the lack of examples for comparisons. The standard method of copying was achieved by the artist looking at the

  

36

photograph and hand copying it onto the canvas, most likely the preferred method used by Johnston since the photographs in all three collection have signs of either finger marks, creases, tears and paint spattering's which suggests their presence near his easel. They also have been repeatedly folded, the process of folding would allow Johnston to section off the photograph in order to narrow his focus on specific sections; in essence a form of cropping. Johnston's use of photography seems to have been a conflicted one. Like many painters who used photography during the later nineteenth and twentieth centuries they had to deal with those, typically art critics, who considered paintings that resembled photographs as a form of "cheating."41 Although debates about the uses of photography by painters polarized many artists, critics, and audiences alike, its growth, accessibility and popularity as a medium contributed to it becoming more commonplace in art circles. Though more accepting, there was still a stigma placed on painters who used photography as pronouncedly as Johnston evidently did. It is therefore noteworthy to have discovered a hand written essay by Johnston entitled, The Painter Who Uses a Camera, which was indicated at LAC42 to have been published under the pseudonym Rodri, along with four supporting photographs produced by Johnston. He quotes Dean Cornwell,43 a famous American painter and illustrator, who once said, "No young artist should dream of using a camera, with less than ten years of drawing and painting behind them."44 This perception of how a painter should use a camera highlights the idea that the                                                                                                                 
41

Wolf, Justin. "Photorealism Movement." The Art Story. Accessed May 17, 2015. http://www.theartstory.org/movement-photorealism.htm. 42 I have yet to determine where the essay was published, but the images used are clearly labeled in the LAC collection. 43 Dean Cornwell (1892 -1960) Nicknamed "The Dean of Illustrators" by his peers. 44 Johnston, Frank H. "The Painter Who Uses A Camera." The Painter Who Uses A Camera, 1938, 1-3.

  

37

camera is used by the artist rather than being controlled by it, an notion Johnston readily agrees with.45 Johnston insists that his use of the camera came out of necessity; he had suffered from a severe illness that prevented  him  to  stay outside for long periods. Given a camera from a close friend it assisted him in capturing photographs he could paint from. His use of the camera became more predominate when he was commissioned by a `wealthy patron'46 to paint a team of white huskies. This was a difficult feat for Johnston, as the use of a pencil sketch did not provide an accurate rendition of the unique movements and features of different teams of huskies.47 Consequently, in order for Johnston to accurately capture these unique characteristics, he required the assistance of a camera. Johnston claims that this was the beginning of his use of photography, this of course is inaccurate since it has been previously determined that Johnston's use of photography started with his paintings of warplanes. It can be concluded that while Johnston initially used photography for his World War One paintings, his predominate use of the camera began sometime in the early 1930s. Johnston was primarily known for his painting and drawing of landscapes scenes, a subject matter that reemerges extensively in his photography, in which he has received little recognition. Although the collections contain photographs that Johnston entered into photography contests, there is no clear evidence of his photography being exhibited during his lifetime. However, in spring of 2015 an exhibition held at the McMichael Canadian Art Collection in Kleinberg, Ontario, brought new awareness of his engagement with photography to the public's attention. Though Johnston discusses his                                                                                                                 
45 46

Johnston, Frank H. The Painter Who Uses A Camera, 1938, Pg. 2 Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Ibid. Pg. 36 47 Ibid. Pg. 1-3

  

38

use of photography in letters to his son and his essay A Painter Uses A Camera, there has been little reference to his photographic work. The only photographic association he seems to have been a part of was the LaBine Camera Club, which he joined during his time in Great Bear Lake in 1939. This is surprising since Johnston would have been in close proximity to the Toronto Camera Club, which was located on Gould Street in Toronto. That being said his association with the Arts and Letters Club would have exposed him to a variety of photographers including M.O. Hammond48 and John Vanderpant49 from whom he may have received some instruction. It is also possible that Johnston did not feel sufficiently proficient in the photographic medium, and this may have restricted him from pursuing a membership.  This was not the case with painting; Johnston was a part of numerous groups devoted to other artistic practices such as the Arts and Letters Club, the Ontario Society of Artists and the Royal Canadian Academy. It is possible that his inability to acknowledge his interest in photography publicly other than under a pseudonym stems from a desire to remain known strictly as a painter. We can presume that Johnston did not consider his photography as art, but rather as an extension of his artistic practice.   Johnston may have chosen to distance himself from photography in the public realm, but upon viewing the nearly 22,000 photographs and negatives that Johnston produced, it is problematic to place Johnston as just an impassive amateur. The numerous contact sheets at the Huronia Museum illustrate that Johnston's use of photography was                                                                                                                 
48

Melvin Ormond Hammond (1876 ­ 1934) was a Canadian journalist and photographer; he acquired a reputation as a skilled portrait photographer, and through his memberships in the Toronto Camera Club and the Arts and Letters Club, also had the opportunity to photograph many famous artists of his time. 49  John Vanderpant (1884-1939) was a photographer and major influence on Canadian photography in the 1920s and 1930s, he established a distinctive style that emphasized light and form and generally shunned popular manipulative processes.  

  

39

not just for the use of visual aid material. Johnston took countless snapshots of his family in their various daily practices or weekend adventures by the water. The contact sheets also show traditionally posed portraits with the sitter being placed in front of a solid coloured backdrop, which indicates that Johnston was experimenting with his photographic skills. The photographs Johnston produced show a strong resemblance to his paintings, however it is interesting to note that earlier paintings bore some of the characteristics of his photographs. For instance, Johnston had been painting streams since approximately 1925, but his interest in those streams gained new life in the photographs that he produced using his Contax I a 35mm50 camera developed in 1932. The extent of Johnston's photography and his use of the darkroom, though he was not a proficient printer, suggest his strong commitment to producing photographs. This indicates that Johnston's painterly observation and his photographic capture affected his pictorial resolutions, both when painting and when using the camera. This was the case with artists who painted from photographs regardless of intent their paintings were changed because of the impact camera vision had on the painter's way of seeing.51 Johnston never denied his use of photography, nor was he ever asked. It seems like many artists of his time, he was not interested in discussing his use of photography publicly. As Ernst Lacan observed in 1852, a painters' relationship to photography is "like a mistress whom one cherishes but hides."52

                                                                                                                
50 51

35mm film was adapted from motion pictures for the Leica in 1924. Coke, Van Deren. The Painter and the Photograph; from Delacroix to Warhol. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1972, Pg. 1 52 Font-Réaulx, Dominique De. Painting and Photography, 1839-1914. Paris: Flammarion, 2012.

  

40

It is difficult to determine how Johnston considered his relationship with photography, other than what we can glean from The Painter Who Uses A Camera, however it should be noted on many occasions he contradicts
Fig. 18: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Moose Pond, 1918, oil on canvas, 26.5 x 33.8 cm. McMichael Canadian Art Collection, Gift of the Founders, Robert and Signe McMichael.  

himself. To the general public he is strictly a painter,

but to those who view and analyze his archive, he can be recognized as an amateur photographer.

5.2 A Shift to Realism
The work of Johnston during his time with the Group of Seven was greatly influenced by their collective desire to create paintings that were uniquely Canadian. As young men they wanted to speak their own voice producing work that broke from the European traditions in art. They used bright, bold colours and simple forms that captured the dense and untamable Canadian landscape (Fig.18). In the creating of these paintings, strong similarities emerged within the Group; Johnston left the Group for this reason and in doing so gradually revived the style he originally distanced himself from: Realism (Fig.19), representing nature as it really is, rather than appearances of what it ought to be.

  

41

The Realism movement coincided with the emergence of photography.53 The French novelist Jules François Felix Fleury-Husson (1820-1889), who wrote under the name Champfleury coined the term Realism in the 1840s, but it did not enter
Fig. 19: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Building the Breakwater, oil on board, 76.2 x 109.2cm. Courtesy of Heffel online auction house.  

into the realm of painting until the 1850s by Gustave Courbet (1819-1877). This art movement believed in the virtue of depicting themes of everyday life from the rural and urban working class. Previous to this, painting was dominated by what is referred to as "High Art", meaning the subject matter tended to appear removed from real life.54 Initially this new form of art was rejected, since it portrayed a way of life that shocked the upper classes.55 Nonetheless the camera satisfied the growing popularity for a need of accurate description of the world.56 The popularity of Realism would wane during the early twentieth-century with the onset of World War One and its horrors. Artists once again were determined to depict the realities of the world. It is therefore to be noted that Johnston's aesthetic shift to the                                                                                                                 
53

"New Visions: Courbet and Photography." The Metropolitan Museum of Art, I.e. The Met Museum. 2008. Accessed May 20, 2015. http://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2008/gustave-courbet/newvisions-courbet-and-photography. 54 "Realism." Tate. Accessed June 2, 2015. http://www.tate.org.uk/learn/onlineresources/glossary/r/realism. 55   "New Visions: Courbet and Photography." The Metropolitan Museum of Art, I.e. The Met Museum. 2008. Accessed May 20, 2015. http://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2008/gustave-courbet/newvisions-courbet-and-photography.   56  Galassi, Peter. Before Photography: Painting and the Invention of Photography. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981. Pg. 12  

  

42

ideas of realism may have started as early as 1918 with the paintings he produced for the War Memorials Fund and, not coincidently, coincides with some of the earliest photographs in his collection. By the 1940s the photographic work by Johnston increased and he began to principally depict rural working class life, farming in particular. The paintings he produced show life in almost photographic clarity, and reminiscent of Realism expressed in Gustave Courbet's Stone Breakers. This transition to Realism not only evolved from Johnston's need to capture the effects of light, but from the photographs he produced. It may be said that while the photographs were used as source material, his paintings never
Figure 20. Frank "Franz" Johnston, Birth of a Navy, c. 1944. tempera on canvas. Library and Archives Canada, Mary Bishop Rodrik and Franz Johnston fonds.  

achieved the exactitude captured in his photographs. It can be determined upon the examination of these collections that as Johnston begins to take photographs, his paintings become correspondingly more faithful to his photographs. The compositions of these photographs are so similar to his paintings that it is clear that he was using photography to supplement his sketches in order to gain more visual information. The majority of the photographs contained within the three divisions of the archive show Johnston's developing skill in producing photographs; the compositions, specifically those that are reminiscent of his paintings, illustrate that

  

43

Johnston had a keen eye for composition. In examining his negatives at the Huronia Museum, there are contact sheets that show his increasing skill over the years, but regrettably many of these negatives do not seem to have corresponding prints. This may indicate that Johnston never printed them or that the prints have been lost over the course of time. Subsequently, it has been difficult to decipher the timeline of the photographs, but Johnston numbered a portion of his contact sheets early on indicating that initially he was concerned with the organization of his photographic work. These contact sheets show a constant flux in his photographic ability, but also show his interest in subject matter other than landscape. The use of the camera changed the way Johnston saw his surroundings for example the painting entitled The Birth of a Navy (Fig. 20) captures the development of sixteen war ships built at the Midland shipyards from 1941 to 1944 (Fig. 21). Johnston
Fig. 21: Frank "Franz" Johnston, Birth of a Navy, c. 1942., gelatin silver print, 8 x 11 cm. Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at the Huronia Museum.  

took a series of photographs during the summer of 1942 in

order to capture the details represented in the painting. This is a later painting and in it Johnston's shift to Realism is clear. Unlike his other works he has not blurred the edges of his subject matter, but rather used straight precise lines that emulated the linear characteristic of the construction at the shipyard. The photograph was reproduced in its entirety; Johnston kept the reflection of the ship in the still water exactly the same,

  

44

suggesting that photography had influenced not just the content but also the technique of his painting. Johnston became renowned for his paintings that captured the effects of light, his paintings of streams in particular capture the light glinting off the waters surface in a photographic manner. Johnston also created details of the trees reflected in the surface of the water, numerous examples of photographic studies containing this subject are found throughout the three collections. He seemed to be obsessed with transitioning these effects onto the canvas and was able to achieve this through his use of his camera. The changing quality of light would happened so quickly and drastically that Johnston would not have been able to produce a sketch quick enough or with the amount of precision needed in order for him to produce his desired effects. My argument is that Johnston's paintings from the early 1930s through to his death begin to show influence from the Social Realism and American Realism movements, this seems to be a possible assumption since some members of the Ashcan School57 had attended Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts only a few years before Johnston. While Johnston created paintings of landscape through his career there are many later examples that capture the life of the worker, in particular that of the farmer. It is possible that this caused by two factors first that he was spending a majority of his time in the country removed from Toronto, the other he was taking pictures of his surroundings and found a new subject matter. Parallels therefore can be drawn from the late nineteenth-century Realism that inspired Johnston, through to his use of the camera and the collected material that influenced his work.                                                                                                                 
57

The Ashcan School was a group of New York City artists who sought to capture the feel of early-20thcentury New York City, through realistic portraits of everyday life.

  

45

Johnston can be placed, as a painter who was captivated by photography and its ability to capture nature with greater veracity than the human eye could perceive. The desire by painters to explore what the medium had to offer in the realization of their work gains popularity in the 1960s and 1970s with works by artists such as Chuck Close, Richard Estes and Audrey Flack; later referred to as Photorealists. A range of photographic styles and practices have evolved with `camera vision' in a myriad ways from photo-collage to silkscreened canvases to extraordinary digital mutations, and have now become an integral part of the artists' vocabulary. While the concepts and goals for these movements differ greatly from Realism, they are still connected through their use of the photograph. It is therefore interesting to see how the relationship between photography and painting has evolved, painters abandoned Realism to the mechanical process of photography only for it to come full circle nearly a hundred years later, with works that deliberately imitated photography, and its variant manifestations.58

                                                                                                                 58  "Realism." Tate. Accessed June 2, 2015. http://www.tate.org.uk/learn/onlineresources/glossary/r/realism.      46

Chapter 6 Catalogue Development 6.1 Methodology
In the development of the Frank "Franz" Johnston catalogue, I allowed for the creation of a document that provides access to the all known information about an object. The benefits of having such a tool is not just about the accessibility of the descriptions but also the preservation of the object. In providing detailed information along with high quality and accurate photographs into a database allows for less handling of the object. This may not be ideal, but for objects that are extremely fragile or need to be viewed regularly, this may be the only course of action in order to preserve the integrity of the object. From the inception of this thesis, it was deemed necessary that the collection should be catalogued in its entirety. The analysis involved in the development of a Finding Aid allowed for a better understanding of the objects in the collection. Through these exports, this thesis will facilitate future access to the collection in order for there to be a better understanding of Johnston's photographic practice. The intended audience for this catalogue would be the AMC personnel and researchers, which necessitated the catalogue to include fields that would relevant to these specific users.59 The key fields generated for this catalogue included the accession number, title, title type, creator, measurements, medium, date, inscriptions, place of origin, and descriptions. Additional fields mainly intended for use by the AMC include current location (location in the                                                                                                                 
59

Pascoe, Julienne. The Personal Albums Of Samuel Bourne At The National Media Museum And The Art Gallery Of Ontario. Master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2009. Toronto: Ryerson University, 2009. Accessed December 15, 2014. http://digital.library.ryerson.ca/islandora/object/RULA%3A1674/datastream/OBJ/view.

  

47

archive), cataloger notes (designated subject headings), acquisition information and condition information.60 These institutional based fields allow for the AMC to navigate their database more efficiently and provide information that would normally needed to be searched separately. The records for the catalogue have been assembled in an Excel spreadsheet, which allows for the information to be imported in numerous types of databases, including the AMC's existing database system, LAVIS. In future I will generate a sample database in File Maker Pro that will be used as a reference for the AMC's possible future transition to this database system. The cataloguing standards used in this Finding Aid incorporates the current AMC's standard along with ones outlined by CCO (Cataloguing Cultural Objects), designed for the cataloguing of cultural objects. The formation of this catalogue was the most time consuming part of this thesis, as it was decided that the AMC would benefit from the collection described in its entirety. The process of doing so was intensive, yet it produced the most detailed information to benefit the end user. Through the cataloguing of this collection, I was able to make additional connections, between Johnston's photographs and paintings in order to further my understanding of Johnston's artistic practice.

6.2 Intellectual Order
The first step in approaching the Frank "Franz" Johnston collection was to survey its contents and determine if any sense could be made of the original arrangement, which was especially tricky due to the provenance of the collection items. It is important to note that an AMC staff member initially created a catalogue entry for this collection upon                                                                                                                 
60

more detailed information in appendix

  

48

its arrival at the AMC, but the arrangement and descriptions were poorly executed as they were lacking detail and a coherent arrangement. I was able to conclude that this arrangement was developed based on the lot numbers provided by the auction house, but it was difficult to determine if the original order was preserved. Ideally, records in a collection should not be re-arranged, the original structure and arrangement should be respected. This is important because the records would have been assembled by the creator in the form that they would have intended for it to be viewed. However, upon surveying the collection, I recognized that the current arrangement was not accurate and the photographs had become misfiled over time, losing their original order. Thus with the approval of the personnel at the AMC we agreed that the current arrangement could be dissembled. In order to develop an arrangement that was more in accordance with Johnston's original arrangement, I began reorganizing the photographs and postcards by their paper type, size, style, and identifying marks. This process allowed me to gain a more detailed understanding of the collection and enabled me to unearth links between the photographs. By approaching the collection in this way, I was able to reconnect photographs that had come from the same roll of film or that had been commercially developed by the same processing company. This regrouping allowed for the identification of numerous other photographs that initially attributed to Johnston. This process allowed for a better understanding of Johnston's photographic methods in order for the attribution to be made on other photographs in the collection. The benefit of disassembling the arrangement allowed for a recreation of the collection into a form more comparable to the original.

  

49

6.3 Accession Numbers
An accession number is a unique number that identifies each group of records in the collection. At the AMC, items that are to be inputted into the LAVIS database are designated by the prefix "LFA" (Lavis Fine Art) which is the followed by an Index Number. This number is a series of sequential numbers that are assigned in ascending order. For example, the Frank "Franz" Johnston collection is recognized by LFA15262. When a work is part of a larger group of items, each piece within the group is numbered with the identical base accession number followed by a sequential suffix number, separated by an underscore, eg. LFA15262_1. The base accession number record represents the group as a whole. The object count for any main group record should total the number of objects in the group. If the parent object record does not represent a physical object (eg. if the record represents a group of items rather than an album containing individual items) that object should be changed to group designation in the location field. Ideally, the objects when initially brought into the AMC would have been given accession numbers following these standards, but unfortunately these standards had not been implemented when the Johnston collection was obtained. Therefore, instead of standard sequential suffix numbers the objects were given numbers with added letters or another number after a hyphen to indicate the object was apart of a group of a similar subject matter for example LFA15262_0316a or LFA15262_351-3. These variations of numbering were perplexing and it was decided that the numbers should be discarded in order for new accession numbers to be generated following the standardized guidelines.

  

50

6.4 Digitization
Rosalind Krauss in her essay, The Originality of the Avant-Garde discussed the importance of evidential value. "The theme of originality," she wrote, "encompassing... the notions of authenticity, originals, and origins, is the shared discursive practice of the museum, the historian, and the maker of art. And throughout the nineteenth-century all of these institutions were concerted, together, to find the mark, the warrant, the certification of the original."61 The original and the importance of the materiality of the photograph are imperative to the understanding of the object. However, the development of digitization has allowed for greater access to objects that formerly were not accessible to the greater public like they are today. This development has also led to less handling of the original objects, which is beneficial long term to the preservation of collections materials. The issue with earlier forms of reproduction is that photographs in particular are easily re-contextualized. Historically, when photographs have been reproduced for books or the news they are frequently modified and altered with information either cropped or eliminated, which leads to distorted understanding about the object. In order to avoid misinterpretation of photographs it is imperative for institutions to provide standards that should be followed when digitizing photographs and documents. The digitization of a selection of objects from the Frank "Franz" Johnston collection were originally done by the AMC's photographer Marcos Armstrong (approximately 75 objects) a previous graduate of the Photographic Preservation and Collections Management program, the rest I myself completed (approximately 25                                                                                                                 
61

Koltun, Lilly. 1999. "The Promise and Threat of Digital Options in an Archival Age." Archivaria 47 (Spring): 134-35

  

51

objects). The recto of each object was scanned and the verso of only those that contained any information. Once each objected was scanned, a file was created to match the original accession number of the object.

6.5 Preservation and Re-housing
The prints in the Johnston collection are all gelatin silver prints, created between 1905 and 1949. All gelatin silver photographic materials are subject to deterioration. The silver particles that comprise the photograph are susceptible to oxidation, leading to yellowing and fading of the image. Silver mirroring is a shiny or mirror-like discolouration in the shadow areas of a photographic image caused by the aging of excessive residual silver compounds. This is caused by gelatin silver pints being housed in poor conditions with a high temperature, fluctuating humidity, and poor storage materials. A simple way to prevent or mitigate the threat of silver mirroring is to store photographic materials in a cool, dry place. There is minor amount of mould growth on some of the photographs, which indicates the photographs were originally kept in a poor storage environment. The other material in the collection includes newspaper clippings; magazines and paintbrushes are in good condition and show little deterioration. In order to reduce further deterioration and damage to the objects each item has been housed in an archival polyethylene sleeve and placed in a Hollinger box, which is lined in black acid-free, lignin-free paper. Preferably, the collections would then be kept in a temperature-controlled environment, which can stabilize the rate of deterioration. This unfortunately is not probable for some of the institutions.

  

52

Chapter 7 Conclusion
Augustus Bridle once wrote, "Franz" has a grand eye for glory... He seldom paints anything because it's grim or ugly."62 Nothing truer could be said of Johnston's work. He strived to capture the uniqueness and majestic beauty of Canada not only through his painting, but also his photographs. Overall, this thesis has been an attempt to decipher Johnston's artistic practice. The photographic appearance of Johnston's paintings and the frequency with which he employed them can no longer be overlooked. Through the cataloguing of each photograph and the compiling of their descriptions, the project has led to an improved understanding between Johnston's painting and photography. Historically, photographs have been viewed for what they contain. In developing this thesis the focus of my research was not strictly based on the image content, but rather on information provided by the object itself; characteristics of the photographic paper, inscriptions, markings, and painterly traces. This object-based approach revealed new insight and proposed authorship attributions for the photographs, as well as their role in Johnston's collection. What is interesting about Johnston's photographic work is not that it exists, but rather that it has been ignored over sixty-years of Canadian art studies. Johnston was a prolific painter and while he has received less attention than his fellow Group of Seven members it is surprising that his photographs have not been thoroughly examined. My study of the collection has shed light on the visual similarities that exist between                                                                                                                 
62

Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Pg. 13

  

53

Johnston's photographs and paintings. While this relationship has been presented to the public in the form of an exhibition at the McMichael Art Collection, however this thesis attempts to provide further details of Johnston's motive in his use of photography. The development of the catalogue was an intensive process; the photographs had to be researched individually for there to be an accurate description of their contents and provenience. Through the process of researching and cataloguing, the relationship between the three divisions of the collections has been established. Research compiled of Johnston's travels allowed for dating clarifications to be made, which subsequently led to the attribution of many of the photographs to Johnston. What became apparent through the cataloguing and research was that Johnston's artistic relationship to photography was complex, but nonetheless this thesis has sought to illuminate its noteworthiness. Although the cataloguing has been completed at the AMC, including documentation on the photographs and the paintings to which they relate, the process needs to be completed at the other two institutions. The LAC has a detailed finding aid that is available online, and they are currently in the process of digitizing the collection. The collection at the Huronia Museum, on the other hand, has received little attention. It is the largest collection of the three and requires proper arrangement as well as immediate attention to its housing since it shows signs of deterioration. Regrettably, due to lack of funds for its proper preservation and organization, the collection languishes and will remain capriciously in jeopardy. The initial institutional descriptions of the three separate divisions of the archive acknowledge that Johnston used photographs as visual aids for his paintings, but the discovery of two photographs that were entered into photography competitions ­ and

  

54

possibly other submissions remain undiscovered ­ provide information indicating that Johnston's engagement with photography goes deeper than just the practical. He was an amateur photographer interested in the visual potentials of the camera, but also used it to his advantage to capture what he was unable to attain with paint. Johnston spent his life exploring Canadian landscape and its people, and expressed his artistic convictions using both painting and photography. While several European and American photography historians have investigated and written at length on the relationship between photography and painting, this topic seems to have been neglected in relation to Canada. This thesis is an initial step into research of photography's role in the work of one member of the Group of Seven. It has been noted that other members, Frederick Varley and Arthur Lismer, also made use of photography. This clearly signals the need for further research and study to discover how the properties of photography enhanced the vision of painters. This often complex relationship should be highlighted, rather than overlooked, as it has been in the work of Frank "Franz" Johnston. My initial research into this field of study makes an essential connection that the use of photography as a creative tool provided a new dimension to the understanding of Johnston's fuller artistic practice.

  

55

Bibliography Frank "Franz" Johnston's Biography Johnston, Frank H. "The Painter Who Uses A Camera." The Painter Who Uses A Camera, 1983, 1-3. Mason, Roger Burford. A Grand Eye for Glory a Life of Franz Johnston. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1998. Reid, Dennis. A Bibliography of The Group of Seven. Ottawa: National Gallery of Canada, 1971. Painting and Photography Brandon, Laura. Double Exposure: Photography and the Great War Paintings of Frank Johnston, Arthur Lismer, and Frederick Varley. RACAR, XXXIX No. 2 2014, pp. 14-28. "Bulletin 16, 1970." Bulletin 16, Photographs by Tom Thomson by Dennis Reid, Curator of Post-Confederation Art. Accessed August 22, 2015. http://www.gallery.ca/bulletin/num16/reid7.html. Easton, Elizabeth Wynne and Clément Chéroux. Snapshot: Painters and Photography, Bonnard to Vuillard. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012. Font-Réaulx, Dominique De. Painting and Photography: 1839-1914. Paris: Flammarion, 2012. Galassi, Peter. Before Photography: Painting and the Invention of Photography. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1981. Hammer, Martin. "Francis Bacon: Painting after Photography." Wiley Online Library. March 12, 2012. Accessed February 1, 2015. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.14678365.2011.00890.x/abstract. "New Visions: Courbet and Photography." The Metropolitan Museum of Art, I.e. The Met Museum. 2008. Accessed May 20, 2015. http://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2008/gustave-courbet/newvisions-courbet-and-photography. "Realism." Tate. Accessed June 2, 2015. http://www.tate.org.uk/learn/online-resources/glossary/r/realism. Scharf, Aaron. Art and Photography. London: Allan Lane, The Penguin Press, 1968, revised 1974,

  

56

Thomas, Ann. Fact and Fiction: Canadian Painting and Photography: From June 20 to August 12, 1979. Montreal: McCord Museum, 1979. Turner, Ian. "Forensic Science and the Attribution of 19th Century Stereoviews." Forensic Science and the Attribution of 19th Century Stereoviews. 2010. Wolf, Justin. "Photorealism Movement." The Art Story. Accessed May 17, 2015. http://www.theartstory.org/movement-photorealism.htm. Museum Cataloguing Practices Buck, Rebecca A., and Jean Allman Gilmore. The New Museum Registration Methods. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums, 1998. Falk, Patricia, Stefanie Dennis Hunker. Cataloguing Outside the Box. New York: NealSchuman Publishers, Inc., 2010. Keefe, Laurence E., and Dennis Inch. The Life of a Photograph: Archival Processing, Matting, Framing, and Storage. Boston: Focal Press, 1984. Koltun, Lilly. 1999. "The Promise and Threat of Digital Options in an Archival Age." Archivaria 47 (Spring): 134-35 Ritzenthaler, Mary L., and Diane Vogt-O'Connor. Photographs: Archival Care and Management. St. Joesph, MI: Society of American Archivists, 2006. Understanding the Archive Braive, Michel F., and David Britt. The Photograph: A Social History. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1966. Edwards, Elizabeth. Raw Histories: Photographs, Anthropology and Museums. Oxford: Berg, 2001. -------The Camera as Historian: Amateur Photographers and Historical Imagination, 1885-1918. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012. Edwards, Elizabeth, and Janice Hart. 2004. Photographs Objects Histories: on the materiality of images. London: Routledge. Haworth-Booth, Mark, and Anne McCauley. 1998. The Museum and the Photograph: Collecting Photography at the Victoria and Albert Museum, 1853-1900. Foresta, Merry A, At First Sight: Photography and the Smithsonian. Washington: Smithsonian Books, 2003.

  

57

Merewether, Charles, ed. The Archive: Documents of Contemporary Art. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 2006. Understanding Snapshot and Travel Photography Coe, Brian, and Paul Gates. The Snapshot Photograph: The rise of popular photography 1888-1939. London: Ash & Grant Ltd, 1977. Evans, Jessica, and Stuart Hall. 1999. Visual culture: the reader. London: SAGE Publications in association with the Open University. Foss, Brian, Sandra Paikowsky, and Anne Whitelaw. The Visual Arts in Canada: The Twentieth Century. Don Mills, Ont.: Oxford University Press, 2010. Greenhill, Ralph, and A. J. Birrell. Canadian Photography, 1839-1920. Toronto: Coach House Press, 1979. James, William R, Patricia C. Albers. Travel Photography: A Methodological Approach. Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 15. Pp. 134-158. USA: Pergamon Journals Ltd. 1988. Lloyd, Valerie. Photography: The First Eighty Years: 27 October to 1 December 1976. London: P. & D. Colnaghi &, 1976. Lübbren, Nina, and David Crouch. Visual Culture and Tourism. Oxford: Berg, 2003. Osborne, Peter D. 2000. Travelling light: photography, travel and visual culture. Manchester [u.a.]: Manchester Univ. Press. Schwartz, Joan, and James Ryan. 2002. Picturing place: photography and the geographical imagination. London: I.B. Tauris. Theses Pascoe, Julienne. The Personal Albums Of Samuel Bourne At The National Media Museum And The Art Gallery Of Ontario. Master's thesis, Ryerson University, 2009. Toronto: Ryerson University, 2009. Accessed December 15, 2014. http://digital.library.ryerson.ca/islandora/object/RULA%3A1674/datastream/OBJ/view. Fleet, Vanessa. Between Art and Artefact: The Photography of Abel Boulineau. Marters's thesis University of Toronto, 2011. Toronto: University of Toronto, 2011. Assessed November 15, 2014. https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/handle/1807/30594

  

58

Appendix A: Comparisons This appendix provides a further record of the visual comparisons between Frank "Franz" Johnston's paintings and the photographs he used as source imagery in producing them. These photographs are only the beginning of a further analysis that needs to be conducted in order to understand the extent to which Johnston used photography. While this is only a small amount of comparisons, it provided insight into the development of this thesis. Example 1: Title: Medium: Size: Midnight Sun, June Midnight, Great Bear Lake N.W.T., 1939 Oil on board 30.4 x 35.5 cm. (12 x 14 in.) Courtesy of Sotheby's Auction House

Title: Medium: Size:

Trees reflected in water at dusk, c. 1939 Gelatin silver print 6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 ½ in.) Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. LFA 15262_155

Example 2: Title: Medium: Size: Winter Morning, Cameron Bay, Great Bear Lake, N.W.T. 1939 Oil on canvas laid on board 30.5 x 25.3 cm (12 x 9 15/16 in.) Courtesy of Artnet

  

59

Title: Medium: Size:

Trees on hill with view of water, c. 1939 Gelatin silver print 6.1 x 8 cm (2 3/8 x 3 1/8 in.) Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. LFA 15262_196

Example 3: Title: Medium: Size: On to Hudson's Bay, Ontario, Canada, 1947 Oil on canvas n.d. Frank "Franz" Collection at the Huronia Museum. Title: Men rowing a boat with sail, c. 19181926 Gelatin silver print 7.9 x 10.2 cm (3 1/8 x 4 in.) Frank "Franz" Johnston Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. LFA 15262_50 Example 4: Title: Onaman Lake, Late March, Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada, c. 1930-1949 Oil with gouache or tempera on hardboard 50.8 x 61 cm McMichael Canadian Art Collection Donated by Roberta Fuller, Bethany, Ontario.

Medium: Size:

Medium: Size:

  

60

Title:

Dogsled with log cabin, Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada, c. 1930-1949 Gelatin silver print 8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.) Frank "Franz" Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. LFA 15262_50

Medium: Size:

Example 5: Title: Winter's Thrall, Great Bear Lake, N.W.T., Canada, 1939 Oil on board n.d. Courtesy of artvalue.com

Medium: Size:

Title:

Trees weighed down by snow, Great Bear Lake N.W.T., Canada, 1939 Gelatin silver print 7.2 x 11.6 cm (2 13/16 x 4 9/16 in.) Frank "Franz" Collection at Archive of Modern Conflict. LFA 15262_50

Medium: Size:

  

61

Appendix B: Timeline This timeline provides further details of Johnston's professional and personal life. Frank "Franz" Johnston (June 19, 1888 ­ July 19, 1949) 1904 1906 Apprenticed as a designer with Toronto jewelers Ryrie Brothers. Worked as a catalogue illustrator at Brigdens Ltd.; took classes at the Central Technical School and the Ontario College of Art (Under William Cruikshank and G. A. Reid) Left employment at Brigden Ltd. to join Grip Ltd. Toronto (a graphic design and photography studio). Here Johnston met Franklin Carmichael, Arthur Lismer, J.E.H. MacDonald, and Frederick H. Varley. They were among the founding members of the Group of Seven. It also came to include A.Y. Jackson and Lawren Harris (Tom Thomson was with Grip Ltd. from 1908-12, died 1917). Married Florence Jamieson; he became a member of the Arts & Letters Club, Toronto; joined the faith of Christian Science and remained a devoted follower. Studied at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts. Was commissioned as a war artist with the War Memorials project until 1919. Starting in 1918 Johnston made 4 annual Algoma Boxcar expeditions with Lawren Harris and J.E.H. MacDonald in the fall of each year. September 10th ­ October 4th: Johnston, Lawren Harris, James MacCallum and J.E.H. MacDonald travelled to Agawa Canyon, Hubert and Batchewana Station. Paintings produced on this trip included: Autumn Algoma, 1918; Drowned Land, 1918; Distant Superior, Algoma, 1918 April 20th ­ May 19th: Johnston, Lawren Harris and J.E.H. MacDonald held an exhibition at The Grange and the Art Museum of Toronto. September 15th ­ October 15th: Johnston, Lawren Harris, James MacDonald and A.Y. Jackson travelled to Agawa Canyon, Hubert and Batchewana Station as part of their second Boxcar trip; upon their return, an exhibition was held at the Art Gallery of Toronto, which included 144 new works At Agawa Canyon Johnston claims to have made one his finest sketches, unfortunately there is no indication of what image he is speaking of; during this trip he also completed Fire Ranger, 1919 (the profile of the landscape is similar to J.E.H. MacDonald's "Forest

1908

1910

1912 1918-1924

1919

  

62

Wilderness", suggesting the two artists were working in close proximity); also during this trip Johnston created Fire Swept, Algoma 1919 1920 Johnston begins teaching at the Ontario College of Art where his students include Franklin Arbuckle March: Group of Seven is founded and the members include Frank "Franz" Johnston, Lawren Harris, J.E.H. MacDonald, A.Y. Jackson, Arthur Lismer, Franklin Carmichael and Fredrick H. Varley. May 7: The First exhibition of newly formed Group of Seven at The Grange, Toronto; Johnston has his first independent exhibition at Eaton's of Canada Gallery. September: Johnston takes part in his final Boxcar trip with Lawren Harris, James MacDonald and A.Y. Jackson. They travel to Mongoose Lake and spent three weeks in Algoma. Johnston becomes principle and director of the gallery at the Winnipeg School of Art. Johnston has a solo show at the Winnipeg Art Gallery Johnston begins a regular column, "Talks on Art" in the Winnipeg Mirror; he leaves the Winnipeg School of Art and returns to Toronto resuming his teaching position at the Ontario College of Art; he also decides to officially leave the Group of Seven to exhibit independently. He continues to have regular exhibitions at Roberts Gallery, Eaton's of Canada Gallery and Robert Simpson's, which are all located in Toronto; he also takes the advice of a friend and changes his name from Frank to Franz. Becomes principal of the Ontario College of Art until 1929. Johnston begins to take trips to the Nipigon area in order to capture the beauty of the Canadian north. He begins summer school for artists at Tondakea Lodge at Palm Beach, near Midland, Ontario. Takes a five-month trip to Great Bear Lake in the Northwest Territories, creating paintings of the Canadian Arctic. Johnston closes his summer school and settles in Wyebridge, Ontario; he created the painting entitled Cabin in the Woods, which sold for $850, but later reproductions of this painting were sold by the thousands

1921

1922 1924

1924-1926

1927 1930s

1931

1939

1940

  

63

with Johnston receiving no royalties for their sales. 1946 1948 Johnston made his final trip to the Nipigon area due to his health. Johnston moved from Wyebridge to Midland, Ontario; during the last few summers of his life he painted pastoral subjects in Quebec, Baie St. Paul, villages in the Laurentians and the Ottawa Valley. At the age of 61 Johnston died of a cerebral hemorrhage. He was buried at Mount Pleasant Cemetery in Toronto, Ontario. His body was moved to the grounds of the McMichael Canadian Collection in Kleinberg to be buried alongside other Group of Seven members.

1949

1963

  

64

Appendix C: Digitized Photographs The AMC does not typically digitize the entirety of a collection, but rather scans an assortment of photographs in order to give an overall impression of what the collection contains. For the purpose of this thesis I've digitized a selection of objects from each of the three series i.e. Postcards, Photographs and Ephemera. Series 1: Photographs

  

65

  

66

Series 2: Postcards

  

67

  

68

Series 3: Ephemera

  

69

Appendix D: Catalogue This appendix provides the reader with descriptions on each field to better understand the method used to produce this catalogue. The information provided in this section is outlined in standards set by the Archive of Modern Conflict. 1. Object_ID: A unique number assigned to each print that enters the collection. LFA Index Numbers are physically affixed to objects and object housing(s). 2. Title: This related field records the title assigned to the object. There are two ways titles were assigned to these objects, the preferred title type is an inscribed title found on the object. The second option is a descriptive title, which is a general description of the object and used as a title. A descriptive title begin with a capital letter and use conventional punctuation and capitalization. 3. Creator: An individual, a group of individuals, or corporate body that contributed to the creation, production, manufacture, or alteration of the object. It the artist is unknown or anonymous, the artist should always be entered as Unknown. 4. Measurements: For the objects in this collection the dimensions are based on measurements taken by AMC staff. Measurements are recorded in both the Metric System, using centimeters & millimeters, and the Imperial System, using inches and fractions, All linear measurements are heights x width or length x width (dimensions are separated by lowercase "x"). First measurement is recorded in `centimeters/cm ', followed by `inches/ins.' in parenthesis, all to the nearest fraction. 5. Medium: The substances used in the creation of a work, as well as any production or manufacturing techniques, processes, or methods used in its fabrication. This information includes a description of the technique, media, and support used in the creation of the work. It clarifies the relationship between the materials of which the work is made and the techniques used to apply them. Materials are the substances of which the work is composed. For prints and photographs the process only needs to be entered in this field eg. gelatin silver print 6. Inscriptions & Marks: Describe or transcribe any distinguishing or identifying physical lettering, annotations, texts, markings, or labels that are affixed, applied, stamped, written, inscribed, or attached to the work, excluding any mark or text inherent in the materials of which the work is made. Among the various types of inscriptions, it is a priority to record signatures, dates, and inscribed titles. All marks and inscriptions should follow this format i.e. location (medium): transcription. The location for a two-dimensional object is recto or verso. The medium indicated the technique used to make the inscription/mark i.e. handwritten in graphite. For the transcription, transcribe the text exactly including punctuation and capitalization, if the inscription breaks into multiple lines, use a

  

70

slash to indicate line breaks. If the text is illegible, enter [illegible], add ellipses to indicate missing text. 7. Date of Origin: The date generally represents either the date the creator completed the object, or the range of dates during which the creator made the object. For a known date it is preceded by month or season if known, months and seasons must be capitalized. For approximate date the abbreviation for circa, c., followed by the date. If the date is a decade a lowercase s follows behind the year, no apostrophe is added. If the object was created during a span of years c. precedes the range i.e. c. 1910-1949. If the dates are unknown and considered contemporary or modern enter an estimated date or enter n.d. 8. Place of Origin: The primary place where an object was created, or where it originated. Geographic terms can be taken from the authoritative source to ensure both accuracy and consistency. When the geographic term is uncertain, add probably or possibly after the term in parentheses. Probably indicates a higher degree or certainty. Possibly indicates a lesser degree of certainty. 9. Current Location: (not included in published version) This related field records the physical location of the object. It is entered at the time of cataloguing and maintained to track movement of object(s). 10. Cataloguer Notes: This field is used for two things first as a section to provide information that cannot be placed in the designated fields. Secondly, this field is used as a subject categories field. The category field organizes the collection into general groups and serves as a basic, top-level retrieval for categories of objects. i.e. Historical Canadian 11. Description: A description of the appearance of a work expressed in clear and objective terms. A description should describe a work in enough detail so that the reader of the description can distinguish the piece from other works. Descriptions should be based on personal examination of the object. Photographs and published accounts can aid in description writing they do not replace physically viewing the piece. 12. Condition: (not included in published version) This field provides a basic overall condition of the object. The cataloguer should indicate if the item is in excellent, very good, good or poor condition using their abbreviations (EX, VG, G, P).

  

71

The Frank "Franz" Johnston Archive
Archive Description Extent 20 cm of textual material 465 photographs The series comprises of items predominantly related to the life and career of Frank Johnston. Included are paper clippings of pictures of animals and landscape views, possibly used for reference when Johnston was painting, as well as, reproductions of art works. The series also contains the research assembled by his son Paul Rodrik in order to write an unpublished. biography of Johnston. Series 1 Series 2 Series 3 Photographs Postcards Ephemera

Scope and Content

Arrangement

Accession

The Frank "Franz" Johnston Archive [textual records, graphic material] (LFA_15262) 1905-1979 English Evans, Reta (n.d.) Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949. Rodrik, Paul, 1915-1983. Rodrik, Mary Bishop, 1919-2006. See Chapter 4 Acquired at auction from the Reta Evans auction lots.

Dates Language Provenance Additional name(s)

Biography Acquisition

  

72

Series Descriptions
Series 1: Photographs Dates Extent Scope and Content 1910-1949 365 black and white photographs This series consists of approximately 365 photographs documenting activities of artist Frank "Franz" Johnston including his time as both a member of the Group of Seven as well as the time preceding his separation from the Group. Many of the photographs document landscapes in northern Canada many of the photographs are by Johnston himself, who used them as visual aids in completing his paintings.

Series 2: Postcards Dates Extent Scope and Content 1905-1949 131 postcards This series consists of approximately 100 postcards that were collected by Johnston throughout his travels as well as obtained through other methods. These postcards depict aboriginal daily life, the Canadian landscapes and a selection that portray Alaska.

Series 3: Ephemera Dates Extent Scope and Content 1939-1979 20 cm of textual material The series comprises art items relating, predominantly, to the life and career of Frank "Franz" Johnston. Series includes clippings of photos of animals and landscapes possibly used for reference purposes when Johnston was painting, as well as clippings of some reproductions of other artists' work. The series comprises the research material collected by Mary Rodrik and the notes and manuscript drafts created by both Mary Rodrik and Paul Rodrik in preparation for a biography of Frank "Franz" Johnston, never published.

  

73

Frank "Franz" Johnston Catalogue
Series 1; Photographs
Object_ID 15262_1 Title Breaking iceberg Creator Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Measurem ents 6.4 x 10.4 cm (2 1/2 x 4 1/16 in.) Medium gelatin silver Inscription and Marks [no inscriptions] Date of Origin c. 1910 1939 Place of Origin Canada Cataloguer Notes Historical Canadian Description Iceberg breaking up and releasing pieces of ice called bergy bits, which float and melt. Image of small iceberg, which has broken away from a glacier.

15262_2

Small iceberg

6.4 x 10.4 cm (2 1/2 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_3

Iceberg surround by breaking ice

6.1 x 10.1 cm (2 3/8 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

Iceberg breaking up and releasing pieces of ice called bergy bits, which float and melt. Image of ice and snow melting into a large body of water.

15262_4

Melting ice and snow

6.4 x 10.4 cm (2 1/2 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_5

Icebergs and breaking ice

6.4 x 10.1 cm (2 1/2 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

Iceberg breaking up and releasing pieces of ice called bergy bits, which float and melt. An aboriginal woman holds a bundled child as others look on. Two men walk along rocky shoreline.

15262_6

Group of aboriginal people outside tipi

9.8 x 13.9 (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_7

Men walk along rocky shoreline

9.8 x 13.9 (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

  

74

15262_8

Group of aboriginal children

15262_9

Aboriginal family stand outside building

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6 x 10.6 cm (3 1/8 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

7 x 10.6 cm (3 1/8 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_10

Aboriginal family stand outside tipi

8 x 10.6 cm (3 1/8 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Group of aboriginal children sit in foreground, while men work in the tents in the background. Group of aboriginals smile and laugh outside a white wood building. A set of antlers hangs above the doorway. A aboriginal family stand outside a tipi in spring.

15262_11

View of a shoreline

6.2 x 10.1 cm (2 7/16 in x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_12

Men paddling two canoes

6.2 x 10.1 cm (2 7/16 in x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_13

Men with huskies hitched to sleds

15262_14

Two men stand in a doorway

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 9.5 cm (2 11/16 x 3 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of homes and a shoreline taken from the water while the photographer sits in the canoe. Image of two canoes on the water. One canoe contains six men while the other boat has been cropped out of the image and only one man can be seen paddling. Two man stand outside in the snow, surrounded by sled dogs that are hitched to a sled. Two men stand outside of a wood home currently under construction.

6.9 x 9.6 cm (2 3/4 x 3 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

  

75

15262_15

View of cabins taken from the water

15262_16

Indian Camp at mouth of Wabimaig River

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

6.9 x 9.6 cm (2 3/4 x 3 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of wood cabins taken from the water.

6.9 x 9.6 cm (2 3/4 x 3 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): C verso (handwritten in graphite): S. / No 4 c / Indian Camp at mouth of Wabimaig River / By the Fiermann recto (handwritten on image): 23

c. 1910 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of a campsite with a man and dog walking toward a tipi on the waters edge.

15262_17

Men canoeing

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.9 x 9.8 cm (2 3/4 x 3 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1910 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_18

Men stand with their sled dogs

15262_19

Tipis being built

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.9 x 9.6 cm (2 3/4 x 3 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of two canoes filled with aboriginals taken from inside another canoe. In the foreground one can see the paddle of the photographers boat. Two men stand with sled dogs outside a wood cabin in winter.

6.4 x 10 cm (2 1/2 x 3 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): C verso (handwritten in graphite):S. / No 3 . C. / Indian Camp at mouth of Wabimaig River / By the Fiermann /C376 / #133 (handwritten in blue): 306 verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA.

c. 1910 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two man stand and look on as others build a tipi.

15262_20

Cabin covered in snow

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.6 x 14.4 cm (3 3/8 x 5 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1910 1949

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Log cabin partially buried in snow.

  

76

15262_21

Man outside log cabin with sled dogs

15262_22

Exterior of the Eldorado Mine

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.6 x 14.4 cm (3 3/8 x 5 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA.

c. 1910 1949

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man stands outside cabin in winter with a team of sled dogs.

8.6 x 14.4 cm (3 3/8 x 5 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1910 1949

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_23

Campsite on water's edge

15262_24

Sled dogs stand in icy water

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

8.6 x 14.4 cm (3 3/8 x 5 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA.

c. 1910 1949

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of log building outside a mine. It is possible that this depicts the Eldorado Mine, which is located at Port Radium, Northwest Territories, Canada. A tent surround by trees and rocks near the waters edge, with dogs in the foreground. One man stands on shore in the snow, while three men sit in a canoe and a team of sled dogs stand in the icy water. View of trees and grass after winter. One can see a dog in the background.

8.6 x 14.4 cm (3 3/8 x 5 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1910 1949

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_25

Dog in forest

11.1 x 13.9 cm (4 3/8 x 5 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c.19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_26

Tree covered hills by water

17.6 x 25.1 cm (6 15/16 x 9 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c.19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Tree covered hills by the waters edge. Looks to be at the end of winter before the onset of spring.
A clerk dressed in a suit stands behind the counter of a clothing shop. There are hats and shoes hanging from the ceiling and fur and fabric can be seen on

15262_27

Clerk stands behind counter in clothing shop

8.1 x 10.7 cm (3 3/16 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

the tables.

  

77

15262_28

A funeral procession

Unknown

9 x 13.9 cm (3 9/16 x 5 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_29

Two moose cross the river View of a man in canoe in the distance Four canoes sit in the river

Unknown

8.1 x 13.7 cm (3 3/16 x 5 3/8 in.) 8 x 10.1 cm (3 1/8 x 4 in.) 7.8 x 10.2 cm (3 1/16 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 10 x 12 [no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

A group of people follow a casket to a burial site. A man carrying a wooden cross leads the procession. Two moose cross the river.

15262_30

Unknown

gelatin silver

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

View of a man in a canoe downriver. Four canoes rest in the middle of a river. Duplicate of 15262_203 View of a aboriginal camp from the water. Man gets into a canoe while two others paddle. View of two canoes being manned by three men. A decrepit sailboat bearing the name "Paradox" run aground on a rocky beach. Jagged rock formation by waters edge. View of the river surrounded by trees.

15262_31

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_32

A aboriginal campsite

Unknown

5.3 x 8.9 cm (2 1/16 x 3 1/2 in.) 6.1 x 10.5 cm (2 3/8 x 4 1/8 in.) 9.1 x 11.5 cm (3 9/16 x 4 1/2 in.) 10 x 12.5 cm (3 15/16 x 4 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

15262_33

Man getting into canoe

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian Historical Canadian

15262_34

Men paddling canoes Beached sailboat

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_35

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_36

Rock formation by waters edge River surrounded by trees

Unknown

15262_37

Unknown

8.2 x 10.9 cm (3 1/4 x 4 5/16 in.) 11.7 x 8.8 cm (4 5/8 x 3 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): a slight expansion on the Nellogauii River / 2.H [no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_38

River running through rock formation

Unknown

8.2 x 13.8 cm (3 1/4 x 5 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 19101949

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_39

View of mountains reflected in still water

Unknown

8.9 x 13.9 cm (3 1/2 x 5 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

View of water running through rock formation that is surrounded by trees. View of mountains and trees reflected in still water.

  

78

15262_40

Dogsled team in snow

15262_41

Man with dogsled Six men in a boat

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

17.7 x 25.2 cm (7 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

A man sits while his dogsled team takes a rest in winter.

13.3 x 17.1 cm (5 1/4 x 6 3/4 in.) 17.2 x 25.1 cm (6 3/4 x 9 7/8 in.) 20.5 x 25.3 cm (8 1/16 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver gelatin silver

[no inscriptions] [no inscriptions]

c. 1910 1949 c. 1910 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian Historical Canadian

Man poses with dogsled and one dog. Group of six men sitting in a boat with a motor. One aboriginal burns buffalo grass as another looks on while holding the reins of the two horses. Man paddling a canoe on lake.

15262_42

Unknown

Canada

15262_43

Burning of the buffalo grass

Attributed to: Pollard, Harry, 1880-1968

gelatin silver

The legeu [?] of burning / of the buffalo grass / on the 1st full moon / in June.

Unknow n

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_44

Man in canoe on lake

Unknown

10.7 x 16 cm (4 3/16 x 6 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in black): Photographs Courtesy/ Canadian National Rys. [Canadian National Railways] / Ry Lake / cf.5438 verso (handwritten in graphite): 3 3/8 / 96361 - Wed / #133 sq. fourth no line (stamped in black): Photographs Courtesy / Canadian National Rys. (handwritten in black ink): McAlpine Lake / Rainy Lakes Country

c.1918 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_45

Tent on waters edge

Unknown

11.1 x 13.9 cm (4 3/8 x 5 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

c.19101949

McAlpine Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Tent on waters edge with canoe placed ashore.

15262_46

Portrait of Victor Watson, Algoma

Unknown

8.2 x 14.2 cm (3 1/4 x 5 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in blue ink): Algoma Victor Watson

c. 19181922

Algoma, Ontario

Historical Canadian

15262_47

Men canoeing

Unknown

8 x 10.2 cm (3 1/8 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19181926

Canada

Historical Canadian

Young man indicated to be Victor Watson with an eye patch holds a paddle while sitting at the rear of a canoe. Image of two canoes with five men paddling.

  

79

15262_48

Men canoeing on still water Men in canoes at water's edge

Unknown

5.8 x 13.7 cm (2 5/16 x 5 3/8 in.) 8.8 x 11.6 cm (3 7/8 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver gelatin silver

[no inscriptions] verso (handwritten in graphite): a chat with the only travellers / we met /Mississaga [sic] Canoe Trip / Canada / On line of Canadian Pacific / Railway / I109 / A Chat with / the travellers verso (handwritten in graphite): 4A

c. 19181926 c. 19181926

Canada

Historical Canadian Historical Canadian

Three men in canoe paddling on still water. Three canoes stopping for a break and men chatting. This photograph was used as reference for the painting The Rendezvous.

15262_49

Unknown

Canada

15262_50

Men rowing in boat with sail

Unknown

7.9 x 10.2 cm (3 1/8 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 19181926

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_51

Athabasca River

Unknown

8 x 10.5 cm (3 1/8 x 4 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): Athabaska [sic] River [no inscriptions]

c. 19181926

Alberta, Canada

Historical Canadian

Five men padding a boat with a sail. This photograph was used as reference for the painting On to Hudson's Bay, Ontario, Canada, 1947. Men paddling a boat across the Athabasca River. Four aboriginals carry hay stacks on their backs.

15262_52

Aboriginals hauling hay

15262_53

Campsite on waters edge

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

8.2 x 10.8 cm (3 1/4 x 4 1/4 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 19181949

Canada

Historical Canadian

10.2 x 8.1 cm (4 x 3 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): No 16

c. 19181949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Image of a tipi near the waters edge, clothes drying on makeshift drying rack. Two aboriginals can be seen in the background. Duplicate of 15262_103.

  

80

15262_54

Men gathered at wood table on a rocky shore

Unknown

8.1 x 10.2 cm (3 3/16 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): No 22

c. 19181949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_55

Black man sits in front of a white tent

Unknown

5.6 x 8 cm (2 3/16 x 3 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19181949

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_56

Men sit around campsite

Unknown

7.8 x 9.7 cm (3 1/16 x 3 13/16 in.) 8.1 x 10.2 cm (3 3/16 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c.1918 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men sit at a fold out table, one is drawing. While others stand around watching. It is possible that the man sitting with glasses is Group of Seven member Franklin Carmichael (1890 -1945) and the man sitting in front of him with his back to the camera could be Frank "Franz" H. Johnston (1888-1949). Old black man sitting on wooden chair in front of a white tent in the middle of the woods. Group of men around their campsite, surrounded by trees. Two canoes and aboriginals on shore and reflected in water. A man holding a gun sits on a fallen tree.

15262_57

Canoe and aboriginals reflected in water Man with gun

Unknown

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): No 11 [no inscriptions]

c. 19181949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_58

15262_59

At the mouth of the Mackenzie

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.8 x 8.2 cm (4 1/4 x 3 1/4 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 19181949

Canada (probably)

8.2 x 10.8 cm (3 1/4 x 4 1/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): At the mouth of the Mckenzie [sic]

c. 19181949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Group of aboriginal men and children on a boat.

  

81

15262_60

Sundown

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

19.8 x 25 cm (7 13/16 x 9 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): IKO Flex / AGFA S.S. Film/ f2.8 at 1/50 / "SUNDOWN" / by / Franz Johnston / 96 Keewatin Ave / Toronto Canada [no inscriptions]

c. 19241939

Canada

Historical Canadian

Large boats and row boats in harbour.

15262_61

Husky and tent

Unknown

10.4 x 7.8 cm (4 1/16 x 3 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1930s

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_62

Group of men and boys plowing farmland

Unknown

5.6 x 8 cm (2 3/16 x 3 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930s

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_63

Two men standing with numerous sled dogs Two men standing with sled dogs in front of a cabin Man walking through snow covered hills

Unknown

5.9 x 8.4 cm (2 5/16 x 3 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): No 26

c. 1930s

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_64

Unknown

5.9 x 8.4 cm (2 5/16 x 3 5/16 in.) 3.4 x 8.8 cm (1 5/16 x 3 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): No 28 [no inscriptions]

c. 1930s

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_65

Unknown

gelatin silver

c. 1930s

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_66

Two dogs hitched to tree

Unknown

7 x 10.1 cm (2 3/4 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in black): MAR 5 1935

1935

Canada

Historical Canadian

Portrait of a husky playing with a stick in the foreground and a camp site in the background. A group of men and young boys pull a plow through the field to ready the ground for seeding. View from a distance of two men standing with numerous sled dogs in the snow. View of two men standing in front of a cabin with sled dogs. The upper body of a man can be seen in the bottom right corner as he walks through snow covered hills. Two dogs tied up sitting by a tree.

  

82

15262_67

Sunlit clouds and tree tops

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

12.5 x 17.6 cm (4 15/16 x 6 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): Division No 2 / Franz Johnston / 64 Grenville St. / Toronto Canada / Contax Camera / Agfa Infrared film / Paquin / Brovira Silk White paper (adhered): Entered in the ? FOURTH ANNUAL / Scientific American / PHOTOGRAP HIC / CONTEST / No. 47-4 [no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

View of sunlit clouds through the tops of trees. Johnston, produced this photograph using Infrared film, which is film that is sensitive to infrared light. This photograph was entered in the Scientific American photography contest.

15262_68

Cabin with view of snow topped hills

15262_69

Aboriginal family

15262_70

Plane docked on shore

15262_71

Snow covered trees near water's edge

15262_72

Snow covered trees

15262_73

Men and sled dogs

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.5 x 9 cm (2 9 /16 x 3 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Log cabin with snow topped hills in the background.

6.5 x 9 cm (2 9 /16 x 3 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

6.5 x 9 cm (2 9 /16 x 3 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Historical Canadian, Aviation

A large group of aboriginals, most likely a family stand in a straight line for a picture. Plane docked on shore.

6.6 x 10.4 cm (2 5/8 x 4 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Historical Canadian

Snow covered trees near the frozen water's edge.

6.6 x 10.4 cm (2 5/8 x 4 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Historical Canadian

Trees covered in snow.

6.6 x 10.5 cm (2 5/8 x 4 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Historical Canadian

Two men talking as sled dogs rest in snow.

  

83

15262_74

Man on snow covered trail

15262_75

Snow covered cabins

15262_76

Two men sitting in the sun

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.6 x 10.5 cm (2 5/8 x 4 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

6.6 x 10.5 cm (2 5/8 x 4 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Historical Canadian

Man walks through snow covered trail that is surrounded by trees. Ground perspective view of snow covered cabins.

12 x 7.5 cm (4 3/4 x 2 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. [no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Historical Canadian, Canadian Vernacular

Two men sit on the grass outside in the sun.

15262_77

View of a radium mine in winter

7.5 x 11.6 cm (2 15/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian, Industry

View of a radium mine from a distance in winter.

15262_78

View of snow covered house

12 x 7.5 cm (4 3/4 x 2 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of a snow covered house.

15262_79

View of snow covered water in winter

7.5 x 11.6 cm (2 15/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Four men stand on an ice and snow covered hill looking over the snowcovered lake. Numerous spruce trees scattered over a flat land, which are heavy with snow. Spruce trees bend over because of the weight of the snow. Heavy snow covered trees.

15262_80

Spruce trees covered in snow

7.2 x 11.7 cm (2 13/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_81

Spruce trees bend with snow

7.2 x 11.7 cm (2 13/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_82

Heavy snow covered trees

7.5 x 11.6 cm (2 15/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA.

c. 1939

Historical Canadian

  

84

15262_83

Trees heavy with snow.

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

7.5 x 11.6 cm (2 15/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. [no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Heavy snow covered trees.

15262_84

Trees weighed down by snow

7.2 x 11.6 cm (2 13/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_85

Heavy snow covered tree

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

7.5 x 11.6 cm (2 15/16 x 4 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in blue): McCUTCHON 's / QUALITY SERVICE / EDMONTON, ALTA. verso (handwritten in Graphite): 497, (stamped on verso in black):504a (stamped in blue): McCutchon's / Quality Service / Edmonton, ALTA. [no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Trees bend over by the weight of the snow. .This photograph was used as reference for the painting Winter's Thrall, 1939 Heavy snow covered tree.

15262_86

View of frozen water through trees

7.3 x 11.9 cm (2 7/8 x 4 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

A view of snow covered water through trees

15262_87

Parked dog sled

15262_88

Hooking up dogs to sleds

15262_89

Man travelling by dog sled

15262_90

Men talk in front of building

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.4 x 9.9 cm (2 1/2 x 3 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

A packed dog sled with anchor in snow.

6.4 x 9.9 cm (2 1/2 x 3 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

Men hooking up dogs to sleds

6.5 x 10.3 cm (2 9/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

Man travels by sled dog through the snow.

6.5 x 10.3 cm (2 9/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

Men discussing something in front of a building.

  

85

15262_91

Log structure at Port Radium

15262_92

Wood cabin covered in snow

15262_93

Cabin surround by snow and trees

15262_94

Log structure and stack logs

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.5 x 10.3 cm (2 9/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of a log building with wood poles on either side.

6.5 x 10.3 cm (2 9/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

6.5 x 10.3 cm (2 9/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

Log cabin covered in snow with smoke coming out of the smoke stack. Log cabin surrounded by trees and snow.

6.5 x 10.3 cm (2 9/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_95

Tipi and canoe on shore

8.2 x 10.7 cm (3 1/4 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_96

Aboriginal children pose for the camera

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.7 x 8.2 cm (4 3/16 x 3 1/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_97

Tipis and a dog

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.2 x 10.7 cm (3 1/4 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_98

Priest raking hay

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.4 x 7.6 cm (4 1/16 x 3 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Log structure with stacks of logs behind it and turned over canoes covered in snow. Image depicts a canoe and tipi on the waters edge. A group of aboriginals can be seen in the background. Two aboriginal boys pose for the camera, while two aboriginal women stand off to the side. The image seems to be taken outside the wood entrance of a fort. A tipi and a dog are seen in the foreground, while clothes and snowshoes are hung on a tipi like structure. Duplicate of 15262_107. Priest raking hay. Duplicate of 15262_106.

  

86

15262_99

Snow covered trees surrounded by snow

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.2 x 10.9 cm (3 1/4 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Snow covered trees weighed down by snow. The shadows of the tress are visible and suggest that it is a bright day. Trees on small hill surrounded by snow. Smaller trees can be seen in background as well as a fence and telephone lines. A man pulls on branch for unknown reason.

15262_100

Trees on snow covered hill

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.3 x 11 cm (3 1/4 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_101

Man pulling on wood branch

15262_102

Sled dogs on train tracks

15262_103

Tipi on water's edge

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.2 x 10.7 cm (3 1/4 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

8.1 x 11 cm (3 3/16 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian, Railroads

A team of sled dogs rest near train tracks.

10.2 x 8.1 cm (4 x 3 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): No 16

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Image of a tipi near the water's edge, clothes drying on makeshift drying rack. Two aboriginals can be seen in the background. Duplicate of 15262_53. A woman and dog walk in front of a row of tipis.

15262_104

A row of tipis

15262_105

Two men sawing down a tree in winter

15262_106

Priest raking hay

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.1 x 11 cm (3 3/16 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

8.1 x 11 cm (3 3/16 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Historical Canadian

Two men saw a tree in winter.

10.4 x 7.6 cm (4 1/16 x 3 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Priest raking hay. Duplicate of 15262_98.

  

87

15262_107

Tipis and a dog

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.2 x 10.7 cm (3 1/4 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_108

A group of young aboriginal girls stand in front of a tipi Man stands with Canadian Railways Limited plane

15262_109

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

11 x 8.1 cm (4 5/16 x 3 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

A tipi and a dog are seen in the foreground, while clothes and snowshoes are hung on a tipi like structure. Duplicate of 15262_97. A group of young aboriginal girls play in front of a tipi. Man in a parka stands in front of Canadian Railways Limited plane, which seems to be in the process of being loaded/unloade d with supplies Men in a parkas stand in front of Canadian Railways Limited plane, help to load/unload the plane. Men in parkas help to load/unload a Canadian Railways Limited plane. Aboriginal woman stands in front of a snow house.

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_110

Men load/unload Canadian Railways Limited plane

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_111

15262_112

Men in parkas load/unload a Canadian Railways Limited plane Aboriginal woman outside a snow house

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_113

Aboriginal woman stands front of a snow house Snow covered hills

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Aboriginal woman standing in front of a snow house. View of snow covered hills taken from inside a town.

15262_114

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

  

88

15262_115

Portrait of a man in snow covered landscape

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_116

Two men wearing parkas

15262_117

A group of aboriginal women and children outside a snow house

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15 cm (4 x 5 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man stands in flat open landscape that is covered with snow. You small town can be seen in the background. Two men wearing parkas to protect them from the fierce winter cold. A group of aboriginal women and children stand in front of a snow house, in the middle of a open snow covered landscape. Aboriginal woman stands in front of a snow house. An enlargement of 112 Portrait of a wind swept man wearing a parka and sunglasses. Interior of a building used as a workers cafeteria, kitchen and social room at Port Radium. Interior of either Eldorado Mine or Echo Bay Mine in Cameron Bay. Radium mine workers play cards and smoke cigarettes. Men hold up pelt of a wolf.

12.6 x 17.4 cm (4 15/16 x 6 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_118

Aboriginal woman stands in front of a snow house

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

12.5 x 17.8 cm (4 15/16 x 7 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_119

Close up portrait of man wearing a parka and sunglasses Interior of workers cafeteria

12.5 x 17.5 cm (4 15/16 x 6 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Port Radium, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_120

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_121

Interior of radium mine

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Port Radium, Northwest Territories, Canada Port Radium, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_122

Radium mine workers

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_123

Two men hold up a wolf pelt

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

  

89

15262_124

Cabin surrounded by trees

15262_125

White partridge resting in the snow

15262_126

Man crosscountry skiing

15262_127

Man cheers as he crosscountry skis

15262_128

Man and his dogs

15262_129

Man travelling by dog sled

15262_130

White partridge in the snow

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

A cabin surrounded by birch trees in winter.

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

A white partridge rests in the snow and is surrounded by trees. A man crosscountry skis along a trail surrounded by trees. A man cheers as he crosscountry skis along a trail surrounded by trees. A aboriginal man and stands stand outside a snow house with his dog sled team. Man travel through snow on a dog sled.

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_131

Port Radium Mine

15262_132

Two loaded sleds sit on the ice

15262_133

Mackenzie Air Service Limited plane

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Port Radium, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

A white partridge standing in the snow surrounded by trees. The shadow of the photographer can be seen in the lower left corner. View of Port Radium Mine in winter.

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian, Aviation

Two loaded sleds sit on ice. It looks as if the sleds are being unloaded to set up camp. A Mackenzie Air Service Limited plane parked on snow and ice.

  

90

15262_134

A plane being loaded

15262_135

Port Radium Mine in winter

15262_136

Men and sled dogs resting

15262_137

Partial solar eclipse

15262_138

Men and sled dogs resting

15262_139

View of a raised log structure used for food storage Aboriginal men skinning their kill

15262_140

15262_141

Plant shadows on snow

15262_142

View of cabins at Eldorado Mine

15262_143

View of snow covered hills

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Port Radium, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Canada

Historical Canadian, Aviation

View of a plane being loaded in winter.

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian, Aviation

View of Port Radium Mine in winter

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

Men and sled dog teams rest on the ice.

6.9 x 11.4 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

April 19, 1939

Historical Canadian

5 x 11.5 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

View of a solar eclipse that occurred on April 19, 1939 over Great Bear Lake. Aboriginal men rest with sled dogs.

6 x 11.5 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

A raised log structure used for food storage.

7 x 11.5 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Two aboriginal men pose for a photograph behind their skinned kill. Small trees and plant shadows on snow.

11.5 x 6.9 cm (4 1/2 x 2 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

6.9 x 11.3 cm (2 11/16 x 4 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Smoke coming out of cabins at the Eldorado Mine.

6.8 x 11.3 cm (2 11/16 x 4 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

View of snow covered hills with groups of trees.

  

91

15262_144

View of trees with hills and river in background.

15262_145

A white fox in the snow

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.) 18.8 x 19.9 cm (7 3/8 x 7 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

View of trees in the foreground with hills and a river in background. A white fox stands in the snow near a frozen lake. Johnston stands in the shadow of a trees surround by snow and in the background snow covered hills can be seen. Summer view of water through pine trees.

15262_146

Portait of Frank "Franz" Johnston in the snow

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_147

Lake view through trees

15262_148

15262_149

Frank "Franz" Johnston painting Tiny Lake in Great Bear Lake Aboriginal family outside tent

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: JPR

8.8 x 14.4 cm (3 7/16 x 5 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

6.5 x 6.1 cm (2.6 x 2.4 in)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in blue ink): Compliments of JPR

1939

Historical Canadian

Frank "Franz" Johnston painting near a body of water.

15262_150

Animal skins drying on racks

15262_151

Aboriginal woman tends to campfire

15262_152

Aboriginal men and dogs

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Aboriginal family stands outside a white tent with a cylinder smoke stack. Aboriginal practice of drying animal skins on racks.

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Aboriginal woman tends to campfire as men rest. Duplicate of 15262_159. Aboriginal men and dogs rest around a campfire.

  

92

15262_153

Aboriginal man stands with canoe paddle, dog in foreground

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_154

Aboriginals resting at camp

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_155

Trees reflected in water at dusk

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_156

View of two men paddling a canoe

15262_157

View of Eldorado mine

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Aboriginal man stands with canoe paddle by water. Two canoes are docked on the waters edge and a dog is in the foreground of the frame. Group of aboriginal men and one woman rest at camp. Smoke can be seen from the cooking fire. Trees reflected in water at dusk. This photograph was used as reference for the painting Midnight Sun, June Midnight, Great Bear Lake N.W.T., 1939. Elevated view of two men paddling a canoe.

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

View of hills, trees, lake and the Eldorado mine which is located on the waters edge. View of two aboriginal men taken from inside a canoe.

15262_158

View of two aboriginal men in a canoe

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_159

Aboriginal woman tends to campfire

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Aboriginal woman tends to campfire as men rest. Duplicate of 15262_151.

  

93

15262_160

A aboriginal woman and two children smile for the camera

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_161

A aboriginal girl poses for the camera

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_162

A boat crosses the lake

15262_163

Men working at Port Radium

15262_164

Aboriginal boy holds up dead beaver

15262_165

Sled dogs reflected in water

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

An aboriginal with smiles for the camera while hold the hand of a little child who is pulling on the shirt of a young girl. The little girl smiles down at the puppies in her arms. An aboriginal girl poses for the camera as she stands on a rock beach. In the background another child can be seen standing. A boat crosses a lake filled with men.

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

Men working at Port Radium.

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Young aboriginal boy hold up a dead beaver.

6.8 x 11.4 cm (2 11/16 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_166

15262_167

Double exposure of white husky standing on ice formations Man paddles canoe

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

As men load up the sled, dogs rest by the waters edge, all which are reflected water. White husky double exposed with ice and snow formations. Image taken from inside of the canoe of a man wearing a maple leaf Canada sweater paddling.

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Historical Canadian

  

94

15262_168

Travellers being pulled by sled dogs

15262_169

Man runs with sled dogs

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Group being pulled by team of sled dogs as the sun sits at the horizon. Man runs alone with the sled dogs. This is in order to get the dogs to move faster. Group of four people are pulled along by a team of sled dogs. Three men rest with sled dogs.

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_170

Group pulled on sled by sled dogs

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_171

Travellers rest with the sled dogs

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_172

A aboriginal mother and children stand around a sled

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_173

A aboriginal mother and children stand around a sled

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_174

Three aboriginal women stand outside a snow house

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

A aboriginal woman and three children stand by a dog sled as the dogs lay in the snow. Duplicate of 15262_173. A aboriginal woman and three children stand by a dog sled as the dogs lay in the snow. Duplicate of 15262_172. Three aboriginal women stand outside a snow house. These temporary shelters, are usually only used for one or two nights. Also known as igloos, they are usually associated with the Inuit and are predominantly constructed by people of Canada's Central Arctic.

  

95

15262_175

Man selling pelts in store

15262_176

Two aboriginal boys stand on rock beach Aboriginal man smiles as he stand by his bow and arrows

15262_177

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Men selling a white animal pelt inside a store.

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Two young aboriginal boys smile as they stand on a rocky beach. An aboriginal man laughs as he gets his picture taken. Next to him various bows and arrows lean against a snow formation. A lone dirty white husky stands on snow and ice.

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_178

White husky stands on snow

15262_179

Melting ice on water with trees

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

9.6 x 6.9 cm (3 3/4 x 2 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

16.1 x 20.7 cm (6 5/16 x 8 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_180

Trees reflected in water

17.2 x 24.7 cm (6 3/4 x 9 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Image of Glacier Bay at Great Bear Lake. Snow covered hills and trees near waters edge. Trees and water's edge reflected in water.

15262_181

Path of the Midnight Sun

6.6 x 11.2 cm (2 5/8 x 4 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): Path of the Midnight Sun / June 21st 1939 verso (handwritten in graphite): Moon_Light over / Great Bear Lake verso (handwritten in graphite): This is Big Sig

1939

Historical Canadian

Depicts a timelapse photograph of the midnight sun over Great Bear Lake. Moonlight shines between two trees over Great Bear Lake Image of Big Sig posing in front of a log building during winter.

15262_182

Moonlight over Great Bear Lake

Unknown

12.9 x 9.4 cm (5 1/16 x 3 11/16 in.

gelatin silver

c. 1939

Historical Canadian

15262_183

This is Big Sig

Unknown

4.9 x 6.3 cm (1 15/16 x 2 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

1939

Historical Canadian

  

96

15262_184

A young aboriginal family poses for a picture

Unknown

6.7 x 6.7 cm (2 5/8 x 2 5/8 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in black): 978

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian, Canadian Vernacular

15262_185

A aboriginal woman with a dogsled

Unknown

7.8 x 6.1 cm (3 1/16 x 2 3/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian, Canadian Vernacular First Nations, Historical Canadian, Canadian Vernacular First Nations, Historical Canadian, Canadian Vernacular

15262_186

A aboriginal man and woman in parkas

Unknown

10 x 12 cm (3 15/16 x 4 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

15262_187

Natives at Eldorado on Sports Day

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

7.3 x 10.6 cm (2 7/8 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in blue ink): Natives at Eldorado / on Sports Day. / The child in / white rompers / is Eskimo [no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

An aboriginal man dressed in a cardigan and newsy cap, stands with a smiling woman who has a baby in her arms. An aboriginal woman dressed in a parka stands beside an unpacked dogsled in winter. An aboriginal woman and man dressed in parkas pose to get their photograph taken. A group of aboriginal women and children sit in the sun. One Inuit child is identified to be wearing a white romper. A group of aboriginal women and children stand outside a travelling circus. Aboriginal men play instruments that look to be Farm Drums or Tli Cho, which are instruments made from the rawhide of caribou stretched over a wooden frame. A group of aboriginal people sit in the sun talking and smiling. Two men travel with dog sled team in winter..

15262_188

Aboriginal women and children at the circus

Unknown

13.7 x 8 cm (5 3/8 x 3 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_189

Man watches as aboriginal men play drums

Unknown

7.5 x 10.1 cm (2 15/16 x 4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 31

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_190

Group of aboriginal people sitting Two men with dogsled team travelling across the snow

Unknown

8.5 x 13.2 cm (3 3/8 x 5 3/16 in.) 6.4 x 10.5 cm (2 1/2 x 4 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian Historical Canadian

15262_191

Unknown

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in black): 706

1939

  

97

15262_192

Aboriginals at camp

Unknown

8.2 x 10.7 cm (3 1/4 x 4 3/16 in.) 15.8 x 19.5 cm (6 1/4 x 7 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian Historical Canadian

Group of aboriginals in the distance work on camp chores. View of a ski trail through snow and trees.

15262_193

View of ski path through snow and trees

Attributed to: JPR

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten in graphite): JPR verso (handwritten in graphite): : BCW-M [no inscriptions]

1939

15262_194

15262_195

Photograph of Frank "Franz" Johnston's winter landscape painting Man laying down in the brush

Unknown

3.5 x 4 cm (1 3/8 x 1 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

A photograph of a painting by Frank "Franz" Johnston.

15262_196

Trees on hill with view of water

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.8 x 14.4 cm (3 7/16 x 5 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Men and dog lay in brush.

6.1 x 8 cm (2 3/8 x 3 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Historical Canadian

15262_197

Winter Landscape at Glacier Bay, Great Bear Lake

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: JPR

5.7 x 6.1 cm (2 1/4 x 2 3/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_198

Trees and hill reflected in water

5.2 x 5.6 cm (2 1/16 x 2 3/16 in.) 5.2 x 5.6 cm (2 1/16 x 2 1/8 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in blue ink): Compliments of / JPR verso (handwritten in blue ink): Compliments of / JPR verso (written in graphite): Dog Team on snow trail / 11103

1939

Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Great Bear Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada Canada

Historical Canadian

High trees atop a snow covered hill with a view of water below. This photograph was used as reference for the painting Winter Morning, Cameron Bay, Great Bear Lake, 1939 Image of Glacier Bay at Great Bear Lake. Snow covered hills and trees near waters edge. Melting snow and tress on waters edge.

15262_199

Water's edge with trees reflected in water Dog Team on Snow Trail

Attributed to: JPR

gelatin silver

1939

Historical Canadian

Image of water's edge with trees reflected in water. Men and dog teams on trail in snow.

15262_200

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

17 x 24.4 cm (6 11/16 x 9 5/8 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1930 1949

Historical Canadian

  

98

15262_201

Four men pose on a boat

Unknown

6.9 x 10.8 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_202

Dogsled team rests in the snow

Unknown

14.6 x 8.9 cm (14.6 x 3 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_203

Four canoes sit in the river

Unknown

8.9 x 11.4 cm (3 1/2 x 4 1/2 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_204

Hitching the huskies

15262_205

White huskies

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.1 x 10. 6 (3 3/16 x 4 3/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in black ink): Hitching the huskies

c. 1930 1949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Four men stand on the edge of a boat to pose for a picture. One man holds some sort of unknown device. A dog sled team rests in the snow and two men stand in the background. Four canoes rest in the middle of a river. Duplicate 15262_31 Man is hitching up a husky to a dog sled in winter.

5.5 x 7.4 cm (2 3/16 x 2 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in black ink): eron's [illegible] white huskies / ie [illegible] Empire mines / the R.R. tracks. verso (handwritten in graphite): Frosty morning

c. 1930 1949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man being pulled by a team of white huskies along a train track.

15262_206

Frosty morning

15262_207

Davidson's dogs

15262_208

Bringing in sick Indian, Nipigon

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.1 x 11 cm (3 3/16 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1930 1949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Snow covered trees taken from a log cabin.

7.9 x 10.9 cm (3 1/8 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): Davidson's dogs

c. 1930 1949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Out of focus image of two men unhooking huskies from a sled.

8.1 x 11 cm (3 3/16 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): Bringing in sick Indian / Nipigon. / Beardmore [scratched out]

c. 1930 1949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian, First Nations

Dog sled carries a sick aboriginal man back to Nipigon.

  

99

15262_209

On the trail

15262_210

Breaking fresh trail

15262_211

Black bear in forest

15262_212

Men resting by the water's edge

15262_213

Deer finding food in snow

Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

8.2 x 10.8 cm (3 1/4 x 4 1/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in black ink): On the trail

c. 1930 1949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man being pulled by white husky sled dog team.

8.1 x 10.8 cm (3 3/16 x

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in black ink): Breaking fresh trail

c. 1930 1949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man on hands and knees on sled, being pulled by white huskies.

7 x 11.1 (2 3/4 x 4 3/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

A bear stands in an opening of trees.

8 x 11.1 (2 3/4 x 4 3/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Bird's eye view of men resting by the water's edge with a canoe. Irregular deckled edge image of deer finding grass through snow. Men with dog sled travelling through the snow. Snow covered cabins and trees with men working in the background. Aboriginal man and women stand in front of a sled filled with gear. A deer eating grass in the snow. Aboriginal family smiles while getting their picture taken in the snow. Three men plowing land with oxen. Duplicate of 15262_220.

6.7 x 11 cm (2 5/8 x 4 5/16 in.) 6.9 x 11.5 cm (2 3/4 x 4 1/2 in.) 8.5 x 14.4 cm (3 3/8 x 5 11/16 in.) 7.5 x 11.9 cm (2 15/16 x 4 11/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_214

Men with dog sled

Unknown

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in blue ink): 26 [no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_215

Cabins in the snow

Unknown

gelatin silver

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_216

Aboriginal man and women with sled

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_217

Deer in snow

Unknown

15262_218

Aboriginal family poses for there picture

Unknown

14 x 8.4 cm (5 1/2 x 3 5/16 in.) 12 x 7.5 cm (4 3/4 x 2 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_219

Oxen pulling plow

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

7.5 x 10.4 cm (2 15/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

  

100

15262_220

Oxen pulling plow

15262_221

A dog watches a stream

15262_222

Clouds over rough water

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

7.5 x 10.4 cm (2 15/16 x 4 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Three men plowing land with oxen. Duplicate of 15262_219. Dog stands on rock over looking a stream.

8.3 x 11 cm (3 1/4 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in black): J.W. BALD'S / Studio / MIDLAND verso (stamped in black): J.W. BALD'S / Studio / MIDLAND

c. 1930 1949

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

9.5 x 12 cm (3 3/4 x 4 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1930 1940

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_223

Clouds over rough water

9.5 x 12 cm (3 3/4 x 4 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in black): J.W. BALD'S / Studio / MIDLAND verso (handwritten in graphite): 15 / 23

c. 1930 1940

Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Irregular deckled edge image of clouds with sunlight streaming onto rough water. Irregular deckled edge image of clouds over rough water. View of two people travelling across Onaman Lake by sled dog. Two people travelling by sled dog across Onaman Lake. One man looks back to smile at the camera. Two men are pulled by a team of white sled dogs, across Lake Onaman. Two people travelling across Onaman Lake by sled dog.

15262_224

Travelling by dog sled team

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_225

Travelling by dog sled team

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 4 / 12

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_226

Travelling by dog sled team

15262_227

Travelling with a dog sled team

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5 / 3 /8

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5 / 8

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

  

101

15262_228

Dogsled with log cabin

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_229

Cabin buried under snow

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 15 / 31

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_230

Cabin partly buried under snow

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 5 / 16

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_231

Mounds of snow outside snow buried cabin

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 15 / 52

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

A team of huskies pulling a sled through snow, with cabin in background. The cabin may be Jack McCurdy's where Frank "Franz" Johnston would spend many of his summers. This photograph was used as reference for the painting Onaman Lake, Late March, c. 1930-1949 View of a cabin partly buried under snow. This cabin most likely Jack McCurdy's on Onaman Lake where Frank "Franz" Johnston would spend much of his later life painting. View of cabin buried in snow and surrounded by tress. This cabin most likely Jack McCurdy's on Onaman Lake where Johnston spend much of his later life painting. View of mounds of snow with snowshoe tracks going over them. The cabin in the background partly buried in snow belongs to Jack McCurdy, a friend of Frank "Franz" Johnston's.

  

102

15262_232

Snow covered trail through trees

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 4 / 16 X 20 / 5 / 33

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of a snow covered trail through trees. The recto and verso show paint residue that suggests the photograph was in his studio. The numbers also indicate that he neither planned to enlarge the photograph or turn it in a painting. View of snow covered Onaman Lake from a cabin.

15262_233

View of Onaman lake from a cabin

15262_234

White dog on snow covered trail

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 10 / 12

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

8.5 x 12.2 cm (3 3/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 3 / 2 / 26

c. 1930 1949

Onaman Lake, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_235

Stream with snow on water's edge

15262_236

View of stream during winter

15262_237

Trees reflected in water

15262_238

Stream partially covered with melting ice

15262_239

View of stream with melting ice

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

14.5 x 18.5 cm (5 11/16 x 7 1/4 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 12x16-17

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

White dog tied up to snow covered tree. In the snow you can see the shadow of possibly Frank "Franz" Johnston. View of a stream with snow on its bank.

12.5 x 17.6 cm (4 15/16 x 6 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

View of stream during winter from a cliff.

13.1 x 19.8 cm (5 3/16 x 7 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Snow melting on water bank with trees reflected in it.

12.5 x 17.6 cm (4 15/16 x 6 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 20x24 10

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

View of stream with melting ice on waters edge.

12.5 x 17.6 cm (4 15/16 x 6 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 15x18

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

View of stream with melting snow and ice.

  

103

15262_240

Sled dogs and dnow shoeing

15262_241

Dogs and snowshoes

15262_242

View of sled dogs through trees

15262_243

Moose Calling, Vermillion Lake, Que Where shall we go?

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Attributed to: Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

20.2 x 25.2 cm (7 15/16 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Onaman, Ontario

Historical Canadian

Snow scenes with sled dogs and snow shoeing.

19.6 x 17.9 cm (7 3/4 x 7 1/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Onaman, Ontario

Historical Canadian

18.4 x 14.9 (7 1/4 x 5 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 11330

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Man in foreground poses for picture with a group of dogs while other men are snowshoeing. View of dog sled team through opening in trees.

16.5 x 21.8 cm (6 1/2 x 8 9/16 in.) 8.9 x 11. 7 cm (3 1/2 x 4 5/8 in.)

gelatin silver

verso: Moose CallingVermillion River, Quebec. / c.7.12084 / R verso (handwritten in graphite): Where shall we go? [no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men in canoe moose calling.

15262_244

15262_245

Plants growing through soil

15262_246

View of tree covered hills with snow

15262_247

Trees and snow covered ground

15262_248

Prospectors making their way into the farther north

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Unknown

gelatin silver

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Group of white ducks in farmyard.

17.6 x 25.1 cm (6 15/16 x 9 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Spring flowers poking through the ground.

8.9 x 16.4 cm (3 1/2 x 6 7/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Snow covered landscape by waters edge.

18.6 x 20.2 (7 5/16 x 7 15/15 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Angled view of snow covered ground with trees in background. Two men paddle a canoe on the still water. There are trees in background with still water in foreground.

15.2 x 9.5 cm

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 15x18 / Prospectors making / their way into the / farther north / "A" / page 4 / 2 5/8

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

  

104

15262_249

Trail through snow and trees

15262_250

Horses pulling a cart through snow

15262_251

Shows of trees reflected in the snow

15262_252

Clouds over water

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

12.6 x 12.3 cm (4 15/16 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Snow covered landscape by waters edge.

12.4 x 12.3 cm (4 7/8 x 4 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Two horses pull a cart with passengers through the snow Shadows of trees reflected in the snow.

12.1 x 12.4 cm (4 3/4 x 4 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

8 x 11 cm (3 1/8 x 4 5/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (stamped in black): MARGARET BALD'S/ Developing & Printing Service / (opposite Post Office) / MIDLAND ONT. verso (handwritten in graphite): On Lakeshore October (stamped in black) MARGARET BALD'S/ Developing & Printing Service / (opposite Post Office) / MIDLAND ONT.

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Image of clouds over a lake in later afternoon.

15262_253

On Lakeshore, October

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.2 x 12.6 cm (4 x 4 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 1930 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Image of clouds over still water. A strip of land can be seen in background.

15262_254

Farm + Clouds Why Road

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.2 x 12.6 cm (4 x 4 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): Farm + Clouds / Why Road (stamped in black) MARGARET BALD'S/ Developing & Printing Service / (opposite Post Office) / MIDLAND ONT.

c. 19301949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Clouds over farm land.

  

105

15262_255

Logging in winter

15262_256

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

12.7 x 12.7 cm (5 x 5 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Men logging in deep snow on trail.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_257

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_258

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man on harrows is pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plowing, which is used for deeper tillage. Side view of man on a harrow being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plow, which is used for deeper tillage. Side view of man on a harrow being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plow, which is used for deeper tillage.

  

106

15262_259

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_260

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_261

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_262

Man plowing field with horses

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949
Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Side view of man on a harrow being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plough, which is used for deeper tillage. Side view of man on a harrow being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plow, which is used for deeper tillage. Side view of man on a harrows being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plough, which is used for deeper tillage. Front view of man plowing field with two white horses.

15262_263

Two horses standing with plow

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Side view of two white horses resting while attached to a plow.

  

107

15262_264

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_265

Man fixing harness on horses

15262_266

Man plowing field with horses

15262_267

Man plows field with horses

15262_268

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Front view of man on a harrows being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plow, which is used for deeper tillage. Man fixes harness on horses.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man plows field with two white horses.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_269

Man on a horse drawn cart

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949
Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man plows field with two whites horses. Farmhouse can be seen in background. Side view of man on a harrows being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plow, which is used for deeper tillage. Man sitting on a horse drawn cart.

15262_270

Man on a horse drawn cart

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man sitting on a horse drawn cart.

  

108

15262_271

Man stands beside horse drawn cart

15262_272

Man on a horse drawn cart

15262_273

Man on a horse drawn cart

15262_274

Man and a horse drawn disc harrows

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man stands beside his horse drawn cart.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man sitting on a horse drawn cart.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Side view of a man sitting in a horse drawn cart.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_275

Man and horses plow field

15262_276

Man milks a cow

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Side view of man on a harrows being pulled by two white horses. In agriculture, a harrow is an implement for breaking up and smoothing out the surface of the soil. In this way it is distinct in its effect from the plow, which is used for deeper tillage. Man plowing fields with two white horses.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_277

Berry pickers getting ready

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man sits on stool to milk his cows. A barn and other cows can be seen in the background. A group of berry pickers are getting ready for the day. Berry pickers bringing in picked berries.

15262_278

Berries being brought in

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

  

109

15262_279

Pickers bringing in the berries

15262_280

Man seeds the field

15262_281

Woman in skirt seeds the field

15262_282

Woman milks cow

15262_283

Man milking cow

15262_284

Man milking cow

15262_285

Woman seeds field

15262_286

Young boy picks berries

15262_287

Sheep in fenced field

15262_288

Man chopping wood

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Picked berries and berry pickers.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man seeds a field.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Woman in skirt seeds field.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Woman wearing dress milks a cow.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man in overalls milks cow.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man in overalls milks a cow.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Woman in skirt seeds field.

10.1 x 15.2 cm (4 x 6 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Quebec, Canada

Historical Canadian

Young boys picks berries in a field.

20 x 25.2 cm (7 7/8 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Sheep in field with wood barn in background.

20 x 25.2 cm (7 7/8 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

A balding man chops wood in front of farm house.

  

110

15262_289

Man chopping wood

15262_290

Two men sawing a tree

15262_291

Men chopping wood

15262_292

Two horses followed by man holding reins

15262_293

Men piling logs

15262_294

Loading and pulling logs

15262_295

Horses pulling logs

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

20 x 25.2 cm (7 7/8 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

A balding man chops wood in front of a farmhouse.

20 x 25 cm (7 7/8 x 9 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men sawing wood in snow.

20 x 25.2 cm (7 7/8 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Three men chop and saw wood in winter.

19.9 x 25 cm (7 13/16 x 9 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

20 x 25.2 cm (7 7/8 x 9 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two horses walking in snow and followed by man holding the reins. Men loading logs for horse to pull.

19.8 x 24.8 cm (7 13/16 x 9 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Men load logs as horses wait to pull through snow.

19.8 x 24.8 cm (7 13/16 x 9 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_296

Horse hauling hay

19.8 x 24.8 cm (7 13/16 x 9 3/4 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_297

Two horses attached to loaded sleigh

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

19.9 x 24.9 cm (7 13/16 x 9 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two horses pull logs as men follow behind. A black dog lays in the snow waiting. Man walks beside horse hauling hay in a cart. Train tracks and phone lines can be seen in background. Two horses stand in snow with loaded sleigh.

  

111

15262_298

The Deepwoods of Onaman

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

27.5 x 35.1 cm (10 13/16 x 13 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten in graphite): THE DEEPWOODS OF ONANMAN / 16x22 / Dec 3/46. [no inscriptions]

Dec 3rd 1946

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

White horse hauling wood through snow, surrounded by birch trees.

15262_299

Horse hauling logs

15262_300

Horse hauling logs

15262_301

Horse hauling logs

15262_302

Two horses hauling wood

15262_303

Horse hauling logs

15262_304

Horse hauling logs

15262_305

Plowing and wood cutting

15262_306

Man plowing land

15262_307

Manholding a saw

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

27.6 x 35.1 cm (10 7/8 x 13 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man holds reins of wood hauling horse.

27.5 x 35.1 cm (10 13/16 x 13 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Brown horse hauling wood through the snow as man follows. Horse hauling wood logs as man follows.

27.6 x 35.1 cm (10 7/8 x 13 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

27.6 x 35.1 cm (10 7/8 x 13 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two horses and two men haul wood through snow.

27.6 x 35.1 cm (10 7/8 x 13 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Horse hauls wood through snow. Man leans down to fix something. Horse hauling wood logs as man follows.

27.6 x 35.1 cm (10 7/8 x 13 13/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

17.6 x 12.6 cm (6 15/16 x 4 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man plowing farmland for seeding.

12.6 x 17.6 cm (4 15/16 x 6 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man plowing farmland for seeding.

21.3 x 7.6 cm (8 3/8 x 3 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Test strip of man holding a saw and walking along a wood log.

  

112

15262_308

Man walking with saw

15262_309

Man working with saw

15262_310

Man and horse hauling wood

15262_311

Two horses haul wood logs

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

19.6 x 7.6 cm (7 3/4 x 3 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

21.5 x 7.5 cm (8 7/16 x 2 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Test strip of man walking with saw through a rockcovered ground. Test strip of man working with saw.

17.6 x 25.1 cm (6 15/16 x 9 7/8 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Horse hauling wood with man.

12.6 x 17.6 cm (4 15/16 x 6 15/16 in.)

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): 25 x 30

c. 19401949

Onaman, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Three men work the land using two horses.

Series 2: Postcards
15262_312 Women and children by rocks Unknown 8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.) gelatin silver [no inscription] c.19071910 Canada First Nations, Historical Canadian Group aboriginal of women and children stand in front of rocks. Man pulling dogsled, team of dogs with another trailing behind. View of York Factory, which was a settlement and factory (trading post) located on the south western shore of Hudson Bay in north eastern Manitoba, Canada. Four men in wood canoe going over rapids. Group of men in long boats on river. Group of six men holding axes.

15262_313

Man pulling dogsled

Unknown

8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.) 8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscription]

c. 19071910

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_314

York Factory

Unknown

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten in black ink): York Factory

c. 19071920

Manitoba, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_315

Canoe going over rapids

Unknown

15262_316

Two long boats on river Men squaring logs

Unknown

15262_317

Unknown

8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.) 8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.) 8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19071915

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19071915

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19071915

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

  

113

15262_318

Men in canoes on river Men unloading canoes

Unknown

15262_319

Unknown

8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.) 8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19071915

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

Group of men in canoes on water. Group of men unloading canoes, possibility setting up a camp site. Group of men docking and unloading canoes. A man padding a canoe on water. Group of men and a woman seated on dog sled pose for a picture, while another man stands to the left and rubs the lead dog. Man on far left looks at two dogsled teams, while another man is seen standing in the background.

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19071915

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_320

Men docking and unloading canoes Man in canoe on water A group poses for a picture with a dogsled team

Unknown

8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.) 8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.) 8.4 x 14.1 cm (3 5/16 x 5 9/16 in.)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19071915

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_321

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19071915

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_322

Unknown

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_323

Two men and their dog sled teams

Unknown

7.8 x 13.5 cm (3 1/16 x 5 5/16)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 1930s

Canada (probably)

Historical Canadian

15262_324

A mill in Nipigon

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Photo by / Everett / Nipigon Ont / Nov 13 1936 recto (handwritten on image): Photo by / Everett / Eleven trucks were spilled during a record snowfall crossing, Lake Helen. The dog team gets through Nipigon, Ont

1936

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Landscape of some sort of industrial plant or mill.

15262_325

Dog sled in deep snow

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19231939

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Dogs trek through the deep snow after a recordbreaking snowfall.

  

114

15262_326

The Mounted Police Team of Huskies of Nipigon, ON

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):The Mounted Police Team of Huskies of Nipigon, ON / Photo by Everett

c. 19231939

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

The mounted police with their husky dog sled teams.

15262_327

Husky dog sled team

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Photo by Everett

c. 19231939

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men and a dog sled team.

15262_328

Sled dogs at Nipigon

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

15262_329

Sled dogs resting in snow

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):Photo by Everett / Sled dogs at Nipigon recto (handwritten on image):Photo by Everett / Nipigon Feb 26 1937 recto (handwritten on image): Winter Transportation at Nipigon, Ont / Photo by / Everett recto (handwritten on image): Photo by Everett

c. 19231939

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two harnessed sled dogs sit in snow.

1937

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

A team of sled dogs resting in the snow.

15262_330

Winter Transportatio n

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19231939

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men pose for a picture with their sled dogs, one man waves.

15262_331

Running dog sled team

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19231939

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Running dog sled team in winter.

15262_332

Mission Building in Bethel, Alk

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image) 19 FD / Mission Building in Bethel, Alk

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

View of homes and the mission building in Bethel, Alaska.

  

115

15262_333

Mail Team Bethel, Alaska

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Mail Team Bethel, Alaska / FD 119 recto (handwritten on image): Kivagalek and wife / FD 60

c. 19241940

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

One dog sled team and two men stand in front of a post office. A aboriginal man named Kivagalek sits outside a wood structure with his wife, both are in native dress. A saw can be seen behind the woman hanging on the wall of the wood structure. View of a small community landscape, with two children running up a small hill and a boat in the foreground.

15262_334

Kivagalek and wife

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_335

Auigillingok, Alaska Nov. 3, 1917

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Auigillingok, Alaska Nov. 3, 1917 / FD

1917

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_336

Amos

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Amos / FD 120

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

A sled dog names Amos sits outside in the snow.

15262_337

Travelling in Alaska

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

15262_338

Freed by the Tide to Break Camp

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Travelling in Alaska / FD 106 recto (handwritten on image): FD 188 / Freed by the Tide to Break Camp recto (handwritten on image):FD 30 / Sawmill Bethel Alaska

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

A man poses for picture while sitting on a dog sled pulled by two huskies. Two men pack up a campsite onto a small sailboat.

15262_339

Sawmill Bethel Alaska

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Horizontal view of piles of wood outside a working sawmill.

  

116

15262_340

Fishing

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): FD 233 / Fishing recto (handwritten on image):Moravi an Church, Akiak, Alk. / 94 FD recto (handwritten on image): Heathen Boys / FD 192

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

A man stands in a kayak fishing.

15262_341

Moravian Church, Akiak, Alk.

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

View of a white church with a steeple set in the centre of trees.

15262_342

Heathen Boys

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Two young aboriginal boys and a dog stand in front of a wood building. A large group of aboriginal children pose for a class photo. Two aboriginal men stand behind a sled filled with deal seals.

15262_343

Public School Bethel ALK.

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

15262_344

Taking Home the Spoils Sealers on Kusk Bay

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

15262_345

Reindeer

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):Public School Bethel ALK. / FD 170 recto (handwritten on image):Taking Home the Spoils Sealers on Kusk Bay / FD 227 recto (handwritten on image): Reindeer / FD 58

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Image of two reindeer in harnesses resting.

15262_346

Travelling with tentsled

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):Travelli ng with Tentsled / FD 51

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_347

Children without school

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):Childre n without school / FD 45

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Aboriginal man with a reindeer pulling a sled poses for a picture while a group looks on in the background. Group of young aboriginal children stand in front of wood building.

  

117

15262_348

Reindeer Herder's Convention

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

15262_349

S. School at Bethel, Alaska

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):Reinde er Herder's Convention / FD 113 recto (handwritten on image): S. School at Bethel, Alaska / FD 38 recto (handwritten on image): A Harvest of Tom Cod / Auigillingok, Alk. / FD

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Group of male aboriginals posing for photograph in front of building. Group of aboriginal children and teachers take a class photograph. Two aboriginal children pose of the camera in foreground. Mid-ground harvested cod sits on the ice and in the background fish is being dried. Dog sled teams move kayak through the snow.

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_350

A Harvest of Tom Cod. Auigillingok, Alk

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_351

Moving a kayak by dog sled

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Moving a kayak by dog sled FD

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_352

Travelling in the rough ice

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):Travelli ng in the rough ice / FD 203 recto (handwritten on image): FD 141 / King Salmon

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

A group travels through snow and ice on dog sleds.

15262_353

King Salmon

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_354

His hair were never cut

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): His hair were never cut / FD 149 recto (handwritten on image): [illegible]

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_355

Twelve men in boat

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Man holds up two king salmon and a young child in a fur coat poses for the camera. Two aboriginal children who have just gotten their hair cut for the first time. Twelve men sit in boat on water.

  

118

15262_356

Break-up on the Kuskok River

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

15262_357

Tundra Natives

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image):FD 516 / Break-up on the Kuskok River recto (handwritten on image): Tundra Natives / FD 48 recto (handwritten on image): Eskimo women making baskets

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Image of ice breaking up on water.

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Group of male tundra aboriginals and one child, pose for a picture. Two Inuit women sit making baskets. The baskets are made with what seems to be the coiling technique. Another woman and two children look on, while in the far left corner a dog sleeps. Image of the town of Quinhagak. The town seems to be covered by a few feet of snow and in the distance a wood church and various wood structures are seen. Two women sit splitting fish using a ulu "women's knife". The fish is then hung to dry on racks that can be seen on the right side of the image. A group of aboriginal children stand in front of drying salmon.

15262_358

Eskimo women making baskets

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_359

Quinhagak, Alaska

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Quinhagak, Alaska

c. 19241949

Quinhagak , Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_360

Women Splitting Fish

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Women splitting fish

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_361

Salmon Drying

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Salmon drying

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

  

119

15262_362

Two Styles Sled

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): x 128 / Two styles of sled recto (handwritten on image): Packing in summer recto (handwritten on image): Reindeer Fair recto (handwritten on image): Quinhagak Ready to Leave

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Two reindeers stand in front of two different types of sleds. Aboriginals pack up items onto the backs of reindeer. Group of aboriginals and reindeer pulling empty sleds. Aboriginals and reindeer sled in foreground, town of Quinhagak, Alaska in background. View of large reindeer herd with mountains in background.

15262_363

Packing in Summer

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_364

Reindeer Fair

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_365

Quinhagak Ready to Leave

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Quinhagak , Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_366

Mission reindeer herd

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Mission reindeer herd recto (handwritten on image):Reinde er Herd Crossing River recto (handwritten on image):Crossin g the River recto (handwritten on image): Kashige recto (handwritten on image): White Whale Auigillingok recto (handwritten on image): Beluga or White Whale

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_367

Reindeer Herd Crossing River

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Reindeer herd crossing the river.

15262_368

Crossing the River

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Reindeer swims behind the boat in order to cross the river. The outside of an Kashige, which is an Inuit shelter. Hunted white whale lies on shore as aboriginal s look on. Dead Beluga or white whale on lies beach.

15262_369

Kashige

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_370

White Whale Auigillingok

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_371

Beluga or White Whale

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

  

120

15262_372

Eskimo Boys

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Eskimo Boys recto (handwritten on image):Skinnin g a White Whale recto (handwritten on image): Eskimo boys with pups recto (handwritten on image):Boys with bows and arrows recto (handwritten on image):King Salmon recto (handwritten on image):Beluga or White Whale recto (handwritten on image):Just Arrived Quinhagak, Alk recto (handwritten on image): Reindeer herd in mountains recto (handwritten on image): In an Eskimo village recto (handwritten on image):Lassoin g and marking reindeer

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Two young Inuit boys stand outside a wood building. Aboriginal skinning white whales.

15262_373

Skinning a White Whale

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_374

Eskimo boys with pups

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Group of Inuit children with husky puppies.

15262_375

Boys with bows and arrows

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_376

King Salmon

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Group of Inuit boys stand with bows and arrows in front of fish drying racks. Two Inuit's holding king salmon.

15262_377

Beluga or White Whale

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Dead Beluga or white whale lying on beach.

15262_378

Just Arrived Quinhagak, Alk

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Quinhagak , Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Reindeer sled arriving in Quinhagak, Alaska.

15262_379

Reindeer herd in mountains

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Reindeer herd with mountains in the background. Group of Inuit children stand in front of drying fish on racks. Group of aboriginals prepare to skin a reindeer. They would have used the lasso to capture the animal.

15262_380

In an Eskimo village

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

15262_381

Lassoing and marking reindeer

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

  

121

15262_382

Travelling in the Mountains

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Travelling in the Mountains

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Man and sled dogs pose for picture in front of snow covered mountains.

15262_383

Seal Hunter on the water

Unknown

8.5 x 13.3 cm (3 3/8 x 5 1/4 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Seal hunter on the water recto (handwritten on rebate edge): Ice Cream Parlor at Ft. Smith. 501

c. 19241949

Alaska, United States

NonHistorical Canadian

Man standing in kayak hunting seals.

15262_384

Ice Cream Parlor at Fort Smith

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Fort Smith, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_385

The First Bank in N.W.T

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): The First Bank in the N.W.T. 45

June 10th, 1921

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Three men, two women and a child enjoy the sun outside a constructed tent called The Little Coffee House. Four men stand outside the Union Bank of Canada in a large tent, which attracted a good deal of attention during the ten days that it served as a shelter for the branch. Americans were particularly impressed, thinking it a fine example of the way in which law and order was observed in Canada even in remote settlements. Permanent quarters for the branch and its manager were soon established in a small log cabin.

  

122

15262_386

Scow at Fitzgerald Portage

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Scow at Fitzgerald Portage. 54

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

A trading scow (a widebeamed sailing dinghy). is docked at the Fitzgerald Portage in Fort Smith, Northwest Territories. These scows were designed for hard work and heavy haulage and they did their job remarkably well.

15262_387

H.B. Post at McMurray

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): H.B. Post at McMurray 13 recto (handwritten): The Fair Sex Coronation Gulf Eskimos 234 recto (handwritten): Chipewyan, Lake Athabasca 34

c. 19241949

Fort McMurray , Alberta, Canada Nunavut, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of Hudson Bay post at Fort McMurray. Postcard is of six Inuit women and children called "The Coronation Gulf Eskimos" A view of Fort Chipewyan taken across Lake Athabasca. Fort Chipewyan is one of the oldest European settlements in the province of Alberta, Canada. The Fort is located on the western tip of Lake Athabasca, adjacent to Wood Buffalo National Park, in the eastern extremity of northern Alberta.

15262_388

The Fair Sex Coronation Gulf Eskimos

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_389

Chipewyan, Lake Athabasca

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Fort Chipewyan , Alberta, Canada

Historical Canadian

  

123

15262_390

Hare Indians, Mackenzie River

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Hare Indians. Mackenzie River 104

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Four Sahtú or North Slavey (historically called Hare or Hareskin Indians) women and children pose for the camera in western dress. A group of Athabascaspeaking people ancestors lived in small, nomadic bands along the lower Mackenzie River valley of the Northwest Territories. The image depicts many tipis indicting a large aboriginal camp. In the background wood structures are seen. Splitted fish can be seen drying on racks, which will then presumably be stored in the wood log stockade in order to protect them from animals. A trappers cache, which is a small log cabin on stilts. Supplies are seen beside the structure. Image of the airplane René, which crashed and was damaged beyond repair on August 21, 1921, at Fort Simpson. There were no fatalities.

15262_391

Indian Camp Great Slave Lake

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Indian Camp [a squiggle] Great Slave Lake, number [illegible]

c. 19241949

Great Slave Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_392

Fish Stockade Near Providence

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Fish Stockade at Providence 211

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_393

A Trapper's Cache, Mackenzie

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): A Trapper's Cache, Mackenzie 158

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_394

Plane on Skis Simpson

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Plane on Skis Simpson 139

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian, Aviation

  

124

15262_395

10pm in the Arctic Circle

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): 10pm in the Arctic Circle

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Image of the midnight sun over the water in the Arctic Circle. Clouds and tress mirrored over Slave River. An airplane docked on the beach at Fort Smith. A large ferryboat docked at Fort McMurray.

15262_396

Mirror of the Clouds Slave River

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_397

The First Aeroplane. Fort Smith

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Mirror of the Clouds Slave River 44 recto (handwritten): The First Aeroplane. Fort Smith. recto (handwritten): SBSS [illegible] Fort McMurray at McMurray 20 recto (handwritten): Northerners Going Outside 9 recto (handwritten): The Rider from the North 213

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

c. 19241949

Fort Smith, Northwest Territories, Canada Fort McMurray , Alberta, Canada

Historical Canadian, Aviation

15262_398

SBSS [?] Fort McMurray at McMurray

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Historical Canadian

15262_399

Northerners Going Outside

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Large group of male travellers stand outside and on top of train. Young boy holds a horse whip while standing next to a dog with a saddle on. Young boy riding on the back of a dog with a saddle and horse whip. Group of aboriginals standing on breaking ice. Group or family of aboriginals stand in front of a tent. Large group of people watching the arrival of a boat at Fort Simpson, the only village in the entire territory, in the Dehcho Region of the Northwest Territories.

15262_400

The Rider from the North

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_401

The Rider from the North

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): The Rider from the North 214

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_402

Ice Break-up at Aclaric, Mackenzie

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_403

Eskimos from the Arctic Coast

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Ice Break-up at Aclaric, Mackenzie 233 recto (handwritten): Eskimos from the Arctic Coast 503 recto (handwritten): Watching boat arrival, Ft. Simpson 506

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Northwest Territories, Canada

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Northwest Territories, Canada

15262_404

Watching boat arrival, Ft. Simpson

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Fort Simpson, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

  

125

15262_405

Eskimo Whale Boat, Mackenzie Delta

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Eskimo Whale Boat, Mckenzie [sic] Delta

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men work on building a whaleboat, which is a long rowboat with a bow at either end for easy manoeuvrabilit y, used in whaling.

15262_406

Eskimo Family

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): Eskimo Family at A [...illegible] 132

c. 19241949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Group of Inuit men, women and children standing in front of a log cabin.

15262_407

A Medicine Man's Wife

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten): A Medicine Man's Wife 513 recto (handwritten): Snowshoes for Breaking Trail [?] recto (handwritten): Slavi [sic] Indians at Fort Good Hope 156

c. 19241949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

A medicine man's wife with her two children stands in front of a tent. Man stands holding snowshoes and a gun. Group of Slavey (also Slave) are a First Nations aboriginal people of the Dene group, indigenous to the Great Slave Lake region, in Canada's Northwest Territories, and extending into northeastern British Columbia and northwestern Alberta. Four tired sled dogs sleeping in the snow.

15262_408

Snowshoes for Breaking Trail

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_409

Slavey Indians at Fort Good Hope

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_410

Tired dogs

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

  

126

15262_411

Dawson

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in) 8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_412

Two fishermen

Unknown

gelatin silver

verso (handwritten in graphite): Dawson [no inscriptions]

c. 19241949

c. 19241949

Dawson City, Yukon, Canada Canada

Historical Canadian

View of Dawson City from a hill. Two fishermen stand in front of a fishing boat, while holding fish. Four sled dogs harnessed and ready to pull the sled with two men. Two men and sled dog team with community church in background. Man being pulled by dogs on a toboggan.

Historical Canadian

15262_413

Two men riding a dog sled

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_414

Dog sled team

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_415

Dogs pulling man on a toboggan

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

[no inscriptions]

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_416

Dog sled team Dog pulled toboggan race Aboriginal family on boat

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in) 8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in) 8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver gelatin silver gelatin silver

[no inscriptions] [no inscriptions] [no inscriptions]

c. 19241949 c. 19241949 c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian Historical Canadian First Nations, Historical Canadian

Dog sled team and two men on ice. Four dogs pull man on a toboggan. Group of children and man standing in boat, on the waters edge. All are reflected in the water. Five men on boat going over a cascade at Athabasca River. Duplicate of 15262_422. Image of aboriginal items shoes, bag and gloves made from Caribou hide. Image of traditional aboriginal and Inuit garments.

15262_417

Unknown

Canada

15262_418

Unknown

Canada

15262_419

Shooting the Big Cascade Athabasca River

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_420

White Caribou Work from Chipewyan

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Shooting the Big Cascade Athabasca River recto (handwritten on image):White Cariboo [sic] Work from Chipewyan recto (handwritten on image): Handiwork from Indians and Eskimos

c.19241949

Alberta, Canada

Historical Canadian

c. 19241949

Alberta, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_421

Handiwork from Indians and Eskimos

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c.19241949

Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

  

127

15262_422

Shooting the Big Cascade Athabasca River

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_423

Eskimo and Wife at Fort McPherson

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Shooting the Big Cascade Athabasca River (duplicate of 72) recto (handwritten on image): Eskimo and Wife at Fort McPherson

c.19241949

Alberta, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Five men on boat going over a cascade at Athabasca River. Duplicate of 15262_419.

c. 19241949

Fort McPherson , Northwest Territories, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

Inuit husband and wife sit in front of tent.

15262_424

Scotty Smith's Dog Train at River Park, Winnipeg

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten in black): Scotty Smith's Dog Train at River Park, Winnipeg recto (handwritten on image): Plowing with Dogs at Simpson recto (handwritten on image): Winter's Footgear N.W.T recto (handwritten on image): Summer on the McKenzie [sic] recto (handwritten on image):Winter Travel on the McKenzie [sic] recto (handwritten on image): Snow Ptarmigan 458

c. 19241949

River Park, Winnipeg, Canada

First Nations, Historical Canadian

15262_425

Plowing with Dogs at Simpson

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Fort Simpson, Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Aboriginal man and white couple in sled being pulled by dogs. Other couples can be seen in the background. Dogs plowing a field.

15262_426

Winter's Footgear

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Snowshoes hanging on outside wall of a log cabin.

15262_427

Summer on the Mackenzie

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of two boats on river.

15262_428

Winter Travel on the Mackenzie

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Northwest Territories, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two dog sleds and two male riders pose for a picture.

15262_429

Snow Ptarmigan

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Snow Ptarmigan in snow.

  

128

15262_430

View of the joining of the Athabasca

Unknown

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_431

Transport Dog Team at Nipigon Ont

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Photo by Sutherland's Pharmacy. verso (handwritten in graphite): The plane landed on the first leg of our flight just about where these dogs are photographed. The Athabasca and Clearwater rivers join here, it's the end of steel in N. Canada recto (handwritten on image): Transport Dog Team at Nipigon Ont / Photo by / Everett recto (handwritten on image): Shooting the Rapids on "The Nipigon River" Canada verso (stamped in black): E.C. Everett, / Nipigon, ONT recto (handwritten on image): Photo by / Everett recto (handwritten on image): Transport Dog Team at Nipigon Ont / Photo by / Everett recto (handwritten on image): Photo by / Everett

c. 19241949

Alberta, Canada

Historical Canadian

View of the joining of the Athabasca and Clearwater Rivers with two men and dog sled. There is a note written on the verso by Frank H. Johnston.

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Dog sled team and two men stand outside Everett's Developing and Printing store. Duplicate of 15262_434. Two men in canoe riding the rapids on Nipigon River.

15262_432

Shooting the Rapids on "The Nipigon River" Canada

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_433

Man and sled dogs

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c.19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man petting a sled dog.

15262_434

Transport Dog Team at Nipigon Ont

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_435

Man running with dog sled team

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Dog sled team and two men stand outside Everett's Developing and Printing store. Duplicate of 15262_431. Man running with dog sled team, while others watch on.

  

129

15262_436

Dog sled team travel near train tracks

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Photo by / Everett

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_437

A Husky Dog Team in Northern Ont.

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_438

Dog Teams are used in the mining districts

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_439

A gentlemen and his team

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): A Husky Dog Team in Northern Ont. / Photo by Everett / 18 recto (handwritten on image): Dog Teams are used in the mining districts / Photo by Everett / Nipigon Ont. recto (handwritten on image): Photo by Everett

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Man travels with dog sled team next to train tracks. A log building of a gold mine can be seen in background. Two men and their dog sleds resting in the snow. Duplicate of 15262_441

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men being pulled by a dog sled team through the snow.

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

A well-dressed young man, stands with a dog sled team in winter.

15262_440

Mounted Police starting out to get "their man." Nipigon Ont

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

15262_441

A Husky Dog Team in Northern Ont. (duplicate of 213)

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

recto (handwritten on image): Mounted Police starting out to get "their man." Nipigon Ont / Photo by Everett recto (handwritten on image): A Husky Dog Team in Northern Ont. / Photo by Everett / 18 recto (handwritten on image): Heavy Snowfall in Northern Ontario. / Photo by Everett

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

A group of police officers standing with their dog sled teams, while on the hunt for a suspect.

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two and their dog sleds resting in the snow. Duplicate of 15262_437.

15262_442

Heavy Snowfall in Northern Ontario

Everett, E. C., (18951984)

8.8 x 14 cm (3 7/8 x 5 1/2 in)

gelatin silver

c. 19241949

Nipigon, Ontario, Canada

Historical Canadian

Two men walk through a snowy path.

  

130

Series 3: Ephemera 15262_443 and 15262_444 Paint brushes Unknown brush various inscriptions c. 19101949 Unknown Historical Canadian Two tempera paint brushes used by Frank "Franz" Johnston. Twelve pamphlets with blue covers and yellow pages. Includes essay about Franz Johnston written by J.E. Middleton. Also includes quotes from various sources parsing Johnston's paintings. Business card for Sigmund Muldal A poster for an exhibition of Franz Johnston's paintings at the Rothmans Art Gallery of Stratford. Nine pages of a hand written autobiography written by Frank Johnston. The pages detail his studies in the united states as well as detailing the start of his friendship with other members of the group of seven. Eleven pages of notes written by Paul and Mary Rodrik as apart of a biography about Frank Johnston.

15262_445

Franz Johnston A.R.C.A., O.S.A.

J.E. Middleton

14 x 10.1 cm (5 1/2 x 4 in.)

paper

[no inscriptions]

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_446

City Museum

Sigmund Muldal

3.4 x 7.6 cm (1 5/16 x 3 in.) 23 X 15.3 cm (9 1/16 x 6 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_447

Franz Johnston in Retrospect 1888-1949

Rodrik, Paul, 1915-1983

paper

[no inscriptions]

1970

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_448 -456

Frank Johnston autobiograph y

Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949

28.1 x 21.4 cm (11 1/16 x 8 7/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_457 -467

Biography notes written by Paul Rodrik

Rodrik, Paul, 1915-1983 Rodrik, Mary Bishop, 1919-2006

28.1 x 21.4 cm (11 1/16 x 8 7/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 19491979

Canada

Historical Canadian

  

131

15262_468 -473

Parts of a biography of Frank Johnston written by Paul Rodrik Paul Rodrik: Pageant of the Human Puppet Exhibition pamphlet Map of Great Bear Lake

Rodrik, Paul, 1915-1983

28.1 x 21.4 cm (11 1/16 x 8 7/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 19491979

Canada

Historical Canadian

Numerous pages typed stories of the life of Frank Johnston. Two Exhibition pamphlets and invite.

15262_474

Rodrik, Paul, 1915-1983

28.1 x 21.4 cm (11 1/16 x 8 7/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 1979

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_475

Unknown

oversized

paper

various inscriptions

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

Map of Great Bear Lake

15262_476 15262_477

Map of Great Bear Lake Map of Cameron Bay Map of the Northwest Territories

Unknown Unknown

oversized oversized

paper paper

various inscriptions various inscriptions various inscriptions

c. 1939 c. 1936

Canada Canada

Historical Canadian Historical Canadian Historical Canadian

Map of Great Bear Lake Map of Cameron Bay Map of the Northwest territories. Includes markings done by Johnston indicating his trip. Travel receipts for Johnston travels in Great Bear Lake. They are from Canadian National Express and Canadian Airways Limited. Cost of room and board for Johnston's time in Great Bear Lake.

15262_478

Unknown

oversized

paper

c. 1935

Canada

15262_479

Great Bear Lake travel receipt

Canadian National Express and Canadian Airways Limited.

approx. 12.5 - 25.1 cm (4 15/16 x 9 7/8 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_480

Travel and room and board receipts.

Unknown

25.1 x 19.8 cm (9 7/8 x 7 13/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_481

Animals of all Countries

Unknown

28 x 21.5 cm (11 x 8 7/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

October 1924

London, England

Historical NonCanadian

The magazine contains illustrations of numerous types of animals. The illustrations are produced in both black and white and colour.

  

132

15262_482

Nature Magazine

The American Nature Associatio n

29 x 21.5 cm (11 x 8 7/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

Decemb er 1927

Princeton, New Jersey

Historical NonCanadian

15262_483

The Beaver

Hudson's Bay Company

28.9 x 20.8 cm (11 3/8 x 8 3/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

Spring 1964

Winnipeg, Canada

Historical Canadian

The magazine contains stories of Alaska. The images within the magazine are of similar subject matter to those found in the paintings and photographs created by Johnston. Contain colour and black and white images of the Canadian North. Envelope that seems to have contained travel tickets. This a small travel tag that has may have been placed on luggage. The tag contains the logo for Mackenzie Air Service along with Johnston's personal information. Canadian Airways passenger ticket from Coppermine to Radium. Handwritten notes.

15262_484

Canadian National Round the World Service Mackenzie Air Service

Canadian National Railways

12 x 16.4 cm (4 3/4 x 6 7/16 in.) 9.8 x 9.3 cm (3 7/8 x 3 11/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 1918 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_485

Mackenzie Air Service Limited Macdonald Hotel, Edmonton

paper

various inscriptions

c. 1918 1949

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_486

Passenger Ticket Canadian Airways Limited Hand writtennote

Canadian Airways Limited

19.5 x 11.3 cm (7 11/16 x 4 7/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_487

Unknown

21.5 x 14 cm (8 7/16 x 5 1/2 in.) 15.9 x 25.3 cm (61/4 x 9 15/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 19491983

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_488

Print of a Paul Rodrik painting

Rodrik, Paul, 1915-1983

paper

[no inscriptions]

c. 19491983

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_489

Thank you letter

Unknown

25.3 x 20.3 cm (9 15/16 x 8 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

February 21st, 1940

Canada

Historical Canadian

Blue clouds in yellow sky hangs over a tipi placed in the middle ground, by the waters edge. A thank you letter to Frank Johnston for a speech he gave at a club.

  

133

15262_490

Receipt for Canadian Airways Limited Franz J. Teaching Thoughts + Philosophy

Canadian Airways Limited Johnston, Frank "Franz" H. (Francis Hans), 1888-1949 various

27.6 x 21.2 cm (10 7/8 x 8 3/8 in.) 24.1 x 38 cm (9 1/2 x 14 15/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

July 11, 1939

Canada

Historical Canadian

Receipt for flight between Coppermine to Port Radium. Folder that held all the paper clippings.

15262_491

paper

15262_492 -586

94 cutouts of various subject matter

approx. 6.4-34.1 cm (2 1/2 x 13 7/16 in.)

paper

verso [handwritten in green marker]: Franz J.Teaching / Thoughts + Philosophy various inscriptions

c.19241949

Canada

Historical Canadian

c. 19491979

Canada

Historical Canadian

15262_587

Note attached to Rembrandt

Unknown

9 x 15.2 cm (3 9/16 x 6 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 19101949

Canada

Historical Canadian

Includes clippings of photos of animals and landscapes possibly used for reference purposes when Frank "Franz" Johnston was painting, as well as clippings of some reproductions of other artists' work. Note written in pencil on white envelope was attached to Self-Portrait of Rembrandt with Beret and Turned-Up Collar. Rembrandt van Rijn - SelfPortrait with Beret and Turned-Up Collar. is a 1659 oil on canvas painting by the Dutch artist Rembrandt. Print of a painting by Millar Waft. The painting depicts various aboriginals working on daily tasks. Women take care of the children as men work. Produce a fire by rubbing a thong on a stick. In the

15262_588

Self-Portrait of Rembrandt with Beret and TurnedUp Collar

Rembrandt Harmenszo on van Rijn, 16061669

30.5 x 24.1 cm (12 x 9 1/2 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

c. 19491979

unknown

Historical NonCanadian

15262_589

Christmas in Snowy Lands: with the Eskimos of the Far North

Waft, Millar

36.1 x 50 cm (14 3/16 x 19 11/16 in.)

paper

various inscriptions

Novemb er 24, 1939

Canada

  

134

background of the image a dear pulling a sleigh. 15262_590 Changed Foxes! An Incident with the Cattistock The Tattler 31.8 x 32cm (12 1/2 x 12 5/8 in.) paper various inscriptions Decemb er 11th 1929 London, England A print of the painting by Lionel Edwards (11 September 1878 ­ 13 April 1966) was a British artist who specialized in painting horses and other aspects of British country life. The painting depicts a British Huntsman in the process of hunting a fox with his hound dogs; lucky the fox has slipped by them unnoticed.

  

135


