   THE  INVITATION:   NICHE  AUDIENCES,  PARTICIPATORY  CULTURE,  AND  THE  HYPE  MACHINE     by   Conrad  Daellenbach   Popular  Music  B.A,  University  of  Western  Ontario,  London,  2013      This  Major  Research  Project   Presented  to  Ryerson  University      In  partial  fulfillment  of  the     Requirements  for  the  degree  of   Master  of  Digital  Media         In  the  Yeates  School  of  Graduate  Studies   Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2015      ©  Conrad  Daellenbach  2015              

   Authors  Declaration  Page   AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  MRP   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  MRP.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  MRP,   including  any  required  final  revisions.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by  other   means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose   of  scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.      Signed,   Conrad  C.  Daellenbach                       

  

ii  

   Abstract   This  paper  explores  the  use  of  aggregation  and  curation  of  syndicated  sources  to  support   social  media  listening  as  a  way  of  addressing  the  problem  of  information  overload  inherent   in  music  discovery.  Whereas  Hodson  &  Wilkes  looked  at  textual  patterns  and  sentiment  in   discourse,  the  objective  of  my  research  is  to  apply  their  techniques  within  the  context  of   identifying  trends  in  electronic  music  discourse.  I'll  then  determined  whether  a  traditional   model  for  understanding  influence,  such  as  Katz  &  Lazarsfeld's  "Two-step  flow  theory,"   remains  true  in  a  digital  ecosystem.  I'll  examine  the  music  blog  aggregator  Hype  Machine,   which  employs  crowdsourcing  and  content  curation  to  pre-filter  a  sample  of  top  blog  posts,   with  the  objective  of  creating  a  dataset  from  which  to  identify  correlations  in  both  audio   properties  and  blog  influence.  My  research  is  driven  by  an  exploration  of  technology  and   cultural  change,  as  well  as  examinations  of  why  and  how  audiences  consume  music.                                  

  

iii  

   Acknowledgements   I  want  to  dedicate  this  thesis  to  my  supervisor,  Dr.  Jaigris  Hodson  for  her  unwavering   support  throughout  this  entire  process,  and  for  inspiring  me  to  write  this  paper.  I  thank  her   for  imparting  on  me  her  unique  outlook  on  the  music  industry  and  (perhaps  most   importantly)  for  refocusing  my  efforts  countless  times.        I  also  want  to  thank  my  directed  studies  partner  and  one  of  the  most  talented  people  I   know,  Naomi  Cowan  for  her  insight,  her  kindness,  and  her  faith.  This  was  an  impactful   journey  to  undertake  and  it  wouldn't  have  been  nearly  as  much  fun  without  her.                                              

  

iv  

   Table  of  Contents:   Title  Page                                                                                                            ..................................................................................          I   Author  Declaration                                                                    ..................................................................................          II   Abstract                                                             Acknowledgments        Table  of  Contents        Introduction                                                    ..................................................................................          III               ..................................................................................          IV               ..................................................................................          V               ..................................................................................          1               ..................................................................................          4  

Music  in  the  Digital  Age       

Consumption,  Remix  &  Data-Driven  Digital  Advertising  ..............................................          7   The  Hype-Machine,  Word-of-Mouth  &  Opinion  Leaders  ...............................................        10   Methodology   Findings                                             ..................................................................................        16               ..................................................................................        22               ..................................................................................        27               ..................................................................................        30               ..................................................................................        32  

Discussion      Conclusion     

Works  Referenced           

  

v  

   Introduction   Lawrence  Lessig  (2008),  an  advocate  of  remix  culture  and  its  many  affordances,   writes  that  YouTube  and  Wikipedia  are  a  part  of  a  cultural  economy  that  gives  the  audience   something  more,  asking  "something  more  of  the  audience,"  and  inviting  a  response  (p.  111).   The  Hype  Machine  is  a  music  blog  aggregator,  founded  in  2005,  that  tracks  posts  from  a   handpicked  set  of  blogs,  and  presents  them  to  its  audience  for  easy  analysis,  consumption   and  discovery  (HypeM,  2015).  David  Beer  and  Roger  Burrows  (2013)  look  at  Hype  Machine   as  a  popular  cultural  source  of  recursive  data,  describing  Hype  Machine  to  be  a  product  of  a   "huge  communal  presumptive  effort  on  the  part  of  participants...  creating  new  forms  of   data"  (p.  55).  The  predictive  feedback  process  that  the  Hype  Machine  community  engages   in  not  only  captures  culture,  but  also  shapes  it  by  inviting  a  response  from  its  audience.  The   opportunity  for  trend  identification,  with  the  use  of  big  data,  has  affected  and  improved  the   process  of  online  music  recommendations,  as  well  as  the  decision-making  process  and  the   process  of  forecasting  information  that  is  at  the  heart  of  opportunity  for  the  musician,  the   label,  and  the  industry  as  a  whole.  To  give  a  quick  example  of  the  power  of  data,  one  can   look  at  the  use  of  data  gathered  by  the  music-streaming  service  Spotify.  In  2013,  Spotify   looked  at  users'  listening  habits,  taking  into  account  song  and  album  streaming,  to   "determine  the  popularity  of  the  music...  Spotify  [then]  used  streaming  data  to  predict  the   Grammy  Award  winners...  In  the  end,  4  out  of  the  6  predictions  made  by  Spotify  turned  out   correctly"  (Van  Rijmenam,  2014,  para.  5).  This  is  only  one  example  of  many.        The  ongoing  conversation  regarding  this  last  decades  paradigm  shift  within  the  

music  industry,  leading  to  diminishing  music  sales  and  inadequate  streaming  royalties,  has   introduced  the  topic  of  new  revenue  sources  that  leverage  `big  data'.  This  trend  has  led  to  

  

1  

   new  information  on  the  use  of  big  data  in  connecting  with  audiences,  which  Darius  Fong   suggests  can  to  some  extent  reveal  consumers'  motivations.  The  Venture  Beat  writer  points   out  that  in  a  data-driven  industry  no  longer  limited  by  the  rigid  structures  of  the  old  music   industry  regime,  artists  can  now  "monetize  by  helping  brands  connect  with  their  target   audience...  instead  of  relying  solely  on  consumers  to  monetize  their  music"  (Fong,  2014,   para.  14).  Social  and  digital  media's  ability  to  create  opportunities  for  brand  partnerships   illuminates  only  one  of  the  many  affordances  granted  to  musicians  and  producers  in  the   digital  space.  My  research  suggests  that  musicians  and  labels  as  a  whole  need  to  stop   looking  at  emerging  barriers  and  instead  look  to  the  opportunities  that  these  "barriers"  are   creating.  With  this  in  mind,  the  goal  of  this  research  paper  is  to  use  a  popular  culture   source  such  as  Hype  Machine  to  identify  a  niche  audience,  and  to  then  produce  music  with   that  audience  in  mind.      The  crowd-sourced  atmosphere  described  by  Beer  and  Burrows  (2013)  parallels   the  changing  roles  of  participatory  culture  and  audience  engagement  outlined  in  Henry   Jenkins'  "Spreadable  Media"  (2013).  Spreadable  media  is  defined  by  Jenkins  (2013)  as  an   umbrella  term  for  content  that  recognizes  the  importance  of  social  connections,   connections  that  are  amplified  by  social  media,  and  content  that  can  be  continually   repositioned  as  it  enters  different  niche  communities.  As  a  musical  content  aggregator,   Hype  Machine  embodies  the  notion  of  "spreadable  media"  in  the  value  it  lends  to  audience   interaction,  open-ended  participation,  and  content  sharing.  If  we  take  Hype  Machine  to  be  a   predictive  reader  of  trending  music,  including  the  display  of  viral  "less-known"  music,  how   does  one  then  produce  spreadable  media  in  a  way  that  holds  on  to  that  audience?  The  easy  

  

2  

   answer  to  producing  a  "viral"  song  is  to  create  a  unique  sound  with  a  compelling  message   that  is  picked  up  by  one  of  the  many  blogs  that  Hype  Machine  curates.  The  not-so-easy   answer  for  creating  spreadable  material  is  that  your  song  must  not  only  appeal  to  a  broad   audience  in  order  to  have  the  best  chance  of  being  noticed,  but  must  be  available  in  such  a   way  that  today's  participatory  remix  culture  can  adopt,  shape,  and  reposition  your  work  to   enter  different  niche  communities.  Henry  Jenkins  (2013)  describes  this  as  a  process  of   fandom,  a  process  where  groups  of  fans  are  "gaining  greater  communicative  capacity   within  a  networked  culture  and  toward  a  context  where  niche  cultural  production  is   increasingly  influencing  the  shape  and  direction  of  mainstream  media"  (p.  36).  The   changing  definition  of  "audience",  from  consumer  to  contributor,  is  illuminated  in  a   participatory  culture  where  platforms  such  as  Hype  Machine  can  be  utilized  to  act  as   vehicles  for  an  artist  to  engage  in  prosumer  marketing.     An  analysis  of  today's  music  sharing  and  discovery  process  that  is  shaping  the  many   ways  that  people  find  new  music,  and  the  many  ways  that  musicians  can  take  advantage  of   this  process,  reveals  the  importance  of  influentials  (mass  media  and  opinion  leaders)  in   generating  conversation  and  visibility  for  a  musician,  as  well  as  the  importance  of  finding  a   service  where  a  content  producer  can  reach  the  largest  percentage  of  their  audience.  In  the   following  sections,  literature  on  technology  and  cultural  change  is  discussed,  followed  by   an  examination  of  why  and  how  audiences  consume  music  online.  Following  this,  the   importance  of  word  of  mouth  and  opinion  leadership  in  music  discovery  and  sharing  is   explored,  concluding  with  the  role  of  digital  technology  in  shaping  music  consumption,   discovery,  and  sharing.  Finally,  I  describe  the  methodology  and  findings  of  a  dataset   gathered  from  two  samples  of  top-20  Hype  Machine  songs  and  the  corresponding  trend  

  

3  

   identification.  It  is  through  this  research  and  findings  that  I  will  be  shaping  the  production   of  a  song,  a  minimum  viable  product,  to  be  pitched  and  potentially  released  through  a   music  blog  influencer  such  as  Indie  Shuffle  or  Dancing  Astronaut.  I  believe  that  producing  a   song  within  the  audio  characteristic  ranges  that  I  have  found,  and  distributed  through  the   right  influentials,  will  give  my  work  the  best  chance  to  spread  and  gain  traction  with  an   audience.        Music  in  the  Digital  Age   Understanding  the  history  of  music  consumption  requires  taking  a  brief  look  at  the   evolution  of  "social  listening"  (a  form  of  social  media  market  research)  and,  more   specifically,  of  music  listening  before  the  digital  age  of  cd's,  mp3's  and  streaming.  Moreover,   an  understanding  of  the  evolution  of  consumption  will  illuminate  the  current  shift  from   mass  marketing,  a  process  made  popular  with  the  advent  of  mass  media,  to  niche   marketing.  If  we  begin  with  the  invention  of  the  LP,  marketed  to  consumers  by  RCA  Victor   in  the  30s,  and  FM  radio  in  that  same  decade,  we  can  recognize  technology  as  an   influencing  force  that  led  to  a  blossoming  of  musical  styles  and  experimentation  (Karr,   2002).  This  introduction  of  mass  media  allowed  for  music  to  be  more  readily  available  to   the  consumer.  This  caused  music  to  be  viewed  by  the  postmodern  consumer  (Van  Raaij,   1993)  as  a  commodity  that  is  subject  to  the  circle  of  consumption  (Arnould  et  al.,  2005).        The  subsequent  rise  and  fall  of  the  music  album,  defined  as  containing  one  or  more   recordings  (as  on  a  tape  or  disc)  produced  as  a  single  unit  (Merriam-Webster,  2015),   mirrors  a  paradigm  shift  in  consumer  behaviours  and  in  technological  innovations.  Since  

  

4  

   2010,  album  sales  have  decreased  steadily,  revealing  an  inflection  point  during  which   digital  sales  overtook  their  analogue  counterparts  for  the  first  time  ­  signalling  a  new  stage   for  music  selling  (Anderson,  2006).  For  the  first  time,  audiences  were  exposed  to  new  ways   of  discovering,  consuming,  and  sharing  music.  Now  fast-forward  to  2015,  where  the   development  of  digital  technologies  has  already  begun  to  radically  reshape  the  ways  people   access  and  share  culture  (Jenkins,  2006).  To  offer  a  current  example,  the  rise  of  today's   niche  audiences  is  the  outcome  of  an  age  in  which  the  consumer  is  afforded  unlimited   choice,  a  privilege  and  process  of  digital  empowerment.  In  a  blog  post  titled  "Mass   production  and  mass  media",  author  Seth  Godin  writes  that  today's  "smart"  creators  are   shifting  away  from  mass  marketing,  a  practice  made  popular  with  the  advent  of  mass   media  (TV,  newspapers,  radio,  etcetera)  over  fifty  years  ago.  "Mass  production,"  he  says,  "is   being  replaced  by  micro  production,  by  the  short  run,  by  customization,  by  the  long  tail"   (Godin,  2015).  What  Godin  is  suggesting  is  that  we  must  now  produce  for  a  micro-market,   or  niche  market,  and  market  to  that  same  niche  market.  This  form  of  niche  customer   development  is  a  deliberate  and  constant  process  that  allows  today's  producer  to  be  as  in- sync  as  possible  with  the  consumer.  In  the  music  industry,  a  shifting  attention  towards  the   long  tail,  which  refers  to  a  digital  retailers  ability  to  sell  "a  large  number  of  unique  items,   each  in  relatively  small  quantities"  over  a  long  period  of  time,  (qtd.  in  Spiers,  2011)  and   towards  targeting  niche  audiences  reflect  certain  innovations  in  technology  and  the  impact   they  have  had  on  Internet  culture.  The  emergence  of  Web  2.0  technologies  and  platforms   such  as  social  networking  sites,  video-sharing  websites,  and  blogs,  where  users  connect   directly  to  one  another  and  collaboratively  create  and  share  content,  has  led  to  a  sharing  

  

5  

   culture  that  empowers  not  only  music  creators  but  consumers  as  well.  These  innovations   have  changed  the  consumption  and  distribution  of  cultural  information  (O'Reilly,  2005).      With  the  elimination  of  barriers  associated  with  distribution  and  retailing,  cultural   consumers  can  now  utilize  Web  2.0  tools  to  interact  with,  create,  and  publish  content   online  that  voices  their  musical  preferences  more  easily  (O'Reilly,  2005).  Where  historically   the  practices  of  producing  and  distributing  cultural  content  had  been  controlled  in  a   predominantly  top-down  process,  these  tools  have  provided  both  amateurs  and  opinion   leaders  great  alternatives  to  expand  their  knowledge  and  to  help  their  peers  (Anderson,   2006).  Media  audiences  that  actively  make  use  of  possibilities  to  find  and  share  content   with  other  online  users  are  continually  switching  between  their  roles  as  consumers  and   producers  of  content  (Jenkins,  2006),  generating  online  attention  to  cultural  products  by   uploading  fan-produced  videos  to  VEVO  or  YouTube,  writing  reviews  in  various  blogs,  or   uploading  music  to  any  number  of  online  platforms  that  now  exist.  The  recent  on-demand   nature  of  music  video  distribution  sites  allows  the  audience  control  that  they  had  not  had   in  the  MTV  video  days,  and  that  is  the  power  of  connection  to  media  libraries,  social   networks,  personalized  playlists,  and  convenience  (Edmond,  2014).  While  these   developments  have,  to  a  certain  extent,  granted  audiences  control  over  both  production   and  consumption,  it  also  created  what  Ryan  Lawler  calls  an  "attention  economy"  (2011)  ­   an  economy  that  places  greater  emphasis  on  personalized  content  and  multi-platform   availability  for  capturing  the  consumers'  attention.  Ray  Velez,  CTO  of  the  digital  ad  agency   Razorfish,  suggests  that  consumer  behaviours  are  putting  burdens  on  publishers  to  drive   personalization  in  an  effort  to  remain  relevant  (Moses,  2015).  For  both  the  musician  and  

  

6  

   the  music  publisher,  it  is  equally  important  to  consider  how  personalization  drives   relevance  in  a  remix-driven  electronic  music  industry.      Consumption,  Remix  &  Data-Driven  Digital  Advertising   Digitization  has  allowed  for  co-creation  in  music  consumption.  Brewster  and   Broughton  (2006),  in  addressing  the  subject  of  the  contemporary  DJ,  suggest  that  the   listener  forms  part  of  a  creative  process  with  the  DJ.  This  idea  parallels  one  of  the  more   transformative  digital  shifts  affecting  the  music  industry,  which  is  the  changing   relationship  of  read-only  (RO)  and  read-write  (RW)  cultures  on  the  web.  In  Remix,   Lawrence  Lessig  (2008)  describes  RO  culture  as  a  way  of  consuming  content  passively;  it  is   a  culture  that  "emphasizes  hierarchy,"  (p.  113)  and  delivers  content  with  a  measure  of   authority  and  control.  Under  the  umbrella  of  RO  culture  would  fall  practices  such  as  viral   marketing  and  sponsored  user-generated  branding.  RW  culture,  on  the  other  hand,  Lessig   describes  as  "giving  the  audience  something  more.  Or  better,  it  asks  something  more  of  the   audience.  It  is  offered  as  a  draft.  It  invites  a  response"  (p.  111).  Within  the  music  industry   sphere,  this  "invitation"  represents  a  shift  towards  democratization,  where  the  relationship   between  the  artist  and  audience  is  no  longer  dependent  on  pre-existing  hierarchies,  such  as   the  control  of  the  major  record  labels,  within  the  music  industry.  What  this  means  is  that   there  is  a  new,  constant  and  shifting  balance  of  control  from  producer  to  consumer,   musician  to  fan.  Paralleling  this  shifting  balance  of  control  is  the  shifting  understanding  of   content,  as  described  by  Jenkins,  that  values  "spreadable"  content  over  "viral"  or  "sticky"   content.  In  an  interview  on  Deep  Media,  Jenkins  (2013)  argues  that  the  term  viral  media   "consistently  strips  agency  from  the  participants  within  networks  of  circulation"  (para.  3).  

  

7  

   "Spreadability,"  he  says,  "recognizes  the  importance  of  the  social  connections  among   individuals,  connections  increasingly  made  visible  (and  amplified)  by  social  media   platforms"  (Jenkins,  2013,  p.  6).  An  understanding  of  digital  content  is  inextricably  linked   to  an  understanding  of  the  processes  by  which  it  is  created,  positioned,  and  distributed.        Gamble  and  Gilmore  (2013)  identify  five  typologies  of  co-creational  marketing  that   categorize  distinctive  relationships  between  the  brand  and  the  consumer:  these  include   viral  marketing,  sponsored  user-generated  branding,  UGC  (user-generated  content)   marketing,  vigilante  marketing,  and  prosumer  marketing.  Looking  at  the  disparity  in  buyer- seller  involvement  along  a  continuum  of  these  marketing  strategies,  one  can  see  an   inherent  "struggle"  for  control  of  creation,  distribution,  and  positioning  of  content.  When   applied  to  the  music  industry,  we  see  that  there  is  an  opportunity  for  greater   understanding  of  fan  preferences  and  market  research,  as  well  as  possible  deployment  of   prosumer  marketing.  As  discussed  earlier,  there  is  a  clear  shift  in  balance  of  power  from   record  label  experts  and  talent  specialists  to  crowd-wisdom,  and  this  shift  in  power  and   engagement  of  prosumer  communities  must  be  further  explored  when  speaking  to  the   changing  nature  of  content.  Konczal  (2008)  defines  prosumer  marketing  as  a  process   whereby  a  consumer  "becomes  involved  in  the  design  and  manufacture  of  products  and   services  so  they  can  be  made  to  individual  specification"  (p.  22-23).     In  today's  progressively  data-driven  musical  landscape,  prosumer  involvement  now   takes  shape  in  the  form  of  adoption;  adoption  of  tools  for  music  discovery,  streaming,   creating,  etcetera.  Audiences  are  becoming  a  part  of  the  content  development  stage  for   promoters,  managers,  and  musical  artists,  and  we  can  see  big  data  and  crowd  wisdom  

  

8  

   increasingly  being  used  as  an  early-detection  system  for  hits.  Shazam,  a  tool  created   initially  for  identifying  unfamiliar  songs,  is  now  being  used  to  identify  in  which   geographical  regions  a  song  is  beginning  to  gain  traction  (Thompson,  2014),  consequently   aiding  the  tour  booking  process  for  managers.  Similarly,  Spotify  is  being  used  by  concert   promoters  to  analyze  which  towns  have  the  most  "listens"  and,  therefore,  the  most  fans.   Where  once  it  may  have  been  a  popular  saying  that  there  is  no  industry  blueprint  guiding   an  artist  on  how  to  produce  a  hit  song,  we  can  now  be  confident  that  crowd-wisdom  has   the  potential  to  tell  us  exactly  that  if  put  through  the  correct  filter.      Allowing  an  audience  the  control  to  shape  an  experience  ties  in  very  closely  to   emerging  music  discovery  platforms  that  employ  crowd-wisdom,  content  curation,  and   filtering  as  a  means  of  allowing  users  to  shape  their  own  results.  Evaluating  a  digital   crowdsourcing  archive,  such  as  Hype  Machine,  demonstrates  that  fan  involvement  can  be   harnessed  in  unique  ways,  and  in  a  way  that  draws  elements  of  both  integrity  and   audience-user  experience  from  both  RO  and  RW  culture  (Lessig,  2008).  Hype  Machine,   which  Beer  and  Burrows  (2013)  describe  as  a  popular  cultural  source  of  recursive  data,  is  a   predictive  music  service  that  engages  in  aggregate  data  gathering  from  popular  music   blogs;  it  is  predictive  in  the  manner  that  it  aggregates  and  curates  its  content,  taking  into   account  feedback  from  listeners  in  the  shape  of  `likes',  number  of  blog  links,  and  searchable,   self-organized  archived  content.     Hype  Machine  recognizes  the  importance  of  audience  interactions  in  the  digital  ebb   and  flow  of  ideas,  and  in  what  Jenkins  calls  "open-ended  participation"  (2013).  He  says  that   the  "participatory  logic  of  spreadability  leads  to  audiences  using  content  in  unanticipated  

  

9  

   ways  as  they  retrofit  material  to  the  contours  of  their  particular  community"  (Jenkins,   2013,  p.  6).  This  touches  on  the  nature  of  remix  culture  and  the  "invitation"  that  Lawrence   Lessig  talks  about.  Lessig  (2008)  believes  that  "it  takes  extraordinary  knowledge  about  a   culture  to  remix  it  well..."  and  furthermore,  "the  audience  is  constantly  looking  for  more  as   the  audience  reads  what  the  remixer  has  written.  Knowing  that  the  song  is  a  mix  that  could   draw  upon  all  that  went  before,  each  second  is  an  invitation  to  understand  the  links  that   were  drawn  ­  their  meaning,  the  reason  they  were  included"  (p.  93).  Remix  allows  content   to  enter  different  niche  communities,  and  spread  in  a  way  that  encourages  consumers  to   engage  with  and  decipher  the  music  in  their  own  unique  ways.       "Search-bar  paralysis",  a  term  coined  by  John  Jurgensen  of  The  Wall  Street  Journal   in  2014,  accurately  explains  the  importance  of  this  process,  and  the  particular  ecosystem   that  helps  to  foster  this  sort  of  content  curation.  Search-bar  paralysis  refers  to  the  average   music  consumer  becoming  overwhelmed  with  the  unlimited  choices  for  song  selection   (Jurgensen,  2014).  The  consumer  falls  back  on  music  that  they  are  familiar  with  rather  than   finding  something  new  that  they  connect  with.  With  an  infinite  number  of  songs  accessible   to  the  user,  the  issue  for  the  consumer  shifts  from  "What  is  available?"  to  "What  available   strategies  are  best  for  searching  a  virtually  infinite  data  bank?"  (Hargreaves  and  North,   1999,  p.  72),  which  presents  the  core  questions  this  study  is  looking  to  answer:  how  do   people  discover  new  music,  and  how  can  musicians  take  advantage  of  these  tools?      The  Hype  Machine:  Word-Of-Mouth  &  Opinion  Leaders   Mike  Kadziulis,  a  writer  for  the  popular  music  blog  Pigeons  and  Planes  suggests  that   "in  order  to  sustain  a  balanced  music  ecosystem,  active  music  listeners  need  a  platform  to  

  

10  

   share  the  music  that  they  discover  with  the  rest  of  the  world"  (2015,  para.  6).  Instead  of   implementing  a  sharing  utility,  The  Hype  Machine  opts  for  a  feedback  mechanism  that   allows  others  to  see  what  music  you  "heart";  a  system  similar  to  Facebook's  "like"  system.   These  "hearts"  act  as  human-based  filters  that  help  users  to  reach  "most-popular"  charts.   This  predictive  feedback  process  creates  a  data  environment  that  not  only  captures  culture,   but  shapes  it  as  well.  This  process  demonstrates  the  ability  for  aggregate  information  on   consumer  behaviour  to  exert  social  influence,  and  modify  consumers'  interest  and  demand.        In  a  study  called  Charts  and  demand:  empirical  generalizations  on  social  influence,   the  success  of  music  products  was  demonstrated  not  only  to  be  a  "function  of  independent   quality  perception",  but  to  also  be  "driven  by  other  consumers'  choice"  (Maecker  et  al,   2013,  p.  429).  Consumers  were  determined  not  only  to  be  interested  in  "viral"  but  also  in   what  is  popular  and  topping  sales  ranks.  Translating  this  to  social  media  popularity  for   mainstream  and  niche  songs,  what  is  considered  "viral"  constitutes  a  newly  released  song   that  has  gained  blog  popularity  and  the  associated  high  sampling  rate  (Dewan  and   Ramaprasad,  2012,  p.  4).  For  fans  looking  to  discover  music  on  a  site  like  Hype  Machine,   looking  for  niche  music  that  has  little  to  no  word-of-mouth  press,  consumers  must  look  to   the  opinions  and  actions  of  other  consumers.  This  crowd-sourced  recommendation   atmosphere  parallels  the  changing  roles  of  participatory  culture  and  audience  engagement.   As  a  music  blog  aggregator,  Hype  Machine  embodies  the  notion  of  "spreadable  media"  in   the  value  it  lends  to  audience  interaction,  open-ended  participation,  and  content  sharing.  A   song  with  "spreadable"  qualities  would  not  only  appeal  to  a  chosen  audience,  but  also  be   available  in  such  a  way  that  today's  participatory  remix  culture  could  adopt,  shape,  and  

  

11  

   reposition  the  work  to  enter  different  niche  communities.  Henry  Jenkins  (2013)  describes   this  as  a  process  of  fandom,  a  process  that  is  changing  to  account  for  groups  that  are   "gaining  greater  communicative  capacity  within  a  networked  culture  and  toward  a  context   where  niche  cultural  production  is  increasingly  influencing  the  shape  and  direction  of   mainstream  media"  (p.  36).        The  topic  of  "  key  influencers"  and  the  roles  that  different  social  platforms  play  in   shaping  the  music  industry  and  shaping  experience  are  important  to  discuss  when  we  try   to  understand  music  discovery  and  music  consumption  in  the  digital  landscape.  Goggins   and  Petakovic  (2014)  suggest  that  different  social  platforms  serve  different  purposes.  For   researchers  this  suggests  differences  in  the  way  we  should  frame  influence  within  those   perspective  platforms.  Different  platforms  carry  different  forms  of  "influence",  as  we  will   uncover  when  looking  at  The  Hype  Machine  under  the  microscope  of  Katz  and  Lazarsfeld's   "Two-step  flow  theory"  (1955).  Where  once  music  industry  gatekeepers  held  the  keys  to   production  and  distribution,  and  the  major  labels  held  the  keys  to  the  kingdom,  digitization   now  offers  many  the  opportunity  to  not  only  produce  from  a  home  studio  but  to  tap  an   infinite  resource  and  reach  a  targeted  niche  market.  I've  described  the  power  of  "remixing"   in  a  participatory  culture  that  lends  itself  to  the  type  of  cultural  customization  that  is  now   absolutely  necessary  to  compete  in  a  once  global  market  now  separated  into  micro   markets.  These  freedoms  are  true  of  today's  music  economy;  however,  powers  of  influence   have  not  necessarily  changed  but  instead  simply  undergone  a  slight  alteration.     A  pre-internet  era  theory  known  as  the  "Two-step  flow  theory"  (Katz  and  Lazarsfeld,   1955)  suggested  that  influence  flows  downwards  from  high  status  individuals  to  lower  

  

12  

   status  individuals.    It  was  also  found  that  high  status  opinion  leaders  generally  formed  their   opinions  based  on  mass  media,  and  those  in  contact  with  the  opinion  leaders  formed  their   own  opinions  accordingly.  Democratization  of  the  music  industry  landscape  has  led  to   hundreds  of  music  blogs  coming  into  existence,  fashioning  themselves  as  "influencers"  and   "trend  setters".  These  blogs  are  simulacrums  of  what  Katz  and  Lazarsfeld  (1955)  describe   as  "opinion  leaders".        Gruzd  and  Wellman  (2014)  imagine  this  form  of  influence  to  resemble  the  ideas   from  solitary  villages  spreading  through  word  of  mouth.  On  a  platform  such  as  Hype   Machine,  word-of-mouth  influence  is  reflected  in  the  feedback  system  that  allows  "hearts"   to  be  tagged  to  particular  songs,  and  "most-popular"  lists  to  be  curated.  In  fact,  we  can   parallel  and,  to  an  extent,  gage  effective  influence  on  a  platform  such  as  Hype  Machine  that   draws  from  various  music  blogs.  Take  for  example  "high  status"  blogs  whose  influence   flows  downwards  towards  lower  status  individuals  or,  otherwise  labelled,  users  on  the   platform  in  question  (Katz  and  Lazarsfeld,  1955).  These  are  those  blogs  that  Hype  Machine   chooses  to  share  with  its  users,  and  those  blogs  that  follow  its  code  of  integrity.  The  songs   posted  by  this  chosen  group  of  influencers  are  then  filtered  and  curated  by  "opinion   followers"  that  search  through  the  index  and  "heart"  their  favourite  songs.     Looking  again  at  the  "Two-step  flow  theory,"  Katz  and  Lazarsfeld  found  that   "influentials"  were  more  influenced  by  mass  media  than  non-influentials  and  in  particular   they  noticed  a  trend  of  homophily  where  "people  tend  to  vote,  it  seems,  the  way  their   associates  vote"  (1955,  p.  32).  In  this  sense,  opinion  leaders  form  their  opinions  based  on   mass  media,  and  those  in  contact  with  those  opinion  leaders  form  their  opinions  based  on  

  

13  

   the  opinion  leaders.  To  apply  this  to  Hype  Machine,  one  can  look  at  music  blogs,  to  an   extent,  as  a  tier  of  opinion  leaders.  Identifying  music  blogs  in  the  digital  space  as  mass   media  influentials  versus  identifying  them  to  act  as  opinion  leaders  can  be  quite  confusing.   Where  certain  music  blogs  have  channels  of  distribution  that  range  from  broadcast  media   to  social  media  and  otherwise,  it  is  not  a  far  stretch  to  imagine  that  music  blogs  have  the   opportunity  to  alter  the  concept  of  "mass  media"  in  a  digital  ecosystem.  This  is  one  of  many   questions  I  hope  to  answer  in  this  case  study.  Nonetheless,  Hype  Machine's  unique  network   offers  an  interesting  look  at  the  "Two-step  Theory"  in  an  aggregated  and  curated   ecosystem.  Figure  1  shows  the  correlation  between  a  posted  (or  blogged)  song  and  the   number  of  favourites  (hearts)  per  hour  tagged  to  that  particular  song  on  a  given  date.      Figure  1:  Favorites  per  hour  on  Hype  Machine                    (Next  Big  Sound,  2015)      If  we  take  a  closer  look  at  Next  Big  Sound's  plotted  graph,  we  could  consider  the  first   blog  poster  (on  May  30)  to  be  the  "opinion  leader",  perhaps  even  the  first  few  if  they  have   not  had  time  to  rebound  to  other  "trending"  blog  posters.  In  the  case  of  "Lose  It,"  the  first   three  posts  are  all  made  on  the  same  day.  We  can  see  the  nature  of  "viral"  content  as  more  

  

14  

   and  more  blogs  post,  adding  to  the  number  of  "blog  shares"  listed  next  to  the  song  on  Hype   Machine.  The  number  of  "blog  shares"  attributed  to  a  song  is  a  useful  indicator  for  users   searching  for  trending  songs.  However,  an  even  greater  indicator  is  the  aggregate  "hearts"   that  a  song  has  accumulated.     So,  why  is  this  graph  important,  and  what  can  these  correlations  possibly  tell  us?  As   found  by  Goldsmith  and  Horowitz  (2006),  the  main  motives  behind  consumers  seeking   opinions  online  are  to  reduce  risk  in  the  purchase  of  new  products  and  to  find  the  lowest   prices.  However,  digital  piracy  and  online  streaming  are  essentially  free,  so  does  this   perception  of  risk  still  apply?  In  today's  attention  economy,  it  becomes  a  question  of  time  ­   the  audience  is  fighting  against  a  lot  of  noise,  content,  and  junk.  The  audience  needs  to   adopt  strategies  to  sort  through  this  noise,  and  some  websites  have  taken  advantage  of  this   opportunity  by  providing  content  through  content  aggregation:  collection  and  syndication   of  content  from  a  number  of  various  sources.   Hodson  and  Wilkes  (2014),  in  exploring  the  use  of  content  aggregation  and  curation   to  support  social  media  listening,  found  that  pre-filtering  a  sample  of  blog  posts  through   crowdsourcing  and  content  curation  could  in  fact  be  used  as  a  means  of  identifying  trends   related  to  a  product  launch.  Their  method  proposed  to  demonstrate  that  "aggregating  the   text  chatter  produced  among  networks  of  high-authority,  and  highly  interested  influencers,   and  subjecting  that  data  to  a  cursory  level  sentiment  analysis,"  could  be  an  effective  way  of   "drawing  usable,  actionable  conclusions  from  activity  on  networks  like  blog  communities"   (Hodson  and  Wilkes,  2014,  N.p.).  I  contend  that  Hype  Machine  is  an  emerging  and  powerful,   influence  driving  music  blog  aggregator  and  music-discovery  platform.  Hype  Machine's   code  of  integrity  allows  us  to  assume  that  "accepted"  blog  influencers  are  posting  with  

  

15  

   authenticity  rather  than  spamming  (for  example,  overloading  the  system  with  content  in   the  hopes  that  something  sticks).  That  doesn't  mean  however  that  there  isn't  a  foreseeable   totem  pole  of  influence  amongst  blogs.  In  2014,  Style  of  Sound  created  a  list  of  the  top  100   influential  blogs,  a  list  that  was  derived  using  a  scoring  system  that  included  Klout  score  as   one  of  many  attributes  (Ulloa,  2014).  While  this  list  in  all  probability  parallels  some  of  the   top  influencers  on  Hype  Machine,  each  algorithm  must  be  altered  to  measure  effective   influence  of  a  corresponding  platform.  Currently,  Klout  incorporates  data  from  Twitter,   Facebook,  Instagram,  etc;  however,  with  the  constantly  shifting  digital  landscape,   algorithms  must  be  shaped  to  incorporate  and  support  emerging  platforms.        Methodology     Whereas  Hodson  and  Wilkes  (2014)  looked  at  textual  patterns  and  sentiment  in   discourse,  for  the  purpose  of  tech-related  market  research,  my  goal  was  to  apply  their   "social  media  listening"  techniques  within  the  context  of  identifying  trends  in  electronic   music  discourse.  To  determine  where  to  focus  my  data  collection  and  analysis  in   developing  a  method  for  producing  content  for  a  niche  audience,  I  leveraged  research  from   the  music  intelligence  platform  Echo  Nest.  In  2014,  Echo  Nest  conducted  a  research  that   showed  prediction  of  iTunes  Sales  through  the  anatomy  of  music.  I  set  out  to  apply  their   methods  to  my  own  questions  regarding  electronic  audiences'  taste  preferences  and  the   role  that  audio  properties  play  in  this.  In  my  experience,  artists  and  bands  are  often   concerned  with  the  anatomy  of  creating  a  hit;  instead,  I  was  interested  in  the  anatomy  of   the  song  itself  and  how  the  audio  characteristics  of  a  curated  list  of  popular  songs  might   lead  to  streams,  blog  interest,  and  "hearts".  My  analysis  answers  this  question  by  

  

16  

   identifying  trends  on  Hype  Machine  in  a  weekly  dataset  sample  taken  over  the  last  6   months,  and  a  daily  sample  over  10  days  from  which  the  audio  data  was  coded  using  API   from  The  Echo  Nest.  Following  Katz  and  Lazarsfeld's  "Two-step  flow  theory,"  we  can   understand  Hype  Machine  as  an  ecosystem  from  which  influence  flows  downwards  from   high  status  individuals,  in  this  case  represented  by  Hype  Machine's  pre-curated  source  of   credible  music  blogs,  to  lower  status  individuals,  which  is  represented  by  users  on  the   platform.           Hype  Machine  is  an  aggregator  in  that  it  tracks  and  presents  content  from  a  

handpicked  set  of  music  blogs.  When  content  is  posted  to  a  music  blog  that  is  being  tracked,   the  content  is  then  shared  for  consumption  and  discovery  on  Hype  Machine's  feed.  This   tool  not  only  empowers  the  voices  and  influencers  that  write  about  music,  but  also   empowers  and  inspires  conversation  about  both  music  and  culture.        Beginning  with  the  sample  taken  over  a  period  of  6  months,  my  first  step  was  to   look  at  Hype  Machine's  "Popular"  section,  and  to  look  at  their  archived    "Time  Machine"   information.  This  sorted  Hype  Machine's  most  popular  music  in  a  way  that  allowed  me  to   collect  data  monitoring  the  Top  20  songs  in  any  given  week.  This  data  included  the  names   of  the  artists,  the  corresponding  songs,  genre,  number  of  blog  posts,  and  the  nature  of  the   musical  content  ­  whether  it  was  a  cover  song,  remix,  or  original.  Data  was  collected  from   January  1st  to  June  1st,  and  was  analyzed  to  identify  corresponding  themes.  The  focus  of   analysis  for  this  sample  group  was  to  look  at  emerging  artists  being  featured  versus   mainstream  artists,  to  determine  user  activity  and  develop  an  understanding  of  Hype  

  

17  

   Machine  as  a  music  discovery  platform.  Moreover,  I  wanted  to  understand  the  qualities  of   the  songs  which  remain  relevant  over  a  longer  period  of  time  (staying  in  the  Top  20)  in  an   attention  and  music  streaming  economy.  As  was  mentioned,  Ray  Velez  suggests  that   consumer  behaviours  are  putting  burdens  on  publishers  to  drive  personalization.  (Moses,   2015).  In  this  6  month  sample,  I  wanted  to  explore  the  correlation  and  potential  connection   between  song  remixes  and  an  artists  ability  to  remain  relevant  ­  which  I  define  as  re- appearing  in  Hype  Machine's  Top  20  charts  more  than  once.        For  the  10-day  sample,  my  methodology  involved  the  coding  of  Hype  Machine's  pre- curated  "Most  Popular"  list.  To  run  this  analysis,  a  data  set  was  built  containing  each  song   appearing  in  the  Top-20  during  this  10  day  period  combined  with  track  features  collected   using  Echo  Nest's  API,  which  can  be  found  at   http://developer.echonest.com/docs/v4/song.html.  Echo  Nest  is  a  musical  intelligence   company  that  developed  an  API  containing  analytic  profiles  for  any  number  of  popular   songs.  These  profiles  include  song  characteristics  such  as  tempo,  time  signature,  musical   key,  and  even  abstract  notions  such  as  energy  and  danceability.  After  collecting  information   from  the  Hype  Machine  to  create  the  10-day  sample  dataset,  I  pulled  data  from  the  Echo   Nest  API  for  each  song.  For  the  few  songs  that  Echo  Nest  was  unable  to  retrieve  audio   summary  data,  I  had  to  either  upload  the  song  to  Echo  Nest  manually,  or  determine  the   values  myself.  Here  (seen  below)  is  a  list  of  all  track  features  collected,  and  their  associated   definitions:          

  

18  

   Figure  2:  Audio  Features  and  Associated  Definitions  
time_signature   (integer  [0,Inf))   key     (integer  [0,Inf))   mode  (binary   [0,1])   tempo  (floating   point  [0,Inf))   An  estimated  overall  time  signature  of  a  track.  The  time  signature  (meter)  is  a  notational   convention  to  specify  how  many  beats  are  in  each  bar  (or  measure).   The  estimated  overall  key  of  a  track.  The  key  identifies  the  tonic  triad,  the  chord,  major  or   minor,  which  represents  the  final  point  of  rest  of  a  piece.   Indicates  the  modality  (major  or  minor)  of  a  track,  the  type  of  scale  from  which  its   melodic  content  is  derived.   The  overall  estimated  tempo  of  a  track  in  beats  per  minute  (BPM).  In  musical  terminology,   tempo  is  the  speed  or  pace  of  a  given  piece  and  derives  directly  from  the  average  beat.  

  
loudness  (floati ng  point  (- Inf,Inf))   The  overall  loudness  of  a  track  in  decibels  (dB).  Loudness  values  in  the  Analyzer  are   averaged  across  an  entire  track  and  are  useful  for  comparing  relative  loudness  of   segments  and  tracks.  Loudness  is  the  quality  of  a  sound  that  is  the  primary  psychological   correlate  of  physical  strength  (amplitude)  

  
duration     (floating  point   [0,Inf))   speechiness     (floating  point   [0,1])   Detects  the  presence  of  spoken  words  in  a  track.  The  more  exclusively  speech-like  the   recording  (e.g.  talk  show,  audio  book,  poetry),  the  closer  to  1.0  the  attribute  value.  Values   above  0.66  describe  tracks  that  are  probably  made  entirely  of  spoken  words.  Values   between  0.33  and  0.66  describe  tracks  that  may  contain  both  music  and  speech,  either  in   sections  or  layered,  including  such  cases  as  rap  music.  Values  below  0.33  most  likely   represent  music  and  other  non-speech-like  tracks.   The  duration  of  a  track  in  seconds  as  precisely  computed  by  the  audio  decoder.  

  

  
liveness     (floating  point   [0,1])   Detects  the  presence  of  an  audience  in  the  recording.  The  more  confident  that  the  track  is   live,  the  closer  to  1.0  the  attribute  value.  Due  to  the  relatively  small  population  of  live   tracks  in  the  overall  domain,  the  threshold  for  detecting  liveness  is  higher  than  for   speechiness.  A  value  above  0.8  provides  strong  likelihood  that  the  track  is  live.  Values   between  0.6  and  0.8  describe  tracks  that  may  or  may  not  be  live  or  contain  simulated   audience  sounds  at  the  beginning  or  end.  Values  below  0.6  most  likely  represent  studio   recordings.  

  
acousticness     (floating  point   Represents  the  likelihood  a  recording  was  created  by  solely  acoustic  means  such  as  voice   and  acoustic  instruments  as  opposed  to  electronically  such  as  with  synthesized,  amplified,  

  

19  

  
[0,1])   or  effected  instruments.  Tracks  with  low  acousticness  include  electric  guitars,  distortion,   synthesizers,  auto-tuned  vocals,  and  drum  machines,  whereas  songs  with  orchestral   instruments,  acoustic  guitars,  unaltered  voice,  and  natural  drum  kits  will  have   acousticness  values  closer  to  1.0.  

  
Danceability     (floating  point   [0,1])   Represents  a  perceptual  measure  of  intensity  and  powerful  activity  released  throughout   the  track.  Typical  energetic  tracks  feel  fast,  loud,  and  noisy.  For  example,  death  metal  has   high  energy,  while  a  Bach  prelude  scores  low  on  the  scale.  Perceptual  features   contributing  to  this  attribute  include  dynamic  range,  perceived  loudness,  timbre,  onset   rate,  and  general  entropy.    

  
valence     (floating  point   [0,1])   Describes  the  musical  positiveness  conveyed  by  a  track.  Tracks  with  high  valence  sound   more  positive  (e.g.,  happy,  cheerful,  euphoric),  while  tracks  with  low  valence  sound  more   negative  (e.g.  sad,  depressed,  angry).  This  attribute  in  combination  with  energy  is  a  strong   indicator  of  acoustic  mood,  the  general  emotional  qualities  that  may  characterize  the   track's  acoustics.  Note  that  in  the  case  of  vocal  music,  lyrics  may  differ  semantically  from   the  perceived  acoustic  mood.  

Figure  2  (sourced  from  Czech,  2015)      Once  song  characteristic  analysis  of  the  aggregated  posts  was  completed,  the   identified  music  content  guidelines  were  then  compared  to  Next  Big  Sound's  analysis  of   how  the  properties  of  music  affect  sales;  which  can  be  found  here:   http://making.nextbigsound.com/post/97809923743/predicting-itunes-sales-through- the-anatomy-of.  These  two  sets  of  guidelines  were  compared  to  illuminate  any  differences   related  to  the  effects  that  audio  characteristics  may  have  on  streaming  success  versus   digital  sales  success.  The  goal  was  to  identify  an  opportunity  for  further  research,  where   Echo  Nest's  API  combined  with  average  daily  iTunes  sales  data  was  able  to  illuminate  audio   guidelines  that  would  best  position  a  song  for  digital  release.     

  

20  

   Within  this  10-day  sample,  I  also  identified  the  top  blog  influencers.  Hodson  and   Wilkes  determine  blogs  and  syndicated  sources  to  generally  have  "core  and  periphery   structure"  where  a  small  set  of  top  blogs  "diffuse  information  to  the  rest  of  the  web  (qtd.  in   2014,  N.p.).  They  say  that  because  of  "unequal  distribution  of  readership"  and  the  scale  free   character  of  how  blogs  link  together  (qtd.  in  Hodson  &  Wilkes,  2014,  N.p.),  developments   among  a  few  top  blogs  can  predict  trends  in  both  reader  interest  and  content  formation.   This  shaped  my  methodology  to  compare  and  contrast  the  human  curation  aspect  of  Hype   Machine's  ecosystem  similarities  to  "Klout".  Amongst  some  questions  regarding  platform   integrity  and  trust  that  were  out  of  depth  for  this  particular  study,  I  was  able  to  ask   questions  such  as:  "How  does  an  aggregate  influence  score  (hearts)  relate  to  song   influence?"  and  "How  do  blog  posts  on  Hype  Machine  effect  the  number  of  "hearts"  and   relative  popularity?"  To  look  at  influence  on  Hype  Machine,  I  looked  to  compile  a  list  of   each  blog  that  contributed  a  post  to  any  song  charting  during  the  10-day  sample.  To  create   a  scoring  system  that  would  take  into  account  post  frequency,  quality,  and  flow,  I  would   record  the  number  of  songs  in  the  Top  20  chart  blogged  by  each  publisher,  as  well  as  when   each  song  was  blogged  in  relation  to  other  publishers.  I  hoped  to  link  data  on  Hype   Machine's  most  influential  blogs  to  Style  of  Sound's  "100  Influential  Blogs"  list  to  identify   both  trends  and  discrepancies.        Although  much  of  what  appeals  to  us  in  music  is  a  combination  of  familiarity  and   surprise  (Sacks,  2006),  my  methodology  looked  to  evaluate  how  emotional  and  even   perceptual  qualities  of  a  song  could  contribute  to  its  popularity  among  tastemakers,  or  in   this  case  blog  aggregators,  such  as  Hype  Machine.  

  

21  

      Findings   Beginning  with  a  time-capsule  look  at  the  Hype  Machine's  Top-20  charts  over  a  6   month  period  from  January  5  to  June  28,  I  set  out  to  discover  whether  users  on  this   particular  music  discovery  platform  were  engaging  with  a  higher  percentage  of   "mainstream"  artists,  or  with  a  greater  percentage  of  "undiscovered"  or  "emerging"  artists.   After  collecting  data  on  408  artists  in  a  6-month  span  on  Hype  Machine,  I  found  that  283  of   those  artists  had  only  one  song  in  the  Top  20.  This  means  that  approximately  69.6%  of  the   artists  in  the  Top  20  over  this  period  did  not  have  more  than  one  trending  song,  whether  it   be  a  remix,  an  original  song,  or  a  cover  song;  although,  these  artists  may  have  had  this  one   song  re-appear  on  the  Top  20  charts  over  a  number  of  weeks.  From  this,  I  could  garner  two   things.  First,  was  that  users  on  Hype  Machine  frequently  "hearted"  a  wide  array  of  songs,   rather  than  using  the  platform  to  listen  to  their  "favourite  artists"  on  repeat.  In  this  sense,   Hype  Machine  acts  as  a  valuable  source  for  discovering  new  music.  Second,  this  told  me   that  30%  of  the  artists  listed  during  this  had  two  or  more  songs  re-appear  on  the  Top  20.        Taking  a  closer  look  at  this  30%,  I  examined  which  artists  were  played  the  most  to   discover  any  correlations  or  common  themes.  I  applied  a  method  of  artist  evaluation  based   on  social  metrics,  in  which  Next  Big  Sound  classifies  an  artist  as  "promising"  until  they   reach  200,000  Facebook  page  likes,  or  until  they  hit  80,000  Twitter  followers  (qtd  in  Buli,   2014).  Interestingly,  while  Kanye  West  and  Ed  Sheeran  (two  mega-stars)  held  two  of  the   Top  3  spots  for  most  songs  total  in  the  Top  20,  the  artist  Phoebe  Ryan  held  the  top  spot   with  9  songs  reaching  the  Top  20.  This  is  especially  interesting  because  of  Phoebe  Ryan's  

  

22  

   standing  as  a  relatively  unknown,  emerging  artist.  It  is  also  interesting  because  it  proves   Hype  Machine  to  be  a  useful  service  for  discovering  emerging  artists.  Using  Next  Big   Sound's  grading  system,  Phoebe  would  be  classified  as  a  "promising"  artist.  Of  the  songs   entering  the  "Most  Popular"  chart,  Phoebe  had  three  original  songs,  one  original  remixed   by  other  artists  four  times,  one  cover  song,  and  the  cover  song  remixed  by  one  artist.  This   finding  highlights  the  opportunity  afforded  by  "remix",  allowing  content  to  be  repositioned   for  niche  audiences  within  a  cultural  frame,  and  in  this  case  within  a  curated  and  aggregate   music  resource.  Similarly  to  Phoebe,  each  artist  within  the  Top  15  "most  songs  trending"   reached  their  listeners  with  a  variation  of  original  songs,  remixes,  and  cover  songs.        To  give  an  in  depth  look  at  the  trend  movement  that  a  song  might  take  on  Hype  

Machine,  we  can  look  at  Phoebe  Ryan's  song  "Mine,"  which  appeared  in  the  Top  20  five   separate  times  during  the  6  month  span  from  January  to  June.  "Mine"  appeared  first  from   January  26  to  February  1st  as  an  original.  "Mine"  then  re-appeared  on  February  16th  as  a   Michael  Keenan  remix,  again  February  23  as  a  DOCO  remix,  and  twice  more.  The  nature  of   the  bootleg  or  "remix"  is  shown  to  consistently  propel  songs  back  into  Hype  Machine's  Top   20,  as  I  found  to  be  the  case  with  other  songs  such  as  Major  Lazer's  "Lean  On"  (appearing  4   times),  and  Flume's  "Some  Minds"  (appearing  3  times).        Going  off  the  assumption  that  "people  tend  to  vote,  it  seems,  the  way  their  associates   vote,"  (Katz  and  Lazarsfeld,  p.  32)  we  can  imagine  a  music  discovery  ecosystem  where   users  on  Hype  Machine  might  often  "heart"  or  like  songs  that  are  already  trending.   However,  this  assumption  does  not  account  for  the  finding  that  the  majority  of  music  on   Hype  Machine's  Top  20  list  has  a  lifetime  of  two  weeks  in  the  popular  sections.  We  have  

  

23  

   established  that  users  on  Hype  Machine  engage  in  music  discovery,  and  will  more  often   "like"  new  music  rather  than  returning  to  popular,  mainstream  artists.  Therefore,  remixing   is  a  powerful  tool  for  the  electronic  artist.  To  offer  another  example,  a  song  such  as  ASTRs   "Activate  Me,"  did  not  break  the  Hype  Machine  popular  mark  (nor  was  it  blogged)  until  a   remix  of  the  original  song  entered  the  charts  on  May  20.  The  song  lasted  on  the  charts  for   three  days,  then  entered  the  Top  20  again  on  June  5th  as  a  remix  by  SNBRN,  again  lasting  for   three  days.  If  we  compare  this  afterlife  to  "partynauseous",  a  song  by  two  mega  stars  in   Kendrick  Lamar  and  Lady  Gaga  that  entered  the  charts  for  a  day  and  did  not  return,  ASTR   and  SNBRN  are  just  two  of  many  examples  suggesting  a  trend  for  Hype  Machine's  "popular"   list  to  consistently  chart  "promising"  artists.           The  goal  for  my  10-day  Hype  Machine  data  sample  was  two-fold:  First,  I  looked  to  

code  each  appearing  song  in  this  sample  for  its  audio  properties  according  to  Echo  Nest's   API.  Second,  I  hoped  to  gage  the  influence  of  music  blogs  on  the  songs  that  most  frequented   the  Top  20  charts.     An  assumption  I  had  going  into  my  analysis  was  that  song  features  would  be   "similar"  based  on  Hype  Machine's  platform  being  geared  towards  the  electronic  music   genre.  I  found  that  there  was  very  little  variation  in  features  such  as  time  signature,  key,   and  tempo.  There  was  slightly  more  variance  when  it  came  to  an  attribute  such  as   acousticness.  Although  the  median  recorded  equalled  0.09,  which  would  constitute   electronically  produced  songs  including  electric  guitars,  distortion,  synthesizers,  etcetera,   approximately  14%  of  the  songs  were  recorded  as  being  more  acoustic  than  electronic.   These  particular  songs  could  then  be  analyzed  to  understand  what  other  audio  elements  

  

24  

   may  have  assisted  in  propelling  them  into  the  top-charts;  however,  my  goal  was  to  find  a   set  of  rules  that  would  guide  audio  characteristics  in  a  given  song,  allowing  it  the  best   chance  to  reach  Hype  Machine's  Top-20  list.        The  largest  amount  of  variance  was  found  in  the  danceability  and  valence  

categories,  which  was  unsurprising  considering  Echo  Nest's  evaluation  of  these   characteristics  as  "perceptual"  measurements.  The  average  "danceability"  for  the  100  songs   that  reached  the  popular  charts  during  this  sample  was  0.63,  meaning  that  the  intensity   and  powerful  activity  released  throughout  the  track  was  higher  (typical  of  energetic  tracks   feeling  fast,  loud,  and  noisy);  whereas  the  average  "valence"  was  0.38,  indicating  a  more   negative  acoustic  mood  (e.g.  sad,  depressed,  angry)  rather  than  positive  (e.g.  happy,   cheerful,  euphoric).  Figure  2  explains  the  associated  definitions  for  this  dataset.      Based  on  my  findings,  a  set  of  guidelines  for  songs  looking  to  achieve  audio   properties  that  could  conceivably  list  them  amongst  Hype  Machine's  curated  Most  Popular   list,  would  fall  within  these  ranges:   Figure  3:  Audio  Guidelines               Looking  at  blog  influence  on  Hype  Machine,  I  set  out  to  follow  my  methodology  to   chart  the  number  of  songs  in  the  Top  20  chart,  in  relation  to  blog  publisher  and  in  relation   to  when  each  blog  posted  a  given  song  (seen  below).   Feature  Name   Duration   Speechiness      Acousticness   Danceability   Loudness   Valence   Range   155  to  325  scs   0.03  to  0.18   0  to  0.69   0.35  to  0.79   -11.6  to  -4  dcbs   0.16  to  0.82  

  

25  

   Figure  4:     Tracking  Music  Blog  Influence  based  on  number  of  posted  songs  to  reach  Top-20  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

Amongst  the  music  blogs  most  frequently  posting  songs  reaching  the  chart  during   the  sample,  Indie  Shuffle  and  Kick  Kick  Snare  were  also  amongst  the  first  to  blog.  As  we  saw   in  Figure  1,  trending  musical  content  on  Hype  Machine  often  amasses  additional  blog  posts   as  it  "spreads,"  or  begins  trending.  Consistently  being  one  of  the  first  to  blog  quality  content   scores  blogs  like  Indie  Shuffle  and  Kick  Kick  Snare,  as  well  as  D  Squared  and  Dancing   Astronaut,  as  top  influencing  blogs.  As  we  know,  the  number  of  "blog  shares"  attributed  to  a   song  is  a  useful  indicator  for  users  searching  for  trending  songs,  however  this  alternatively   introduces  users  to  the  blogs  posting  these  songs.  It  is  in  this  case  that  we  can  see  a  music   blog  like  JayeL  Audio  Music,  in  Figure  3,  capitalizing  on  the  nature  of  viral  content.  Not  once   were  they  one  of  the  first  five  to  blog  a  popular  song;  however,  by  posting  what  is  already  

  

26  

   trending,  they  are  lower  on  the  influence  totem  pole,  and  nearer  the  bottom  of  the  two-step   flow  theory.        In  2014,  Style  of  Sound  created  a  list  of  the  top  100  most  influential  blogs  using  a   scoring  system  based  on  post  frequency,  quality,  SEO,  social  media,  and  Klout  score  (Ulloa).   Comparing  our  two  lists,  there  is  very  little  crossover  in  our  Top  20  influencing  blogs.  A  list   of  music  blogs  appearing  on  both  lists  include  Indie  Shuffle  and  Dancing  Astronaut.   However,  the  appearance  of  these  two  influencers  on  Style  of  Sound's  list,  as  well  as  my   own,  confirms  the  finding  that  the  two-step  flow  theory  exists  in  a  platform  such  as  Hype   Machine  (Katz  and  Lazarsfeld,  1955).  These  two  music  blog  influencers  are  not  only  found   to  consistently  post  music  that  amasses  a  high  aggregate  of  total  "hearts",  but  also  are   found  to  consistently  post  content  before  other  blogs,  which  presents  the  possibility  that   these  two  blogs  are  influencing  other  blogs  to  post  this  content.  As  is  suggested  in  Katz  and   Lazarsfeld's  (1955)  "Two-step  flow  theory,"  the  posted  content  is  then  "pushed",  and   shared,  by  all  those  the  content  flows  on  to.  While  all  music  blogs  handpicked  by  Hype   Machine  could  be  considered  to  have  "high  status",  in  relation  to  those  blogs  whose  posts   are  not  aggregated,  Indie  Shuffle  and  Dancing  Astronaut  are  found  to  be  two  opinion   leaders  who  sit  atop  the  totem  pole.  These  two  blogs,  whom  other  high  status  blogs  form   their  opinions  based  on,  provide  many  mass  media  services.  In  this  sense,  these  music   blogs  have  not  disrupted  mass  media  in  providing  commentary  or  new  emerging  content   producing  practices,  but  have  instead  taken  their  place.  Content  posted  from  these  high   status  music  blogs  can,  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  be  categorized  as  mass  media   influencers.    

  

27  

   Hodson  and  Wilkes  (2014)  acknowledge  that  content  aggregation  and  curation  is   often  overlooked  as  a  means  of  performing  market  research  because  it  "lends  itself  more  to   repeating  what  has  been  said  by  other  influential  voices  online"  (N.p.).  However,  my   findings  identified  two  prominent  "tastemakers",  further  validating  the  authors  contention   that  it  is  this  process  of  "buzz"  generation  and  the  flow  of  spreadable  media  that  is  useful   when  separating  signal  from  noise  in  large  social  datasets.  The  data  flow  in  my  findings   suggests,  "developments  among  a  few  top  blogs  can  predict  trends  in  both  reader  interest   and  content  formation  more  generally"  (Hodson  and  Wilkes,  2014,  N.p).            Discussion   After  applying  social  learning  techniques  to  compare  HypeM  "hearts"  to  audio  data   from  The  Echo  Nest,  we  can  understand  some  of  the  most  common  audio  characteristics   found  amongst  popular  songs.  Of  course,  finding  information  about  artists  and  tracks,  such   as  existing  following  or  online  social  activity,  would  be  useful  when  determining  the   relevance  of  song  properties  to  popularity.  However,  for  the  purpose  of  my  own  research   and  production,  the  goal  was  to  see  what  could  be  learned  exclusively  from  a  song's  audio   properties,  as  well  as  the  effect  that  today's  opinion  leaders  would  have  on  subsequent   distribution.  I  acknowledge,  and  have  developed  in  my  research,  the  importance  of   distribution  channels  and  music  blogs  in  an  attention  economy  that  appears  to  have   continued  to  operate  consistent  to  the  "two-step  flow  theory";  however,  it  is  uncertain   whether  the  musical  content  or  distribution  method  has  a  greater  affect  over  the  other.   Sometimes  the  content,  and  the  contributing  artist,  has  qualities  that  attract  the  attention   of  both  listeners  and  blog  influencers,  and  sometimes  it  is  the  blog  influencer  that  attracts  

  

28  

   the  attention.  However,  through  this  study  of  Hype  Machine,  we  can  not  only  see  what   audio  properties  that  the  platform's  users  are  partial  to,  but  also  which  audio  properties   top  blogs  are  most  likely  to  post.        An  opportunity  for  further  research  would  be  to  compare  these  measurements  to   Next  Big  Sound's  own  generalized  set  of  guidelines,  which  follows  audio  content  based  on   Echo  Nest's  API  combined  with  average  daily  iTunes  sales  data.  In  comparing  our  data  with   the  findings  of  Next  Big  Sound's  study,  one  could  potentially  illuminate  differences  related   to  streaming  success  and  digital  sales  success.  Another  potential  research  opportunity   would  focus  on  producing  musical  content  with  a  platform  in  mind.     A  Next  Big  Sound  study  tells  us  that  "about  a  quarter  of  all  music-related  follows  on   Twitter  last  year  were  for  indie  rockers,"  yet  "we  don't  in  fact  spend  time  on  different   services  depending  on  what  genre  we're  seeking"  (2014,  para.  10).  While  it  is  possible  for   an  online  community  that  aggregates,  curates  and  positions  music  for  niche  audiences,   such  as  Hype  Machine,  to  be  an  indicator  of  trending  music  (Hodson  and  Wilkes,  2013),   producing  content  that  aligns  with  a  niche  audience  interest  is  only  half  the  battle.  The   other  half  is  of  course  reaching  that  audience.  When  analyzing  popular  charts  from  Hype   Machine,  one  could  assume  that  the  data  will  be  skewed  based  on  the  blogs  and  genres  the   service  caters  to;  in  this  case,  the  service  is  more  electronic  and  indie  focused.  For  music   producers  looking  to  reach  their  target  demographic  it  is  not  only  in  their  interest  to  look   at  the  trends,  but  to  find  a  service  where  they  can  reach  the  largest  percentage  of  their   audience.  This  supports  the  use  of  micro  marketing,  and  supports  advocates  (such  as  Godin   and  Jenkins)  that  identify  the  best  strategy  for  the  marketing  of  niche  cultural  production  

  

29  

   to  be  tailoring  goods  or  services  to  a  "small  group  of  people  that  really  want  to  hear  about  it   and  really  want  to  spread  the  word  (Godin,  2014,  para.  4).          Finally,  it  would  be  interesting  to  research  the  process  for  positioning  a  song  to  best   attain  niche  appeal.  Songs  that  recurred  most  often  in  the  "most-popular"  charts  were  often   remixed  for  these  niche  audiences  existing  on  Hype  Machine.  The  original  songs,  remixed   and  positioned  for  sub-genres  by  other  artists,  could  be  evaluated  to  understand  which   audio  properties  were  most  consistent  in  allowing  that  content  to  be  spread.  Of  course,   there  are  some  major  differences  when  comparing  text  content  with  musical  content;   however,  the  nature  of  spreadable  content,  and  its  ability  to  transform  to  permeate   multiple  micro-markets,  remains  consistent.        Conclusion   During  my  studies  in  the  popular  music  program  at  Western  Ontario,  a  central   lesson  surrounding  song  production  was  that  while  following  a  set  of  song-writing  rules   would  not  absolutely  lead  to  a  "hit,"  following  these  rules  would  give  your  song  the  best   chance  to  make  a  splash.  While  analyzing  data  based  on  an  aggregated  and  curated  list  of   popular  songs  can  present  a  set  of  audio  properties  guidelines,  the  fact  is  that  there  are   many  other  factors  involved  in  determining  which  music  "sticks",  and  which  music   "spreads".  Today's  consumers  have  a  vast  array  of  tools  at  their  disposal  that  allow  them  to   access  cultural  products  in  new  ways,  and  today's  musician  must  follow  and  adapt  to   trends,  just  as  the  music  industry  does,  by  understanding  why  and  how  music  is  consumed.    

  

30  

   By  looking  at  a  source  of  recursive  data,  such  as  Hype  Machine,  we  can  prove  that   Katz  and  Lazarsfeld's  "Two-step  flow  theory"  (1955)  has  stayed  constant  in  the  digital  era.   As  Katz  and  Lazarsfeld  found  that  influentials  were  more  influenced  by  mass  media,  and   that  people  tended  to  vote  the  way  their  associates  vote,  we  found  that  both  music  blogs   and  users  acted  in  this  manner.  Moreover,  we  were  able  to  prove  Hype  Machine  to  be  a   useful  service  for  discovering  new  artists.  For  those  fans  looking  to  discover  niche  music   with  little  word-of-mouth  press,  consumers  must  look  to  the  opinion  and  actions  of  others.   In  this  crowd-sourced  recommendation  atmosphere,  and  in  pre-filtering  for  influential   opinions,  the  data  gained  by  analyzing  a  source  of  aggregated  music  blogs  proved  valuable   to  understanding  blog  influence  and  the  role  that  audio  properties  play  in  music   recommendation.  This  research  shows  that  micro-analysis  of  crowd  sourced  media,  from  a   cohesive  social  platform,  is  an  effective  guide  for  the  strategic  leveraging  of  cultural  and   popular  trends  in  musical  innovation  and  creation.                                

  

31  

   Works  Cited:   Anderson,  C.  (2006).  The  long  tail.  1st  ed.  New  York:  Hyperion.     Arnould,  E.,  Price,  L  and  Zinkhan,  G.  (2005).  Consumers.  (1st  ed.).  New  York  [etc.]:  McGraw- Hill/Irwin.   Beer  D,  Burrows  R.  (2013).  Popular  Culture,  Digital  Archives  and  the  New  Social  Life  of   Data.  Theory,  Culture  &  Society.     Brewster,  B.  and  Broughton,  F.  (2006).  Last  Night  a  DJ  saved  my  life.  (1st  ed.).  London:   Headline.   Buli,  Liv.  (2014).  Difference  Between  Being  `Undiscovered'  And  `Epic'  On  Social  Media.   Forbes.  Retrieved  from  http://www.forbes.com/sites/livbuli/2014/10/07/the-difference- between-being-undiscovered-and-epic-on-social-media   Czech,  Eric.  (2014).  Predicting  iTunes  Sales  Through  the  Anatomy  of  Music.  Next  Big  Sound.   Retrieved  from  http://making.nextbigsound.com/post/97809923743/predicting-itunes- sales-through-the-anatomy-of   Dewan  S,  Ramaprasad  J.  (2012).  Music  blogging,  online  sampling,  and  the  long  tail.   Information  Systems  Research.     Edmond,  M.  Here  We  Go  Again:  Music  Videos  after  YouTube.  Television  &  New  Media.     Fong,  Weespin  D.  (2014).  How  big  data  can  change  the  music  industry.  Venture  Beat.   Gamble  J,  Gilmore  A.  (2013).  A  new  era  of  consumer  marketing?:  an  application  of  co- creational  marketing  in  the  music  industry.  European  journal  of  marketing.     Godin,  Seth.  Mass  production  and  mass  media.  Seth's  Blog.  Retrieved  from   <sethgodin.typepad.com>  

  

32  

   Godin,  Seth.  Micro  marketing  and  the  called  bluff.  Seth's  Blog.  Retrieved  from   <http://sethgodin.typepad.com/seths_blog/2014/06/micro-marketing-and-the-called- bluff.html>   Goggins,  S  and  Petakovic,  E.  (2014).  Connecting  Theory  to  Social  Technology  Platforms:  A   Framework  for  Measuring  Influence  in  Context.  American  Behavioral  Scientist.     Goldsmith,  R  and  Horowitz,  D.  (2006).  Measuring  motivations  for  online  opinion  seeking.   Journal  of  interactive  advertising.     Gruzd,  A.,  and  Wellman,  B.  (2014).  Networked  Influence  in  Social  Media:  Introduction  to  the   special  issue.  American  Behavioral  Scientist.     Hargreaves,  D.  J.  N.,  Adrian  C.  (1999).  The  functions  of  music  in  everyday  life:  Redefining   the  social  in  music  psychology.  Psychology  of  Music.   Hodson  J,  Wilkes  G.  (2013).  Using  social  media  aggregation  and  curation  techniques  in  the   classroom  to  identify  discourse  trends  and  support  brand  operations.  Professional   Communication  Conference  (IPCC).  IEEE  International.   Hodson  J,  Wilkes  G.  (2014).  Content  Aggregation  vs.  social  listening  software  as  a  means  of   separating  signal  from  noise  in  a  discourse.  The  case  of  the  iPhone  5S  [poster].  Social  Media   and  Society  Conference.  September  2014.  Toronto,  ON.   Jenkins,  H.  Convergence  culture.  (1st  ed.)  New  York:  New  York  University  Press.   Jenkins,  H.  Deep  Media.  Books,  Copyright,  Social  Media.  Retrieved  from   http://www.deepmediaonline.com/deepmedia/2013/01/henry-jenkins-on-spreadable- media.html   Jenkins  H,  Ford  S,  Green  J.  (2013).  Spreadable  Media:  Creating  value  and  meaning  in  a   networked  culture.    

  

33  

   Jurgensen,  John.  (2014).  An  Ode  to  Joyful  Music  Streaming.  The  Wall  Street  Journal.   Retrieved  from   <http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304591604579290721300786680>   Kadziulis,  Mike.  (2015).  The  importance  of  music  curation  in  the  digital  era.  Pigeons  and   Planes.  Retrieved  from  <pigeonsandplanes.com/2015/04/spotify-beats-playlist-human- curation/   Karr,  R.  (2002).TechnoPop:  The  Secret  History  of  Technology  and  Pop  Music.  Retrieved   from  http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=1150717   Katz,  E.,  Lazarsfeld,  P.F.,  and  Columbia  University.  (1955).  Personal  influence:  The  part   played  by  people  in  the  flow  of  mass  communications.  Glenco,  Ill:  Free  Press.   Konczal,  J.  (2008).  Identifying,  knowing  &  retaining  your  customers:  the  "prosumer"".   Customer  Interaction  Solutions.     Lawler,  Ryan.  (2011).  Ubiquity  imperative:  Why  content  needs  to  be  everywhere.  Gigaom.   Retrieved  from  http://gigaom.com/2011/12/13/the-ubiquity-imperative   Lessig,  Lawrence.  (2008).  Remix:  Making  Art  and  Commerce  thrive  in  the  Hybrid  Economy.   The  Internet  Archive.     Maecker  O,  Grabenstroer  NS,  Clement  M,  Heitmann  M.  (2013).  Charts  and  demand:   empirical  generalizations  on  social  influence.  International  journal  of  research  in  marketing.     Moses,  Lucia.  (2015).  5  things  holding  back  personalized  content.  Digiday.  Retrieved  from   <digiday.com/publishers/5-things-holding-back-customized-content>   Next  Big  Sound  Presents  2014:  State  of  the  Industry.  (2014).  Retrieved  from   <https://www.nextbigsound.com/industryreport/2014>  

  

34  

   O'Reilly,  T.  (2005).  What  Is  Web  2.0.  Retrieved  from   <http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html>   Sacks,  O.  (2006).  Musicophilia:  tales  of  music  and  the  brain.  New  York:  Vintage  Books.   Spiers,  J.  Wiley.  (2011).  Perish  Your  Publisher.  (1st  ed.).  Seattle:  Seattle  Teacher's  Press.     Thompson,  Derek.  (2014).  The  Shazam  Effect.  The  Atlantic:  Magazine.  Retrieved  from   http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2014/12/the-shazam-effect/382237/   Ulloa,  Nina.  (2014).  The  20  Most  Influential  Music  Blogs...  Digital  Music  News.  Retrieved   from  <www.digitalmusicnews.com/2014/03/26/20blogs>   Van  Raaij,  W.  (1993).  Postmodern  consumption.  Journal  of  Economic  Psychology.     Van  Rijmenam,  Mark.  (2014).  How  Big  Data  Enabled  Spotify  To  Change  The  Music  Industry.   Datafloq.  Retrieved  from  <https://datafloq.com/read/big-data-enabled-spotify-change- music-industry/391>     

  

35  

