DEVELOPMENT OF NOVEL POLYSTYRENE COMPOSITE BEADS FOR DEFECT-FREE LOST FOAM CASTING

by

Satiendra (Uttam) Jagoo, B. Eng. (Aerospace Engineering), Ryerson University (Canada), 2005

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the Program of Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007 © (Satiendra Jagoo) 2007
PROPERTY OF RYERSON UNlVRllV UBRAaV'

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

SatIen a Ja

0

11

BORROWER'S PAGE

Name (last, first)

Address

Date (day/month/year)

111

ABSTRACT Development of Novel Polystyrene Composite Beads for Defect-Free Lost Foam Casting

© Satiendra Jagoo, 2007
Master of Applied Science

In the Program of Mechanical Engineering
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007
The wider adoption of the Lost Foam Casting (LFC) process by the foundry industry has been impeded by the occurrence of fold defects. It is well known that a new foamed polymer, which degrades with less thermal energy (or less endothermic) and produces fewer gaseous pyrolysis products, may be a solution to fold defects. Hence, this

pioneering research was an attempt to develop novel polystyrene composite beads for the LFC process through suspension polymerization. Low molecular weight polystyrene composite beads were initially produced, and the presence of the additives inside these beads was confirmed by Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. High molecular

weight polystyrene composite beads were then produced. The thermal properties of these low and high molecular weight beads were studied using advanced characterization techniques such as thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). It was found that these polystyrene composite beads degrade faster and at lower onset temperatures of degradation than the unmodified polystyrene beads. Finally, such novel polymers have the potential to replace the currently used polystyrene beads in the LFC industry to reduce casting defects.

iv

.I

RESUME
Developpement de nouvelles billes abase de polystyrene pour minimiser les defauts de fonderie dans Ie procede de moulage a modele gazeifiable (LFC)

© Satiendra Jagoo, 2007 Maitrise en sciences appliquees
Dans Ie cadre du programme de genie mecanique Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007
Le procede de moulage defauts associes

a modele

gazeifiable tend

a produire

un certain nombre de

a la decomposition du modele en polymere lors de la coulee du metal.

L'adoption plus large de ce procede par l'industrie de la fonderie en a donc ete freinee. La formulation d'un polymere dont la temperature de composition serait plus basse et qui produirait moins de produits de decomposition pourrait constituer une solution

a ce

probleme. Dans ce contexte, ceUe recherche pilote visait a developper de nouvelles billes

a base de polystyrene par Ie processus de polymerisation par suspension. Initialement, des billes a base de polystyrene de poids moleculaire relativement bas ont eM produites et
la presence des additifs

a l'interieur

de ces billes a eM confirmee par l'analyse X par

dispersion d' energie. Par la suite, des billes de poids moleculaire plus eleve ont eM produites. Les proprietes thermiques et physiques de ces deux types de billes ont ete etudiees en utilisant des techniques de caracterisation avancees. billes se degradent plus rapidement et

n a eM constate que les

a des temperatures plus basses que les billes non a modele

modifiees. Finalement, de tels polymeres ont Ie potentiel de remplacer les billes de polystyrene actuellement utilisees dans l'industrie du procede de moulage gazeifiable (LFC) pour reduire les defauts de fonderie.

v


