Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Application specific product qualification report for uninterruptible power supplies used in nuclear reactors R1 and R2
Sam Sadeghi
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Sadeghi, Sam, "Application specific product qualification report for uninterruptible power supplies used in nuclear reactors R1 and R2" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 165.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

APPLICATION SPECIFIC PRODUCT QUALIFICATION REPORT FOR UNINTERRUPTIBLE POWER SUPPLIES USED IN NUCLEAR REACTORS Rl AND R2

by

Sam Sadeghi, B. Eng, Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, March 2008 Masters of Engineering Project Report Presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Masters of Engineering in the Program of Electrical and Computer Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008
©Sam Sadeghi 2008

RYERSO!~ U~li\i~?.tinY UG'AJU'V

P.'i0PFATV OF

"

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this report.

Sam Sadeghi

Date

ABSTRACT
Safety is the most important aspect and is considered the overwriting priority in nuclear power plants, which comprise of thousands of systems and components that work systematically together for the purpose of generating electricity in a safe, economical and environmentally friendly manner. As the instrumentation and electrical components advance and become more sophisticated and migrate from analog design to the more complicated and error-prone softwarebased topology, the task of determining that a programmable electronic system (PES) is capable of meeting its safety-related design objective becomes ever more challenging. The dependence on the PES to accomplish its safety-related objective must be thoroughly studied to assess the safety-related impacts associated with the potential failure modes of the device. Application Specific Product Qualification (ASPQ) is used to provide necessary assurance in the design integrity of a PES and confirms that the product can meet the requirements of a safety-related application. This report is an application specific product qualification (ASPQ) assessment of WEP 101O-1101l20-NEA and WEP 1020-1101l20-NEA Uninterruptible Power Supplies manufactured by Gambit Electronic Ltd. Information referenced in this report is based on the data received from Gambit, other nuclear power plants using Gambit products and the site visit paid to Gambit, Country-X in August 2007. Gambit WEP 1010- and 10XX-XXXfYYNEA UPS systems are used to provide un interruptible Class II power to a number of safety-related control and instrumentation power distribution panels for Rl and R2 reactors located in X facility. These UPSs are Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) products intended for industrial un interruptible power supply applications.

III

