THE ATID PROJECT: TEACHING THE HOLOCAUST! THROUGH DIGITAL STORYTELLING! ! by! ! Eli Kowaz ! BA (Hons), McGill University, 2013! ! ! A Major Research Paper! Presented to Ryerson University! ! in partial fulfillment of the! requirements for the degree of! Master of Digital Media! in the! Yeates School of Graduate Studies! ! Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2015! © Eli Kowaz! ! ! ! ! !

!

AUTHOR'S!DECLARATION! ! I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this MRP. This is a true copy of the MRP, including any required final revisions.! I authorize Ryerson University to lend this MRP to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.! I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.! I understand that my MRP may be made electronically available to the public.! ! ! Signed,! ! ! Eli!Kowaz! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !

ii!

ABSTRACT! This paper aims to develop a Holocaust education protocol template with the goals of maximizing student engagement, enhancing the student experience, boosting retention of information, and facilitating the individual's identification with the historical events of the Holocaust. The protocol proposed is of general application and is suitable for other current and historic events. At the same time, the Holocaust is a powerful and appropriate event for illustrating the impact of digital media on education, and in particular, it highlights head on the issue of historical distance from actual events and the ways in which digital technology and media can reduce the risk of losing key sources of testimonial experience that are so often central to the student's appreciation and understanding of such events. This proposed conceptual protocol is founded on three basic dimensions: Content, Learning Sequencing, and Digital Media. These dimensions are interactive and overlapping in the proposed model.! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !

!

iii!

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT! I would like to acknowledge my advisor, Professor Jason Boyd, for his commitment and guidance. This paper would not be possible without his wisdom and knowledge. Also, my second reader Professor Michael Carter, for his dedication and counsel.! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !

!

iv!

DEDICATION! To the victims of the Holocaust, the millions of innocent people who lost their lives because of their beliefs, sexual orientation, religion, or their will to fight evil. To the survivors, many whom are no longer with us, most of whom lost their entire families and spent their lives telling stories and educating others in order to preserve the memory of those who perished and, ensure the events that transpired will never be repeated, to the victims of genocide around the world, who have suffered from the most barbaric acts of man and lastly, to my grandmother the late Dr. Sally Rogow, who spent her life helping those in need, writing, teaching, and fighting for an equal and just society, publishing over dozens of peer reviewed journals, articles, and books, two of which focused on brave heroes of the Holocaust.! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! v!

TABLE!OF!CONTENTS! Author's!declaration!................................................................................................................................!ii! Abstract!.......................................................................................................................................................!iii! Acknowledgments!...................................................................................................................................!iv! Dedication......................................................................................................................................................v! Table!of!Contents......................................................................................................................................!vi! List!of!Figures............................................................................................................................................vii! Introduction..................................................................................................................................................1! Digital!Media!in!Current!Holocaust!Education..............................................................................4! Major!Existing!Internet!Sites..............................................................................................................12! A!Proposed!Protocol!of!Digital!Storytelling........,.........................................................................17! Dimension!One:!!The!Content.............................................................................................................19! Dimension!Two:!!Sequencing.............................................................................................................19! Dimension!Three:!Digital!Media........................................................................................................20! Key!Components!of!a!Digital!Story!Telling!Model.....................................................................22! ! ! ! Testimony.............................................................................................................22! GeoVImmersion.....................................................................................................26! Web!2.0..................................................................................................................27! Google!&!Dynamic!Digital!Mapping....................................................................31! Summary!of!the!Proposed!Model......................................................................................................32! Case!Study...................................................................................................................................................33! Dimension!One:!!The!Content.............................................................................................................35! Dimension!Two:!!Sequencing.............................................................................................................39! Dimension!Three:!Digital!Media........................................................................................................41! Summary!and!Conclusions...................................................................................................................43! References...................................................................................................................................................46! ! ! ! ! ! ! vi!

! Figure 1/ Yad Vashem's Thematic and Chronological Narrative of the Holocaust..........14! ! Figure 2/ The USHMM's Web Homepage........................................................................15! ! Figure 3/ An Online USHMM Encyclopedia Article.......................................................16! ! Figure 4/ Holocaust Education Through Digital Storytelling: The Cube..........................18! Figure 5/ The Digital Storytelling Cube of Pinchas Gutter..............................................34! ! Figure 6/ Gutter's TimeLine..............................................................................................38! Figure 6a.! Figure 6b.! Figure 6c.! ! !

LIST OF FIGURES!

!

vii!

INTRODUCTION    From 1941 to 1945, the Nazis systematically murdered six million Jews, killing  approximately twothirds of the European Jewish population. In addition, they murdered  approximately five million nonJews including Gypsies, Poles, homosexuals, the  mentally and physically disabled, political opponents, and prisoners of war (Baumeister,  2002241). The methodicalness and scale of this atrocity, commonly referred to as the  Holocaust, are hard to comprehend. How one of the most advanced and civilized nations  of Europe was able to commit such heinous acts of organized mass murder is still  difficult to grasp. This only happened seventy years ago. A quick perusal of today's news  stories suggest that the worst aspects of humankind, so aptly illustrated by the Holocaust,  continue to find expression. While the magnitude of the Holocaust is much greater than  these events, there is no shortage of atrocities in our modern world.  The horrors of the Holocaust teach the dangers of silence and indifference, while  emphasizing the value of living in society where our rights and personal beliefs are  protected. Many survivors have recognized the importance of telling their stories as a  means of honouring their families and other victims, and as a means of educating future  generations. As Holocaust survivors pass on, the debate about how to teach the Holocaust  intensifies, in particular, the most effective method of preserving survivor testimonies for  educating future generations.   This comes at a time when in many countries, astonishingly, the historical reality  of the Holocaust is being questioned a 2014 survey from the AntiDefamation league  found that only 54 percent of the global population has heard of the Holocaust, and only a 
1   

third believes the Holocaust has been described accurately (Green, 2014). A popular BBC  television program, Big Questions, recently did a show on the question `Is it Time to Lay  the Holocaust to Rest?'(Koren, 2015), and in 2006 Iran hosted an international Holocaust  denial conference (Fathi, 2006).   When prominent American historian Deborah Lipstadt published a book  condemning Holocaust denial, Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth  and Memory (1993), she found herself being sued for libel by one of the most dangerous  Holocaust deniers, David Irving, who, at that time, had a reputation as a meticulous  historian. After a highly publicized trial, Irving was subsequently convicted for  deliberately misrepresenting and distorting historical evidence (Irving v. Lipstadt, 2000).  This case represents the continual threat to the truth of the Holocaust by those who wish  to question the evidence provided by survivor testimony and historical documentation. At  the conclusion of the trial, Professor Lipstadt said "I see this not only as a personal  victory, but also as a victory for all those who speak out against hate and prejudice"  (Busfield, 2000). Her subsequent book describing this experience is aptly titled: History  on Trial. The dangers of Holocaust denial make finding an effective method of Holocaust  education in the postsurvivor era all the more critical.  Professor Yehuda Bauer of Hebrew University explains that when it comes to  Holocaust education, the most important thing is the relevance of the topic to the lives of  those being educated (Bauer, 2012). That relevance is determined not only by the content  of the message, but how it is delivered. A McGrawHill study (2015) surveyed 1,697  college students and found that digital technology is an essential part of study for the 

2   

majority of students. The study found that 81 percent of students use mobile devices to  study, 62 percent of students say technology helps them feel better prepared, while 77  percent believe adaptive technology has helped them improve their grades. A 2012 study  by the National Literary Trust in the UK found that "technologybased formats, such as  text messages (68.4%), websites (53.2%) and messages on social networking sites  (51.1%) are most commonly read outside of class at least once a month" (Clark, 2012).  This evidence is compelling, and shows a clear trend towards digital technology as the  most effective way of engaging young people.  With survivors passing away, much of the immediacy and impact of testimony is  lost and therefore it is essential to find the most effective way to preserve testimony in  order to memorialize the Holocaust and educate future generations. Digital storytelling  tools are uniquely suited as the medium for recording and preserving this important  firsthand source as new technologies, such as holographic 3dimensional recordings of  survivors, allow us to record and present testimony in ways never thought possible. Using  these tools in educational settings is important but it is crucial to do so in a responsible  and specific manner. As Don Tapscott argues, "Don't throw technology into the  classroom and hope for good things. Focus on the change in pedagogy, not the  technology. Learning 2.0 is about dramatically changing the relationship between a  teacher and students in the learning process" (2008:140).   This paper aims to develop a Holocaust education protocol template with the  goals of maximizing student engagement, enhancing the student experience, boosting  retention of information, and facilitating individual identification with the historical 

3   

events of the Holocaust. In doing so, I will first highlight the role of digital technologies  currently being used in the Holocaust memorial landscape, including a survey of two  major internet web resources on Holocaust memorial and education, Yad Vashem and the  USHMM (United States Holocaust Memorial Museum). After a critique of these sites, I  will outline an educational protocol after a careful review and analysis of the newest  technologies and developments in Holocaust education. including the simulation of  survivor testimony through Holograms, Web 2.0 affordances, and geoimmersion.  DIGITAL MEDIA IN CURRENT HOLOCAUST EDUCATION    The role of digital technologies in the teaching of the Holocaust and the  communication of Holocaust memory is important for achieving educational objectives  related to this important historic event. In addition, it serves as an important vantage point  from which to observe the role of different media in the communication of the memory of  important events more generally. Anna Reading explains: "Focusing on how the memory  of the Holocaust is being articulated by new technologies in public spaces can provide  important clues for understanding the relationships between media, culture and memory  that, in turn, can enable reflection on the role of different media and socially inherited  memories in current events and subsequent atrocities" (2003:71).  Significant online educational resources on teaching the Holocaust are available  in North America and Europe, resources which include the websites of the two most  wellknown Holocaust museums (in Washington DC and Jerusalem). As Reading  explains, "Holocaust memory has become configured within museum environments in  virtually every community worldwide in which Jewish people and other Nazi displaced 
4   

persons were forced to resettle. One of the earliest of these museums to be established  was Yad Vashem: the Holocaust Martyrs and Heroes Remembrance Authority in 1953  created by an act of the Israeli Knesset in Israel" (Reading, 200370). She also notes that  in the United States, "15 years after President Carter established the Commission on the  Holocaust, the US Holocaust Museum was opened on prime land in Washington, DC"  (Reading, 200370). Since its opening in Washington, D.C., the US Holocaust Memorial  Museum has welcomed almost forty million visitors, including ten million children and  ninetysix heads of state (About the Museum, USHMM). The museum's "primary  mission is to advance and disseminate knowledge about this unprecedented tragedy to  preserve the memory of those who suffered and to encourage its visitors to reflect upon  the moral and spiritual questions raised by the events of the Holocaust as well as their  own responsibilities as citizens of a democracy" (Mission Statement, USHMM).   Museums are especially significant because, unlike archives, they have a mission  to engage the public with the historical evidence. Yad Vashem opened in 1953 and is the  second most frequently visited tourist destination in Israel. Its new exhibition space was  opened in 2005 and was designed by renowned IsraeliCanadian architect Moshe Safdie.  It houses the largest collection of artwork from the Holocaust and has collected  approximately 110,000 audio, video, and written testimonies of Holocaust survivors (Yad  Vashem Archive). The new museum embraced the ideal of integrating digital technology  into the Holocaust memorial and educational experience. There are more than 140  flatpanel displays, and 130 video streams fully integrated into the exhibit. There are 

5   

dozens of projectors and the museum's entrance features Michal Rovner's video art  projected on a 14metre high triangular screen (Avitecture, 2005).   These museums were the first to integrate digital technology into Holocaust  memory and education. As Reading notes, "public institutions such as museums,  websites and interactive digital media consoles are also increasingly part of the  memorial landscape" (2003:67). Reasons for this are twofold. First, museum  organizations have been quick to recognize the possibilities provided by new  technologies and second, as survivors age, museums have recognized that it is essential to  "find ways of tactfully retaining survivor's stories in the form of digital interactive  multimedia consoles located in the exhibition space" (Reading, 200371).  Museums exist beyond the borders of Israel and the United States. Holocaust  museums can be found Argentina, Australia, Canada and South Africa. In Asia, there is  an exhibition in Shanghai, and in Japan there are Holocaust Education Centres in Tokyo  and Fukuyama City (Reading, 2003). In Europe, concentration and death camps that the  Nazis were not able to destroy have been preserved and many have been turned into  museums or memorials. AuschwitzBirkenau is a UNESCO world heritage site and had  more than 1.5 million visitors in 2014 (Payne, 2015). Reading (2003) observes that while  many of these Holocaust museums are still primarily artifactual, there has been a strong  movement towards using new technologies and digital interactivity. The Simon  Wiesenthal Center's Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles was one of the first to develop  this powerful approach. It was "established with the view that new technologies could  provide young people especially with important new ways of learning about the events" 

6   

(Reading, 200371). The centre devotes "almost an entire floor to its Multimedia  Learning Center" and "digital interactivity in a variety of forms has been at the heart of  the museum's philosophy since it opened in 1993" (Reading, 200371). The Los Angeles  Museum of the Holocaust also focuses on the digital storytelling experience: its digital  innovations were completed by Variate Labs, a design film specializing in architecture  and interaction design. The exhibition wall and touchscreen monitors, improved audio  guides with more user controls, and traditional photographic and objectfilled exhibits are  all a testament to the recognition of the significance of the digital storytelling experience  within the confines of the museum. Lester explains, that by digitizing museums "the  immersive experience becomes individualized" (2013:247).  For those fortunate to have a museum or education centre close by, school visits  are a powerful way to teach the Holocaust but for many if not most schoolage children,  this is not possible. For this reason, it is essential to bring a specific method of teaching  the Holocaust through digital storytelling to the classroom. As Meghan McGlinn Manfra  and Jeremy D. Stoddard argue, "digital resources have the potential to enhance genocide  and Holocaust education by providing robust content resources and interactive  opportunities for students to develop new skills and understanding" (2008:260).  In Holocaust education, a key goal includes the retention of the events as  experienced by survivors and in educating future generations about its magnitude and  impact. According to its director, Douglas Greenberg, the Shoah Visual History  Foundation has recorded 51,721 video testimonies of Holocaust witnesses and survivors,  while developing digital interactive systems that allow researchers to call up computer 

7   

extracts of digitized video testimonies on indexed subjects (as cited by Reading,  200367).   Thus while new forms of media have become a part of Holocaust education, and  resources abound, the integration of digital media has occurred at a slow pace and has not  fully capitalized on the full power and potential of digital media and technology. Many  Holocaust education websites provide survivor testimony using plain text, while YouTube  videos of testimony are often long, unedited and not identified as to target groups or  intended audience, not to mention the challenges of Holocaust education in particular  with the the dependency on facetoface survivor testimony, the sensitivity of the topic,  and the vast resources available. In emphasizing these challenges, D. Crowe (2001)  explains that the resources available are "massive and daunting" (Manfra & Stoddard,  2008260).  It is also important to emphasize that a key element of Holocaust education is  preventing future genocide. James Brown (2007) provides an example of the complexity 
 of teaching genocide in the 21st   century. While his example centres on Darfur, his 

observations are generalizable to the Holocaust and other genocidal atrocities. Brown  describes freshman university students playing the role of refugees in a simulation of a  refugee camp in Darfur, Sudan. Darfur, a region in southwestern Sudan, was the site of  the most deadly genocides since the Holocaust. Governmentfunded Arab militias known  as the Janjaweed killed more than 300,000 people according to UN estimates, leaving  approximately 3.2 million people displaced (Darfur Conflict, 2014). Though intended to  leave the students with an affective experience from which they would learn, the 

8   

designers of the simulation, in Brown's view, trivialized the experiences hundreds of  thousands and refugees. Brown states:   One of the students volunteered to go up on stage and demonstrate the "Darfur is  Dying" computerbased simulation that had been projected onto a large screen.  (1) She selected one of the eight members of a family in Darfur portrayed in the  simulation to "forage for water." As the student used the computer keys to help  the female animated character, "Sittina," race across the desolate wasteland in  search of water, the audience cheered wildly. They shrieked as the Janjaweed  truck came creeping closer, roared approval as the character ran to evade the  militia, and booed at her inevitable capture. At this point, the simulation queried if  we would like a chance to try again. The audience clamored, "Yes!" and so  another family member was selected, this time a child named "Abok." This  cartoon figure was much faster, and glided across the screen, to the delight of the  crowd, but ultimately met the same fate as Sittina. As the simulation ended,  students applauded enthusiastically. (Brown, 200721)    Afterwards, Brown was unsure if this was the appropriate way to teach genocide  even if it increased awareness. He writes: "I sat in my chair, disturbed, questions racing  through my head: Is this the way to teach issues such as genocide in a new millennium  characterized by new technologies? Is this how we reach students who have grown up  playing video and computer games? Do these technologies provide a new opportunity for  activism and understanding? It may be that the answer to all of these questions is "yes,"  but ethical questions do arise. Is it acceptable to trivialize a tragedy (of a massive scale)  through a game so that awareness is increased? Should we make the study of history  more gamelike? What are the limits of simulations?" Brown recognized the importance  of digital media in engaging and motivating students to learn about genocide, but hoped  teachers would instead "use new technologies [that] will help students to access authentic  information from primary sources, which we may have only been able to simulate in the 

9   

past" (2007:23). This example highlights a danger lurking in the adoption of digital  technology without comprehension of the current generation's exposure to gaming and  other aspects of the digital experience that may create a challenge in differentiating real  events from those of the imagination (or in the imagination of gaming designers). Brown  is describing how his students may have distanced themselves from the experience of  Darfur, just like they are accustomed to do in their use of digital technologies for  precisely the objective of escape and fantasy. This reality has to be appropriately  acknowledged and addressed in the use of digital technology for teaching about real  historic events and individuals who experienced them. Planned and well thought out  applications of digital media in the teaching of difficult historical events is critical, and is  all the more important, given the potential intensity of the audience experience with  regard to difficult content.  Fred M. Newmann and Gary G. Wehlage's (1993) framework for "authentic  instruction" provides a valuable resource for effective social studies education using new  digital technologies. Manfra and Stoddard (2008) explain that this framework is  particularly effective because it "suggests specific criteria for meaningful social studies  teaching and learning and reflects the purposes of the affective revolution­era  curriculum." The framework they suggest is comprised of three main components:  (1) student construction of knowledge through the engagement of higherorder  thinking skills, including interpretation, analysis, and synthesis 

10   

(2) student engagement in disciplined inquiry that leads to a depth of knowledge  and engagement in substantive conversations, modeled after social science  professions  (3) student engagement in making connections to the world beyond school.  Manfra and Stoddard suggest compiling a variety of "available resources   to identify digital media that engage students in moral and ethical valuing, emphasize  historical inquiry, and are relevant to the world outside of school (e.g., taking action to  thwart presentday genocide)" (2008:260).  Importantly, Manfra and Stoddard focus on using "new media to demonstrate  ways to teach authentically about genocide and the Holocaust" while acknowledging "the  importance of textbased and photographic Webbased resources currently available"  (2008:261). The Holocaust provides an opportunity to model the optimal use of digital  media in achieving educational goals at a crucial intersection: availability of vast digital  resources and technologies and the timeliness of availability of facetoface survivor  testimony. The value and timeliness of facetoface survivor testimony is an essential  dimension of the teaching of the Holocaust. Yet even among those who are willing to  share their stories, health issues and other aspects of aging are becoming an increasing  challenge. Manfra and Stoddard explain that "this decline has led to a number of digital  media projects that capture the stories of survivors and make them available via  streaming audio or video" (2008:261).   Unfortunately, from the perspective of these researchers, turning to digital  technology as an effective education tool in teaching the Holocaust has predominantly 

11   

been a reactive process, meaning museums and educators have turned to technology only  because the difficulty of direct access to survivors. As Reading explains in reference to  the role of digital interactive technology in Holocaust exhibits, this "area of inquiry has  been virtually ignored by scholars in the field of Holocaust studies" (2003:71).    MAJOR EXISTING INTERNET SITES  After extensive research of online Holocaust Museum educational resources, it is  clear that two stand above the rest: the educational section of the website of Yad Vashem  in Jerusalem, and the website of the US Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington,  DC. Yad Vashem is the most content heavy of online Holocaust education resources. The  website features a database of Holocaust victims, and an extensive online photo and  document archive. The site also features a video testimony resource centre and a film  archive. The website is full of primary sources.  

For basic historical coverage, Yad Vashem offers a Thematic and Chronological  Narrative of the Holocaust. This webpage features a side tab with title and subtitle links  in chronological order describing the history of the Holocaust from 1933 to the  conclusion of the Nuremberg Trials. The content is good, but it is text heavy: every page  features only one small image, and the remainder is text (Figure 1). Each article is 
 engaging and wellwritten, but the question arises about its ability to keep a 21st   century 

student engaged. The problem with this and many other such websites is that the  abundance of content at their disposal makes it difficult to present an engaging online  story. Another impressive part of the Yad Vashem online resource is their video 

12   

collection, in particular its YouTube channel, where there are over 1100 videos posted.  These include survivor testimonies, an educational tool kit series featuring video tutorials  advising teachers how to approach different Holocaust topics, virtual tours of different  exhibits in the museums, and minidocumentaries. All of these videos are important and  most are arranged in playlists however, maneuvering between the collection of more  than a thousand videos is difficult because in many cases they are not connected using  common themes, indexed by a keyword, or in the language of the person conducting the  search (Gray, 2014). Gray argues that it is important these resources be "made  userfriendly for both teachers and students alike, so that they can search and select the  appropriate testimonies quickly and easily" (2014:112).  

13   

Figure 1 Yad Vashem's Thematic and Chronological Narrative of the Holocaust 

  Another leading institution with a significant online presence is the United States  Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM) in Washington, DC. Unlike Yad Vashem, the  front page is captivating and clear (Figure 2). The website features a Holocaust  encyclopedia which has been translated into 14 different languages. 

14   

Figure 2 The USHMM's Web Homepage 

    Similar to the Yad Vashem site, the text from the Encyclopedia articles is very  heavy (Figure 3). A significant difference is that the sidebar of many articles invites  viewers to watch historical video footage, and view photographs relevant to the article  being viewed. This is beneficial however, the influence is on plain text and not the  interactive elements of the site.           
15   

Figure 3 An Online USHMM Encyclopedia Article   

  These two websites were selected because of the solid reputation of their  respective organizations, their efforts to integrate digital technology into the framework  of Holocaust education, and the digital and nondigital resources available. It is clear that  both Museums have invested a great deal in digitizing primary historical content and  making them available on the Web however, they are not maximizing the digital 

16   

affordances, nor are they making the connection between their content and how young  people are using digital technology.  A review of these and the USC Shoah Foundation at The Institute for Visual  History and Education (http://www.vhf.org/)   supports the rationale for the current paper  and its objective of developing an educational protocol that will maximize the goals of  student engagement, enhancing the student's experience and retention of information, and  facilitating the individual's identification with the important historical events of the  Holocaust. This protocol is especially important because keeping the Holocaust relevant  will become increasingly more difficult as time passes and as survivors pass on.    A PROPOSED MODEL OF DIGITAL STORYTELLING    This paper proposes an education protocol with the specific goal of effectively  linking digitized historical content and young people's interaction with digital  technology. The protocol will consequently maximize student engagement, enhance the  student experience, boost retention of information, and facilitate the individual's  identification with the historical events of the Holocaust. As Michael Gray argues "it is  imperative that sufficient training is available for practitioners so that they can become  confident and savvy in their use of the technology" (Gray, 2014120). Yet the training  that occurs needs to go beyond simply showing how the programmes and software work,  but how they can be best employed to fulfil the specific goals of Holocaust education"  (Gray, 2014120). 

17   

This protocol is founded on three dimensions: Content (academic resources,  testimony, evidence), Learning Sequencing (importance of timing and sequencing of the  learning experience) and Digital Media (the use of modern day digital technology in all  its forms). These dimensions are interactive and are not mutually exclusive (Figure 4).     Figure 4. Holocaust Education Through Digital Storytelling: The Cube. 

 

18   

DIMENSION ONE: THE CONTENT  Content gives us the resources to tell the story. Content includes academic  resources and research, testimony, and other sources of evidence. In the proposed  protocol, the main objective of this dimension is the effective and efficient use of the vast  amount of available Holocaust resources.  The landscape with regards to content is vast and includes thousands of archives  and scholarly publications much of which is preserved in museums, universities, and  other educational institutions. The challenge is to make use of this content to effectively 
 and efficiently engage the 21st   century student. For this reason, many institutions have put 

significant resources into improving their web presence.  Academic resources are comprised of predominately reading material from  scholarly research to relevant books: these resources give us the academic support to tell  the story. Testimony comes in different forms: written, recorded audio, and video  testimony. Testimony is an indispensable resource: not only does it tell us the story of  Holocaust survivors and victims, but it integrates the History with personal stories. Other  evidence includes the vast amount of documents, photographs, video footage, audio  recordings, and all physical remnants from the Holocaust.    DIMENSION TWO: SEQUENCING  The next dimension of the protocol is Sequencing. This involves sequencing of  the various elements as a key factor in achieving the goals of the protocol, including  ethical considerations reflecting the sensitivity of the material. This dimension deals with 

19   

the actual unfolding of the story, including attention to what comes first, what comes last  and what kind of preparation the participant needs before exposure to the story itself,  such as preliminary readings or discussions.  It is useful to review some ethical considerations inherent to the teaching of  difficult materials, such as the magnitude of human suffering in the Holocaust and other  atrocities, and the dimension of sequencing puts this into primary focus. As an example,  it is important to ensure that students are aware of the nature of the film clips and story  content through preparatory summaries and readings, as well as addressing this directly  through digital media, so that students are prepared. Equally important is building into  the sequencing appropriate follow up to allow for discussion and debriefing after hearing  or viewing some of the more difficult content. The objective of this dimension is to  ensure that the preparation and followup provide the appropriate support so that the  actual digital experience is appropriate and effective in reaching the learning objectives.  DIMENSION THREE: DIGITAL MEDIA   The third dimension of the cube is Digital Media, which in this protocol is seen to  be the means of achieving the important objective of enhancing the experience of the  storytelling and the experience of the student through the use of digital media and  technology. This includes all the resources that have been digitized along with new  technologies that can be integrated to the story. As Yehuda Bauer (2012) emphasized, the  most important part of Holocaust education is to make what is learned relevant to the  lives of the students. To do this effectively it is imperative to integrate digital media with  proven information processing and educational methods. 

20   

The 21st century student is different from students of previous generations. As  Don Tapscott describes, "The Net Geners (21st century students) have grown up digital  and they're living in the twentyfirst century, but the education system in many places is  lagging at least 100 years behind. The model of education that still prevails today was  designed for the Industrial Age. It revolves around the teacher who delivers a  onesizefitsall, oneway lecture. The student, working alone, is expected to absorb the  content delivered by the teacher" (2008:22).  This integration of digital media will help facilitate a shift in focus from the  teacher to the student. Tapscott argues that this shift is needed to teach effectively in the  21st century: "instead of focusing on the teacher, the education system should focus on  the student. Instead of lecturing, teachers should interact with students and help them  discover for themselves. Instead of delivering a onesizefitsall form of education,  schools should customize the education to fit each child's individual way of learning.  Instead of isolating students, the schools should encourage them to collaborate"  (2008:122). Tapscott explains that "to focus on the student, educators must abandon the  old system in which the teacher delivers the lecture, the same lecture to all students" and  "encourage students to discover for themselves, and learn a process of discovery and  critical thinking instead of just memorizing the teacher's information" (2008:130).  One of the most concerning observations with regards to Holocaust education is  that "teachers [in the US] are uncomfortable using technology and are unaware of all it  offers, both to increase their own historical knowledge and to create learning activities for 

21   

students" (JESNA, 2006). This protocol provides a clear framework intended to give  teachers the confidence to adopt digital storytelling into their Holocaust curriculum.    KEY COMPONENTS OF A DIGITAL STORY TELLING MODEL  This section describes key components to a digital story telling model in  Holocaust education. In doing so, it will make reference to the research literature and  highlight both the strengths, weaknesses, and potential pitfalls.  Testimony  Holocaust testimony is one of the most interesting aspects to be integrated into an  effective digital storytelling method. Hearing the story from a survivor facetoface is  deeply moving, raw and unfiltered. As Sheryl Ochayon (2015) explains, survivor "voices  resonate with the authority that comes from their personal experiences" (0:150:20).  Survivors act as the "human bridge that connects us to the events that occurred in the  past" (0:220:27). Ochayon comments that with the passing of survivors, "we will lose  much of the immediacy and impact that comes from their testimony" (0:380:43). This is  why it is imperative to use recorded testimony in appropriate context, striking a balance  between the history and the emotional experience of hearing the story. As Ochayon  explains, "In a world where survivors no longer walk among us, it will be critical to use  survivor's testimony in the classroom to bring students closer to the human stories of the  Holocaust" (0:470:55). Due to its importance in Holocaust education, substantial effort  had been invested in creating ways testimony can survive after the survivors themselves  are gone. One important resource is the Iwitness program. The program provides access 

22   

to teachers to the video testimonies along with an activity building feature. The program  facilitates the integration of testimony into the classroom in many ways, allowing  students to actively engage with the process and content. The program enables students to  produce media projects with a builtin video editing system (Gray, 2015). This is a  significant step in integrating technology into Holocaust education and is similar to  digital storytelling as it means "students can engage with the medium to find out some of  the answers to their questions" (Gray, 201561). In another interesting project, the  University of Southern California Shoah Foundation collaborated with smartphone app  Broadcastr. The app provides users with relevant content based on their location. This  technology was adapted to Holocaust education and the app allows students to hear  Holocaust testimonies from the USC Shoah Foundation's testimony collection based on  the location of the user (Gray, 2015). If a student was visiting Lodz in Poland, for  example, testimonies from the city would be available to download.  Wolf Kansteiner, Professor of History at Binghamton University, explains that the  "culturally constructed aura of the Holocaust survivors has been a crucial component of  Holocaust education in the past decades" and that "for the future of Holocaust memory, it  is important that that aura gets a second lease on life or is replaced by a similarly  attractive memorial focus" (2014:404). The most notable attempt in this direction is the  New Dimensions in Testimony project. The project aims to create an interactive  connection between the survivor and the student, an imperative in teaching the Holocaust  in the 21st century (Gray, 2015). The project has recorded survivor testimony in a 26foot  spherical stage, lit by over 6,000 LED lights, producing a hologram projection (Gray, 

23   

2015). The aim of the project is to create "an environment in which an individual or an  entire class can have a survivor sit with them to tell his or her story, via video or project  they will be able to ask questions and the survivor will answer from the testimony as if he  or she were in the room" (Maio et al. 201224).  Taken at face value, this project appears to be an effective solution to preserving  survivor testimony and presenting it to future generations. It is timely as well. According  to a report from The Tauber Holocaust Library and Education program in San Francisco,  approximately 500,000 Holocaust survivors are still alive, yet 610 percent of those die  annually, and their average age is 79. Clearly the challenge of finding living survivors  who would be physically able or willing to tell their story in such detail becomes more  critical with each passing year. Kansteiner explains that "the holograms of survivors are  very good at mastering the past in simulated conversation, they seemingly spontaneously  provide the details of their family histories, camp ordeals, survival strategies, and postwar  lives" (2014:404).  While this is compelling, it is important at this juncture to examine the possible  challenges and pitfalls of this potentially powerful digital tool. Recall the result of  Brown's inclass simulation, where students played the role of refugees in a simulation of  a Darfur camp there are pitfalls in using simulation technologies in the classroom. As  sophisticated as the technology is, it is a simulation and not a real engagement with a  person. As Kansteiner explains, the survivor holograms "cannot handle the present don't  ask them what they had for breakfast today. At some point during the communicative  process, the ingenious hybrid of dialogical questions and monological answers breaks 

24   

down" (2014:404). This breakdown is concerning and raises the prospect of confusing or  "turning off" the students, and perhaps even making them question whether the  simulation's presentation of the testimony is authentic. Further, such technologies will  not be able to reproduce the same emotional experience of spending time with a survivor.  This raises the importance of finding a way to approximate authentic survivor  facetoface testimony that in itself does not undermine the intention of using this  technology. Kansteiner makes an important point that "despite their technological  sophistication, the holograms cannot be effectively and continuously brought up to date  they will likely always carry small, yet pervasive, markers of historical nonsimultaneity"  (2014:404). This is a potential weakness in the holograms as an educational tool, since, as  Bauer (2012) highlighted earlier, the most integral part of Holocaust education is  relevance to the contemporary world of students.  It also appears that the project has not yet focussed on one of the most important  aspects of its success, the overall student experience. Kansteiner argues that "any  experiments in selfguided immersion in digital violent worlds such as New Dimensions  in Testimony must be accompanied by extensive reception studies" (2014:407). The  failure to focus on the student's receptive experience is crucial, and unfortunately, it  seems this mistake is not limited to New Dimensions in Testimony but occurs often in  genocide education, as Gray explains: "in many decades of linear genocide education, we  have acquired very little knowledge about actual reception processes, and we are about to  repeat that mistake in our lack of study of digital historical cultures" (2014:105). 

25   

Paul Debevec, Professor of Computer Science at USC, who was involved with the  project, discusses this technology, emphasizing both its uniqueness and innovativeness,  but also reasons for concern: "We lose many of our survivors every year. We definitely  feel the sense of urgency and that realistically it's going to be now or never"(Katz, 2013).  The challenge is to balance a "now or never" mindset with appropriate consideration of  the receptive experience. Attention must be turned to this dilemma. This is a  groundbreaking and fascinating way to preserve and present survivor testimony  however, the literature suggests that there are aspects of an impulsive reaction to the the  affordances of new 3D holographics technology at a time when Holocaust survivors are  passing away. What is needed is a well thought out and planned method of educating  future generations using new media technologies.    GeoImmersion  Arguably the most innovative of Holocaust education technologies is being  developed by the The Integrated Media Systems Center at the University of Southern  California, where geoimmersion is used to present computergenerated `virtual spaces'  that show changes over time. Shahabi, Khodaei and Fishbain explain: "4D `virtual  spaces' are 3D buildings and places built up from original maps and plans, which change  with time, making a fourth dimension. It means that if you view the space as it was in  1940, it will be different from 1944 and very different from the current day" (2012:11).  Michael Gray explains that this would "provide a very useful resource for students to see  the changes that occurred on a street, in a ghetto or in a concentration camp" (2014:120). 

26   

Using geoimmersion, "we aim to place the testimonies of Holocaust survivors within a  4D space, such as an interface that would allow a student or researcher to `walk' through  a simulated location ­ a historical site, for instance ­ observing how it looked 70 years  ago compared to how it looks today, all while listening to relevant testimony about the  location and the events that occurred there" (Shahabi et al., 201211). Gray asserts that  this effort has the ability to "revolutionise the nature of Holocaust education especially  outside of the classroom when visiting historical sites. It would offer an unprecedented  insight into the past with the potential to integrate the voice of survivors into the  exploration of the place which is being discovered" (Gray, 2014120).     Web 2.0  Victoria Walden observes that "[w]hen Anna Reading suggested in 2001 that `the  Holocaust has taken on a virtual dimension', she could hardly have predicted the impact  digital technology would have on contemporary Holocaust memory" (2015:1). The  emergence of social media has enabled contributions of content from a much broader  population. Walden explains: "There is a growing number of platforms, in relation to  material constructed for users, that enables anyone to contribute to Holocaust memory,  including YouTube, Twitter and Facebook" (2015:2). Walden cites the interesting  example of a YouTube video titled "I Will Survive Auschwitz." The clip shows a male  survivor dancing with his grandchildren at various concentration camps to celebrate his  survival. The video received mixed reviews, Walden notes, with "many survivors  lambasting it as distasteful, but younger generations celebrating it as the survivor's way 

27   

of remembering his history" (2015:2). Walden makes an important point: that "if the new  generation is to be the future authority of Holocaust memory, then to completely  condemn its modes of communication is counterproductive. Behind the drive to  remember are imperatives to learn from the past and defend against denial. By refusing to  engage with young people's preferred methods of communication, we risk discouraging  them from engaging with Holocaust memory" (2015:2).  One concern with the work of Reading and Manfra and Stoddard is that it fails to  address web content generated by young people, which is an integral part of the digital  interactive space and social media. Walden notes that the focus is solely on web content  created for young people and "they highlight texts that enable young people to see and  hear eyewitnesses, but engage them less in actively contributing to memory" (2015:3).   There are risks here of trivializing the memory of the Holocaust if proper  safeguards are not in place. For example, one of the most popular videos about the  Holocaust and Second World War on YouTube is from the German movie Der Untergang  [Downfall] (2004), which tells the story of the last days of the Nazi regime. A clip of  Hitler ranting at his generals for what he believes is their incompetence at preventing the  Allied advance on Berlin has been used for all sorts of parodies, so much so that one of  Britain's most respected newspapers, The Daily Telegraph, published a guide entitled  "Hitler Downfall parodies: 25 worth watching". Sadly, these videos together have more  internet views than any focussing on actual memory of the Holocaust. It is important to  conduct research to find out if there is a correlation between such videos and the  understanding of the Holocaust among young people. 

28   

Still, social media is a place where students can easily contribute to Holocaust  memory in a forum in which they excel. For example, USHMM has over 220,000  followers on Twitter (August 2014). USHMM tweets include important dates and events,  and more importantly, they provide interactive question and answer periods enabling  students around the world to engage with experts and survivors in real time (Gray, 2014).   It is clear the involvement of young people in actively contributing to memory is  important yet another important concern with social media is that it is being used to  effectively spread rightwing extremism and Holocaust denial (Pfanzelter, 2013).  Mainstream social media sites such as Facebook have cracked down on such activity, yet  in 2010 there were thirtyone Facebook groups with "the denial of the Holocaust as their  central or predominant purpose" (Darnell, 201032). The members of such groups  number approximately 4,853 (Darnell, 2010). Steve Darnell's most concerning finding  relates to Google, where "the relative popularity of searches of the term `Holocaust' has  trended downwards since 2004, the relative popularity of searches of `Holocaust denial'  is on the rise. Specifically, over the past year, the use of `denial' as a related search term  to the Holocaust has increased by seventy per cent" (Darnell, 201033). Again, this is an  important area for research to ascertain if this is because of a rise in interest in `Holocaust  denial", or, hopefully, an increase in concern about the phenomenon of `Holocaust  denial" itself.  Gray (2014) notes that Facebook, a very popular social sharing site with young  people, has become a means of Holocaust memorialization. One example is where  residents of Lublin, Poland, set up a profile page for Lublin resident Henio Zytomirski, 

29   

murdered at Majdanek in 1942. "Henio" gained over 3,000 Facebook friends (Geras &  Sislowska, 2010). A cousin of Henio's, Neta Zytomirski Avidar, wrote: "Henio was an  eyewitness and a victim to the Nazis' actions. Because he was murdered, he could never  provide his testimony. We try to guess what might have been his testimony" (Geras &  Sislowska, 2010). This raises some potential concerns. The value of testimony is in its  authenticity and verifiable nature. As soon as this is removed, its legitimacy can be  questioned. Historian Adam Kopciowski of Lublin's Marie CurieSklodowska University  cautioned: "This is an act of pretending to be a person that has died, but we cannot be  sure whether he spoke that way, whether he thought that way, whether he acted that way"  (Geras & Sislowska, 2010). On the other hand, Joy SatherWagstaff, a cultural  anthropologist at North Dakota State University argued: "I look at this as a virtual version  of what they would leave if they actually went to a place where there was a monument to  him.... I bet they would leave little notes and toys -- the physical material version of  what you see them leaving on Facebook" (Geras & Sislowska, 2010).  Lublin had one of the highest proportion of Jews in Poland, with a third of the  city's population at that time almost all of its 42,000 Jews were killed in the Holocaust  (Poprzeczny, 200481). "Henio"'s Facebook profile read: "Forty thousand names and  faces ... cannot be memorized," urging people instead to "remember just one of them"  (Geras & Sislowska, 2010). This is an important point because very few people would  have ever heard of Henio's story if not for this Facebook initiative. Facebook has  recently updated the visibility of deceased users sites to "maintain the visibility of a 

30   

person's content and account as it had been set up by that user allowing Facebook to  serve as a public memorial site to people who wanted to share publicly" (Fowler, 2014).     These observations, along with the concerns raised earlier about the outcome of  Brown's simulation and the New Dimensions of Testimony project, highlight the real  dangers of playing with history through the use of digital technologies. Gray elaborates  on the conflicting nature of such instances, explaining they "raise ethical issues about the  morality of speaking on behalf of the deceased in the first person, yet they raise  awareness of the tragedies which befell the victims, preserve their memories and may  educate individuals about their experiences" (2014:115). Engagement with social media  raises real issues with regards to Holocaust education, however, there are important  opportunities here as well.    Google & Dynamic Digital Mapping  In addition to incorporating different types of media from the Holocaust into  digital storytelling, it is important to integrate new technologies that can help student 
 understanding in the context of the 21st   century and this is exemplified by some of the 

tools and resources from Google. In 2007, Google partnered with the United States  Holocaust Memorial Museum in an "unprecedented online mapping initiative aimed at  furthering awareness and action in the Darfur region of Sudan". The project was entitled  Crisis in Darfur. The project used Google technology to help users visualize and learn  about the events and destruction in Darfur. "The highresolution imagery in Google Earth 

31   

enables users to zoom into the region to view more than 1,600 damaged and destroyed  villages, providing visual, compelling evidence of the scope of destruction" (United  States Holocaust Memorial Museum [USHMM] and Google Join in Online Darfur  Mapping Initiative, 2007). Not only do such projects benefit the teaching experience but  "humanitarian organizations and others now have a readily accessible tool for better  understanding the situation on the ground in Darfur" (USHMM and Google, 2007). At  the same time, the Museum announced a mapping project on the history of the Holocaust  through the program Google Earth. As described on its website, the Museum is using  Google Earth to map key Holocaust sites with historic content from its collections,  powerfully illustrating the enormous scope and impact of the Holocaust" (Mapping the  Holocaust: Google Earth, n.d.). This technology enables the use of maps as visual  browsing interfaces for class lessons. The Google Cultural Institute partnered with Yad  Vashem to create another fantastic resource in creating an effective online digital  storytelling method for teaching the Holocaust. This involved using experimental optical  character recognition (OCR), which helped transcribe the text on many of the more than  140,000 images, making them discoverable on the web (Google Cultural Institute, n.d.).    SUMMARY OF THE PROPOSED MODEL  There exists a large body of digital information and resources on the Holocaust.  My research has focused on how to make the best use of this information, along with the  objectives of combining different digital technologies to maximize information retention,  student engagement, and identification with the events, which is illustrated by a case 

32   

study. This protocol also includes a review of potential strengths and pitfalls of digital  technology, along with consideration of ethical issuesa concern present in the education  and teaching of emotional and disturbing events such as the Holocaustin light of a  diminishing number of actual survivors and the efforts to preserve their experiences  through digital technology.      CASE STUDY  As an example of the proposed approach, this paper uses the story of Pinchas  Gutter. Gutter was born in 1932 in Lodz, a city in central Poland, 135 kilometers  southwest of Warsaw. His story stands out for several reasons. First, from a historical  perspective, Gutter experienced the early antisemitic policies of Nazis immediately after  their invasion of Poland, he experienced life in hiding in the Warsaw Ghetto, and he  survived the Nazi death camps Majdanek and Buchenwald, several forced labour camps,  and the death march back into Germany near the end of the war. His story helps students  get a profound understanding of what the Holocaust was. Second, Gutter's story is  particularly relevant when it comes to the issues of survivors passing away and the  integration of digital technology, as Gutter recently took part in the first project involving  holographic representation of Holocaust survivors to preserve and share testimony. Third,  his story is presented in an impressively interactive way. Gutter spent five days  answering no less than 1,800 questions on his Holocaust experience.   

33   

  Figure 5: The Digital Storytelling Cube of Pinchas Gutter                                             

34   

DIMENSION ONE: CONTENT  The content provides the resources to tell the story. These resources must be used  effectively and efficiently. This means just enough content to tell the story without  overloading the viewer. In Gutter's case, this is challenging considering so much content  is available. It is important to take elements from his testimony that reflect each aspect of  his life before, during, and after the war. Fortunately, Gutter's story is documented in  detail in a documentary by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Gutter retraces his  childhood from growing up in Lodz before the war to his liberation at Theresienstadt in  1945. While all this material is valuable, it is unnecessary to show it in its entirety for it  to be effective. For example, as Gutter stands in front of his apartment building in Lodz,  he tells a story about the Jewish community, describing the scene at the market. Gutter  explains tradesmen would constantly shout out offering their services and beggars would  ask people to throw them charity from their windows. Gutter recounts how his  grandfather would stack money on his window to give to beggars, and when the money  ran out, he would go to the kitchen and give them his food. He says "these are the  memories he had from living at the place" (Nevo, 2014). This is important evidence for  documenting Jewish life in Poland before the Second World War however, it does not  necessarily add to Gutter's story in the context of the protocol.  Gutter describes another instance from his childhood that is more appropriate to  the context of the lesson. On a Saturday trip with his mother to the local park where  Gutter often came to play, a man crossed from the other side of the street, stopped in  front of his mother and said "How dare you a Christian young women work for these 

35   

dirty Jews?" (Nevo, 2014). The man was under the impression that Gutter's mother was a  nonJew because of her beautiful blonde hair and blue eyes, while Gutter was dressed in  clearly identifiable Jewish religious garb. This illustrates that, despite Gutter's relatively  normal childhood, antisemitism was present.   In addition to selecting important aspects of Gutter's testimony, it is crucial to  address the historical context in an engaging way. By using a digital timeline, outlining  major historic events leading up to the WWII and the Holocaust, this objective can be  achieved. The timeline below is a modified version of The Guardian's interactive WWII  timeline (The Guardian, 2009). Modifications have been made to the timeline, including  the student's ability to interactively track events on Google Maps, watch relevant videos  explaining the events, and clear descriptions of how Pinchas Gutter's story exemplifies  this part of history. There are three especially important events (See Figures 6a, 6b, and  6c on the next page) which need to be emphasized in the content domain in this case  example:   1. The first is the Nazi invasion of Poland on September 1st, 1939, marking the start  of World War II (WWII). When the Nazis reached Gutter's hometown of Lodz on  September 7th, 1939, they almost immediately instituted restrictions on Jews.  Gutter, seven years old at the time, describes that Jews were banned from trains,  public parks, had limitations on bank withdrawals, and Jewish shops were closed.   2. The second event is the creation of and life in the Warsaw Ghetto. Established in  the late 1940's, the Ghetto covered an area 3.4 square kilometers and contained  400,000 Jews. To put the size in perspective, 30% of Warsaw's population were 

36   

living in an that covered 2.4% of city. Pinchas Gutter and his family were among  them. Between 23 July and 21 September 1942, Grossaktion Warschau (Great  Action Warsaw) operation took place. In 1942, at least 254,000 of the Ghetto's  inhabitants were sent directly to their deaths at the Treblinka extermination camp.  Gutter and his family were in hiding and managed to avoid deportations until  1943 when they were deported to Majdanek where his entire family was  murdered.  3. The third event is liberation on May 8th, 1945. After surviving the Warsaw  Ghetto, two death camps, multiple labour camps, and the death march, Russian  soldiers liberated Gutter at Theresienstadt in Czechoslovakia.  

37   

Figures 6 a, b, and c: Gutter's Timeline 

 

38   

 DIMENSION TWO: SEQUENCING  In the case example, we can verify Gutter's will to survive, through the  documented records and survivor testimony. The sequencing of this coverage is one of  the most effective means of ensuring student engagement and learning.  Bernard (n.d.) advises that information be presented "when it best serves the  story". She explains "if you give away too much information too soon, important details  will be lost or their significance missed. Like a good dramatist, you want to introduce  characters and seed information in a way that allows the viewer to anticipate the story  and its tensions, and ultimately, to resolve them, hopefully before the film does (allowing  the viewer the satisfaction of "getting it" and enjoying what's known as an "aha!"  moment)".   The suggested sequencing of the story is as follows:   1. Begin with a clip and a quote of a Barack Obama speech citing Pinchas Gutter  and his importance.  2. Give the historical context: describe the Nazi invasion of Poland, the Final  Solution, Establishment of Ghettos, and deportations to extermination camps.  3. Introduce Pinchas as a child, who he is and where he is from.  4. Let students explore Gutter's journey before and during the War, in the  Warsaw Ghetto, at Majdanek, Buchenwald, various work camps, and the  death march. This should be followed by a debrief to a address students  uncomfort with the content. 

39   

5. Discuss Gutter's life and mission after the Holocaust.  6. Hold a classroom discussion discussing the significance of Pinchas Gutter.  7. Debriefing: Ethical considerations have been stressed as important in the  storytelling about the Holocaust. The particular case example chosen is a story  of hope and survival. Thus sensitivity to reactions to the story and the  opportunity for debriefing are important.   Rationale:   Beginning with the video of Barack Obama is important because he is a  recognizable figure of significant stature who highlights Gutter's importance. Obama's  popularity among young people is important and his comments are likely to engage  students. Next, it is crucial to address the basic historical context to ensure student  familiarity with the topic. Steps 2 through 4 are studentfocused learning with the  guidance of the teacher. This includes the important step of introducing the students to  the feature of this case study, Mr. Gutter. It is important to put focus on Gutter's  childhood before the war as well in order to understand that Gutter's lived a normal  childhood that almost entirely worry free. Still, it is important to tie his childhood  experiences with relevant events. Only once this is addressed is it appropriate to move to  the fourth stage which is pivotal in student engagement and participation. Students need  to be given adequate time to explore the interactive timelines, maps, videos and other  digital components. In this stage it is important for students to learn about the horrors of  the Holocaust, as terrible as they may be. The power of Gutter's experience and ultimate 

40   

survival is tied to the horrors experienced by millions, from living in the horrible  conditions of the Warsaw Ghetto, to surviving death camps and witnessing his family's  murder at the gas chambers at Majdanek, watching his friends die in the death march.  This is followed by the additional context of Mr. Gutter's life after the Holocaust. Here it  important to acknowledge how impressive, courageous and heroic Gutter's survival is but  at the same time focus on the posttraumatic experience of the Gutter's survival, which he  acknowledges haunts him to the present day. Further, these last two steps are focused on  ensuring students can generalize from the specific story to its greater historical  significance, followed by ample opportunity for debriefing.    DIMENSION THREE: DIGITAL MEDIA  This case study provides a very powerful opportunity to make the case for the  power and possibility of digital technology and media, and exemplifies the clarity of the  proposed template in finding the right balance between the ample digital material  available, supplemental historical content and other resources, along with a thoughtful  sequencing of the material.  Providing geographic context will help students to understand not just Gutter's  personal story, but the history of the Holocaust as a whole. The videos linked here feature  Gutter's own testimony at each of the locations he was at during the war.   Though traditional research suggests that students and teachers often misperceive  geography as an outdated discipline, more recent research suggests the contrary. Fitchett  and Good (2012) cite a report by Segall and Helfenbein (2008) of "efforts by educators to 

41   

advocate a new geography that emphasizes a studentcentered constructivism, whereby  `doing geography' takes precedent over rote practice. These pedagogical positions  counter prevailing misconceptions of the role and importance of geography among the  social studies disciplines" This concept is referred to as new geography, which "promotes  an intertwining of geographical content knowledge, skills, and perspectivetaking"  (2008:87).  Geographical Information Systems (GIS) is a tool that incorporates geography  into the classroom by combining digital mapping and quantitative data to create  interactive maps (Fitchett and Good). GIS mapping enable students to discover the  corresponding relationship of spatial themes and historical events (Knowles and Hillier,  2008). Interestingly, genocide has become the popular focus of historical GIS efforts in  recent years (Manfra and Stoddard 2008 O'Lear and Egbert 2009). Joseph Kirman  (2003) suggests that "exposing students to a geographic perspective of genocide elicits a  critical dialogue on resulting social and ecological ramifications, thereby encouraging a  `transformative geography'" (Kirman 2003). Fitchett and Good explain "not only does  transformative geography challenge students to engage and react to historic and/or  contemporary genocide, but it also encourages them to recognize the importance of social  justice as a key component of social studies instruction and purpose" (2012:88), while  O'Lear and Egbert assert that "employing GIS and geo browser applications affords  students the opportunity to conceptualize geography in a more dynamic and  inquirybased manner" (2009:91).  

42   

The interactive mapping framework created for Gutter's story combines GIS with  other digital media tools such as YouTube, digitized images and documents in order to  create an effective resource for educating students. This resource gives students the  ability to explore Gutter's story on their own, with guidance, but not in a traditional  "onesizefitsall, oneway lecture" that Tapscott describes (2009:22).   In spite of the fact that a hologram has been developed of Mr. Gutter, it was  decided to deliberately leave the hologram out of the case study. The experience of  watching the hologram illustrated some of the very pitfalls that have been discussed in  this paper. Mr. Gutter appeared to be "out of this world", and rather than an experience of  meaningful interaction with a real person telling a powerful story, it was actually  unsettling. It seems premature to integrate such technology into Holocaust education until  more work is done bridging the capabilities of the technology with the important  objective of communicating a human experience to which students can relate and  understand. Gutter's story is powerful and compelling and should be told in an  environment that supports his humanity and the story he has to share. This is why the use  of proven digital storytelling methods, interactive timelines, dynamic mapping, and video  clips were chosen in communicating Gutter's story. More work remains in harnessing the  power of digital technology in the context of capturing the human experience of survivors  like Mr. Gutter.  SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS    In order to effectively to teach the Holocaust in the 21st century, it is imperative  to use the digital technologies we have at our disposal. Testimony, video footage, 
43   

photographs, film, and art have been important components of Holocaust education for  years. However, with the goal of ensuring the ongoing relevance of historic events such  as the Holocaust, and in consideration that the passage of time, stories may need to be  told long after the survivors have passed on. Digital media provide the ability if not the  obligation to make intelligent use of digital resources.  The use of digital media in an integrated protocol such as the one proposed in this  paper is also a compelling approach to achieving the goals of student engagement,  information retention and facilitating the student's identification with the historic events.  As Barack Obama eloquently stated, "by keeping the memories alive, by telling stories,  by hearing those stories, we can do our part to fulfill the mitzvah, the commandment of  saving a life. I think of Pinchas Gutter, a man who lived through the Warsaw Ghetto  Uprising, and survived the Majdanek death camp. Today he serves as a volunteer  educator at the Shoah Foundation. In his own words, Pinchas Gutter says it best: `I tell  my story,' he says, `for the purpose of improving humanity, drop by drop by drop. Like a  drop of water falls on a stone and erodes it, so, hopefully, by telling my story over and  over again I will achieve the purpose of making the world a better place to live in.' Those  are the words of one survivor  performing that `sacred duty' of memory  that will echo  throughout eternity. Those are good words for all of us to live by" (Obama, 2014).  It is hoped that this protocol will be of use in creating an accurate, enduring and  indispensable resource for educating about the Holocaust as an illustration of the power  and potential of digital media and technology. At the same time, it is important to  recognize the importance of integrating forms of digital media technology in a 

44   

responsible and thoughtful way, taking into account the ways in which the information  will be received and processed by the intended audience. In this paper the focus was on  students who have an unsurpassed access to and command of digital technology. The vast  resources invested into developing these technologies must directly address the pitfalls of  assuming that if they are technologically advanced, they will be educationally effective.  If we fail at this task, not only will we reduce the effectiveness of Holocaust education,  we will also miss the opportunities provided by these powerful technologies and their  potential to properly acknowledge and memorialize the experience of Holocaust  survivors and other important historic events.   

45   

REFERENCES    About The Museum  United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. (n.d.). Retrieved from  http://www.ushmm.org/information/aboutthemuseum    Avitecture  Yad Vashem Holocaust History Museum. (n.d.). Retrieved from  http://www.avitecture.com/index.php/projectgallery/63yadvashem    Bauer, Y. (2012, August 15). Teaching the Holocaust in the 21st century [Video  file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xvJVCTYxpQ     Baumeister, R. (2002). The Holocaust and the Four Roots of Evil. In The social  psychology of the Holocaust: Contemporary analyses of the perpetrators of genocide.  New York: Oxford University Press.     Bernard, Sheila Curran. (n.d.). Documentary Storytelling: The Drama of Real Life.  Retrieved from  http://www.writersstore.com/documentarystorytellingthedramaofreallife/.       Brown, J. G. (2007). Teaching about genocide in a new millennium. Social Education,  71(1), 21.    Busfield, S. (2000, April 11). Irving loses Holocaust libel case. The Guardian. Retrieved  from http://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/11/irving.uk    Clark, C. (2012). Children's and Young People's Reading Today: Findings from the 2011  National Literacy Trust's Annual Survey. National Literacy Trust.    Crowe, D. (2001). The Holocaust, historiography, and history. In Teaching and studying  the Holocaust, ed. S. Totten and S. Feinberg, 24­61. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.    Darfur conflict. (2014, July 31). Thomson Reuters. Retrieved from  http://www.trust.org/spotlight/Darfurconflict    Darnell, S. (2010). Measuring Holocaust Denial in the United States, (Policy Analysis  Exercise, MA: Harvard Kennedy School of Government).   
46   

Fathi, N. (2006, December 10). Holocaust Deniers and Skeptics Gather in Iran. New York  Times. Retrieved from  http://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/11/world/middleeast/11cndiran.html?_r=0    GardeHansen, J., Hoskins, A., & Reading, A. (2009). Save as... digital memories. New  York: Palgrave Macmillan.    Gray, M. (2014). Contemporary debates in Holocaust education. New York: Palgrave  Macmillan.     Gray, M. (2015). Teaching the Holocaust: Practical Approaches for Ages 11­18. London:  Routledge.    Green, E. (2014, May 14). The World Is Full of Holocaust Deniers. The Atlantic.  Retrieved from  http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2014/05/theworldisfullofholocaust deniers/370870/      Hitler Downfall parodies: 25 worth watching. (2009, October 6). The Telegraph.  Retrieved from  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/6262709/HitlerDownfallparodies25wort hwatching.html    Hollinger, A. (2007, April 10). United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and Google  Join in Online Darfur Mapping Initiative. Retrieved from  http://www.ushmm.org/information/press/pressreleases/unitedstatesholocaustmemoria lmuseumandgooglejoininonlinedarfurma    Irving v. Lipstadt, (2000), High Court of Justice of England and Wales  Queens Branch  115    Kansteiner, W. (2014). Genocide memory, digital cultures, and the aestheticization of  violence. Memory Studies, 7(4), 403408.    Katz, L. (2013, February 11). Holograms of Holocaust survivors let crucial stories live  on. CNET. Retrieved from  http://www.cnet.com/news/hologramsofholocaustsurvivorsletcrucialstoriesliveon/    

47   

Knowles, Anne Kelly, and Amy Hillier. (2008). Placing history: How maps, spatial data,  and GIS are changing historical scholarship. Redlands, CA: ESRI Press.    Koren, D. (2015, January 29). BBC asks if it's time to stop talking about Holocaust. Ynet  News. Retrieved from http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L4620177,00.html    Lambert, J. (2012). Digital storytelling: Capturing lives, creating community. London:  Routledge.    Lester, P. (2013). Digital Innovations for Mass Communications: Engaging the User.  London: Routledge.    Lipstadt, D. (1993). Denying the Holocaust: The growing assault on truth and memory.  New York, N.Y.: Plume.     Lipstadt, D. (2006). History on trial: My day in court with a Holocaust denier. New York:  Harper Perennial.     Maio, H., Traum, D. and Debevec, P. (2012). New Dimensions in Testimony. Past  Forward, Summer 2012, 22­26.    Manfra, M. M., & Stoddard, J. D. (2008). Powerful and authentic digital media and  strategies for teaching about genocide and the Holocaust. The Social Studies, 99(6),  260264.    Maryann Kiely Lovelace. (2005). MetaAnalysis of Experimental Research Based on the  Dunn and Dunn Model. Journal of Educational Research, 98(3), 176­83.    Mapping the Holocaust: Google Earth. (n.d.). Retrieved from  http://www.ushmm.org/learn/mappinginitiatives/mappingtheholocaustgoogleearth    Nevo, Z. (Director). (2014). Political, Polish Jew: The Story of Pinchas Gutter [Motion  picture]. Israel: Hebrew University of Jerusalem.    Newmann, F. M., & Wehlage, G. G. (1994). Five standards of authentic instruction.  Annual editions: Educational psychology, 9495.     

48   

Obama, B. (2014, May 7). Remarks by the President at USC Shoah Foundation Dinner.  Retrieved from  https://www.whitehouse.gov/thepressoffice/2014/05/07/remarkspresidentuscshoahfo undationdinner    Ochayon, S. (2015, March 26). Using Holocaust Testimony in the Classroom [Video  file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vGx8oMuOsk    O'Lear, Shannon, and Stephen L. Egbert. (2009). Introduction: Geographies of genocide.  Space and Polity 13 (1): 1­8.    Pfanzelter, E. (2013). `The Holocaust and Social Networks: Memory, Commemoration or  Forums for AntiSemitism and Racism?' Paper presented at The Future of Holocaust  Studies Conference, Universities of Southampton and Winchester, 29­31 July 2013.    Poprzeczny, J. (2004). Odilo Globocnik, Hitler's man in the East. Jefferson, N.C.:  McFarland.    Reading, A. (2003). Digital interactivity in public memory institutions: the uses of new  technologies in Holocaust museums. Media, Culture & Society, 25(1), 6785.    Shahabi, C., Khodaei, A. and Fishbain, B. (2012). GeoImmersive Learning, Past  Forward, Summer 2012, 11­12.    Tapscott, D. (2009). Grown up digital: How the net generation is changing your world.  New York: McGrawHill.     Walden, V. G. (2015). New Ethical Questions and Social Media: Young People's  Construction of Holocaust Memory Online.    Yad Vashem Archive. (n.d.). Retrieved from  http://www.yadvashem.org/yv/en/about/archive/about_archive_whats_in_archive.asp     Yad Vashem  Cultural Institute  Google. (n.d.). Retrieved from  http://www.google.com/culturalinstitute/about/yadvashem/     

49   

