Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

Three-dimensional modelling of ground surfaces
Ming Li
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Mechanical Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Li, Ming, "Three-dimensional modelling of ground surfaces" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 157.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

THREE-DIMENSIONAL MODELLING OF GROUND SURFACES

by
MingLi B.Eng, Beijing University of Aeronautics andiAstronautics Beijing, China, 1997

A Thesis
presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the program of Mechanical Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007 ©Ming Li, 2007

RYERSON W~IV~fY UOOARV

PROPERTY OF

,

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

I authorize Ryerson University to lend ~S theSi7'other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson

University~eproduce

this thesis by photocopying or by other

means, in total or in part, at the request of other insti~ions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

111

Three-dimensional Modelling of Ground Surfaces A thesis for the degree of Master of Applied Science, 2007 by MingLi Department of Mechanical Engineering Ryerson University

Abstract
The efficiency and quality of abrasive machining processes influence costs and quality of elements produced, as well as whole products. Hence, the estimation of surface characteristics can greatly facilitate the requirements of performance evaluation. But the surface finish is dominated by many factors and a physical model which could predict it is not practical. Therefore, it is very important to develop modelling techniques for the reliable prediction of surface characteristics.

This thesis describes the development of a three-dimensional predictive modelling methodology for surface characteristics of a ground surface. The methodology uses solid modelers to generate the chips and remove them from the solid model of the workpiece. This

iv

results in a surface model which represents the ground surface in three dimensions. Various surface characteristics can then be deducted from this model.

The modelling of individual abrasive grains follows a statistical distribution which depends on the grinding tool characteristics. The cutting path depends on the relative motion between the tool and workpiece.

The methodology was implemented for three different types of tool path. The results are in agreement with expected values.

v

