religions
Article

The Dardenne Brothers and the Invisible Ethical Drama: Faith without Faith
John Caruana
Department of Philosophy, Ryerson University, 350 Victoria St., Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada; jcaruana@ryerson.ca; Tel.: +1-416-979-5000 Academic Editor: Joseph Kickasola Received: 2 March 2016; Accepted: 15 April 2016; Published: 26 April 2016

Abstract: The cinema of the Dardenne brothers represents a new kind of cinema, one that challenges a number of our conventional ways of thinking about the distinction between religion and secularism, belief and unbelief. Their films explore the intricacies of spiritual and ethical transformations as they are experienced within embodied, material life. These features of their cinema will be examined primarily through the lens of Emmanuel Levinas's philosophy of the imbrication of the drama of existence and the ethical intrigue of self and Other. The work of the Dardenne brothers can be understood as an attempt to express what I describe as a "faith without faith"--a recognition of the absolute centrality of belief for the development of a responsible subject but in the absence of a traditional faith in a personal deity. Keywords: Dardenne Brothers; Levinas; film-philosophy; postsecular cinema

1. Introduction The films of Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne represent a new kind of cinema that forcefully captures our current existential and spiritual state of affairs1 . I contend that the power of their films derives from an awareness of the necessity for transcendence in a time when traditional, institutional religion appears incapable of addressing that very need for significant numbers of people in the western world. Their films can be conceived as attempting to perform a task formerly carried out by means of explicitly religious rituals and practices. How we characterize what is "new" in their cinematic philosophy, however, is critical. One needs the right words to describe what is at play in their work. Some critics and commentators have been justified in recognizing the persistent presence of religious themes in their films--beyond the very secular surface that we first encounter on the screen. Attentive viewers will undoubtedly notice the many allusions to biblical sources in those films2 . Without careful qualification, however, the term "religious" is simply misleading. We are fortunate to have at our disposal a number of illuminating interviews that one or both of the brothers have given over the years. In addition, we now have ample written material, in particular, from Luc Dardenne about the significance of their art3 . His written reflections reveal a genuine preoccupation with religion, but from the standpoint of someone who grapples with the question of the death of God. Indeed, that theme is repeated so many times in his most recent work that a superficial reading of that text might lead one to think that we are dealing with a straightforward atheistic view of life. He himself recently admits of having no faith in a personal

1

2 3

I would like to thank Isobel Bowditch and Doug Cummings for reading an earlier version of this paper and for their insightful comments. Special thanks, as well, to Joe Kickasola for the invitation to contribute to this special issue, and for his encouraging support and feedback. See, for example: Bert Cardullo, 2002 [1]. See [2­4]. All translations from these texts are mine.

Religions 2016, 7, 43; doi:10.3390/rel7050043

www.mdpi.com/journal/religions

Religions 2016, 7, 43

2 of 16

God. However, the simple epithet of "atheist" is as problematic as "religious" in this context. When asked about his own relation to faith, his response puts us on notice that this is no simple atheism: "that does not mean that I cannot speak about God, or that I cannot feel a relationship with such a Being that does not exist"4 The religious impulse goes to the heart of what it means to be human, for him, and, presumably, his brother5 --even if, at the end of the day, he, admittedly, lacks faith in the personal God that is attested to in the monotheistic traditions. The Dardenne brothers' films, I maintain, take religious experience seriously but beyond the traditional and conventional ways that we conceive of the dichotomies of religion and secularism, belief and unbelief. In an effort to better understand what is at stake in their remarkable work, I will make special use of the philosophy of Emmanuel Levinas. Much has already been said about the obvious links between Levinas and the Dardenne brothers6 . My own distinct approach frames that relationship in terms of Levinas's depiction of the imbrication of two dramas that are at play in human life. That framing, I hope, can shed further light on the brothers' highly original cinematic style--one whose phenomenological reduction (it is not a stretch to call it that) has the capacity to reveal what is most hidden in the drama of existence and the ethical relation with the Other. Finally, Levinas also provides us with a useful way of positioning their aesthetic production with respect to the question of faith. 2. Levinas and the Invisible Drama of Self and Other One would be hard pressed to find a more felicitous coupling of film and philosophy then the relationship that conjoins the cinema of the Dardenne brothers and Levinas's thought. What makes this particular pairing between philosopher and artist so fruitful is the fact that the filmmakers in question are intimately familiar with Levinas's ideas. Luc Dardenne, who pursued graduate level work in philosophy, studied with Levinas when he was a visiting professor at the University of Louvain. The filmmaker explicitly acknowledges the brothers' indebtedness to Levinas's philosophy in various interviews and in his books. However, before discussing their work, I want to briefly sketch some of the basic attributes of what, for Levinas, constitutes the human drama and how art either neglects or distorts these features. The human drama, for Levinas, is comprised of two separate but related dramas7 . The first drama concerns our relationship to being or existence. Levinas refers to this relationship as the "drama of being" ([10], p. 40). This drama is primarily characterized by the self's precarious place within being. For Levinas, the self is an ontological point or moment that temporarily arrests the flux or indeterminacy of being, what he calls the il y a or "there is." The il y a, for Levinas, represents being in its most diffuse state, existence shorn of all determinations or thingness. Its biblical corollary is the tohu wa bohu of Genesis 1:2; the formless and empty darkness out of which a world eventually emerges. Despite its accomplishment, the fact that it has staked out a place within the impersonal murmur of being, the self is nevertheless constantly threatened by the possibility of being undone by the diffusiveness of the il y a. Levinas describes the il y a as threat, but also as a site of fascination for the self. The fascination has in large part to do with some of the extreme states that the il y a can give rise to. When in the grip of the il y a, the boundaries of selfhood begin to dissolve giving rise to intense affective paroxysms. In 1947, Levinas observes that when the ego is under the spell of the il y a it is "submerged by the night, invaded, depersonalized, stifled by it" ([11], p. 58). These

4 5

6 7

"Interview de Luc Dardenne" [5]. An English translation of this interview will appear in Accursed Films: Postsecular Cinema between the Tree of Life and Melancholia. Edited by John Caruana and Mark Cauchi [6]. Despite the fact of frequently speaking with a common voice in many of their interviews, I cannot, of course, say with certainty that they share similar views on the matters discussed in my article. And, so, while I leave open the real possibility that Jean-Pierre may not always concur with his brother, Luc, on some of the details discussed here, I will, nevertheless, for the sake of my exposition, assume that their views coincide. See, in particular, Sarah Cooper [7] and Philip Mosley [8]. I develop this notion of the dramatic dimension of Levinas's philosophy in greater detail in "The Drama of Being: Levinas and the History of Philosophy." [9].

Religions 2016, 7, 43

3 of 16

liminal states create the impression of a kind of transcendence, relief from the burden of existence. For Levinas, however, this impression is nothing more than a powerful illusion. For the impersonal and anonymous experience of the il y a only serves to confirm the ubiquity of being, its vice-grip hold on the self. Far from offering freedom from being, the il y a represents for Levinas the "no exit" par excellence. Put otherwise: there is so proper solution to the problem of human existence from within the strict parameters of being itself. The existential desert of the il y a represents, for him, the antithesis of human encounter and solidarity. The drama of being unfolds within an anonymous space devoid of an accountable "I" who can genuinely express "here I am"8 in response to the ethical demands of a "You" who stands before it. As far as Levinas is concerned, the only genuine site of transcendence is to be found in another drama, one that his later work refers to as the "ethical intrigue" ([12], p. 200). With this second drama, another figure appears on the scene: the Other--and with, the Other, a hint or trace of the divine also makes itself known. Levinas's mature work attempts to describe the nature of the invisible drama that draws together self, Other, and an ever-receding Wholly Other who we are constantly in danger of ossifying or idolizing as a result of the inevitably self-limiting nature of names and concepts. As a way to avoid this danger, Judaism has a long-standing tradition of proliferating the names for the absolute Other. Levinas repeats this gesture in his own writing, employing, as he does, a multitude of names for this third party within the ethical drama of human existence: the traditional designation of "God", the philosophical term "Infinite", and even neologisms like "Illeity". It is critical for Levinas that we avoid focusing on this third at the expense of the other parties that make up the ethical intrigue. The encounter with the human Other gives rise to what Levinas calls the "idea of God that comes to mind"--a jarring awareness that something greater, Infinite, breaks through in that encounter, but which simultaneously removes itself from my reach. As such, for Levinas, talk of "God" is legitimate only within the context of the asymmetrical relationship between myself and the flesh-and-blood Other who, from an ethical perspective, always has the upper hand over me. "Ethics is not the corollary of the vision of God", the Jewish philosopher states, "it is the very vision. Ethics is an optic, such that everything I know of God and everything I can hear of His word and reasonably say to Him must find an ethical expression" ([13], p. 17). The Other impinges, breaks through with her ethical demands, before I have had an opportunity to respond or make sense of her. It is in that relationship that I am left with a trace, a hint, of a force that we can legitimately--but always with the utmost caution--name "God". Ethical substitution--one of the central concepts of his later philosophy--is meant to capture the peculiar relation that is established between myself and the others in my midst. For Levinas, the other human being has the remarkable capacity to morally interrogate my existence. The Other accuses me, challenges me, and makes seemingly infinite demands on me. These actions on the part of the Other are not initiated by the self. That is, left to ourselves, we would gladly pursue our own selfish desires. However, the Other will not have it that way. She questions my very attempt to establish myself as the center of my reality. There is a kind of displacement that transpires when we encounter others. Our entire focus shifts--from self-concern and self-preservation--to a responsiveness that is reoriented outside of the self. This displacement is so radical at times that the self finds itself seemingly occupying the Other's place. I can feel so utterly obligated towards the Other as to literally feel that I have been taken hostage by him or her. This is what Levinas means by "substitution" [14]. For Levinas, ethical substitution is at the heart of our humanity. If the Other lacked this capacity to alter our way of being in the world, we would be condemned to the meaningless vagaries of the il y a as well as to a state of perpetual war, that is, an endless, futile battle of ego against ego. As a result of the ethical drama, the

8

In the Jewish scriptures, the "here I am" [hineni] expresses the most vigilant form of readiness before the otherness of God, as attested mostly notably by Abraham and Moses. See, for e.g., Gen. 22:1 and 22:11.

Religions 2016, 7, 43

4 of 16

threat and fascination of the il y a within the tragic drama of being provisionally loses its grip on the human imagination, to be replaced by the promise of hope, frankness, and responsibility. The nature of ethical substitution is such that it powerfully suggests, for Levinas, a connection between the other human being and the divine or Infinite. That the Other can make the self morally question its place under the sun and can do so by short-circuiting the cogito's representational and rationalizing capacities suggests to Levinas--adapting a famous expression of Plato's--the trace of the good beyond being. This insight receives, for Levinas, its first major articulation with the advent of Judaism. The Jewish scriptures identifies the essence of the divine with an obligation to look after the "widow", "orphan", and "stranger", that is, the most vulnerable in society (for example, Deut. 10:18). The New Testament extends this view, for example, in the admonition that if religion has any authentic significance, it does so, not as a set of badges that one wears to publicly express one's supposed religiosity, but rather in one's ethical comportment, and specifically--repeating almost word for word the earlier Mosaic demand--in one's responsibility "to look after orphans and widows in their distress" (James 1:26­27). For Levinas, the ethical commandment that comes from the Other highlights the revelatory nature of ethics. By emphasizing the exteriority of the call, ethics for Levinas is itself a kind of religious encounter, albeit invisible. For, as Levinas sees it, the trace of the divine always already recedes from the ethical relation even as it underwrites the relation as such. Given Levinas's emphatic position that what is essential to the human drama remains invisible to the phenomenological gaze, it would seem that art and its various methods of representation cannot do justice to the religious or spiritual background of the ethical intrigue. An initial reading of Levinas's most well-known statement on aesthetics, his 1948 essay "Reality and its Shadow," would strongly suggest that not only can art not do justice to the human intrigue, but that it will inevitably distort and displace what is truly at stake in that intrigue. In this essay and later in Totality and Infinity, Levinas maintains that art substitutes façade for the face, illusory spectacle for the provocations of the ethical intrigue. "Reality and its Shadow" decries the image as that which "marks a hold over us rather than our initiative, [it is] a fundamental passivity" ([15], p. 132). The image, Levinas goes on to say, is a form of "incantation", a primal rhythm that possesses the subject, rather than a mediated concept that maintains a critical distance from the object to which it refers. What seems most vexing for Levinas is the capacity for the image to disengage us from reality, to obscure the exigencies of material existence. Art, for Levinas, belongs to a realm prior to creation, where indeterminacy rules and subjectivity has yet to emerge or has been eclipsed. The plasticity of art, in other words, transports us to the inhuman realm of the il y a. Its lifeless images point to other formless images and away from the ethical intrigue. In this way, art shares the same nature as the hallucinations that possess the self when it finds itself in the grip of the il y a. In short, the aesthetic experience could not be further removed both in practice and in the content that it divulges from the ethical encounter of self and Other. Levinas does not limit these critical remarks to the plastic arts, but extends them to include "music, literature, theatre", and, not surprisingly, "cinema" as well ([15], p. 139). But is this the entire story? Is Levinas's final view then that art--cinema included--is fundamentally irreconcilable, even in conflict, with the spiritual and ethical truths of human existence? To get beyond the impasse that such an interpretation leads to, it might be useful to keep in mind a couple of points concerning Levinas's critique that have already been foregrounded by commentators like Richard Kearney [16], but which bear repeating in this present context. First, Levinas, much like Plato before him, and with whom he is often linked on this issue, does not condemn art tout court as much as challenge some of the more grandiose claims that are made on its behalf. In this respect, art, Levinas states categorically in "Reality and its Shadow", is "not the supreme value of civilization" as some would have us believe ([15], p. 142). The second point is that Levinas's privileging of criticism over art does not rule out the possibility that the artist and the critic can be one in the same--a claim that is touched on towards the end of "Reality and its Shadow", and developed further in his subsequent essays on aesthetics. In later essays on writers like Celan and Proust [17], Levinas expresses his praise for a form of literature that calls into question the very illusory trappings of art.

Religions 2016, 7, 43

5 of 16

Such art is sometimes deployed in the service of drawing our attention to both the ethical demands of the Other and the ways that we evade them. Of course, even if we acknowledge the possibility of an ethically oriented literature in Levinas's thought, the question still remains as to whether or not the same can be said of cinema. There are so few references to cinema in Levinas's work as to make it impossible to definitively answer this question on the basis of textual evidence alone. However, it might not be so difficult for us to imagine what such a redeemed cinema might resemble. Certainly, the history of cinema criticism provides us with some possible examples, including two from the list of great luminaries of film theory: Siegfried Kracauer and André Bazin. When Kracauer declares that the technical features of film must be deployed in the service of the camera's capacity to record reality [18], it is impossible to miss the ethical imperative behind his claim. For Kracauer, film should be a form of truth-telling. The ethical and spiritual force behind Bazin's theory of realism is likewise evident. Bazin describes the realist filmmaker's vocation as one of love for the reality he or she captures with the camera. There is no way of completely understanding the art of Flaherty, Renoir, Vigo, and especially Chaplin unless we try to discover beforehand what particular kind of tenderness, of sensual or sentimental affection, they reflect. In my opinion, the cinema more than any other art is particularly bound up with love ([19], p. 72). The Dardenne brothers undoubtedly could be added to this list of filmmakers who demonstrate a genuine compassion for their characters or subjects. I also suspect that Levinas would regard the creative efforts of his former student and his brother as a redemptive form of cinema, one that grapples with the essentials of the human drama. As deeply engaged and responsible filmmakers, the Dardenne brothers consciously employ the tools of cinematography not to dazzle their audience, but rather to capture what defines us as both individuals and partners in the human intrigue. In this regard, the brothers are very aware of how images when treated for their own sake can, and most certainly do, traffic in the inhuman nature of indeterminate being. Thus Luc Dardenne writes in his diary: Many hours spent in front of a television screen: broadcasting a neutral, muted flux, a continuum that envelops, an indeterminate presence that numbs. A state of torpor that closely resembles what Levinas writes in relation to the il y a, the murmur of being. No word, no sound, no image can bring this state to an end . . . To drown in the flux, in the density of the void . . . that is the deep desire of the telespectator . . . ([2], p. 59). To this use of imagery, which is of course not limited to the moving images of television but is equally present on the screens of movie theatres, Luc Dardenne counterpoises another type of image, one that speaks to the ethical intrigue rather than to the seductive deluge of vapid, amorphous images which have the power to seize us and pull us back into the void of the existential wasteland of the tohu wa bohu. 3. Faith without Faith: A Postsecular Cinema The Dardenne brothers, I maintain, offer us an excellent example of an ethical cinema--one that tracks the key contours of the ethical intrigue and the perils of the drama of being wherein the ego takes flight into the seductive allure of anonymous existence. Like Levinas, they too share an apprehension of the image9 , of its propensity for the inhuman. The brothers charge themselves with the demanding task of representing the ineffable features of our humanity. The desire to represent the deepest aesthetic, moral, and spiritual dimensions of the human being seems further complicated, even insurmountable,

9

For an extended discussion of the Jewish apprehension with the image as it applies to Levinas's thought and cinema, see Libby Saxton's "Blinding Visions: Levinas, Ethics, Faciality." [20].

Religions 2016, 7, 43

6 of 16

in the case of artists whose vocation is cinema. If the prohibition of the graven image means that the static image is minimally met with initial reservation, then it is doubly so with the moving image. Cinema's capacity to reflect back both the surface and movement of reality makes it an even more powerful tool of enchantment and sorcery. The consternation with the image is intensified in the case of film, because cinema's formal features (i.e., special effects, montage, etc.) make it possible to graphically render the contents of the world as well as the human imagination in spectacular and mesmerizing ways. Although, as Bazin, amongst others, points out, cinema is at the same time remarkably well suited to give testimony to experiences that often elude other media. Rejecting the idea of creating images for their own sake or for the purpose of enchanting an audience, the Dardenne brothers have set for themselves the alternative task of offering testimony to the human condition and in particular to witnessing the ethical intrigue. Over the past two decades, they have created films that attempt to represent the transformative possibilities of ethical substitution. Their distinct camera work can be conceived as a meticulous spiritual exercise, one which permits them access to phenomena and experiences that otherwise fail to register in our minds. The use of the term "spiritual" in this context is not contrived. The Dardenne brothers are not averse to using that language themselves to talk about their work. As they note in one interview "perhaps filming gestures and very specific, material things is what allows the viewer to sense everything that is spiritual, unseen, and not a part of materiality" ([21], p. 132). The movement of their camera is painstakingly attentive to the materiality of the world--in the service of showing what otherwise might go unseen: "[w]e tend to think that the closer one gets to the cup, to the hand, to the mouth whose lips are drinking, the more one will be able to feel something invisible--a dimension we want to follow and which would otherwise be less present in the film" ([21], p. 132). Developing this observation in greater detail, Luc Dardenne, in one of his most perceptive film journal entries, notes: The movements of our camera are rendered necessary by our desire to be in things, inside the relations between glances and bodies, bodies and scenery. If the camera films a body in profile, immobile, with a wall behind it, and if this body begins to walk along the wall, the camera will go there, passing in front of the body, slipping between the wall and the body making a movement that will frame the body in profile and the wall behind it, and then the wall and the body . . . ([2], p. 138). We immediately recognize in these words a succinct description of one of the hallmarks of their cinema. Their distinctive way of tracking the human body is evident from La Promesse (1996) [22] onwards. It is especially pronounced in Le Fils (2002) [23] in which most of the narrative telling is communicated through the presence of the body rather than the manipulation of narrative temporality, that is, montage. A brief analysis of the opening sequence reveals the intricacies of their cinematic style. The body is the precise starting point of the film just as the title credit appears. After a few seconds of the black backdrop of the title credit that first appears we suddenly realize that what we are actually seeing is a darkened, extreme close-up of the protagonist's back. From that moment onwards, the camera meticulously trails every movement of Olivier's restless body. This often produces the impression that the camera is always just catching up to his corporeal shifts and turns. This approach to filming the human body is established in the opening shot of the film. It is maintained for the duration of the film. In the opening seconds of the film, as the camera slowly moves away from his back, it gradually shifts upwards to shoulder level. We now see the back of Olivier's head and neck (Figure 1). From there, it pans leftward, revealing in the process a middle-aged woman (Figure 2). The camera then pans rightward, returning to the previous vantage point directly behind his head and neck. It then moves slowly down following the contours of his left arm and stops to show us that Olivier is holding a document (Figure 3)--presumably something that was just handed to him by the woman. We are always just an arm's reach away from the objects and people in Olivier's immediate environment. A minute later--after a brief interruption involving a malfunctioning circular saw--we are made to appreciate, again through his bodily gestures, that the document communicates something jarring (Figure 4). The body registers an apprehension. The camera moves in even closer. Olivier's troubled

Religions 2016, 7, 43

7 of 16

face fills the screen in profile. And while he continues to move the camera suddenly stops. The face of the woman who just a moment two earlier stood before him  intimately now occupies the frame (Figure  5). Olivier's   consternation.   Like   this or sequence,   the  rest  of   the  film   follows   the  motility of  Olivier's  consternation.  Like  this  sequence,  the  rest  of  the  film  intimately  follows  the  motility  of  The expression on face mirrors consternation. Like Olivier's  body as  it her contends  with itsOlivier's  everdynamic  environment.   this sequence, the rest of the film Olivier's body as it contends with its everdynamic environment.  intimately follows the motility of Olivier's body as it contends with its ever-dynamic environment.

Religions 2016, 7, 43  Religions 2016, 7, 43 

   
Figure 1. 1. Opening  Sequence  of of Le Le Fils Fils. .  Figure Opening  Sequence  Figure  1. Opening Sequence of Le  Fils.  

   
 2. Opening Sequence of Le Fils.  Figure  Figure 2. Opening Sequence of Le Fils. 

   
Figure 3. Opening Sequence of Le Fils.  Figure 3. Opening Sequence of Le Fils. 

7 7

Religions 2016, 7, 43 Religions    2016 ,,    7 ,,    43    Religions 2016 7 43

8 of 16

  
Apprehension.  Figure 4. 4. Apprehension. Figure

  
Figure   5. 5.   Apprehension. Apprehension.   Figure Figure 5.

What motivates this"desire "desireto to   be be   in in    things"?   Luc   very   question:   "Why    this    What   motivates   this   "desire   to things"? Luc   Dardenne Dardenne  poses poses  this this very question: "Why this What motivates this be in things"? this very question: "Why this desire   that   my   brother   and   I   share   absolutely?   Why   don't   we   keep   our   distance   from   bodies...?"    desirethat   thatmy   mybrother   brotherand   andI  I   share   absolutely?  Why  don't  we  keep  ourdistance   distance from from  bodies...?" desire share absolutely? Why don't we keep our bodies . . . ?" Reflecting   as   he   does   on   the   intensity   of   their   camera's   attentiveness   in   relation   to   the   phenomena   at    Reflectingas  ashe  hedoes  doeson  onthe  the  intensity of of their their camera's camera's attentiveness attentiveness in  to  the  phenomena  at Reflecting intensity in relation relation to the phenomena at hand,  the the  Belgian Belgian  cineaste, cineaste, directs directs  his his self self questioning questioning    to   the  human   subjects   that   their    hand,   specifically specifically to subjects that their hand, the Belgian cineaste,  directs his  self-questioning specifically to  the the human human subjects that their films   track   with   unrelenting   dedication.   "Why   these   solitary,   uprooted,   nervous,   bodies...?"   And,   filmstrack   trackwith   with   unrelentingdedication.   dedication."Why   "Whythese   thesesolitary,   solitary,uprooted,   uprooted,nervous,   nervous,bodies   bodies...?"   And,   films unrelenting . . . ?" And, furthermore,  why, why,  he he  inquires, inquires,   do do   the the    brothers brothers    not not  film   these    bodies    at    a   distance?   To   which   he    furthermore,   film   these bodies at a distance? To which he furthermore, why, he inquires, do the brothers not film these bodies at a distance? To which he confesses  that that  he he  and and  his his  brother, brother,  of of  course, course,    "would "would      something   in   us   resists   that",   and    confesses   like like  to...but to...but something in us resists that", and confesses that he and his brother, of course, "would like to . . . but something in us resists that", and compels  them, them,  instead, instead,   to to   do do   otherwise. otherwise.    And, And,    then, then,     an    of what   is   to   found    compels   finally, finally, an   admission admission of  is what isfound to  be be found compels them, instead, to do otherwise. And, then, finally, an admission of what to be "inside" "inside"   those   things   and   bodies.   "Perhaps   it's   because   we   find   there",   he   continues,   "close   to   things,   "inside"  those  things  and  bodies. "Perhaps  it'swe  because  we find  there",  he continues,  "close  tobetween  things,  those things and bodies. "Perhaps it's because find there", he continues, "close to things, between  bodies, bodies,  a a  presence presence   of of   the the   human human    reality, reality,  a   fire,   a   warmth    that   irradiates,   that   burns   and    between   a   fire,   a   warmth that irradiates, that burns and bodies, a presence of the human reality, a fire, a warmth that irradiates, that burns and insulates us insulates  us us  from from  a a sadness sadness  that that  reigns reigns   in in    the the    void, void,      great   void  in   life.   It   our   way   of   not    insulates   the the   very veryin great in life. It  is is our way of not from a sadness that  reigns in the void, the very great void life.  void It is our way of not despairing, despairing,   to   have faith   again"   ([2],   pp.   138­39).   Rather   than   adopting   the   safety   of   distance   which   despairing,   to   have  faith  pp. again"   ([2],  pp.   138­39).   Rather   thanthe   adopting   the   safety  ofwhich   distance   which   to have faith again" ([2], 138­39). Rather than adopting safety of distance their lens their lens afford them, their camera, instead,  consciously consciously      their   lens   afford   them,   their   camera,   instead,    plunges plunges  into into  the the  very very  being being  of of  their their  subject subject afford them, their camera, instead, consciously plunges into the very being of their subject matter, matter, inhabiting it  in in  much much the  same same way   that that   meditation meditation      or    matter,   inhabiting   it   the   way  requires requires  one one  to to  be be  present present  to to  intrusive intrusive or inhabiting it in much the same way that meditation requires one to be present to intrusive or even even painful  thoughts thoughts  and and  sensations, sensations,  rather rather   than than   to even   painful to   flee flee   them, them,  as as  we we  are are  all all  want want  to to  do. do.   painful thoughts and  sensations, rather  have than to flee them, as we  are all  sort want to   do. The   materiality that   the   brothers in   mind   is   not   the crude   that is   often   by    The  materiality  that  the  brothers  have  in  mind  is  not  the  crude  sort  that  is  often  peddled peddled by The materiality that the  brothers have in  depth mind  in is  material not the  crude sort that is often peddled by reductive   materialism.   There is   an   irreducible existence.   Disrupting   the   drama   of   reductive  materialism.  There  is  an  irreducible  depth  in  material  existence.  Disrupting  the  drama  of  reductive materialism. is  vulnerable, an irreducible depth in material existence. Disrupting the drama of being--at the  material material  There level  of of  exposed exposed      being--at   the level   vulnerable,   bodies bodies   encountering encountering  one one  another--is another--is  the the  ethical ethical being--at the material level of vulnerable, exposed bodies encountering one another--is the ethical intrigue.  Again, Again,  Levinas Levinas  seems seems   to to   be be   a a    major major    influence influence     intrigue.   here. here.   In In   the the  final final  phase phase  of of  his his  philosophy, philosophy, intrigue. Levinas to be major influence here. In  the final of his  insisted philosophy, Levinas  Again, prefers  the   term seems proximity   to a his   earlier   invocation   of  the face.   Thephase   face  he   had   on  Levinas  prefers  the  term  proximity  to  his  earlier  invocation  of  the  face.  The  face  he  had  insisted  on  Levinas prefers the term his earlier invocation of The face beyond he had what insisted earlier is  not simply  whatproximity  we see, its to plasticity.  There  is "more"  tothe  the face. face, a  surplus  is  earlier is not simply what we see, its plasticity. There is "more" to the face, a surplus beyond what is  on earlier is not simply what we see, its plasticity. There is "more" to the face, a surplus beyond observed  by  our  senses.  As  a  result  of  repeated  misunderstanding,  Levinas  began  to  employ  observed  by  our  senses.  As  a  result  of  repeated  misunderstanding,  Levinas  began  to  employ  what is observed our senses. As result repeated misunderstanding, Levinas began to employ "proximity"   as  aby   way   to   suggest   a a form   of of irreducible   presence   to  our  embodied   life--that   marks   a  "proximity"  as  a  way  to  suggest  a  form  of  irreducible  presence  to  our  embodied  life--that  marks  a  paradoxicalas  experience  is at a once  near and intimate  but simultaneously  far (in the  sense that  it is a "proximity" a way to that suggest form of  irreducible presence to our embodied life--that marks paradoxical experience that is at once near and intimate but simultaneously far (in the sense that it is  outside  my   capacity  to   control) and  strange--that   yet  exceeds   my  capacity far to  master   No that matter   paradoxical experience that is at  once near and intimate but simultaneously (in the  it. sense it is outside  my  capacity  to  control)  and  strange--that  yet  exceeds  my  capacity  to  master  it.  No  matter  how  much   I  try,  I  cannot   assimilate   the  excessive surplus my of  the   Other's proximity.   The   Other's   outside my capacity control) and strange--that yet  capacity to  master it. No matter how how  much   I  try,  I to cannot   assimilate   the  excessive   exceeds surplus  of  the   Other's proximity.   The   Other's   8 8

Religions 2016, 7, 43

9 of 16

much I try, I cannot assimilate the excessive surplus of the Other's proximity. The Other's irreducible strangeness unsettles me, pulls me out of myself, denudes me, exposes me, turns me inside out. The debt owed to Levinas can be seen in a number of their films, and, perhaps, most explicitly in L'Enfant (2005) [24], which received the prestigious Palme d'Or award at Cannes in 2005. This film, like their previous three major features (La Promesse, Rosetta, and Le Fils), as well as subsequent films since then (like Deux jours, une nuit), illustrates the redemptive force of responsibility, specifically, how the self is transformed in its response to the Other's unrelenting interrogations and demands. L'Enfant tracks the movement from the arid, narcissistic, often violent, universe that the ego inhabits to the ethically meaningful world that is made possible by the Other's provocation to respond. In other words, this film, like their other work, narrates the tensions that exist between the drama of being and the ethical intrigue of self and Other. It is important to note, however, that these dramas do not play themselves out in two distinct realities, one material, the other, immaterial. Rather, we experience ethical and spiritual transcendence in the very heart of embodied, material existence. In the first installment of Au Dos de nos images, Luc Dardenne singles out the following line from one of Levinas's commentaries on rabbinical texts dealing with the messianic: "spiritual life is essentially a moral life and its home is the economic sphere" ([13], p. 62; trans. modified). To which the filmmaker immediately adds: "this view of Levinas is also that of our cinema" ([2], p. 71). The film features a freewheeling homeless youth by the name of Bruno and his girlfriend Sonia. Bruno lives off Sonia's welfare checks and his petty theft activity. We learn at the beginning of the film that Sonia, his girlfriend has just had their baby. While in the hospital, without telling her that he has done so, he sublets her apartment in order to pocket the extra money. When she finally tracks him down on the street to introduce him to his son, the hurried Bruno can barely spare a moment for his own prodigy. When Sonia lifts Jimmy, their son, so that Bruno might embrace him, his awkwardness barely conceals his disinterest. Indeed, he seems perversely relieved when a second or two later he notices that the would-be-victim he has been staking across the street is about to get away and he uses this as an opportunity to call his accomplice on his cell phone. That he reaches for his phone rather than the creature in Sonia's extended arms establishes for the viewer the extent of his self-immersion. Bruno's self-regard reaches its high-point when tired of having to wait in line for Sonia's social assistance cheque he decides to take up the offer of one of his shady associates who claims to know someone who traffics in babies for the adoption black-market. Some time later that afternoon, Bruno, unbeknownst to Sonia, exchanges his own flesh and blood for a hefty wad of cash. For someone who has not seen the film, the temptation at this point in my description of it might be to imagine Bruno as evil incarnate. Yet, the film discourages this view. The fact is that for much of the film, Bruno comes across as a likeable person. His playful demeanor and his easy-going attitude make him no different than any typical twenty-something male in our midst. As seen through the camera of the Dardenne brothers, Bruno is no monster. If he is capable of carrying out as objectionable a deed as selling his own son, we see that this has more to do with his all-too-human egoism and indifference than it does to some ostensible evil inclination operating within him. If we must speak of evil in this context then we must qualify it as Hannah Arendt did as utterly banal [25]. From his own selfish perspective, Bruno's decisions appear to him not only beneficial but justified as well. Selling Jimmy for a few thousand Euros appears to him eminently reasonable. His son, after all, will be in better hands and he and Sonia desperately need the money. Thus when the alarmed Sonia asks him where Jimmy is, after returning to her with an empty baby stroller, Bruno responds matter-of-factly, "I sold him". To which he then adds, as if to reassure her, "don't worry we can always make another one". Bruno's phenomenology resembles that of the natural ego that Levinas so vividly describes in Totality and Infinity [26]. His own immediate needs lead him in general to overlook the fact that the world is populated by distinct others. Bruno carries himself in such a way as to make the most of what he can get from others at the same time that he shuns their accusations or demands. The viewer cannot help but be struck by the fact that for virtually the entire film, Bruno avoids his son's gaze. Similarly, throughout much of the film, even while in the midst of others, Bruno is shown to be engrossed with

Religions 2016, 7, 43

10 of 16

his cell-phone, as if to suggest that he prefers the distancing that such technologies afford him over the directness of human proximity. However, the power to stand back from the world--viewing the world as a spectacle for one's own benefit--concomitantly reveals the self's fettered state. Bruno's universe is  2016 the, utilitarian world of maximizing pleasure and avoiding pain. However, that way of Religions 7, 43  comporting oneself, as Levinas shows, belongs to the impersonal drama of being. That is, the universe afford  prior him  over   the ethical directness   of  humanrevealed   proximity.   However,   thea   power   to  stand   back  from   the  as it exists to the orientation by the Other, universe comprised exclusively world--viewing  the  world  as  a  spectacle  for  one's  own  benefit--concomitantly  reveals  the  self's  of things and images in flux and not creatures assuming the responsibility that proximity to one fettered  state.  Bruno's  universe  is  the  utilitarian  world  of  maximizing  pleasure  and  avoiding  pain.  another demands. The flipside of the ego's desire for anonymity and sovereignty is existential and However,  that  way  of  comporting  oneself,  as  Levinas  shows,  belongs  to  the  impersonal  drama  of  spiritual imprisonment. being.   That  is,  the  universe  as  it  exists  prior  to  the  ethical  orientation  revealed  by  the  Other,  a  The theme of self-imprisonment isolation is central for  the brothers as it  is in universe   comprised   exclusively  of and things   and  images   in  flux andDardenne   not  creatures   assuming the   the cinema of one of their important influences, that is, the work  of Bresson. The older French responsibility  that most proximity  to one another  demands.  The  flipside of Robert the ego's  desire for  anonymity   andis  sovereignty  is existential  spiritual  imprisonment.   director worth noting for our and purposes because he too sets for himself the goal of representing the The theme  of self  and isolation  is central  for the  Dardenne  brothers  as it is  indifferent  the  hidden spiritual drama ofimprisonment the human being. Admittedly, Levinas and Bresson are working on cinema   of   one   of   their   most   important   influences,   that   is,   the   work   of   Robert   Bresson.   The   older philosophical and religious registers. For Levinas, the inaccessibility of the divine acts as a foil  that French  director  is  worth  noting  for  our  purposes  because  he  too  sets  for  himself  the  goal  of  is meant to return us towards--what he calls the supreme "detour"10 --the only legitimate access to representing  the  hidden  spiritual  drama  of  the  human  being.  Admittedly,  Levinas  and  Bresson  are  the divine, namely, the inter-human drama. By contrast, for the Catholic Bresson, the distance from working  on  different  philosophical  and  religious  registers.  For  Levinas,  the  inaccessibility  of  the  the divine serves to underscore man's fallenness. For Bresson, if the Hidden God reveals Himself divine  acts  as  a  foil  that  is  meant  to  return  us  towards--what  he  calls  the  supreme  "detour"10--the  he does so primarily as the of the unmerited grace that  drama. God shows for His creatures. Despite only  legitimate   access   to result the  divine,   namely,   the  inter human   By  contrast,   for   the  Catholic   this difference--which ought be exaggerated, because frequently for Bresson the catalyst Bresson,  the  distance   from not the  to divine   serves  to  underscore   man's   fallenness.   For  Bresson,   if  the  for spiritual conversion involves other human beings--there are shared concerns between Bresson Hidden   God  reveals   Himself   he  does   so  primarily   as  the  result   of  the   unmerited   grace  that   God  and shows   for   His   creatures.   Despite   this   difference--which   ought   not   to   be   exaggerated,   because   the Levinas that are worth noting. These similarities, as we will see, can be gleaned from the work of frequently   for   Bresson   the   catalyst   for   spiritual   conversion   involves   other   human   beings--there   are   Dardenne brothers who are indebted to both figures. shared   concerns   between   Bresson   and   Levinas   that   are  worththat   noting.   These   similarities, as  we   will   of Like Levinas, Bresson has an eye for the deep ambiguity riddles the self. The  ego for both see, can be gleaned from the work of the Dardenne brothers who are indebted to both figures.  them simultaneously represents sovereignty and imprisonment. On the one hand, the fact that the ego Like Levinas, Bresson has an eye for the deep ambiguity that riddles the self. The ego for both of  emerges against the background of an infinitely vast universe is, to use Pascal's language, a virtual them  simultaneously  represents  sovereignty  and  imprisonment.  On  the  one  hand,  the  fact  that  the  miracle. The ego's emergence is a major accomplishment in the face of the anonymous indeterminacy ego  emerges  against  the  background  of  an  infinitely  vast  universe  is,  to  use  Pascal's  language,  a  of being. On the other the ego faces own existence as  ain crushing from which it virtual   miracle.   The  hand, ego's  emergence   is  a  its major   accomplishment   the  face  burden of  the  anonymous   cannot free itself. Bresson, especially in his early and middle films, made use of the prison theme as a indeterminacy  of  being.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ego  faces  its  own  existence  as  a  crushing  burden  metaphor the human The Dardenne brothers similarly the insularity of Bruno from  for which   it   cannot condition. free  itself.  Bresson,   especially   in  his  early   and  convey middle  films,   made  use   of   the  by prison  theme  as him a  metaphor   for   the  human   condition.   Thecontained   Dardenne by brothers   similarly   convey   the  bars frequently showing against a wall, in a solitary space, a fence, looking through insularity ofsimilar   Bruno  by   frequently   showing   him  against   a  wall,   in principal a  solitary  character's space,  contained   by  a from (Figures 6­8).  A device was used in Rosetta to heighten the isolation fence,  looking  through  bars  (Figures  6­8).  A  similar  device  was  used  in  Rosetta  to  heighten  the  the world (Figure 9).
principal character's isolation from the world (Figure 9). 

 
Figure 6. 6. Isolation.   Figure Isolation.

10

See, for example, Otherwise than Being ([14], p. 12).
10

See, for example, Otherwise than Being ([14], p. 12). 

10

Religions 2016, 7, 43  Religions 2016, 7, 43  Religions 2016, 7, 43
Religions 2016, 7, 43 

11 of 16

Figure 7. Isolation.  Figure Isolation. Figure 7. Isolation.    Figure 7. Isolation.

 

   

 
Figure 8. Isolation. 

   

Figure 8. Isolation. Isolation.  Figure Figure 8. 8. Isolation. 

 
Figure 9. Isolation. 

to  speak,   and,  in  the   process,   makes   the   self  receptive   to  the  demands   of  others.  Only   the  Other's   process, makes self receptive to the demands of others. the Other's proximity, to use   to  speak,   and,  the in  the   process,   makes   the   self  receptive   toOnly   the  demands   offace--or,   others.  Only   the  Other's 11   term--has face--or,  proximity,   to use   Levinas's  later   preferred   the   power  out to address   the ego,  to   call  Levinas's later preferred term--has the power to address the ego, to call it   of its tendency face--or,  proximity,   to use   Levinas's  later   preferred   term--has   the   power to address   the ego,to   tohide   call  it out  of its itself tendency  its to hide  or dissolve  itself  into its of surroundings.  In is, the  absence  of the Other,  that  or dissolve into surroundings. In the absence the Other, that where immanence prevails, it out of its tendency to hide or dissolve itself into its surroundings. In the absence of the Other, that  is, where immanence  prevails,  "everything  is absorbed,  sunken  into,  walled  in being..."  ([14],  p. 182).  "everything is absorbed, sunken into, walled being..."  ([14], p. 182). The temptation of the ego--its is, where immanence  prevails,  "everything  isin  absorbed, sunken  into,  walled  in being..."  ([14],  p. 182).  11 11

   accusation.  This  What  finally  breaks  the  illusion  of  absolute  sovereignty  is  the  Other's Figure 9. Isolation.       provocation,  and  the  possibility  to  respond  ethically  on  the  part  of  the  self,  offers  the  only  genuine  Figure 9. Isolation.  way  to  transcend  the  ego's  limited  purview.  In  response  to  the  Other's  provocation,  the  self  undergoes  a kind  of self  or  self  The  Other  erodes  the  psychic  armor,  so What   finally   breaks  hollowing the   illusion   of evisceration. absolute   sovereignty   is  the   self's Other's   This accusation.    This  What breaks the illusion of absolute sovereignty is the Other's accusation. provocation, What finally finally   breaks   the   illusion   of  absolute   sovereignty   is  the   Other's  accusation.   This  to   speak,   and,   in   the   process,   makes   the   self   receptive   to   the   demands   of   others.   Only   the   Other's   provocation,   and   the   possibility   to   respond   ethically   on   the   part   of   the   self,   offers   the   only   genuine   and the possibility to respond ethically on the part of the the only genuine way to transcend provocation,   and   the   possibility   to  respond   ethically   onself,   the offers part   of   the   self,   offers   the   only   genuine   face--or, proximity,   to   use   Levinas's   later   preferred   term--has   the power to   address   the   ego,   to   call   way  to  transcend   the  ego's   limited   purview.  Other's In  response   to  the  Other's   provocation,   the   self   the limited purview. In response to the   provocation, the self undergoes a kind of   wayego's   it to   transcend   the  ego's   limited   purview. In   response   to  the   Other's   provocation, the  out  of  tendency to  hide  or dissolve  itself  into  its  surroundings.  erodes In the  absence  of the  Other,   that    self undergoes  a  its kind   of self  hollowing  or self evisceration.  The  Other    the self's  speak, psychic  armor,  so  self-hollowing or self-evisceration. The Other erodes the self's psychic armor, so to and, in the undergoes  a kind  of self hollowing  or selfevisceration. The Other  erodes the  self's psychic is, where  immanence  prevails,  "everything  is absorbed,  sunken  into,  walled   in  being..."  ([14], p.  armor, 182).   so 

 

Religions 2016, 7, 43 Religions 2016, 7, 43 

12 of 16

desire to establish a shell-like challenged the Other's proximity, which the  The temptation  of the  ego--itsinsularity--is  desire to establish  a shellby like  insularity--is  challenged  by"forbids  the Other's reclusion and reentry into the shell of the self" ([14], p. 183). proximity, which "forbids the reclusion and reentry into the shell of the self" ([14], p. 183).  The  final final  scene  of  the   L'Enfant--one  that  pays  homage  to  the   famous  ending  of  Bresson's  Pickpocket--powerfully --powerfully  conveys conveys  the the  transcendence transcendence  of of  the the  ego,  and  the  idea  that  the  ethical  drama  implicates  three  different   agents or forces: self, Other, Appalled  by  his  agents  or  forces:      and and  the the wholly wholly Other. Other.  Appalled indiscretions,  Bruno, Bruno,  after after retrieving Jimmy at much higher cost than the initial compensation   retrieving   Jimmy   at   a a much   higher   cost   than   the   initial   compensation   he  he was offered for son, his son, turns himself the police. In this last scene, we see  Bruno in prison. was  offered  for his  turns  himself  into into the police.  In this  last  scene,  we see  Bruno in prison.  Sonia,  Sonia, who until now has been estranged from  comes Bruno, comes to visit him. True to their the  who  until   now   has   been   estranged   from  Bruno,   to   visit  him.   True   to  their   form,   theform,   brothers brothers this particular scene by foregrounding the proximity between Bruno and Sonia, but film  thisfilm   particular   scene  by   foregrounding   the  proximity   between   Bruno   and   Sonia,   but   also  between  ourselves and the characters that watch. In this  ethically climatic moment, filmmakers ourselves   and   the   characters   we that   we  watch. In  this  ethically   climaticthe   moment,   the  refuse us the safe  distance that might that soften the  impact of  a challenge our narcissistic fancy for  filmmakers  refuse us the safe  distance  might soften the impact  of a to challenge  to our narcissistic flight escape. Instead, we are immersed into the  material reality of the setting: cold, cement fancy and for flight  and  escape.  Instead,  we are immersed into the material  reality  of the the setting:  the  cold,  enclosure of the prison visitor's room, the ambient backdrop of nearby conversations, and various cement  enclosure  of  the  prison  visitor's  room,  the  ambient  backdrop  of  nearby  conversations,  and  other noises the shuffling of chairs the reverberating footsteps on the hard ground. The  various  otherlike  noises  like  the shuffling  of and chairs  and  the reverberating  footsteps  on  the hard  ground. camera carefully tracks the movements, always at close range, first of Bruno as he  enters the room, The  camera   carefully   tracks   the  movements,   always   at  close   range,   first   of  Bruno as  he  enters   the  expressionless (Figure 10). He sits  across from Sonia. She asks  him he would some coffee. She  room,  expressionless   (Figure   10). He  sits   across   from   Sonia. She  if asks him  if like he  would   like  some gets up to retrieve some from a nearby vending machine. The camera follows her, away from and then  coffee.   She   gets  up   to  retrieve   some   from   a  nearby   vending   machine.   The  camera   follows   her,   away back the table, where she sits again. They glances. Ravaged  by Sonia's gaze, Bruno finally  from to and   then   back   to  the   table,   where   sheexchange   sits  again.   They  exchange glances.   Ravaged   by  Sonia's breaks down in a torrent of tears  and (Figure 11). His tears give way hers. They reach each  gaze, Bruno  finally  breaks  down in a sobs torrent  of tears  and  sobs  (Figure  11).to  His  tears  give  wayfor  to hers. other's hands. two faces draw  together. Followed by forgiving caresses. We sense that something They reach  for The each  other's  hands. The two faces  draw  together.  Followed  by  forgiving  caresses.  We  has come in that We are made to witness the ethical the self that is eviscerated sense  thatundone  something  hasspace.  come undone  in that  space.  We  are  madeintrigue:  to witness  the  ethical  intrigue:  the  by presence of the Other. egoistic no longer intact, Bruno feels the full brunt of his  selfthe   that   is  eviscerated   by  theHis   presence   ofdefences   the  Other.   His   egoistic   defences   no  longer   intact,   Bruno shame for the terrible pain has inflicted his lover. not witnessing two egos  in conflict or  feels  the   full   brunt   of   his he shame   for  the on terrible   painWe   heare   has   inflicted   on  his   lover. We   are  not even collaborating with one another. At that very moment, Bruno encounters the Other, not another witnessing  two egos  in conflict  or even  collaborating  with one  another.  At that  very  moment,  Bruno  ego. As his  the Other, Sonia's presence broaches bodily  and psychic space.  Bruno's From a  Levinasian encounters   Other,   not  another   ego.   As  hisBruno's   Other,  Sonia's presence   broaches bodily  and  perspective, something has broken through  in that space. However, all we can say of  this "more" psychic  space.   From  a else Levinasian   perspective, something   else   has  broken   through   in that  space.  is that it "comes mind". What are made of aware at  such moments, for Levinas, is the third,   an However,   all  weto   can   say  of   this  we "more"   is  that   it   "comes to  mind".   What   we   are  made   of  aware at  ethical surplus  that neither  the self nor  Other could have  authored and as such deserves the name, such moments, for Levinas, is the  third, an ethical  surplus that neither  the  self  nor  Other could  have  however provisional, of "God"  or the "Infinite". If it were not for this third, the universe would as  authored  and as such  deserves the  name,  however  provisional,  of  "God"  or  the  "Infinite".  If it be were Hobbes described it a heartless homo homini lupus.  described it a heartless homo homini lupus.  not for this  third, the  universe  would  be as Hobbes

 
Figure 10. Prison .  Figure 10. Prison Scene Scene in in L'Enfant L'Enfant.

12

Religions 2016, 7, 43 Religions 2016, 7, 43 
Religions 2016, 7, 43 

13 of 16

Figure  11. Proximity Proximity in   Figure 11. in L'Enfant. L'Enfant.
Figure 11. Proximity in L'Enfant. 

   

The  ending  of  L'Enfant  is  reminiscent  of  the  moral  conversion  undergone  by  some  of  The ending of L'Enfant is reminiscent of the  moral conversion undergone by some  of Dostoevsky's The   ending    of   L'Enfant   is  reminiscent of  the    female moral   companions conversion    undergone by   otherwise some  of   Dostoevsky's  own male  protagonists  in the presence  of who they have own male protagonists in the presence  of female companions who they have otherwise mistreated. One Dostoevsky's   own   male   protagonists in   the   presence   of   female   companions   who   they   have   otherwise    mistreated.  One  thinks  here  of  Liza  in  Notes  from  Underground  and,  of  course,  Sonia's  namesake  in thinks here of Notes from Underground and, of course, Sonia's namesake Crime Punishment mistreated.  Liza One in thinks   here   of   Liza  in  Notes   from   Underground   and,   of  course,in   Sonia's   and namesake   in  . Crime  and  Punishment.  Dostoevsky  we  know  consciously  conceived  of  these  female  characters  as  Crime  and we Punishment .  Dostoevsky   we  know   consciously   conceived   of  these   female   characters   as  Dostoevsky know consciously conceived of these characters as Mary Magdalene figures, Mary  Magdalene   figures,   and  more   importantly,   as female Mary  Magdalene   transfigured   by  the  divine   Mary   Magdalene   figures,   and   more   importantly,   as   Mary   Magdalene   transfigured   by   the   divine   and more importantly, as Mary Magdalene transfigured by the divine presence  of Christ. female presence   of  Christ.  These   female   characters   resemble  Christ   in   two  important ways:   likeThese   him,  their   presence  of  Christ.Christ   These  female   resemble   Christ   in their two  important  goodness ways:  like makes him,  their  characters in two  characters important ways: like him, essential essential resemble goodness  makes   them   targets  of   abuse,   and   also   like   him  they   demonstrate  them an  essential   goodness   makes   them   targets   of  abuse,   and  also  like   him  they   demonstrate   an  targets of abuse, and also like him they demonstrate an extraordinary capacity for love and compassion extraordinary  capacity  for  love  and  compassion  even  in  the face of the  bitter hatred  that  is personally   extraordinary   capacity   for   love   and   compassion   even   in   the   face   of   the   bitter   hatred   that   is   personally   even in the  at face of the hatred is personally directed at  them (as a side-note, the original title directed   them   (asbitter   a  side note,  that the  original   title  for   L'Enfant was  supposed   to  be  "The   Force  of   directed  at  them  (as  a  sidenote,  the  original  title  for  L'Enfant  was  supposed  to  be  "The  Force  of  forLove"). L'Enfant was supposed to be "The  Force of Love"). is equally central  for Bresson who   This   idea   is  equally   central for  Bresson   whoThis   we  idea know   was   profoundly influenced   by   Love").  This  idea  is  equally  central  for  Bresson  who  we  know  was  profoundly  influenced  by    literature.  At   the  end  of   Bresson's   Pickpocket   (Figure  12),   the   male   finally  weDostoevsky's know was profoundly influenced by Dostoevsky's literature. At the end of  protagonist Bresson's Pickpocket Dostoevsky's  literature.  At  the  end  of  Bresson's  Pickpocket  (Figure  12),  the  male  protagonist  finally  breaks   down   the  infinite  patience   of  Jeanne   who   he  had   previously   rebuffed   and   neglected.   (Figure 12), the  before male protagonist finally breaks down before the infinite patience of Jeanne who he breaks  down  before  the  infinite  patience  of  Jeanne  who  he  had  previously  rebuffed  and  neglected.  The   final   words   of   Pickpocket --"Oh   Jeanne,   to   reach   you,   what   a   strange   path   I   had   to   had previously rebuffed and neglected. The final words of Pickpocket--"Oh Jeanne, to reach you, what The  final  words  of  Pickpocket--"Oh  Jeanne,  to  reach  you,  what  a  strange  path  I  had  to  take"--reminds   me to of take"--reminds Levinas's  recourse   in of Otherwise  than  Being  to  anOtherwise   old  Portuguese   adageto   which   a strange path I had me Levinas's recourse than  Being an old take"--reminds   me  of  Levinas's  recourse   in  Otherwise  than  Being  to in an  old  Portuguese adage  which   he  notes  succinctly   summarizes   ethical  drama   that  implicates   self,   Other,  and   God.  The self, proverb   Portuguese adage which he notes  the succinctly summarizes the ethical drama that implicates Other, he  notes  succinctly   summarizes the   ethical  drama   that  implicates   self,   Other,  and   God.  The  proverb   in   question   is   "God   writes   straight   with   crooked   lines"   ([14],   p.   147).   The   crooked   lines   here   refer   to   and The in question is "God writes straight crooked lines" ([14], p.  refer 147). The inGod.  question  isproverb  "God writes  straight with  crooked  lines"  ([14], with p. 147).  The crooked  lines  here  to   the   torturous   and   strained   relations   between   self   and   Other   in   the   human   intrigue.   The   redemptive   crooked lines here refer to the torturous and strained between self and Other in the human the  torturous   and   strained   relations   between   self  and relations Other  in  the   human   intrigue.   The  redemptive   possibilities  that  open  up  as  a  result  of  these  "crooked  lines"  gesture  towards  another  more  radical  intrigue. The redemptive possibilities open up as a result these  "crooked lines" gesture towards possibilities   that  open  up   as  a  resultthat   of  these   "crooked   lines"of   gesture towards  another   more  radical   and invisible source of the human intrigue, namely, the divine.  another more radical and invisible of namely, the human intrigue, and invisible  source  of the  humansource  intrigue,  the divine.   namely, the divine.

  
Figure    Proximity Proximity in  Pickpocket Pickpocket..   Figure12.  12. 12.  Figure Proximity in in Pickpocket .

13 13

Religions 2016, 7, 43

14 of 16

Luc Dardenne recognizes that religion traces the contours that delineate the dramas as described by Levinas. In this regard, he has on more than one occasion acknowledged the legacy of the monotheistic traditions in shaping our spiritual interiority and ethical sensibility. In an interview with the Belgian review, Toudi, he remarks: The biblical texts say what life should be according to God, life according to the Law, according to Love, according to Justice. If one sees something religious in our films, it's no doubt because the experiences of our characters refer to this life according to God which even without God today continues for us the life that is the most humanly possible, not for all situations in life, but at least for some [6]. Despite this admission, his own lack of faith leads him to speculate that the name of "God" is perhaps an echo of the mother's unremitting love for her child11 . In this way, he departs from both Bresson and Levinas, for whom the divine or the Infinite cannot be traced back to any particular person or thing in the world. That is Luc Dardenne's wager. Nevertheless, it is important to note that the "atheism" that is expressed in his understanding of his cinema challenges a dominant account of secularism that has until recently defined the modern age--but which we are only now seeing signs of a creative renewal. Today, philosophers like Jürgen Habermas [27] speak of "postsecularism". The postsecular is not an abandonment of secularism. It represents an effort to free Enlightenment secularity from the false dichotomies that it sets up between belief and unbelief, faith and reason. Most significantly, the postsecular drops the pretence that secular reason is fully rational and transparent while religion ostensibly is driven by an irrational faith. Instead, the postsecular position concedes--as Luc Dardenne is prepared to do--that faith in something outside of oneself is a necessary precondition for subjectivity in general. This is a faith in the Other's capacity to save me from the despair of impersonal existence, though not a faith in a personal deity: faith without faith. For these reasons, I think it best to conceive of the cinema of the Dardenne brothers as an exemplary expression of the postsecular. In her own exploration of their cinema, Sarah Cooper makes a similar claim: "This is post-secular filmmaking that is comfortable with the place of religion in an industrial world in which faith and unbelief sit side by side, and through which the remnants of Judeo-Christian commands and counsel live on in secular morals and conduct" [28]. The postsecular cinema of the Dardenne brothers bears witness to the absolute necessity for transcendence from the binding limitations of our egoism, as the sine qua non of human solidarity. 4. Conclusions The postsecular cinema of the Dardenne brothers poses a unique challenge to both a traditional understanding of faith and the modern concept of secularism. Some of Luc Dardenne's recent writing might be misinterpreted as a form of atheism. But this is no conventional atheism. He fully recognizes and respects that religion--and in particular, the monotheistic faiths--pays careful attention to a dynamic of faith that is so essential for the well being of the self and the solidarity of a community. Nevertheless, in his most recent work, he conceives of our current task as learning to live without recourse to a personal God. His reflections on these matters suggest that the brothers' cinema is an appreciation of the critical role that belief in an infinitely loving Other plays in the emergence of human subjectivity. Without such a belief, the self would collapse back on itself. And, at the same, time, their cinema can be understood as an attempt to live that faith without necessarily invoking in name or in practice the institutions or discourses of traditional religion. Consequently, I think it might be best to describe the cinema of the Dardenne brothers as an expression of faith without faith.
Acknowledgments: I would like to thank Ryerson University's Faculty of Arts for a grant that made it possible for me to develop this paper.

11

This is a theme he develops in Sur l'affaire humaine [4].

Religions 2016, 7, 43

15 of 16

Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.

References
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Bert Cardullo. "Rosetta Stone: A Consideration of the Dardenne Brothers' Rosetta." Journal of Religion and Film. Available online: https://www.unomaha.edu/jrf/rosetta.htm (accessed on 3 February 2016). Luc Dardenne. Au dos de nos images (1991­2005). Paris: Seuil, 2005. Luc Dardenne, and Jean-Pierre Dardenne. Au dos de nos images II (2005­2014). Paris: Seuil, 2015. Luc Dardenne. Sur l'affaire humaine. Paris: Seuil, 2012. Luc Dardenne. "Peut-on penser l'inconsolable sans consolation?" Interview by José Fontaine. Available online: http://www.larevuetoudi.org/fr/story/chapitre-x-peut-penser-linconsolable-sans-consolationinterview-de-luc-dardenne (accessed on 3 February 2016). Luc Dardenne. "Can the Inconsolable be Thought without Consolation? An Interview with Luc Dardenne." In Accursed Films: Postsecular Cinema between the Tree of Life and Melancholia. Edited by John Caruana and Mark Cauchi. Albany: SUNY Press, forthcoming. Sarah Cooper. "Mortal Ethics: Reading Levinas with the Dardenne Brothers." Film-Philosophy 11 (2007): 66­87. Philip Mosley. The Cinema of the Dardenne Brothers: Responsible Realism. London and New York: Wallflower Press, 2012. John Caruana. "The Drama of Being: Levinas and the History of Philosophy'." Continental Philosophy Review 40 (2006): 251­73. [CrossRef] Emmanuel Levinas. Time and the Other. Translated by Richard A. Cohen. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 1987. Emmanuel Levinas. Existence and Existents. Translated by Alphonso Lingis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1978. Emmanuel Levinas. God, Death, and Time. Translated by Bettina Bergo. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2000. Emmanuel Levinas. Difficult Freedom: Essays on Judaism. Translated by Seán Hand. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990. Emmanuel Levinas. Otherwise than Being or Beyond Essence. Translated by Alphonso Lingis. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981. Emmanuel Levinas. "Reality and its Shadow." In The Levinas Reader. Edited by Séan Hand. Oxford and Cambridge: Blackwell, 1989, pp. 129­43. Richard Kearney. "Levinas and the Ethics of Imagining." In Between Ethics and Aesthetics: Crossing the Boundaries. Edited by Dorota Glowacka and Stephen Boos. Albany: SUNY Press, 2002, pp. 85­96. Emmanuel Levinas. Proper Names. Translated by Michael B. Smith. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996. Siegfried Kracauer. Theory of Film: The Redemption of Physical Reality. New York: Oxford University Press, 1960. André Bazin. What Is Cinema? Translated by Hugh Gray. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971, vol. 2. Libby Saxton. "Blinding Visions: Levinas, Ethics, Faciality." In Film and Ethics: Foreclosed Encounters. Edited by Lisa Downing and Libby Saxton. New York and London: Routledge, 2009. Luc Dardenne, and Jean-Pierre Dardenne. "Taking the Measure of Human Relationships: An Interview with the Dardenne Brothers." In Committed Cinema. Edited by Bert Cardullo. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2009. La Promesse. Directed by Jean-Pierre Dardenne and Luc Dardenne. Liège: Les Films du Fleuve, 1996. DVD. Le Fils. Directed by Jean-Pierre Dardenne and Luc Dardenne. Liège: Les Films du Fleuve, 2002. DVD. L'Enfan. Directed by Jean-Pierre Dardenne and Luc Dardenne. Liège: Les Films du Fleuve, 2005. DVD. Hannah Arendt. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. London: Faber & Faber, 1963. Emmanuel Levinas. Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority. Translated by Alphonso Lingis. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 1969. Jürgen Habermas. An Awareness of What Is Missing: Faith and Reason in a Post-Secular Age. Malden: Polity Press, 2010.

6.

7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.

22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.

Religions 2016, 7, 43

16 of 16

28.

Sarah Cooper. "Put yourself in my place': Two Days, One Night and the Journey Back to Life." In Accursed Films: Postsecular Cinema Between the Tree of Life and Melancholia. Edited by John Caruana and Mark Cauchi. Albany: SUNY Press, forthcoming. © 2016 by the author; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

