 

      THE SPENCE BAY PROJECT:    INUIT REPRESENTATION, SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT, AND FEMINIST PEDAGOGY   IN THE PHOTOGRAPHIC WORK OF PAMELA HARRIS        by    Liisa Graham    B.F.A. Photography, Ryerson University, Toronto, 2004          A thesis    presented to Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada    in partial fulfillment of the     requirements for the degree of        Master of Arts        in the Program of    Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management    Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2015              © Liisa Graham 2015 

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A THESIS I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

The Spence Bay Project: Inuit Representation, Social Engagement, and Feminist Pedagogy in the Photographic Work of Pamela Harris Liisa Graham Master of Arts, 2015 Film and Photography Preservation and Collections Management (FPPCM) Ryerson University, Toronto

ABSTRACT This thesis project analyzes the Pamela Harris Spence Bay Collection, held at the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO). It is comprised of photographic work produced by Harris while in the Inuit community of Spence Bay, in 1972 and 1973, as well as photographs and documents pertaining to the community darkroom Harris initiated. Harris's photographs capture an Inuit community in transition, encompassing both Northern and Southern ways of being, and analyzed within the historical context of photographic representation of Indigenous communities. The community darkroom is examined through a feminist pedagogical framework, and illustrates how community members utilized photography as a tool of empowerment. This project is analyzed within the political and social contexts of the late 1960s and early 1970s, and explores the themes of community engagement, the politics of representation, and empowerment, and argues that Harris's social consciousness contributed to a shift in Indigenous visual discourse.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS I would like to thank my first reader, Sophie Hackett, Associate Curator of Photography at the Art Gallery of Ontario, for her enthusiasm, encouragement, advice, and guidance during the development of this research project. I would also like to thank Amy Furness and Marilyn Nazar of the AGO's E.P. Taylor Research Library and Archives, for their assistance and insight in this project. Thank you also to my second reader Blake Fitzpatrick, for your suggestions and insight. I wish to thank the many professors, instructors, and individuals at Ryerson University's School of Image Arts: Don Snyder, David Harris, Bob Burley, Phil Bergerson, Marta Braun, Peter Higdon, who, during my undergraduate and graduate studies, all inspired my continued love of the photographic arts. And of course, Pamela Harris. Thank you for giving me your time, and sharing your memories and wonderful stories with me. You were an incredible source of information, I could not have written this paper without your insights. I thank you immensely. To my loved ones, who never stop believing and supporting me in all my endeavours, thank you, I love you. Liisa Graham August, 2015

iv

CONTENTS Author's Declaration........................................................................................................... Abstract............................................................................................................................... Acknowledgements............................................................................................................. List of Illustrations.............................................................................................................. List of Appendices.............................................................................................................. Introduction......................................................................................................................... Methodology....................................................................................................................... Literature Survey................................................................................................................ Chapter One: Pamela Harris & The Spence Bay Project ............................................ Chapter Two: The Photographs ­ Particulars of Place & Approach.......................... i. Why Spence Bay..................................................................................... ii. Community Engagement & Inuit Representation.................................. Chapter Three: The Darkroom Project.......................................................................... i. "Cooking up Pictures:" Pedagogy & Community Empowerment............................................... ii. The Photographer & The Photographed: Voice, Power, & Representation............................................................ Conclusion.......................................................................................................................... Appendix A - Pamela Harris Interview Questions #1........................................................ Appendix B - Pamela Harris Interview Questions #2......................................................... Appendix C - Excerpt from "A Conversation" in Another Way of Being.......................... Bibliography....................................................................................................................... ii iii iv vi viii 1 5 7 20 28 28 31 43 48 55 64 67 69 70 72

v

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

All illustrations are reproductions of Pamela Harris gelatin silver prints from the collection of the Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, ON, unless otherwise noted.

Fig. 1 Fig. 2

Unknown, Pamela Harris at the Arctic Women's Workshop in Toronto, 1974, in Arctic Women's Workshop [June 1974]: 43. Location of Spence Bay in Relation to Toronto. Map by Chahé Sabag, Another Way of Being, 59. Addition of red circles made by author. Another Way of Being, book cover. Photograph: Tulurialik and Neeveeakchuk Waiting to Sell Carvings, 1972. Joannie Saituk Playing Accordian, 1972/73. Children (in Woody Woodpecker Jackets), 1972. Mary Edetoak (Old Mary) on her Bed, with Dolls, 1972. Gemma Unalerk and Mailbag Tent, Netsilik River, 1973. Family Sleeping (Cambridge Bay), 1973/73. Jude Iqalliyuq, 1972/73. Pauloosee Jayko (The Day the Boat Came In), 1972/73. Spence Bay from the Air, 1972/73. Judy McGrath with the Spence Bay Natural Dye Recipe and Sample Book, in Arctic Women's Workshop [June 1974]: 25. Nilaulaq Fingerweaving on the Way to Netsilik Camp, 1973. Mary Neeveakcheak in her Room (Posters), 1973. Pauloosee Jayko (The Day the Boat Came), 1972/73. Storage Tanks, 1972. Karoo Ashevak Carving, 1972/73.
vi

3

3 22 22 24 24 26 26 27 27 28 30 34 34 37 37 40

Fig. 3 Fig. 4 Fig. 5 Fig. 6 Fig. 7 Fig. 8 Fig. 9 Fig. 10 Fig. 11 Fig. 12 Fig. 13 Fig. 14 Fig. 15 Fig. 16 Fig. 17

Fig. 18 Fig. 19 Fig. 20 Fig. 21 Fig. 22 Fig. 23

Napachee Kallak and Joanie Saittuq Stepdancing, 1972/73. Nilauloq and Willie in Darkroom, 1973. Nilauloq and Willie in Darkroom, 1973. Selena Tucktoo in Darkroom, 1973. Loui and Friend in Darkroom, 1973. Darkroom Project instructional materials, courtesy of the Pamela Harris Collection at the AGO's E.P. Taylor Research Library and Archives. Theresa Quaqjuaq, Untitled, 1973/74. Unknown Photographer, Untitled, 1973/74. Selena Tucktoo, Untitled, 1973/74. Teresa Totalik, Untitled, 1973/74. The Spence Bay Photo Show at the Arctic Women's Workshop, in Arctic Women's Workshop [June 1974]: 79. The Spence Bay Photo Show at the Arctic Women's Workshop, in Arctic Women's Workshop [June 1974]: 79.

40 45 45 47 47

52 56 56 58 58 62 62

Fig. 24 Fig. 25 Fig. 26 Fig. 27 Fig. 28 Fig. 29

vii

LIST OF APPENDICES

Appendix A Appendix B

Pamela Harris Interview Questions #1 - March 20, 2015, Toronto, ON. Pamela Harris Interview Questions #2 - May 14, 2015, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, ON. Excerpt from "A Conversation" in Another Way of Being, 11-12.

67

69 70

Appendix C

viii

INTRODUCTION      In 1972 and 1973, Pamela Harris  (fig. 1) , an Americanborn, selftaught photographer,  travelled to the Inuit community of Spence Bay,    then located in the Northwest Territories. At  the time, Harris was in her early 30s and based in Toronto. On her first trip in 1972, she spent  several weeks photographing the people and the landscape of this Arctic community. She  returned in 1973 and continued her documentary work for three months. During this trip she also  built a community darkroom in the local women's craft shop, and taught anyone who wanted to  learn how to produce their own photographs.   Spence Bay is located just under 3000 kilometres from Toronto (fig. 2), on the Boothia  Peninsula, in Nunavut. The Hudson's Bay Company established it as a trading post in the 1950s,  and soon after, other institutions began to move in as well: a school, the Royal Canadian  Mounted Police (RCMP), and a nursing station, to name a few. For Harris, it took approximately  three days to travel there, on three different planes. She photographed Spence Bay at a time of  significant transition, and wrote:    It is certainly understandable that people would make this move, even though many  regretted leaving the life on the land ... To live through the Arctic winter in a warm,  lighted house, to buy food at a store when no fresh meat can be killed, to have the help of  a nurse when a child is sick: these things are good.... But these new advantages cannot be  chosen in isolation, for they draw with them an entirely new way of life, directed by the  South and dependent upon it. In the myriad of experiences are many things, whether  positive or negative, that people enjoy. It is this very enjoyment of the new that makes it  difficult for those experiencing the changes to evaluate what is being lost and it also  makes it difficult for an outsider to make judgments about what is  2 happening--everything is doubleedged.    
1

1

 Spence Bay was renamed Taloyoak in 1992. However, for clarity, and because Harris incorporated Spence Bay  into the title of the project, I will refer to it as Spence Bay throughout this paper.   2  Pamela Harris,  Another Way of Being: Photographs of Spence Bay N.W.T.  (Toronto: Impressions, 1976), 4. 

 1 

As a documentary photographer, Harris made a variety of photographs while in Spence Bay, the  majority of them portraits. They capture moments and activities that depict old and new ways of  living, both on the land and in the town, and what she refers to as the tension between Northern  and Southern ways of being. She was conscious of being a guest within the community, a visitor  whose role was to photographically document what she saw.  Harris's outsider status led to her  careful examination of both her approach to her own photographic work, and to the community  darkroom project.  Harris came of age in the 1960s, an era  that saw the height of secondwave feminism.3 A  time rich with social justice, antiwar movements, and  a mentality that encouraged selfinitiated  endeavours.  This was also a time when pedagogical discussions focused on popular education, a  form of teaching that promoted an equal exchange between teacher and student, and attempted to  reduce the hierarchical structures of conventional academic institutions. Harris had connected  with the people at  This Magazine is About Schools , a "radical magazine about schools"4  produced in Toronto from 19661973.5 Their editor states, "It is a stamp of our age to believe  that `nothing can be done' about the things we don't like. One of the results of this is that we  rarely even hear about experiments which disprove this view....  This Magazine  intends to report  such experiments, and to suggest what can be learned from them."6  Coming of age during this  
3

 "The term secondwave feminism refers mostly to the radical feminism of the women's liberation movement of the  late 1960s and early 1970s.... it grew out of leftist movements in postwar Western societies, among them the student  protests, the antiVietnam War movement, the lesbian and gay movements, and, in the United States, the civil rights  and Black power movements. These movements criticized `capitalism' and `imperialism' and focused on the notion  and interests of `oppressed' groups: the working classes, Blacks, and in principle, also women and homosexuals."  Charlotte Kroløkke, "Three Waves of Feminism: From Suffragettes to Grrls," in  Gender Communication Theories  & Analyses: From Silence to Performance  (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006), 7, 89.  4   Robert Davis, "Editorial,"  This Magazine is About Schools  1, no. 1 (April 1966): 1.  5  Harris photographed for several articles featured in  This Magazine About Schools,  including "Getting to Rochdale"  vol. 2, no. 1 (Winter 1968): 7296, and "Will it Live in a MilkCarton? City Kids Discover Nature" vol. 2, no. 2  (Spring 1968): 3138. The publication changed its name to  This Magazine  in 1973.  6   Davis, "Editorial," 12. 

 2 

     

             
  Figure 1. Unknown Photographer. Pamela Harris                at the Arctic Women's Workshop in Toronto, 1974. 

                                       
                       Figure 2. Lo cation of Spence Bay in Relation to Toronto.     

 3 

era had a profound effect on Harris. It influenced what photographic   projects she undertook, and  shaped her approach in how they were carried out. In Spence Bay she witnessed a community  undergoing a significant cultural shift a community often overlooked or misrepresented and, to  her, a community worth documenting.  The practice of traveling and photographing in the Canadia n North is  nothing new or  unique. However, the majority of historical photographs of Indigenous7  people have been made  by outsiders,  f or  outsiders.8  Hence the importance of examining  Harris's work within  the context  of the political and social climate of the late 1960s and early 1970s, and situating her in this  transformative era when she produced the Spence Bay project, not only for outsiders, but for  insiders as well. In so doing, I will illustrate how her work compares to the work of others who  travelled to and photographed th e North,  and ultimately what sets her apart from her  predecessors. Harris was  directly influenced by ideas of equality, exploitation, and power over  one's own representation. She sought to engage and empower the community she worked with,  by including them in both the production and process of creating photographs. This mutual  engagement is what distinguishes her from the Northern image makers that came before her, and  constitutes a significant contribution to  Indigenous  visual discourse.           
  The majority of the scholarly research consulted for this thesis uses the term Aboriginal. In light of more recent  conversations surrounding appropriate terminology, I have opted to use the term Indigenous instead, as Aboriginal is  considered by some to be problematic: " It's an English word , and it's  not what they call themselves. Most people  assume the word aboriginal means `the first inhabitants' or `from the beginning.' But the root meaning of the word   'ab' is a Latin prefix that means `away from' or `not.' And so aboriginal can mean `not original.'" Don Marks,   "What's in a Name: Indian, Native, Aboriginal or Indigenous?" CBC News, October 2, 2014,  http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/whatsinanameindiannativeaboriginalorindigenous1.2784518.  8   Dan Savard,  Images from the Likeness House  ( Victoria B.C.: Royal BC Museum, 2010), 143. 
7

 4 

METHODOLOGY      Determining the methodology for my research began with the realization that aside from  several magazine and newspaper articles, and Harris's own written documents, including  Another Way of Being: Photographs of Spence Bay N.W.T.,  there was not a lot of written  material on Pamela Harris's Spence Bay project. Fortunately, Harris lives in Toronto, and I was  able to meet with her on several occasions, to discuss her work.  I conducted two recorded  interviews with her the first took place at her home on March 20th, 2015, and the second took  place at the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO), with her photographic prints, on May 14th, 2015.  Interviewing her offered an invaluable amount of information and insight for this project.   The main bodies of work I studied were Pamela Harris's Spence Bay photographs in the  AGO's collection, and the archival material held in the AGO's E.P. Taylor Research Library and  Archives. Much of my time was spent closely observing Harris's photographic work and reading  through archival documents, including correspondence. Harris made two separate trips to Spence  Bay, each with its own focus. The first was to primarily create photographic work, and the  second to create a community darkroom. Thus it became clear that the logical approach was to  divide the research and the resulting thesis paper into two main sections: The Photographs, and  The Darkroom.  I also researched the broader historical context of photographic representations  of Indigenous subjects in Canada, in order to garner an understanding of past practices, and to  observe what aspects made Harris's work different. These differences are analyzed within the  political and social climate of the late 1960s and early 1970s, the era when Harris came of age. It  is clear that her socially conscious background shaped her approach, and discussing her work  through this lens provides great insight into how and why these differences occurred.  

 5 

The photography section is discussed in terms of community engagement and  participation. I discuss how Harris's social concerns related to creating photographic work alters  the representation of  Indigenous  people, especially when compared to the historical practices of  photographing the North.  T he darkroom project is analyzed through a feminist pedagogical  framework, and discussed as a means of community empowerment which resulted in a  significant shift in Indigenous photographic perspective and representation. 

 

 

 6 

LITERATURE SURVEY        This literature survey examines several topics relevant to Harris's project in Spence Bay.  These texts are divided into four sections, beginning with books and articles that discuss the  history of Indigenous photography by nonIndigenous photographers, followed by writings that  analyze photographic representations of Indigenous subjects. These texts place Harris's Spence  Bay project in a historical context--how it was conducted, why, and by whom. They illustrate  the visual conventions established by her predecessors, which offers a basis for comparison with  Harris's work: how it differed, why, and the resulting social impact. These texts also provide the  context necessary to examine the themes of power, empowerment, representation, and  "otherness" in photographic representations of Indigenous subjects. Following that, writings on  feminist pedagogy offer an analytic framework to approach the darkroom project. Again, themes  of "otherness" and empowerment are explored, as well as the ways in which Harris's feminist  perspective shaped her approach to teaching in a community with linguistic and cultural barriers.  Finally, material produced directly by or about Harris and the Spence Bay project serves to  compliment her body of work by illustrating how it was discussed and disseminated in mass  media.     a. History of Indigenous Photography Produced by NonIndigenous People  The discussion of these texts illustrates past historical practices of Indigenous  photography by nonIndigenous people, and compares them to Harris's work.9 By doing so, one 

  Amongst the many nonIndigenous photographers of the Canadian Arctic, it should also be noted that Inuit artist  Peter Pitseolak began creating photographic work in the early 1940s. He is considered the first Indigenous  documentary photographer in the Canadian Arctic. I am not discussing him in this thesis paper because the focus is 
9

 7 

gains a better understanding of how her approach differs, and the significance of these  differences.  In this section, work produced by the following photographers will offer a basis for  comparison: Geraldi ne Moodie  (1854­1945) , Robert Flaherty (18841951), and Richard  Harrington (19112005). Comparisons will include the approach or style employed by the  photographer, possible perspectives and/or attitudes that influenced those decisions, and the  social contexts of the time period.   

Donny White discusses Geraldine Moodie in the chapter,  "In Search of Geraldine  Moodie: A Project in Progress."10  Moodie was a female studio photographer who photographe d  in th e Canadian Arctic in the early 1900s. She joined her husband, J.D. Moodie, aboard the  government expedition vessel  Neptune , where "she set about familiarizing herself with her new  surroundings and establishing a rapport with the Inuit whalers and their families, who would  become the primary focus of her p hotography...."11  In  Framing Identity: Social Practices of  Photography in Canada, 18801920 ,12 Susan Close explains that Moodie  predominantly  photographed portraits in neutral studio environments, and argues that they were arranged to  "create the consciously and carefully constructed images of romanticized motherhood required  by the colonial imagination..."   Subjects are posed, in traditional clothing, and often look at the  camera. On occasion they face another person in the frame, such as a child. Moodie was drawn  to create photographic work of the Inuit, in part, because she recognized its value as a 
13

on the work produced by nonIndigenous photographers, a status that applies to Harris.  Dorothy Harley Eber, "Peter  Pitseolak and the Photographic Template," in  Imaging the Arctic , eds. J.C.H. King and Henrietta Lidchi (Seattle:  University of Washington Press, 1998), 53.  10  Donny White, "In Search of Geraldine Moodie: A Project in Progress," in  Imaging the Arctic , edited by J.C.H.  King and Henrietta Lidchi, 8897 (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1998).  11  Ibid., 9192.  12   Susan Close,  Framing Identity: Social Practices of Photography in Canada, 18801920  (Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring,  2007).  13  Ibid., 57. 

 8 

commodity that, as Close argues, would "raise her profile and advance her career as a  professional photographer."   Harris, on the other hand, never treated her subjects as specimens  to be profited from. Close also writes about Moodie in the context of being a woman, and  inquires if Moodie's gender alters her production of photographic work. Close asks: "Does her  perspective as a woman, another marginalized other, make her representation of her Inuk  subjects different? Does she produce a more sympathetic rendering of her subject?"   Close  discusses theories developed by others and suggests that photographs made by women display "a  recognizably greater degree of empathy toward their subjects.... portraits made by women tend  to be 'less grim' and more 'eyetoeye' than those made by men."   Eye contact, the subject's  gaze, and depicting an expressive relationship between family members,  --also present in  Harris's work--will serve as a basis for comparison. White also describes the significance of  Moodie's gender, which provides an alternative perspective in creating photographic work, and  how, "Judging from her portraiture work, the Inuit were at ease and comfortable with Geraldine,  especially the women and children, who appear in many of her images." 18 Though there are some  paralells, Harris exclusively photographed people in natural environments, thus producing work  in an entirely different context than Moodie.19 The lack of natural environments in Moodie's  photographs lessens or omits the sitespecific context of her subjects. In Harris's work, however,  the inclusion of the natural environment aids the viewer in receiving particular character  attributes, and highlights the importance of location and environment. 
17 16 15 14

14 15

 Ibid., 51, 104.   Ibid. ,  5657.  16  Ibid., 51.  17  Ibid.,   54, 58, 59.  18   White, "In Search of Geraldine Moodie," 92,  93.  19  That said, the technical limitations of photography in the early 1900s must be acknowledged, as that is a factor in  the type of photographic images one was able to produce, especially in the Canadian Arctic.  

 9 

Robert Flaherty, primarily a filmmaker known for his film  Nanook of the North  (1922),  also created still photographs of Inuit people. The exhibition catalogue,  Robert Flaherty,  Photographer/ Filmmaker: The Inuit, 19101922: An Exhibition,  states that Flaherty took nearly  a thousand photographs during several expeditions between 1910 and 1916.   In the introduction,  curator JoAnne Birnie Danzker discusses his work in relation to the Inuit people he lived and  travelled with, highlighting the relationships that developed between them. The book goes on to  discuss these relationships, and how this affected his photographic work: "As Flaherty's intimacy  with the Inuit increased, his camera began to locate and isolate the personality of his companions  rather than their exotic lifestyle and modes of dr ess."   The majority of Flaherty's portraits are  closeups,  which tend to fall into two categories: "StudioType," where subjects are posed in  conventional 19th century style portraits, with little or no eye contact and "Confrontation," in  which "the viewer is literally confronted, through direct eye contact, by the subject."22 His  images evoke a sense of the subject as historical figure, whose existence has a place in the past,  though perhaps not in the future. They are mesmerizing--emotive yet stoic, mysterious and  distant. Yet, the directional posing of his subjects produces images that are of Flaherty's vision,  drawing attention to the creator. Harris, on the other hand, who did not direct her subjects in the  same fashion, created photographic work that defers more authority to the subject, and not on her  as the photographer. Harris also employs direct eye contact between subject and viewer, a  significant factor in distinguishing the similarities and differences amon gst those who  p hotographed Indigenous communities. 
21 20

Robert Flaherty, Robe rt Flaherty, Photographer/Filmmaker: The Inuit, 19101922: An Exhibition  (Vancouver:  The Vancouver Art Gallery, 1979), 5.  21  Ibid., 25.  22   Ibid., 26 
20 

 10 

Richard Harrington, a photographer and writer, photographed Inuit communities  extensively between 1947 and 1953. He lived and travelled with the Inuit, producing thousands  of photographs,   some of which can be seen in his book,  The Inuit: Life As It Was.24    This book is  predominantly made up of his photographs and accompanying text, all from Harrington's  perspective. The photographs are his interpretation of the Inuit way of life, encompassing the  themes of survival, fortitude, and happiness. The book  Richard Harrington: Canadian  Photogra pher,25 incl udes a selection of his Inuit photographs in the "Canada" section. Again, the  images are accompanied by short captions, and describe the people and the situation of the  photograph. In both books the captions describe the Inuit in general terms, and, aside from a few  instances, people are not referred to by name, but simply by, "the hunter," "this Inuit mother,"  "this young Inuk," etc. Harris's use of text, on the other hand, incorporates direct quotes from  individuals in the community, and always refers to them by name. Harrington, like Harris,  photographs people in their natural environments, and focuses on a variety of activities and  subject matter pertaining to hunting, food, clothing, children, traditions, etc. Also, both  photographers were aware of the changing Inuit culture, and express concern for, or empathy  with, the Indigenous community's future. The subtitle of Harrington's book,  Life As It Was,  suggests that the Inuit were now a culture of the past, and without a future in contemporary  society. Harrington's attitude contrasts fundamentally with Harris's. She utilized the social  changes she witnessed as an opportunity to empower the Inuit, instead of mourning their  supposed cultural destruction. There is no sense of  Harris idealizing or rom anticizing her subject  matter as objects to be preserved through photographic images. Further, the title,  Another Way of 
 Richard Harrington,  The Inuit: Life As It Was  (Edmonton: Hurtig Publishers, 1981), 1  2.    Ibid.  25   Richard   Harrington,  Richard Harrington, Canadian Photographer  (Edmonds, WA: Alaska Northwest, 1998). 
23 24

23

 11 

Being  indicates that she did not view them as a vanishing people, but rather a culture in  transition--one whose future entails a new mode of existence.      b . Writing, Discussing and Analyzing Ph otographic Representations of Indigenous Subjects  In his book,  Northern Exposures: Photographing and Filming the Canadi an North,  192045 ,26  educator and historian Pet er Geller discusses the nature of Southern photographic  imagemaking within a Northern Canadian context. He investigates which individuals and  organizations were producing these photographs (namely the Canadian government, the  Anglican Church, and the Hudson's Bay Company),   places them in a historical context, and  analyzes their role in shaping Canadian national identity. Geller writes, "Northerners and the  land they inhabited were caught in the observer's gaze and, in the process, transformed."   This  "transformation" refers to the photographer's mandate, in which what they desire to capture and  accomplish with photography transforms their subject into the very thing that will accomplish  these goals. He also points to the omission of names, which are "replaced by the generalized title  'Native Type' and standing in stark contrast to the portraits of named whites."29 These topics  highlight the power dynamic that can exist between the photographer and the photographed, an  issue discussed throughout this paper, in relation to Harris's work, and specifically how her  approach acted against these past practices.  Carol Payne is the author and editor of several works that discuss the nature of  Indigenous  photography in Canada.  In her essay, "Through a Canadian Lens: Discourses on 
 Peter Geller,  Northern Exposures: Photographing and Filming the Canadian North, 192045  (Vancouver:  University of    British Columbia Press, 2004).  27  Ibid.,   6.  28   Ibid.,   11.  29  Ibid.,  35. 
26

27

28

 12 

Nationalism and Aboriginal Representation in Governmental Photographs," Payne explains that  photography is a "social practice" that is "historically inscribed [by] the biases and concerns of  the culture and times in which it was developed and viewed."30  Both this essay and the interview  she conducted with Iroquoian artist and curator Jeffrey Thomas, entitled, "Aboriginal  Interventions into the Photographic Archives: A Dialogue Between Carol Payne and Jeffrey  Thomas," discuss how photography was used to construct images of Indigenous people to further  colonialist attitudes, and how disregarding names renders Indigenous peoples as the nation's  "other."   Thomas describes his encounter with Indigenous photographs as one predicated on  frustration: "When I was a young boy and would come across photographs of First Nations  people, I had the sense that they had something to say to me. I remember feeling frustrated by  this because the images usually didn't offer any personal information about the people I was  looking at. And, I wondered if anyone really knew who they were."   Harris, on the other hand,  was adamant about recording people's names and stories, and included them alongside her  photographic work. This illustrates how her approach was significantly different from her  predecessors and, as a result, included what  had been predominantly m issing in Indigenous  visual history.  In " Returning Fire, Pointing the Canon: Aboriginal Photography as Resistance," She rry  Farrell Racette describes how the camera becomes a tool of resistance and decolonization for  Indigenous photographers within the historical context of colonization and feminist theory.   She 
33 32 31

30

 Payne, "Through a Canadian Lens: Discourses on Nationalism and Aboriginal Representation in Governmental  Photographs," in  Canadian Cultural Poesis: Essays on Canadian Culture,  edited by Garry Sherbert, Annie Gérin,  and Sheila Petty (Waterloo, ON: Wilfred Laurier University Press, 2006),  423.  31  Ibid., 109.  32  Ibid., 119.  33     Sherry Farrell Racette, "Returning Fire, Pointing the Canon: Aboriginal Photography as Resistance," in T  he  Cultural Work of Photography in Canada , edited by Carol Payne and Andrea Kunard (Montreal: McGillQueen's 

 13 

discusses several expedition photographers, many employed by the Hudson's Bay Company, and  then compares them with the creative projects produced by Indigenous people who have utilized  the camera as a tool for reclaiming their representation, and articulating their creative vision. She  writes,  "Their respective practices both celebrated and served as witness. Together they left a  legacy of thousands of photographs that had recorded their communities with a lens that  occupied a space that was neither ethnographic nor exclusively familial. It was shared, collective  space in which the photographer documented 'ourselves for ourselves' and extended the  collective gaze toward the land."34  These ideas resonate with  Harris's community darkroom  project, insofar as the participants documented their own lives, for themselves, and the  empowerment associated with this practice.   In "Lessons with Leah: Rereading the Photographic Archive from the North," Carol  Payne discusses how images of the Canadian North were constructed by those in the South (or  non  Indigenous ), often portraying them namelessly, and thus positioning them " as anonymous  cultural 'types' rather than historic individuals."    She analyzes the work of Richard Harrington,  who often did not record people's names, to show how visual repatriation initiatives, such as  "Project Naming,"36 have allowed for the identification of previously unidentified  Indigenous  subjects in  photographs.   Again, Harris's commitment to recording people's names indicates her 
37 35

University Press, 2011),  70.  34   Ibid., 79.  35  Carol Payne,  The Official Picture: The National Film Board of Canada's Still Photography Division and The  Image of Canada, 19411971  (Montreal: McGillQueen's University Press, 2013),   181.  36  "Project Naming seeks to identify some of the thousands of Inuit depicted in images from the LAC's photographic  collections in Ottawa.... Elders responded to images viewed on the [computer] screen.... each researcher asked the  following questions about the images: 'Do you know who is in the picture? Do you know where it was taken? Can  you describe what is happening in the picture? What was life like for Inuit back then?' The researcher... asked the  elder to confirm the spelling of the photographic subjects' names in English, Inuktitut, and Innuinaqtun. It is  important to note that Project Naming does not include full oral histories." Ibid., 181, 183.  37   Ibid.,  183. 

 14 

awareness of the importance of doing so, in order for her subjects to maintain their individual  identities.    c. Feminist Pedagogy  The first feminist text that Harris read was Betty Friedan's  The Feminine Mystique,38  and  from there she went on to explore the writings of Germaine Greer, Kate Millett, and Shulamith  Firestone, among others.39   As a feminist, the politics embedded in feminist literature influenced  Harris's educational practices. She developed  a nonhierarchical model of teaching and learning  that challenged oppressive structures while examining the role of power and, consequently,  empowerment. Therefore, it is only appropriate to analyze  her approach to the darkroom project  through the field that is now known as feminist pedagogy.  In her article, "What is Feminist Pedagogy?" Carolyn M. Shrewsbury offers a basis for  understanding the ideas and practices of feminist pedagogy. She describes it as:    a vision of the classroom as a liberatory environment in which we, teacherstudent and  studentteacher, act as subjects, not objects. Feminist pedagogy is engaged teaching/  learning--engaged with self in a continuing reflective process engaged actively with the  material being studied engaged with others in a struggle to get beyond our sexism and  racism and classism and homophobia and other destructive hatreds and to work together  to enhance our knowledge engaged with the community, with traditional organizations,  40 and with movements for social change.   
 "Betty Friedan's 1963 book  The Feminine Mystique  exploded the myth of the happy housewife in the affluent,  white, American suburbs `the problem that has no name', she wrote, `burst like a boil through the image of the  happy American Mystique'.... But Friedan's book was a wellresearched, sharply written, even passionate  indictment of the fact that even affluent middleclass women lead restricted lives, and too often lapse into a  depressed acceptance of that restriction. She insisted that each woman must at least ask what she truly wants. Then  she may indeed realize that `neither her husband nor her children nor the things in her house, nor sex, nor being like  all the other women, can give her a self '. Friedan's own background had been in radical politics, and her earlier  writings, particularly, display a keen awareness of social inequalities."  Margaret Walters, "SecondWave Feminism:  The Late 20th Century," in  Feminism: A Very Short Introduction  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005),  102.  39  Pamela Harris, email message to author, July 29, 2015.  40  Carolyn M. Shrewsbury, "What is Feminist Pedagogy?"  Women's Studies Quarterly  25, no. ½ (Summer 1997):  166. 
38

 15 

This philosophy is reflected in Harris's focus on engaging with the community of Spence  Bay--in terms of an engagement with their stories through her own photographic work, and their  engagement with photography in order to represent their lived experiences.  Feminist Pedagogy: Looking Back To Look Forward , edited by Robbin D. Crabtree,  David Alan Sapp, and Adela C. Licona, poses these questions: "What do we teach and why?  How do we teach and why? How does what and how we teach impact our students and our  communities?"   Pamela Harris answers these questions in documented writings pertaining to the  darkroom project in Spence Bay. She discusses her motivations for the project, her goals, her  methodological approach, and the implications--all of which can be linked to feminist beliefs.  These aspects will be discussed in greater detail i n "The Darkroom" c hapter of this paper.  Crabtree, et al, suggest that, "Feminist pedagogy emphasizes the epistemological validity of  personal experience, often connected to notions of voice and authority.... [It] questions the ways  traditional knowledge production and received knowledge serve particular interests and social  configurations of power through the systematic exclusion or oppression of particular classes of  people."    In "Revaluing Female Voices,"43 Carrie F. Paechter discusses the nature of power  relations in a pedagogical context, and questions whose voices are heard in various  circumstances. This is applicable to Harris's work because, traditionally, photographs of  Indigenous people have been constructed from the perspective of the nonIndigenous, who have  often fulfilled their ow n goals v ia suppressing the voice of the subject being depicted. In order to 
42 41

  Robbin D. Crabtree, David Alan Sapp, and Adela C. Licona, eds.,  Feminist Pedagogy: Looking Back To Look  Forward  (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 2009),  3.  42  Crabtree et al.,  Feminist Pedagogy , 4.  43  Carrie F. Paechter,  Educating the Other: Gender, Power, and Schooling  (London: Falmer Press, 1998), 6479. 
41

 16 

shift the power dynamic, space must be given to those who have been historically silenced,  which was the goal of the darkroom project.  
44

 

The themes of voice, power, and representation, all apparent in Harris's thoughts and  writings on the darkroom project, echo the ideas present in feminist pedagogical theory. 45 The  above texts offer a framework to analyze these aspects of the darkroom project, and their  implications for  Indigenous  visual culture.      d. Writings Pertaining to Pamela Harris and Her Work      i.  Books by Pamela Harris    Pamela Harris produced  Another Way of Being: Photographs of Spence Bay N.W.T.  as a  result of her time and work in  the arctic community. The book offers a selection of Harris's  photographs, alongside her writing that incorporates stories and perspectives from Inuit people in  the community, and interview excerpts. She acknowledges, as a  documentary photographer, that  she did not aim to speak for anyone else, and that, "The real story of the North must be told by  the Inuit themselves."   The book illustrates the diversity of her subjects. Through this  representation of diversity, Harris helps to dispel stereotypical images of Indigenous people, an  act that exemplifies and supports her feminist philosophy. Similarly, Harris's later book,  Faces  of Feminism:  Portraits of Women Across Canada ,47  combines text and images in order to present  the voice of the photographed individual alongside  their visual image. Lisa Steele writes in the 
44 45

46

 Ibid., 67.   I am using the term `voice' to refer to visual representations of perspective, and not in the literal sense, as  photographs do not actually speak.   46   Harris,  Another Way of Being,  5.  47  Pamela Harris,  Faces of Feminism:   Portraits of Women Across Canada  (Toronto: Second Story Press, 1992). 

 17 

prefa ce: "Harris has a way of making portraits that allows content to pour into the isolated frame.  By heightening the narrative qualities of the photographs, she increases the viewer's desire to  look inside, to get to know these women, to engage."48   The portraits are captured in various  personal environments and depict the diversity that exists within the women's movement, just as  the variety of Spence Bay photographs depict the diversity within their  community. Both projects  were a result of collaborative work between Harris and the community photographed, and, as  Harris writes: "all of them have a presence in the project, for it was built with their aid."49 These  two texts compliment each other in methodology and execution,  and provide a broader  understanding of Harris not only as a photographer, but as a feminist.         ii. Newspaper and Magazine Articles Pertaining to Pamela Harris's Spence Bay  Project    Pamela Harris's photographs appeared in several publications shortly after the Spence  Bay project took place, between 1974 and 1978. Some are pieces written by others and include  photographs by Harris, and some are photoessays compiled by Harris herself. The photoessays  include excerpts from  Another Way of Being , and alternative, original selections of photographs  and accompanying text. Examining this material helps establish an understanding of how and  why her photographs were reproduced and disseminated, in the context of the era in which they  were made.  In the article, "Photography Helps Inuit Control Changing Culture," published in the  Toronto Star,50  journalist Gary Michael Dault reviews the Spence Bay project, and Harris's 

 Ibid.,  9.   Ibid.,  171.  50  Gary Michael Dault, "Photography Helps Inuit Control Changing Culture,"  Toronto Star , July 2, 1976. 
48 49

 18 

exhibition at the David Mirvish Gallery in Toronto. He describes the photographic work with  praise: "Harris is both a consummately skillful technician and a superbly controlled intuitive  artist, [and] demonstrates [a] splendid command of both the precise moment that most accurately  reveals the nature of personality, and the esthetic moment that offers the perfectly composed  photograph."51 In the piece, "Photography at Spence Bay, N.W.T.," featured in  Focus Magazine ,
52

 Mary Mallon writes an adaptation from reports written by Harris. It discusses the many aspects 

of the darkroom project, including how photography was used by the Inuit participants. She  includes several of their photographs, and credits them all by name. Features such as these offer  insight into how Harris's work was received and discussed in mass media publications at the  time.  Many of the features found in periodicals are photoessays compiled by Harris herself.  Two such photoessays appear in  This Magazine , which focuses on Canadian politics and the arts.  They are entitled, "Mary Edetoak,"53  and "On the Land."54 Another piece, entitled, "Arctic  Women" appears in the "Canadian Magazine For Women"  Branching  Out .55 Ea ch piece features  a selection of Harris's photographic work, paired with captions telling a bit of the story of the  people in the photographs. They reinforce her commitment of documenting people's lives  through the use of both words and images, giving a voice to the faces in the photographs.        

51 52

 Ibid.   Mary Mallon, "Photography at Spence Bay, N.W.T.,"  Focus Magazine  (1975): 9093.  53  Pamela Harris, "Mary Edetoak,"  This Magazine  8, no. 3 (AugSept 1974): 1819.  54  Pamela Harris, "On the Land: Photos and Text by Pamela Harris,"  This Magazine  10, no. 5 (NovDec 1976):  2425.  55  Pamela Harris,  "Arctic Women,"  Branching Out  (JulyAug 1976): 2027. 

 19 

CHAPTER ONE:    Pamela Harris and The Spence Bay Project      Pamela Harris was born in 1940 in Erie, Pennsylvania, and moved to Toronto in 1967,  when she was 27 years old. She has a Bachelors of Arts in English Literature from Pomona  College in California, and is a selftaught photographer, having taken two workshops with the  photographer Minor White, in 1970 and 1972. Harris's photographic work primarily focuses  on  the nature of communities. She captures the characteristics and identities of the many individuals  who exist and participate in a particular geographical, social, or cultural space.  The communities  Harris chose to photograph were ones she felt warranted more attention than they were receiving,  were worth creating a photographic document of, and would benefit in some way from the  project. Between 1966 and 1975, Harris photographed in Ontario, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland,  Quebec, New England, Kentucky, Czechoslovakia, Italy, France, and England. She is best  known for her book and project entitled,  Faces of Feminism ,    a collection of portraits  representing the women's movement in Canada. Harris had each participant write a piece from  their own perspective, since she wanted to avoid generalizing the community and allow her  subjects "to speak for themselves."
57   56

Harris's work is in the permanent collections of several prominent institutions, including  Library and Archives Canada (LAC), and George Eastman House (GEH) in Rochester, New  York. She has contributed to numerous books, journals, and periodicals since the 1970s, and has  taught at the Ontario College of Art and Design, Ryerson University, and Sheridan College,  among others. From the 1970s through to the late 1990s, she also gave many lectures and 
56 57

 Pamela Harris, interview by author, Toronto, ON, March 20, 2015.    Ibid. 

 20 

presentations across Canada.  In 2012, the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO) acquired Pamela Harris's Spence Bay  collection. It includes 172 gelatin silver prints, consisting of unmounted photographic prints, as  well as mounted prints from the exhibition entitled  Spence Bay, N.W.T. , which was shown at  The  Photographers' Gallery  in Saskatoon, in 1975  The David Mirvish Gallery  in Toronto, 1976 and  in California's  The Monterey Peninsula Museum of Art,  in 1977. Additionally, the E.P. Taylor  Research Library and Archives at the AGO hold the Pamela Harris fonds, including: textual  documents such as correspondence, exhibition text panels, publicity and graphic material, 394  photographs, 1 35mm film strip, 1 audio disc, 2 audio cassettes, and 4 audio reels. The 394  photographs include gelatin silver prints, contact sheets, and transparencies, created by both the  darkroom participants and Pamela Harris.   The majority of Harris's images are portraits of women and men, both young and old, and  children. They are photographed while carrying out various activities such as camping, carving,  weaving, sewing, playing, exploring, dancing, sleeping, cooking, and fishing. Harris juxtaposes  images that represent traditional Inuit life alongside those that represent a Southern influence.  Another Way of Being  (fig. 3) grew  from the photographic work Harris produced while in Spence  Bay, along with her research and interviews. It is comprised of 44 photographic reproductions  and is divided into five sections:  "Spence Bay," "Images," "A Conversation," "On the Land,"  and "The People."  Another Way of Being  combines text with imagery, a formal choice that  Harris believes is essential to conveying multifaceted insights. She states that "words can capture  more complex realities than images. Images give a kind of emotional sense of place and texture  and person. But the complexities, I think are there more in the writing. And that's why for me,   

 21 

                       
                             Figure 4.  Joa nnie Saituk Playing Accordian,  1972/73. 

        Figure 3.  An other Way of Being , book cover. Photograph:  

        Tulurialik and Neeveeakchuk Waiting to Sell Carvings,  1972.  

 22 

this project is words  and  images."    The inclusion of interviews and insights from the Inuit  people she met,59 highlights Harris's commitment to providing the Inuit a venue to tell their own  stories, in their own words, alongside her own, with the photographs.    Subtle elements within the images are indicative of the dichotomy between Northern and  Southern culture sometimes the viewer must look closely to see them. For example, in the  photograph  Mary Edetoak (Old Mary) on her Bed, with Dolls  (fig. 5) we see a woman sitting on  her bed, where she works over a wooden plank to make dolls. The walls of the room are covered  in floral wallpaper and various pictures, small decorations, a map, and a piece entitled, "The  Lord's Prayer." Other elements indicate purchased Southern products, such as the box under her  bed that reads "Fresh pasteurized milk," and on the floor, to the bottom left of the image, is a  shopping bag that reads "The Bay." These elements may be subtle, but they are precisely the  things that struck Harris so profoundly while in Spence Bay. She witnessed a way of life quite  different from her own, one that she viewed as separate and unique from Southern traditions. At  the same time, however, there were other visual cues familiar to her own culture: consumerism,  mass produced factory made products, Christianity, etc.   In the photograph  Children (in Woody Woodpecker Jackets)  (fig. 6), we see four young  boys posing together in front of the camera, uninhibited. The boy situated in the middle in the  back has his arms outstretched around the boys to either side of him. Three of the boys are  wearing jackets depicting Woody Woodpecker, a popular American cartoon produced by the  Walter Lantz animation studio, and considered a Southern visual signifier. These children may or    

58

58
59

  Pamela Harris, interview by author, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, ON, May 14, 2015.   For an example, see discussion of figure 14 on page 3536.   23 

                     Figure 5.  Mary Edetoak (Old Mary) on her Bed, with Do lls,  1972. 
                 

   
       Figure 6.  Children (in Woody Woodpecker Jackets) , 1972. 

 24 

different."60    A  more subtle example is the photograph entitled,  Gemma Unalerk and Mailbag  Tent,   Netsilik River  (fig. 7). At first glance, the photograph seems rather straightforward: an Inuit  person standing in front of their tent, smiling, facing the camera, with hands clasped in front. It  looks quite Northern. However, a s the title indicates, the tent is made from a mailbag, brought to  Spence Bay from another place and way of life, and resourcefully repurposed into material for a  tent.    These images offer an alternative perspective from the imagery that dominates  Indigenous visual cultur e, cr eated  by Southerners--ima ges that depict subjects as objects, as  specimens of a disappearing culture, sometimes devoid of context--and are indicative of how  Harris's work differed from her predecessors.61  Her photographs often depict elements that are  shared between Northern and Southern cultures. At the same time, one gets a sense of place in  the photographs. There is a sense of personhood in them, an emphasis on the relationship  between individuals, their environment, their pastimes, and their traditions. There is no  monotony in choice of setting, person, clothing, or activity. The diversity of the Spence Bay  community, in every respect, is captured by Harris. From incredibly intimate images, such as  Family Sleeping (Cambridg e Bay)  (fig. 8), to ones more formally composed, such as  Joannie  Saituk Playing Accordian  (fig. 4). The face is particularly prominent (fig. 9, 10), and H arris  explains, "For me, I love it when I get an eye connection, because I love it when people look at  one another, and the soul flows out, I don't believe in souls but you know what I mean, the being  of the person."
62  

60 61

 Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.   Harris was familiar with both Flahery's and Harrington's work. She describes the book,  The Family of Man , in  which Harrington's work appears, as, "...my first photographic teacher." Pamela Harris, email message to author,  July 29, 2015.  62  Harris, interview, May 14, 2015. 

 25 

                                 
   

  

                                       
 

           Figure 7.  Ge mm a Unalerk and Mailbag Tent, Netsilik River , 1973. 

 

          Figure 8.  Fa mily Sleeping (Cambridge Bay) , 1973/73. 

 26 

                               Figure 9 .  Jude Iqalliyuq , 1972/3.                                          

   

           Figure 10.  Pau loosee Jayko (The Day the Boat Came In) , 1972/73. 

 
 27 

CHAPTER TWO:    The Photographs ­ Particulars of Place and Approach    Why Spence Bay  Spence Bay ( fig. 2 & 11 ) was an Arctic community rooted in traditional Inuit culture ,  comprised of Netsilik and Dorset people, who speak Inuktitut.    At the time of Harris's first visit  in 1972, she observed a community in transition a community becoming increasingly influenced  by Southern culture.   As she looked around with open and curious eyes, she continuously saw  Northern and Southern aspects juxtaposed in the same environments, stating that you didn't even  need to look for the cultural melange, it was everywhere.   However, it was not that one way of  life was vanishing because of another, but that these Northern and Southern ways, were now  coexisting.  
                 
65 64 63

 

    Figure 11 .  Sp ence Bay from the Air ,  1972/73 . 

 Marilyn Nazar, and Molly Kalkstein, " Description and Finding Aid" [201 3] Pamela Harris Papers, E.P.  Taylor  Research Library and Archives, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, p. 2.  64  Harris,  Another Way of Being , 4.  65  Harris, interview, May 14, 2015. 
63

 28 

Harris went to Spence Bay largely due to circumstance. While exploring Newfoundland,  Harris met the artist Judy McGrath ( fig. 12 ), whose husband was employed by the Canadian  Arctic Producers, who purchased whale bone carvings made by the Inuit in Spence Bay.66   Harris  recognizes that she would never have gone to Spence Bay if McGrath had not already been up  there. She explains:  "I only did that project for one reason, it's pure serendipity. I would never  have had the guts, or even thought I should, go to a little community like that, if I didn't have a  connection. It is because I met Judy, it's 'cause we connected strongly, it's 'cause she was going  up there..."   Moreover, McGrath's presence offered an entryway into the community. Instead of  arriving as a complete stranger, Harris's ties to McGrath made her a  de facto  friend of Spence  Bay's inhabitants.    After her first trip, Harris realized that she was drawn to the community, and  decided on a return visit.   But this time, with a greater purpose.  Due to the remoteness of Spence Bay, Harris recognized that many people in the South  had no idea of what life was like in this small Northern community. So few people lived or  travelled there, but Harris believed it was important to capture their lives and share it with  communities elsewhere. It was a means by which the Inuit could have a presence outside of their  own community, to be both seen and heard in contemporary society, and contribute to a  historical record.  The question confronting Harris was  how  to depict Spence Bay. How does one  represent a community that has historically been represented as "other"--what photographic  approaches will portray the residents of Spence Bay in a way that does not reinforce Indigenous  stereotypes?  
69 68 67

  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.   Ibid.  68  Pamela Harris to Judy McGrath, 24 June 1972, Series 1, file 18, Pamela Harris Papers, E.P. Taylor Research  Library and Archives, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto.  69   Harris to McGrath, 8 February 1973, Series 1, fol. 19, Pamela Harris Papers. 
66 67

 29 

                             
                   Figure 12. Judy  McGrath with the Spence Bay Natural Dye Recipe and           Sample Book, i  n  Arctic Women's Workshop , 1974.   

 

     

 30 

The situation in Spence Bay helped Harris realize that this was a unique moment in  history, Southern cult ure was changing the traditional Northern way of living it was trans  forming Inuit culture. Everywhere she looked, Harris observed visual elements that she  associated with Inuit culture coupled with elements that were familiar to her from Southern  s oci ety. As a documentary photographer, she want ed to create photographic records of this  phenomenon--visual documents that captured chosen moments in time--an embodiment of both  photographer and subject. She states: "what I recorded when I went to Spence Bay, is gone. TV,  internet, Southern culture, has totally washed over it, the North, for better or worse. So this is a  document, however incomplete, of a community at a certain point in time. How the people were  then. And I think it's tremendously important, that we keep our history, because otherwise the  future rewrites it."    The "our history" that she refers to is the collective "us,"--not just in  Canada, but applicable everywhere--and highlights how photographs serve as a means to secure  certain aspects of history in visual documents, a role that Harris's photographs soundly  accomplish.     Community Engagement & Inuit Representation  Harris was conscious of being a guest within the Spence Bay community, and her  position as such led to careful selfexamination of her photographic approach and its impact on  the community. Many photographers who travel into different and unfamiliar communities are  outsiders. However, it is  how  one approaches their photographic work that is important: their  interaction with their subjects, the context of their representation, and the resulting photographic  images.  
70

70

 Harris, interview, March 20, 2015. 

 31 

When a nonIndigenous person photographs an Indigenous community, questions and  considerations arise, for both photographers and scholars, regarding how one represents others in  photographic work. For photographers who encroach on the space of the other, one might ask:  What has changed, if anything, when a nonIndigenous person photographs in an Indigenous  community? What purpose do the photographic images serve? What are the intentions and the  perspective of the photographer? What background experiences influence how one creates  photographic work? Did Harris's link to feminism and the women's movement influence her  photographic approach? Did her gender change anything? How does this alter Indigenous  representation in photographic work?   To highlight the importance of these questions, one must consider the perspective of  Indigenous individuals. For example, Iroquoian artist and curator Jeffrey Thomas discusses his  encounter with photographs of Indigenous people in archives, and states: "I found pictures by  white photographers who seemed to have an overwhelmingly singular preoccupation with   photographing Indian warriors and chiefs. I felt that the photographic archive should reflect the  reality of Aboriginal people, depicting all the members of our societies in everyday settings,  rather than single out one aspect of our culture and history."    Harris's approach to creating photographic work is indeed influenced by her own  experiences. Her involvement in social justice causes, such as the antiVietnam war movement,  often incorporated photography.72 This work helped her develop the ability to analyze the world  around her, and be politically conscious of the responsibilities inherent to image making. Given  the socialpolitical context of the 1960s and 1970s, it is important to question Harris's approach 
71

71 72

 Payne and Thomas, "Aboriginal Interventions into the Photographic Archives," 110.    Harris, interview, March 20, 2015. 

 32 

to creating photographic wo rk of Indigenous others, the s ocial responsibilities such work entails,  and the impact this has on the lives of others.   Harris describes her use of photography as a window, rather than a mirror.73  She did not  seek to produce photographs about herself, but wanted to photograph the things she saw around  her, and, in particular, to celebrate the ordinary.    This is why communities have been central to  her work, in order to honour the unique and varied individuals that communities are comprised  of. Early on in her career, Harris photographed a number of communities in the United States  and Canada. They were not always geographically defined, but rather aligned through social  justice movements, such as the women's movement, or antiwar movements.   These projects  illustrate her interest in the social aspect of the communities she chose to photograph.  The  relationship between photographer and the community being photographed is of particular  significance. Engaging with community members and focusing on their participation in the  creation of the photograph alters its social context. No longer is it merely an image taken  of  someone, but one created  with  them.  Fir stly, it was important fo r Harris to communicate her intentions with the Spence Bay  commu nity. She states: "If people kno w why you're photograp hing, ... if y ou have a reason,  [and] you're not just clicking because you think you get to run away with their faces," illustrates    
75 74

73

 This is in reference to John Szarkowski's exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York, and  accompanying book, entitled  Mirrors and Windows: American Photography since 1960  (1978) .  Harris did not see  the exhibition but was aware of it and the ideas behind it, which suggests that "...there is a fundamental dichotomy  in contemporary photography between those who think of photography as a means of selfexpression and those who  think of it as a method of exploration." John Szarkowski,  Mirrors and Windows: American Photography since 1960  (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1978), 11.  74   Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.  75  Ibid. 

 33 

                       Figur e 13.  N ilaulaq Fingerweaving on the Way to Netsilik Camp , 1973. 

 

 

           
                     Figure 14.  Mary Neeveakcheak in her Room (Posters) , 1973. 

 34 

her concern for the power dynamic that can emerge between the photographer and the  photographed.   Since she respects people as equals, Harris was committed to a nonhierarchical  exchange, putting into practice the ideals embedded in feminist theory. By communicating why  she was there, what she planned to photograph, and how the images were to be used, she created  a space for dialogue. It allowed for the community to respond, and encouraged a relationship of  trust to develop.  Harris captured people in their natural environments, in everyday situations, rather than  in isolation from them. As Jeffrey Thomas points out, this was one of the things that was missing  from the Indigenous photographs that he encountered. Similarly,  Susan Close notes that  el iminating the social context contributes to the objectification of the subject, and is "also used to  as a strategy to assign otherness."    In Harris's photographs, everyday situations  present a diverse  range of contexts, including those portraying traditional Inuit culture, as well as those portraying  a Southern cultural influence. A variety of interior and exterior landscapes are depicted,  documenting what is both foreign and familiar to a Southern audience. For example, in  Nilaulaq  Fi ngerweaving on the way to Netsilik Cam p  (fig. 13), we  see Nilaulaq, in a boat, wearing a  parka. She is not making eye contact with the viewer, but is instead looking downward, focusing  on her weaving. The image is taken outdoors, on the water, and is captured in a natural setting. It  is neither staged nor posed. On the other hand, in the photograph  Mary Neeveakcheak in her  Room (Poster s)  (fig. 14), we see a young girl who is sitting on her bed in her bedroom. She is  leaning on one arm, looking slightly away from camera and smiling ­ she seems relaxed. Several 
77 76

76 77

 Harris, interview, May 14, 2015.   Close,  Framing Identity , 57, 58. 

 35 

posters hang on her bedroom walls, depicting movie and pop stars.78  Text from  Another Way of  Being  offers additional information to what and who the photograph depicts:    Eeteemunga agrees to teach me fourstrand braiding. I go to her house and we drink tea.  She is braiding such fine strands of sinew that I'm afraid I won't be able to learn. We  have no language except for our eyes hers are very kind, full of life. We kneel on the  floor and she struggles to teach my fingers what to do. When they finally learn, I feel  very happy and close to her. Later her teenage daughter comes in, one of the generation  who left the camps to go to school in Inuvik. She is gentle and shy. Her English seems  unsure, but she tells me she speaks better in English than in Inuit. She has never learned  four strand braiding. She shows me her room, the walls covered with posters of pop  singers and a table covered with bottles of perfume and cosmetics.79    If it was not made clear where this photograph had been taken (in the bedroom of an Inuit  community), it almost seems as though it could have been taken anywhere in Western society.   This emphasizes mass media's ability to both reach and appeal to people of radically different  cultures. As another example, a landscape image of   industrial storage tanks, with small climbing  figures (fig. 15), is juxtaposed, in a spread, against an image of a child in a parka running in a  beautiful snowy Arctic landscape (fig. 16). The images taken at a distance are meant to create a  sense of place, through depictions of landscape, and in  Another Way of Being  are always  displayed alongside more intimate images. Harris uses juxtaposition and diversity to show the  viewer two simultaneous pictures of Spence Bay. Firstly, she shows what is expected,  reinforcing certain stereotypes. Secondly, and more importantly, she shows what may  not  have  been, which challenges expectations.     
80

78

 The posters on the walls depict actor Clint Eastwood, and the musical group The Osmonds, among others. Pamela  Harris, email message to author, July 29, 2015.  79  Harris,  Another Way of Being , 7.  80   Harris, interview, May 14, 2015. 

 36 

             
              Figure 15.   Pauloosee Jayko (The Day the Boat Came) , 1972/73.       

               
      Figure 16.  Sto rage Tanks , 1972. 

 

 37 

For Harris, photography is a tool used to engage with her subjects, and one that they  could participate in together.    She was not interested in passively taking photographs that were  detached and superficial, but close, personal, and intimate communicating her intentions, getting  to know her subjects, listening to their stories, and creating a trusting friendship with them.  Having a good relationship with people was, in some ways, more important to Harris than  creating beautiful photographs.   By doing so, the practice becomes something that people are  involved in together, which dispels the latent power dynamic.  She states: "if you feel shy about  getting in there and engaging without photographing, or photographing without engaging, that's a  good feeling because it implies that you are aware of the possibility of a power struggle/  relationship, or you're aware of the power of what you are doing, and then you can be sensitive  to those people, and you're going to get better pictures, I think that's true."   Photography was a means for Harris to collect the stories and experiences that she felt  were integral to the people within them.  It was "the livingness in things"   that energized her.  She was not seeking to capture images as objects to be looked at, or owned, but as a record of  social interactions that conveyed the lived experiences of the subjects within them. In a letter to  Judy McGrath, she writes: "It's related to everything I've been saying to you about the trip to  Spence crystallizing certain feelings about photography: you all gave me energy to print just by  being in the pictures, because the audience I'm interested in this time is you all... the people in  the pictures. The other audience can come along too, but they don't ma tter. The image as object  is less important.... If the  life that is in Spence is reflected at all in the photographs, I'm happy, 
84 83 82 81

 Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.   Harris to McGrath, 2 November 1972, Series 1, fol. 18, Pamela Harris Papers.   83  Harris, interview, May 14, 2015.  84  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.  
81 82

 38 

they do what I think they should do..."   The stories connected to the images are integral. The  community is not just the subject of the photograph, but a part of its production and existence.  This is why the inclusion of text with the images is necessary, and desired, and helps to define  Harris as a documentary photograp her. When speaking about  Another Way of Being , she states:  "I don't think people looked at this as a photo and text book, you cannot figure out what this  book is about just by looking at the pictures, you have to read this, because there are things that  are not in these pictures, that are here in the writing, and for me the absolute key to the whole  thing is the conversation with... `Jude,'86  ... I think it's the essence of the whole book, the  tension between things is in what he has to say..."87  Jude is an Inuit Harris interviewed. The  "key," as she describes it, are his feelings toward the cultural changes he is observing and  experiencing. There is a sense of him feeling torn between two worlds, a dissatisfaction towards  this, and a sadness (see excerpt in Appendix C).   

85

Harris's interest in, and the connection she felt toward, the community of Spence Bay  gave her the ability to create intimate portraits of people and landscape, both in the town and on  the land. The photographs show the subject's connection to their craft, their environment, their  community, their family, and to Harris. Subjects are not isolated from their environments, and  the viewer gets a sense of the surroundings and happenings of this place. She succeeded in  capturing the everyday experiences and variety of activities  (fig. 17, 18) that  she witnessed and  participated in while at Spence Bay images of a time, place, and way of life that was unique to  that moment.    
 Harris to McGrath, December 1972, Series 1, fol. 18, Pamela Harris Papers.   Jude is not his real name.  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.  87  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.  
85 86

 39 

                               Figure 17.  Karoo Ashevak Carving , 1972/73.                     
        Figure 18.  Napachee Kallak and Joanie Saittuq Stepdancing,  1972/73. 

 

 40 

Historically speaking, the majority of  Indigenous  people depicted in photographs have  been portrayed nameless, often identified simply as, 'Eskimo woman.'   Carol Payne explai ns  that naming  has significant meaning in Inuit culture, and that "Three essential parts made a  human in the Inuit view: body, soul, and name. A nameless child was not fully human..."   Names serve to embed photographs with a specific individuality, and a unique perspective. Not  doing so runs the risk of representing people as "interchangeable racial types."   Harris was  adamant about recording people's names. She mailed some of her photograp hs to Spence Bay, as  gifts, but to also obtain or correct the names of people in the photographs.   This act illustrates  her commitment to capturing their individual identities, which sets her apart from her  predecessors. Harris was not attempting to pose as an insider, but strived to behave as a socially  conscious outsider, something many failed to do before her.  Each individual is presented with a  specific name and i dentity, unique in the community yet collectively bonded. In addition to this,  the titles accompanying the photographs often indicate the activity taking place, such as  fingerweaving, playing the accordion, or step dancing. Descriptive titles that reference activity  help to convey a sense of place, an important element in garnering a sense of the subject's  identity.   Harris's involvement with the women's movement  coincides with her work on "The  Women's Kit"92 while working at t he Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE).  A  parallel can be  drawn between the representation of Indigenous people in photography, and the 
91 90 89 88

  Payne,  The Official Picture:  175,    Ibid.,  186.  90  Payne, "Through a Canadian Lens," 436.  91  Harris to McGrath, 28 January 1973, Series 1, fol. 19, Pamela Harris Papers.  92  An  educational multimedia kit geared toward young women.  For a more in depth discussion of "The Women's  Kit," see Chapter Three: The Darkroom Project. 
88 89

 41 

representation of women. Harris, as a woman and feminist, created photographic work that did  not objectify. Historically, there have been several women that photographed Indigenous  communities, often associated with a studio or an anthropological organization. The significance  of Pamela Harris being a woman, is that she came of age as secondwave feminism was  emerging, offering new and analytic perspectives on the lives, roles, and representation of  women. This no doubt influenced her a great deal, as she identifies as a feminist, and did so at  the time of the Spence Bay project. 

     

 42 

CHAPTER THREE:  The Darkroom Project      Following her first trip to Spence Bay, Harris immediately began to think of reasons to  return. On her second visit, however, she wanted to offer something useful to the community, in  return for welcoming her as a guest in their homes. Harris writes: "There is a question that  continually bothers me when I'm photographing, particularly in a place I like as much as Spence  Bay: of what use is my photographing to these people? Am I just using them? There's much talk  about the honest record,93 but of what use is the record to the people? ... I would like to evolve a  way in which the process of being photographed would be meaningful to the people I  photograph. In other words, I would like to be able to use the process of recording as a  consciousness raising tool for the subject..."   The next step after  photographing  the community, was naturally, to connect the  community  with  photography. The result was the Spence Bay darkroom project. She states: "I  kept feeling parasitical [ sic ]--until I decided that the one thing I had to offer them was the skill  of developing and printing their own photographs themselves."   Teaching darkroom techniques  would encourage the Inuit community of Spence Bay to document their own lives and create  their own visual history. It was a practical tool that could continue to be used into the future. 
95 94

93

 The "honest record" is in reference to social documentary photography, or photographers wanting to make a  difference, as Harris puts it. Harris also refers to the Farm Security Administration (FSA), in relation to this  statement, as Harris wanted to "make photographs useful to the people she documented." Pamela Harris, email  message to author, July 29, 2015.  94  Pamela Harris, "Photographic Documentation Project" [April 1973], Series 2, file 212, Pamela Harris Papers,  E.P. Taylor Research Library and Archives, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, p.  3.  95  Dault, "Photography Helps Inuit Control Changing Culture," 1976. 

 43 

The late 1960s and early 1970s was an era that embraced freethinking and selfinitiated  projects. As Harris explains, if one wanted to start a project, one just went ahead and did it:  "Somehow, there was so much young energy... things seemed more possible.... There was a  whole movement of starting free schools, talking about education ... all kinds of i ssue s... there  was cultural foment...  of course it all starts with the civil rights movement and Vietnam... there  was a lot of different ways of thinking about things, in the sense that if you wanted to start a  gallery, you just started a gallery, and if you wanted to put out a magazine, you put out a  magazine."   There was a strong sense of selfempowerment, and this mentality influenced  Harris in her vision of the darkroom project.   After much planning and correspondence be tween herself and McGrath,  Harris returned  to Spence Bay in 1973. This time she stayed for three months. She brought darkroom supplies  and equipment, funded by the support of several organizations: the Department of Economic  Development of Northwest Territories (who provided money for equipment), Kodak Canada  Limited (who supplied materials), The National Film Board (NF B) of Canada,  and the Canada  Council.    The Darkroom (fig. 19, 20, 21, 22) was set up in the local women's craft shop ­ a location  chosen because "it is  the centre of activity for the women and... a place that belongs to the  people who work there."   The craft shop was established by McGrath, who was conducting dye  workshops.99  It took over a month to set up the darkroom, partly because of certain things taken  
  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.   Pamela Harris, "The Spence Bay Darkroom" [December 1973], Series 2, file 212, Pamela Harris Papers, E.P.  Taylor Research Library and Archives, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, p.1.  98  Mallon, "Photography at Spence Bay,"  9  1.  99  Judy McGrath, "started a women's craft project in which the women work on the adaptation of traditional styles  and techniques into contemporary design... [and ran] the first Northern naturaldye workshop, investigating,  developing, and teaching native people the naturaldye potential of Northern plants.  Harris, "Photographic  Documentation Project,"  3. 
96 97

96

97

98

 44 

           Figure 19. Nil auloq and Willie in Darkroom, 1973. 

             
   

        Figure 20. Nilaul oq and Willie in Darkroom, 1973. 

 

 45 

for granted, such as plywood, or copper piping--were not easy to come by in Spence Bay.  " Everything , every piece of wood, everything has to be brought there..."    In a piece adapted from a report written by Harris, featured in  Focus Magazine ,  Mary  Mallon describes the darkroom:  "The darkroom itself was 5 x 7 feet with a small bathroom sink (no taps) and a small  collapsible table. By dint of hard work the final result was a lightproof room, with a  sturdy work table and shelves running its entire length, a separate drying table, plenty of  electrical outlets and a sink with cold running water and drainage. The craft shop is now  equipped with a large water tank and an electric pressure pump for running water. At  present, hot water is produced in an electric tea kettle. Water is a problem as it is  delivered to the town by truck from a lake and therefore is very scarce. There was a delay  in installing drainage for the sink so that for the first two and a half months the sink  101 drained into a bucket which was then dumped outside."       This chapter will examine the darkroom project within a feminist pedagogical framework, and  will analyze how this approach led to photography being utilized as a tool of empowerment. In  1972, many people in Spence Bay already had cameras and were engaging with photography.  However, as Harris writes, "photography, like most of southern culture, was something that was  passively consumed ­ they took the films to The Bay and a few months later got back the  pictures. I thought it would be helpful for people to have the option of making their own  photographs, not that they particularly needed photography, but that since they already had it,  they should also have power over it, the power that comes from being able to do things    
100

100 101

 Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.   Mallon, "Photography at Spence Bay," 91. 

 46 

               

Figure 21. Selena Tucktoo in Darkroom, 1973. 

                   
  Figure 22. Loui and friend in darkroom, 1973.  

 

 47 

oneself.   It also creates a sense of autonomy a skill that would continue on in those who  participated, if they chose to do so. No longer would they need or submit to  people from outside  the community, to create photographic work for, or of them ­ but, of course, the choice was still  there. "My intention," Harris writes, "was to provide people with the understanding of how the  process worked and the skill of making their own photographs.... techniques by which the  people of Spence Bay could tell their own story... The real story of the North, must be told by  the Inuit themselves."     "Cooking up Pictures:" Pedagogy & Community Empowerment   
103

102

If it was important to include the community in her photography, then it was essential for  Harris to involve them in the development of the darkroom project and in their own image  making. In her writings, Harris acknowledged the importance of the community's response. She  made a deliberate point of inquiring after their thoughts on the project, via correspondence with  her friend McGrath, and letters directly received from community members. The significance  Harris places on positive feedback to the darkroom project, prior to her second visit to Spence  Bay, illustrates her consciousness toward the community's response to her presence, and to the  idea of a darkroom. She writes:             
102 103

 Harris,  Another Way of Being,  58.    Ibid., 5. 

 48 

The practical background for this project is that I have already established a good  relationship with people in Spence Bay. When I left, they were sorry to see me go and I  have many letters encouraging me to come back. The photographs I sent up were  warmly received. When I suggested the possibility of a community darkroom to Judy  McGrath, she mentioned it to some of the people in the community and the response was  enthusiastic. Numerous people are interested in learning photography, I have had several  letters from individuals saying that they would like to learn to make pictures and one  offering a room of her small house for the darkroom! ... One of the things that has been  most encouraging is the very vocal interest in the darkroom possibility, and that sort of  104 strongly spoken position seems to be an outgrowth of the women's project.       The darkroom was not a project imposed upon the community, but one that was welcomed and  encouraged. If there had not been such a positive response, it is unlikely that Harris would have  gone forward w ith it. Her approach was not to impose a specific teaching style with the  workshops, but to allow the participants' needs to shape her educational technique.  The goals for  the darkroom project were clear: keep it simple, make good prints, and create a model of learning  and teaching that encouraged people to work at their own pace, and in their own way. She  explains: "I do not want to start with preconceptions of what would evolve from this darkroom. I  think it is important just to take the material there, make the skills available to people,105 and let  them take it in their own directions."    As a selfidentified feminist, and someone immersed in the politics of secondwave  feminism during this era, Harris was particularly conscious of and well versed in the critical  aspects of the women's movement. Discussions regarding concepts of hierarchy, the politics of  representation, and selfempowerment were prominent.   Her awareness of these issues are echoed 
 Harris, "Photographic Documentation Project,"  8.   Harris was open to teaching both men and women, but as she explains, "...it really was only acceptable for me to  be in the darkroom with women, except for that one young couple, `cause he was with his wife." There were a  couple men who did a few pictures, but the darkroom participants were predominantly women.  Harris, interview,  March 20, 2015.   106  Harris, "Photographic Documentation Project,"  5. 
104 105

106

 49 

in all aspects of the darkroom project, and how it was constructed.  Between her first and second  visit to Spence Bay, Harris initiated "The Women's Kit"   while employed  at the Ontario Institute  for Studies in Education (OISE). It was an experimental multimedia kit, and OISE's "first  explicitly feminist project."107  The kit was comprised of material about women--pamphlets,  photographs, posters, audio recordings, slides, drawings--and distributed to educational  institutions in Canada, as a teaching aid.   The 1970s marked a time when OISE was hiring a  number of feminist faculty members, and was described as "a pioneer in new approaches to  education, especially women's education."109 Evidently, Harris's connection to OISE fostered a  new way of thinking about education and alternative methods of teaching, especially for women.  Her awareness of these ideas are echoed in the darkroom project. Both it s structure and  approach, was grounded in a feminist pedagogical framework, whether or not intentional. As  stated in  Feminist Pedagogy :    feminism encompasses ideas about the importance of women and women's experiences,  histories of social movements seeking gender equality, a philosophy of humanism that  works as a lens for understanding the entire human condition (not just that of women),  and a critical analytical method that interrogates the relationships among gender,  sex/uality, race, class, the environment, and power, often using misogyny as an  organizing principle to explain inequalities and injustices in these realms. All of these  understandings of feminism, and the multidisciplinary literatures that explicate them,  110 inform feminist pedagogy.         
108

  Julian Humphreys and Dawn Martin, eds.,  Inspiring Education: A Legacy of Learning 19072007  Celebrating  100 Years of Studies in Education at the University of Toronto , accessed Aug 13, 2015,  https://www.oise.utoronto.ca/oise/UserFiles/CENT%20PUB_15_10_06.pdf   ( Toronto: OISE/UT, 2006), 62.  108  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.    109   Humphreys and Martin, eds.,  Inspiring Education , 62, 63.  110  Crabtree, et al., eds.,  Feminist Pedagogy,  1. 
107

 50 

Feminist pedagogy is a theory of teaching and learning grounded in feminist thought and  politics. It is used as a framework to examine techniques used in the classroom, and a guide to  analyze educational approaches, that have a specific outcome in mind. It is aligned with    a vision of the classroom as a liberatory environment in which we, teacherstudent and   studentteacher, act as subjects, not objects. Feminist pedagogy is engaged teaching/  learning--engaged with self in a continuing reflective process engaged actively with the  material being studied engaged with others in a struggle to get beyond our sexism and  racism and classism and homophobia and other destructive hatreds and to work together  to enhance our knowledge engaged with the community, with traditional organizations,  111 and with movements for social change.      Harris taught in a nonhierarchical manner that did not perpetuate a power structure between  teacher and student. The approach to the darkroom was an indication of the feminist ideas  ingrained in Harris's  modus operandi.  It directly links her personal politics to the mandate and  implementation of the darkroom workshop--a politics that encouraged respect regarding cultural  differences, an awareness of power dynamics, and an interest in community engagement and  empowerment.  Awareness and sensitivity are important when there are cultural and racial differences  between people. Especially when one group has historically oppressed or exploited the other. As  stated by bell hooks: "If the effort to respect and honor the social reality and experiences of  groups in this society who are nonwhite is to be reflected in a pedagogical process, then as  teachers ... we must acknowledge that our styles of teaching may need to change."   Harris  had to devise ways to teach the basic concepts of photography despite linguistic and cultural  barriers between her and the darkroom participants. Some participants did not speak English, and  
111 112

112

 Shrewsbury, "What is Feminist Pedagogy?" 166.   bell hooks,  Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom  (New York: Routledge, 1994), 35.  

 51 

                              
                    Figure 23. Darkroom Project instructional materials.  

     52 

one of them was a deaf mute. Things that Southerners take for granted, such as understanding the  concepts of measurement and time, posed challenges in how to teach photography.   As Harris  explains: "Because I could not teach them in their own language, and because their language and  background did not include many concepts and processes of the type involved in photography, I  tried to translate everything into the simplest possible terms and to divide the whole process into  bits they could handle. Most people learned very quickly."   Examples of the instructional  sheets devised by Harris can be seen  in fig. 23, wh ich show hand written documents, including  illustrations, and the translation of instructions into Inuktitut. Her technique was practical: find  ways to communicate, simply and clearly, in order for the participants to grasp the techniques  needed to begin creating photographic work. Together they called it, "cooking up pictures."   Harris approached the project with the knowledge that she herself had a lot to learn, and  acknowledged that "As they were learning photography, I was learning how to teach photo  graphy. As I learned what areas would prove difficult, I could find new ways to make them  easier. As I simplified the process, it got to the point where everything could be summed up on a  few posted lists of steps, which were then translated into syllabics. By having a check list posted,  people who were working by themselves for the first time had an aid to remembering what to do  when. This made them feel more sure of themselves and of their ability to go it alone."   Her  methodology was to work with one person in the darkroom at a time, though on a few occasions,  two they were taught how to control the medium, and make their own choices. Harris states, "I 
116 115 114 113

 Mallon, "Photography at Spence Bay," 92.   Harris, "The Spence Bay Darkroom,"   3.  115  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.   116   Harris, "The Spence Bay Darkroom,"   3. 
113 114

 53 

wanted the process of learning to make people feel more selfconfident, able to do whatever they  wanted to do."
117  

Harris explains further: 

    They would shoot a couple of rolls of film and then we would develop these. A day or so  later we would print from these rolls. Learning was never theoretical people were  always working on material of their own in which they had a natural interest.... I would  begin by explaining how photography works--in the simplest possible terms. Then, as  we went through the development process, I tried to relate each stage to this explanation  and to describe what each chemical was doing.... When there was something one could  do to  show  how things worked (like turning on the light while a print was in the  developer and watching it turn black) we did that. The second time we developed or  printed, I asked people to pretend I wasn't there and to see what they could remember on  their own, but with the assurance that if they were about to forget something or make a  mistake, I would let them know. This wasn't a test, but rather letting them try it  themselves. It worked well because it was fun. I was always there for help and there was  never any stigma to needing help.... I tried never to pressure or chide anyone. No matter  what was forgotten or what errors were made, it was always  all   right ... It seemed to me  that if they were going to undertake to learn this very new technology, they would have  118 to do it in their own way, at their own pace, voluntarily and feeling good about it.       When the roles of teacher and student are more distinct, and opposite--teacher teaches, students  learn--an inherent power dynamic exists between the two. When every individual is viewed and  treated as both, a relationship of equality is established, which reflects a nonhierarchical and  nonoppressive model of learning, the feminist pedagogical approach.   The darkroom workshop  was not a traditional classroom by any means, but rather a group of people who came together to  both teach and learn in their own ways, in an environment that treated everyone as both teacher 
119

 Ibid., 2.   Ibid., 24.  119  Crabtree, et al., eds.,  Feminist Pedagogy,  5. 
117 118

 54 

and student. Once they learned the process, they went on to teach each other, and one of the  women, Selena Tucktoo went on to teach photography at a new school in the community.  
120

 
The Photographer & the Photographed: Voice, Power & Representation   

Harris recognized the importance of helping the Inuit create their own photographic  work, because doing so would contribute to a shift in power. Creating photographic work was a  way to control one's own representation, or the representation of one's community. Harris  explains: "Doing something yourself is a kind of power.... Since there is already a sweeping  cultural invasion of the North by the rest of the world, there is some urgency that the Inuit should  have as much control of his culture as possible. Photography is one way."   An analysis can be  applied to the visual culture surrounding  Indigenous  people. Historically, they have been  depicted visually in preconceived notions of what  Indigenous  culture means. It is not their voice  or perspective being heard or shown, but that of the objectifier, the outsider. As Harris writ es:  "they [the Inuit] are also people who are being exposed to a barrage of photographic images for  the first time... When there a re native people in the community who can produce photographs,  they would have the option of recording themselves and doing their own interpretation, rather  than always being shown to the outside world by outsiders."   When you place the control in the  hands of the community being represented, it is their perspective that is now being seen. It is  their voice and their lives, and not a projected construction.     
122 121

 Harris, interview, March 20, 2015.    Dault, "Photography Helps Inuit Control Changing Culture," 1976.  122   Harris, "Photographic Documentation Project,"  6. 
120 121

 55 

                            Figure 24. Theresa Quaqjuaq,  Untitled,  1973/74. 
                   

 
            Figure 25. Un known Photographer,  Untitled,  1973/74. 

 

 56 

The camera is a powerful tool--sometimes referred to as a kind of weapon--and historically it  has been utilized by white colonizers to photograph  Indigenous  communities.   Non Indigenous  people have created the vast majority of images depicting  Indigenous  life. The viewer's  understanding is therefore seen from the perspective of an outsider, and not from someone who  is representative of the represented community. The power held by the photographer, in  controlling how things are represented, must be acknowledged.  One must ask, from what vantage  point, what context is the photograph created in?  As stated by Payne:  "photography is by no  means a neutral and objective trace of the world. Instead, it  mediates  the visible through  subjective selection of subject matter, vantage point, and framing alterations in depth, colour  and tone the extraction of one fraction of time from a temporal continuum the exclusion of  other sensory information and, usually, binocular vision and recontextualization through  placement, accompanying language, and reception."   In the context of Indigenous  representation, this statement warrants a closer analysis.  
124 123

Control over photographic representation can aid in individual and/or community  empowerment,  accomplished by "analysing ideas about the causes of powerlessness, recognizing  systemic oppressive forces, and acting both individually and collectively to change the  conditions of our lives."   Harris recognizes the power embedded in photography, it can be both  oppressive and empowering. It is this empowering aspect that was utilized through the darkroom,  as it was an active and implemented model that served to accomplish the goal of community  empowerment. She writes: "there is the possibility of community documentation, done by the  people in the community, ... it should be a process that would strengthen the community's sense  
 Payne and Kunard, eds,  The Cultural Work of Photography in Canada , 70.   Payne, "Through a Canadian Lens," 425.  125  Paechter,  Educating the Other,  67. 
123 124

125

 57 

                   
       Figure 26. S elena Tucktoo,  Untitled,  1973/74.   

                        Figure 27. Teresa Tota lik,  Untitled,   1973/74.   58   

of self, what they have, who they are. This is a very important process in a place that is in itself  new and alien to most of the inhabitants and that is constantly bombarded with an ever escalating  amount of information and pressure from the al ien Southern cu lture."   The darkroom served as  an initiative that supported the philosophies of individual choice and control over visual  representation. The darkroom was a tangible project that the community members could utili ze  actively involved in their lives, with observable impact. T hat lived experience reverberates  through the photography they crea ted (fig. 24, 25, 26, 27), thr ough the context of where they  exist, into those who view it, and into Indigenous discourse. Their visual perspective is now an  official part of the collective story, created by the numerous photographers that made  representations of Indigenous  life.    The notion of choice in how one is represented gives voice to those who have been  historically silenced. Indigenous representation in photography has predominantly been  archetypal ­ nameless, and thus voiceless. In the political and social context of the 1960s and  early 1970s, within a discourse of challenging oppressive and exploitative structures, having  one's voice heard was significan t. Political activist movements during this time, such as the  women's movement, the antiVietnam war movement, the civil rights movement, etc., embraced  a climate in which the voices of the historically silenced are now provided a space to speak.  Photography is a way in which one can speak visually, and in a sense be heard. As discussed in  the context of feminist pedagogy, some voices are given more legitimacy, and "it is therefore  essential that those who would wish to develop an empowering pedagogy give space to those  voices that would otherwise remain silenc ed."   
127 126

126 127

 Harris, "Photographic Documentation Project," 67.    Paechter,  Educating the Other , 67. 

 59 

Selena Tucktoo ( fig. 21 ), one of the darkroom participants, was asked by Harris to  describe her experiences with the workshop, and her feelings on producing photographic work  ( fig. 26) . She states:  I took all kinds of pictures to show what people did this summer. It's always fun to see  what we did before. And maybe show people in other places, show them what we did  with flowers and lichens, show them how they can be used. When I was taking those  pictures I never thought of showing them to  people in other towns I just thought to keep  them to myself. I like to keep them to myself but I like to show people, too. I like to tell  them what we did.... I like the women in the shop to see what pictures I did, give them  128 free pictures.      It is apparent from how she speaks about the photography workshop that she found pleasure and  pride in the work she produced, and in showing it to others. It  was work produced from  observing and documenting her own life, an acknowledgment of her perspective, and an act of  selfempowerment.  The following excerpt, from Harris's written documents, illustrates how photography was  used as a documentary tool. It succeeded in helping the Inuit create their own photographic  work, by documenting the dye workshop they participated in:  We had been promised an additional $500 if the darkroom group supplied the  Department of Economic Development with a photographic documentation of Judy  McGrath's summer dye workshop. I had had reservations about the attempt to combine  learning photography and aiming at a product. However, beginning photo work with an  assignment proved to be a very good idea. First of all, both the dye workshop and the  craft project were funded by Manpower, and of the many women who were salaried to  collect dyeplants, or to sew, a small number wanted also to learn photography. These  women could thus be paid to do this documentation and hence were willing to  concentrate on pictures of these activities and to make the necessary prints. If they had  not been salaried I think the situation would have been quite different. Secondly, it just 
  Pamela Harris, as told to by Selena Tucktoo, "Learning to Make Pictures" [1973], Series 2, file 212, Pamela  Harris Papers, E.P. Taylor Research Library and Archives, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, p.  2. 
128

 60 

seems to work well to have a common goal. The dye workshop was so terrific  anyway--the camaraderie, the spirit, the hardwork and the enjoyment of that work, the  link to traditional activities--this was an activity that everyone enjoyed and was proud of  and so of course it was lots of fun to make pictures of it. Thirdly, these women who did  the documentation were not simply photographing. During the summer they also walked  out everyday with the other women, carrying food, tea kettles, kids, bags--their  Instamatic X35's and a couple of rolls of film tucked in a pocket or at the bottom of a  haversack with the bannock and tea bags. They scraped lichen, picked flowers, changed  diapers, made tea--and took pictures. They were part of the process they photographed  they were themselves photographed by each other there was no division between  129 photographer and subject.     Since the dye workshop and the darkroom existed in the same physical space, it made sense that  they would make use of each other, and that the projects would collaborate in some way. Some  of the darkroom participants documented the dye wo rkshop excursions, thus producing  pho tographic work made by their own community members. In so doing, it allowed both groups  to see the significance of the dye workshop and share its importance to a wider audience. In  1974, their photographic work was shown in an exhibition at the Arctic Women's Craft  Conference, held at the Toronto Dominion Centre in Toronto (fig.  28, 29 ).   Another anecdote illustrates the pride and accomplishment felt by the darkroom  participants: there was a visit from the Commissioner's  (of the NWT)  publisher, who "came from  Yellowknife with a photographer to 'do' the dye workshop for the  Commissioner's book. The  women in the workshop decided among themselves that this was not something they wanted, and  one of their major reasons for expressing their feelings in this way was that they felt (to quote)  'We have our own photographers now.'"   Selena Tucktoo describes the same incident:      
129 130

130

  Harris, "The Spence Bay Darkroom,"  56.   Ibid.,   7. 

 61 

                                                                       
   Figure 29.   The Spe nce Bay Photo Show at the Arctic Women's Workshop,    in  Arctic Women's Workshop,  1974.131    
131

     Figure 28. The S pence Bay Photo Show at the Arctic Women's       Workshop, in  Arctic Women's Workshop,  1974. 

 The publication  Arctic Women's Workshop  included both English and Inuktitut. 

 62 

That time when that man came from Yellowknife--that was the first time I heard of not  letting anyone take pictures of the ladies.... they said they didn't want him to take  pictures of them cause they already got somebody to take pictures of them, they got their  own photographer. I felt proud. That's the reason why they all said no.... The people who  come in, I don't even know who they are some time. Sometimes I get really scared.  (Asked why she thought the women preferred to be photographed by her.) Because they  132 know me they didn't get nervous.     The proclamation of "We have our own photographers now" exemplifies the autonomy felt by  the Inuit women. They now had a position to assert themselves, and deny an outsider from  fulfilling a job that they themselves could do. That is empowerment, and that is the success of  the darkroom. Harris writes: "the pictures they produced are pictu res Southerners coul d never  take. These are pictures taken by insiders--people who understand what they are photographing  from the inside and who are making pictures of their friends and relatives."
133  

The fact that the 

photographers were women, and that they were documenting women's work (the dye workshop),  is incredibly relevant in this era of secondwave feminism. The Inuit women were recognized as  active participants in the telling of their own stories, and  created photographic work that applies  to and documents their own lived experiences.  The images they produced are not overtly distinct  from a visual analysis. Their significance lies in the social context of their creation, having  control over their own visual representation, and deciding what the act of photographing  symbolically represents to the members of their community.            

132 133

 Harris, as told to by Selena Tucktoo, "Learning to Make Pictures,"  2.   Harris, "The Spence Bay Darkroom," 6. 

 63 

CONCLUSION          The social and political consciousness of the late 1960s and early 1970s had a significant  influence on the implementation of the Spence Bay project, and are directly linked to Harris's  approach and methodology. Due to her position as an outsider, Harris carefully examined her  approach to photographic work, and the educational aspects of teaching photography. Her  involvement with the women's movement was especially influential and, when coupled with her  rich background in education, resulted in an educational philosophy that stressed a non  hierarchical and shared exchanges of teaching and learning. The politics of representation,  knowledge formation, objectification, and empowerment, also resonate with Harris's  methodology.  The Spence Bay photographs are a significant contribution to the already existing  Aboriginal visual history, created decades prior, by other skilled photographers. It is a  continuation of the practice of photographing in the Canadi an North. Th at being said, Harris  recognized that a group of photographs can never  "represent the totality of the experiences,"134   which is why she chose to couple the photographs with text sourced from the photographic  subjects themselves. What cannot be shown, must be told. This inclusion created a body of work  that highlights the subject first, and the photographer second supporting Harris's view of  photography as a window onto the world, rather than a mirror turned on herself.  She states: "A  good photograph is an epiphany it throws everything else into focus. Even so, it is only a touch  of one moment, and the documentary photographer ought to be incredibly humble in the face of  the larger reality which he has left behind."135  
134 135

  Marjaleena Repo, "Photography and the Powerless,"  This Magazine is About Schools  4, no. 1 (Winter 1970):  134.   Pamela Harris, "And a Reply:,"  This Magazine is About Schools  4, no. 1 (Winter 1970):  141. 

 64 

Harris's photographic work does not present the Inuit of Spence Bay as an idealized or  romanticized people, projected through a condescending empathy. Similarly, it does not  subscribe to the notion of a race of people vanishing into history. The cultural transition Harris  witnessed was not viewed as something that was going to inevitably erase their traditional way  of life. Harris created images of a community that has relevance in contemporary  society--present, here and now, not historical figures of the past, to be pitied, belittled, or put on  display as objects. Southern viewers are confronted by both familiar and unfamiliar visual  elements in Harris's photographs, disrupting the preconceived image that society has been  exposed to by previous image makers. It is a community not disappearing, but transforming, and  coexisting i n a Northern and Southern cultural dichotomy. H arris depicts a more complex view  of Inuit life, dispelling stereotyp es, an d therefore widening the representation. It is also, in some  ways, a simplified representation that celebrates their ordinariness,136  as unspectacular people, in  the most humbled and dignified way. It is through this lens that their humanity is fully present.  That is the legacy of this project.   The darkroom project was a culmination of Harris's feminist ideals and of her exposure  to, and involvement with, experimental education discourse. Its implementation was collectively  accomplished, by Harris and the Inuit participants, and utilized photography as a tool of  empowerment a practical project of utilitarian value. The darkroom participants used  photography to directly contribute to the visual history of their own lives, a radical departure  from the majority of photographs of Indigenous peoples throughout history. In these  photographs, the Inuit exist as both subject and creator, which diminishes the possibility of  "otherness" they exist as one and the same. Participation in the process of photography, and 
136

 As Harris stated herself.  Harris, interview, March 20, 2015. 

 65 

having a sense of control over it, granted a sense of autonomy to the women of Spence Bay, and  aided in diminishing an y presumed dependence o n nonIndigenous society.   Harris's unique perspective allowed fo r an alternative app roach in creating a photographic  documentation of Inuit culture. The result is a body of work distinct in its representation. One of  dignity, meant to enrich and strengthen all those involved in its production. The Spence Bay  project represents a shift in Indigenous visual discourse. This is photography not just  of  community, but  for  and importantly  from  the community.   
 

   

 

 66 

APPENDIX A 

 
Pamela Harris Interview Questions #1    March 20, 2015, Toronto, ON.      · What was happening in the late 1960s or early 1970s, for you, that you feel led toward the  Spence Bay photography project? What were you reading, doing, or seeing that may have  influenced you to embark on this project?     · What was the political and social climate like for you then? Was there anything happening  politically that was inspiring you?    · Could you elaborate on how your being a feminist influenced your approach to this project? In  what capacity do you think it shaped how you photographed, as well as how you taught the  darkroom workshops?    · Do you feel like  Another Way of Being  received a fair amount of press or attention? If not, why  do you think that might have been? Do you think that you being a woman had anything to do  with that? Do you think if a man had carried out a similar project, in the 1970s, it would have  received the same amount of attention?    · Is there anything you would change about the selection (or anything else) in the book  Another  Way of Being ? Would you include more or different images? More or less writing? How do you  feel about its size?    · Is there anything you would do differently now, with either the darkroom project or your own  photography work in Spence Bay? Are there things you wished you had photographed but  didn't? Is there anything you would change in how you taught or ran the darkroom workshops?    · Did you leave Spence Bay feeling satisfied with what you had accomplished there? Was there  ever a desire to go back to complete something that felt unfinished?    · Are you still in touch with any of the individuals you met in Spence Bay?     · How did you and Judy meet, before she went up to Spence Bay?    · What most ties you to these two projects (Spence Bay and  Faces of Feminism )? What about  you (your perspective/approach) do you see manifested most in them?    · I saw that you attended the Native Indian and Inuit Photography Conference in Hamilton in  1985. What issues were being discussed? Did you speak at it? Was your book showcased or     · Do you consider yourself a documentary photographer? If yes, what does documentary  photography mean to you?     67 

· Any final or general thoughts on the project, 40 years later, that you'd like to mention?    · Do you still photograph? Any ideas for future projects?   

 68 

APPENDIX B      Pamela Harris Interview Questions #2   May 14, 2015, Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, ON.      · In your writing, you often mention the tension that existed between Northern and Southern  ways of being. Did you aim to capture this dichotomy in your photography, and if yes, do you  think you were successful in doing so?    · Do you feel that any of the photographs represent both Northern and Southern ways, or do the  majority of the images just show one or the other? Or is it that the photographs as a group are  meant to convey this?    · Many of your images are portraits of people, seemingly posed. How often did you instruct  people to gather or sit together in order for their photograph to be taken? Did you ever direct the  sitters? To smile, embrace, lean in to each other, look away, etc.?    · The majority of your photographs have a very happy and lighthearted feel to them ­ people are  smiling, playing, enjoying their task, etc. Do you feel you shied away from photographing  moments that were less pleasant, that perhaps showed some of the hardships or struggles of the  Spence Bay community? Or did you not witness much of this while you were there?    · What are some of the lasting impressions that Spence Bay left on you? Do you think these  impressions are conveyed in your photographic work? Do you think that the viewer now can  accurately sense what it is you were trying to convey about the community then? And what  would you describe those things to be?    · From your previous work as well as from your writing, it is apparent that you are particularly  interested in the lives of women. Do you think you paid closer attention to women in your  photographic work in Spence Bay? What aspects of their lives did you find most interesting,  challenging, fascinating, etc., and in which images do you feel this was captured? 

 

 

 69 

APPENDIX C      Excerpt from "A Conversation" in  Another Way of Being , 1112.      Pam : What do you think of doing with the rest of your life? Like, do you think of what you're   going to be doing in ten years? Have any plans?    Jude : I don't know. Well, my father kept telling me I should be like some other young peoples.   Cause today the young peoples are change. Most of them are speaking in English, and  most of them are acting like white peoples, like English. And most of them don't want to  go out hunting they just want to work, like, get a job and stay at it... But I like hunting  better, cause... I just don't know why.    Pam : So your father isn't pressing you to stay in the traditional ways? He would like you to   change?    Jude : Well... You know, I been going out to school and each spring I have to get home every   spring I have to go back home. And around August I have to leave to Inuvik and come  back June, around end of June. And like, those days, other young people were just like  any other Eskimo, because they stay home all the winter and summer. But I was one of  the kids who go out to school like white peoples, as if I was going to be a white person.  But I don't really like it that way. Everything change around. I rather be an Eskimo, a real  Eskimo, who never speak English. I kept telling my friends I should never go to school...  Because, it's going harder every year for me. Well, like, you know, if I had parents who  know about English, if they know about English as well as Eskimo, it would be a lot  easier, I think. But with your parents just plain Eskimo who never know about the life of  the English, it's hard... I understand my parents, but they don't understand me sometimes,  how I act, and sometime when I say something that I mustn't say. You know. I don't have  the same brains, I guess. Different way of thinking and different way of acting....    Pam : Maybe you could try and tell me a little more about what you feel is the difference between   being a real Eskimo and being an English Eskimo....    Jude : The things change... Today... it's as if they're hungry for money... Like, another person   gets, maybe, a new kicker or a skidoo or a canoe--looks as if another Eskimo is jealous...  Looks as if the money is their Dad now. Cause they're only earning their living by money  now, most of them anyways. But years ago they used to live by only meat and fish. Or  maybe caribou, caribou meat and seal meat, maybe polar bear. And they used to never  think about money, cause they got enough food. Maybe they care for the money cause  they want to buy the stuff that they see from The Bay like, in the store, they look at  something, "That's good," he wants to buy it now. That's why they care about so much  money... It's really funny because, you know, few years ago, most of the Spence Bay  Eskimos were living in the igloos, and they didn't know anything about the white peoples   70 

and how they live. They know little bit of it, but not that much. And now today they're all  dressed up like white peoples and living in a house, and they're trying to be as clean as  they can. And, I just don't know why I say that. But, it's strange. If I was an old timer, I  would never change my life...       

 71 

BIBLIOGRAPHY      Bernardin, Susan, Melody Graulich, Lisa MacFarlane, and Nicole Tonkovich .  Trad ing Gazes:   EuroAmerican Photographers and Native North Americans, 18801940.  New  Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers, 2003.   Chang, Zulay Jau Ting. "A Full Catalogue and Analysis of Photographs and Photogravures by   Robert J. Flaherty at the Art Gallery of Ontario." MA Thesis, Ryerson University, 2010.    Close, Susan.  Framing Identity: Social Practices of Photography in Canada, 18801920.   Winnipeg: Arbeiter Ring, 2007.   Cole, Barbi. "Unique Crafts From Our Arctic."  Toronto Sun  (June 27, 1974): 27.    Condon, Richard G. "The History and Development of Arctic Photography."  Arctic Anthropolgy   26, no. 1 (1989): 4687.   Crabtree, Robbin D., David Alan Sapp, and Adela C. Licona, eds.  Feminist Pedagogy: Looking   Back To Look Forward.  Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 2009.   Dault, Gary Michael. "Photography Helps Inuit Control Changing Culture."  Toronto Star , July 2,   1976.    Davidov, Judith Fryer.  Women's Camera Work: Self/Body/Other in American Visual Culture.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998.   Davis, Robert. "Editorial."  This Magazine is About Schools  1, no. 1 (April 1966): 14.    Department of Indian and Northern Affairs.  Arctic Women's Workshop . Ottawa: Department of   Indian and Northern Affairs, 1974.        Eber, Dorothy Harley. "Peter Pitseolak and the Photographic Template." In  Imaging the Arctic .   Edited  by J.C.H. King and Henrietta Lidchi, 5359. Seattle: University of Washington  Press, 1998.    Edwards, Elizabeth.  Raw Histories: Photographs, Anthropology and Museums.  Oxford: Berg,   2006.   Flaherty, Robert Joseph.  Robert Flaherty, Photographer/Filmmaker: The Inuit, 19101922: An  Exhibition.  Vancouver: The Vancouver Art Gallery, 1979.   Francis, Daniel.  The Imaginary Indian: The Image of the Indian in Canadian Culture.   Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press, 2011.     72 

Geller, Peter.  Northern Exposures: Photographing and Filming the Canadian North, 192045.     Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 2004.   Grace, Sherrill E.  Canada and the Idea of the North.  Montreal and Kingston: McGillQueen's    University Press 2001.   Harrington, Richard.  Richard Harrington, Canadian Photographer.  Edmonds, WA: Alaska   Northwest, 1998.   --.  The Inuit: Life As It Was.  Edmonton: Hurtig Publishers, 1981.   Harris, Pamela. "And a Reply:"  This Magazine is About Schools  4, no. 1 (Winter 1970):   137141.    --.   Another Way of Being: Photographs of Spence Bay N.W.T.  Toronto: Impressions, 1976.   --. "Arctic Women."  Branching Out  (JulyAug 1976): 2027.   --.  Faces of Feminism: Portraits of Women Across Canada.  Toronto: Second Story Press, 1992.   --. Interview by author. Audio Recording. Toronto, March 20, 2015  --. Interview by author. Audio Recording. Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, May 14, 2015.    --. "Mary Edetoak."  This Magazine  8, no. 3 (AugSept 1974): 1819.   --. "On the Land: Photos and Text by Pamela Harris."  This Magazine  10, no. 5 (NovDec 1976):   2425.   --, Papers. Spence Bay Collection. E.P. Taylor Research Library and Archives, Art Gallery of   Ontario, Toronto.   --.  "Portfolio."  Ms.  (March 1978) 1415.   hooks, bell.  Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom.  New York:   Routledge, 1994.        Humphreys, Julian, and Dawn Martin, eds.  Inspiring Education: A Legacy of Learning   19072007  Celebrating 100 Years of Studies in Education at the University of Toronto.  Toronto: OISE/UT, 2006. Accessed Aug 13, 2015,  https://www.oise.utoronto.ca/oise/UserFiles/ CENT%20PUB_15_10_06.pdf         Kroløkke, Charlotte. "Three Waves of Feminism: From Suffragettes to Grrls." In  Gender   Communication Theories & Analyses: From Silence to Performance,  123. Thousand  Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2006.   73 

Mallon, Mary. "Photography at Spence Bay, N.W.T."  Focus Magazine  (1975): 9093.    Marks, Don. "What's in a Name: Indian, Native, Aboriginal or Indigenous?"  CBC News ,   October 2, 2014.  http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/whatsinaname  indiannativeaboriginalor  indigenous1.2784518.    Payne, Carol.  The Official Picture: The National Film Board of Canada's Still Photography   Division and The Image of Canada, 19411971.  Montreal: McGillQueen's University  Press, 2013.   --. "Through a Canadian Lens: Discourses on Nationalism and Aboriginal Representation  in Governmental Photographs." In  Canadian Cultural Poesis: Essays on Canadian  Culture.  Edited by Garry Sherbert, Annie Gérin, and Sheila Petty, 42142.   Waterloo, ON:  Wilfred Laurier University Press, 2006.   --. "'You Can Hear It in Their Voice': Photographs and Cultural Consolidation Among Inuit   Youths and Elders." In  Oral History and Photography,  edited by Alexander Freund and  Allistair Thomson, 97114. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.   --, and Andrea Kunard, eds.  The Cultural Work of Photography in Canada.  Montreal:   McGillQueen's University Press, 2011.   --, and Jeffrey Thomas. "Aboriginal Interventions into the Photographic Archives: A Dialogue  between Carol Payne and Jeffrey Thomas."  Visual Resources  18, no. 2 (January 2002):  10925.   --, Sheena Ellison and Amos Hayes. "Mapping Views from the North: Cybercartographic   Technology and Intuit Photographic Encounters." In  Developments in the Theory and   Practice of Cybercartography: Applications and Indigenous Mapping , edited by Taylor,  D.R. Fraser, 191200.   Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2003.   Paechter, Carrie F.  Educating the Other: Gender, Power, and Schooling.  London: Falmer Press,   1998.   Repo, Marjaleena. "Photography and the Powerless."  This Magazine is About Schools  4, no. 1   (Winter 1970): 130136.    Ross, W. Gillies. "The Use and Misuse of Historical Photographs: A Case Study from Hudson   Bay, Canada."  Arctic Anthropology  27, no. 2 (1990): 93112.   Ruby, Jay.  Picturing Culture: Explorations of Film and Culture.  Chicago: University of Chicago   Press, 2000.   Savard, Dan.  Images from the Likeness House.  Victoria B.C.: Royal BC Museum, 2010.    74 

Shrewsbury, Carolyn M. "What is Feminist Pedagogy?"  Women's Studies Quarterly  25, no. ½   (Summer 1997): 16673.   Stern, Pamela, and Lisa Stevenson, eds.  Critical Inuit Studies: An Anthropology of   Contemporary Arctic Ethnography.  Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2006.   Szarkowski, John.  Mirrors and Windows: American Photography since 1960.  NY: The Museum   of Modern Art, 1978.    Thomas, Jeff. "From the Collections: The Portfolio: Luminance--Aboriginal Photographic   Portraits."  The Archivist , no. 112 (1996): 723.   Trott, Christopher G. "The Dialectics of 'Us' and 'Other': Anglican Missionary Photographs of   the Inuit."  The American Review of Canadian Studies  31, no. 12 (June 2001): 171190.           Walters, Margaret. "SecondWave Feminism: The Late 20th Century." In  Feminism: A Very   Short Introduction,  97116. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.    White, Donny. "In Search of Geraldine Moodie: A Project in Progress." In  Imaging the Arctic .   Edited  by J.C.H. King and Henrietta Lidchi, 8897. Seattle: University of Washington  Press, 1998.    Wilford, Nigel. "Spence Bay: Whalebone Carvings."  North/Nord  (March/April 1974): 2231.  

 75 


