Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Emotional memory in violent video game players and nonplayers
Holly J. Bowen
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Psychology Commons Recommended Citation
Bowen, Holly J., "Emotional memory in violent video game players and nonplayers" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 481.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

EMOTIONAL MEMORY IN VIOLENT VIDEO GAME PLAYERS AND
NONPLAYERS

·

» -

Holly J. Bowen
BA Trent University, 2006

A thesis presented to Ryerson University.

in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Masters of Arts

in the Program of Psychology Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009
©Holly J. Bowen 2009

RYERSON UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose
of scholarlv research.

Emotional Memory in Violent Video Game Players and Non Players. Holly J. Bowen, MA in
Psychology, 2009, Ryerson University. The present study examined whether chronic exposure to violent media was associated with alterations in emotional long-term memory. Derived from the finding that violent video games

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly
research.

reduce physiological arousal to violent stimuli I predicted that violent video game players would
show lower recognition accuracy for negative images in general but higher accuracy for violent images in particular, compared to a control group of non-players. Participants completed an oldnew recognition task with 300 pictures of scenes ranging in emotion (negative nonviolent, violent, neutral and positive). Violent video game players were matched to non-players on age and gender.

Memory accuracy, measured by d', showed no significant effects of group or valence, but there
were effects of valence on reaction time. Diffusion modelling analysis revealed that across groups, participants were more liberal in their responses to emotional items and more efficient at detecting novel (unstudied) pictures than at recognizing studied pictures.

List of Tables Table 1. Means of all questionnaire data for VG-Players and Non-Players
Figure 1. The Diffusion Model (Ratcliff, 1978)

Table 2. Hit Rates, False Alarm Rates and d' in VG Players and Non-players for all levels of
Valence

Figure 2. Means of the brightness judgment responses across groups Figure 3. Means of the brightness judgment reaction times across groups Figure 4. Median reaction time for correctly identified target items at each level of valence across
groups 2

Table 3. Median Reaction Times for Hits and Correct Rejections (in ms) for VG players and
Non-players at all levels of Valence

Table 4. Means of the Diffusion Parameter Values Table 5. Mean Arousal Ratings for VG players and Non players

Figure 5. Median reaction time for correct rejection of distractor items at each level of valence across groups Figure 6. Mean values of response bias (z/a) for negative, positive, and neutral images across groups Figure 7. Mean drift rates for negative, positive, and neutral items separately for targets and distractors across groups 33 3>x 21

List of Appendices Appendix A: Video Game Questionnaire (VES)

Emotional Memory in Video Game Players
And Non-players

Appendix B: Calculations and analyses for excluded participants Appendix C: Correlations between diffusion parameters drift and response bias

In most industrialized nations, the mass media serve as a primary source of

entertainment. American youth spend on average more than 4 hours a day with television, computers, movies, and video games (Woodard & Gridina, 2000), and violent content is
omnipresent in these types of media (Haninger & Thompson, 2004; Signorielli, 2003). Anderson

and Bushman (2001) conducted a meta-analytic review of studies investigating the effects of violent video games on aggressive behaviour, empathy, proviolence attitudes and aggressive cognitions. The results suggested that violent video games may increase aggressive thoughts, at least in the short term. However, long-term effects of media violence on subsequent cognition and behaviour have rarely been documented to date. In particular, it is not known whether long-

term exposure to media violence affects individuals' ability to attend to and remember emotional
information. In light of evidence suggesting that violent video games can cause habituation to

negative emotional content, particularly violence (Carnagey, Anderson & Bushman, 2007), it is
interesting to ask whether desensitization and its cognitive-affective consequences can be longlasting. The present study focuses on the relationship between exposure to media violence and memory for negative information. It will test the hypothesis that long-term exposure to violent video games, a particularly common form of violent media, is associated with a decline in the

emotional response to negative stimuli, and ultimately with a selective reduction in memory
performance for these stimuli.

Exposure to violent media and desensitization to violence Video games became widely available about 30 years ago and have become the fastestgrowing, and one of the most profitable, sectors of the entertainment industry, earning almost

$18 billion in the United States in 2007 alone (NDP Group, 2008). Market research data also indicate that 39% of video game players are under 18 years old (Entertainment Software Association, n.d.). The number of allegations in the media about the harmful effects of video
to support these

Affective and physiological components ofdesensitization Arousal refers to the intensity of affective experience; it can be measured using physiological indices such as skin conductance (SC) or heart rate (HR), or using subjective ratings (i.e., self-report). The findings with respect to arousal and habituation to negative stimuli are somewhat mixed. Bradley and colleagues (1993), for example, investigated the effects of repeated exposure to emotional stimuli on physiological arousal. Participants in their study
viewed a set of pleasant, unpleasant and neutral pictures repeatedly before being presented with a set of novel pictures. Both SC and HR were sensitive to valence during the habituation phase,
with emotional (pleasant and unpleasant) images eliciting a stronger arousal response than neutral images. There was also some evidence for greater arousal responses to unpleasant pictures, at least early during the habituation phase. Overall, habituation was observed for both SC and HR, and across valence levels, with the exception of the HR response to negative pictures, which persisted across presentations. Additionally, Bradley and colleagues (1996) reported that physiological measures of arousal such as heart rate actually increased after
exposure to repeated unpleasant pictures, suggesting sensitization, rather than habituation, to emotional stimuli.

claims. Some research suggests that playing games high in violent content is associated with increases in aggressive affect, aggressive thoughts, and irritability (i.e., a readiness to "explode"
with negative affect with the slightest provocation; Anderson & Bushman, 2001). Unlike television, video games are interactive. Players receive rewards for virtual violent acts and can come to identify with the character they control (Carnagey, Anderson, & Bushman, 2007). This
identification may explain why, according to recent findings (see Carnagey et al., 2007), individuals who frequently play violent video games may be particularly likely to become
desensitized to violence.

Desensitization is defined as a diminished psychological or emotional responsiveness to a stimulus after repeated exposure (Wolpe, 1982) that persists in the long term. Habituation is similar in that there is a diminished response to repeated stimuli; however, habituation effects are
short-lived and the response rebounds in the presence of novel stimuli (Bradley, Lang, & Cuthbert, 1993). It is believed that repeated exposure to real-life and entertainment violence may

More recent studies that involve video game playing and physiological arousal have evidenced either habituation or sensitization to emotional material, depending on the

alter cognitive, affective, and behavioural processes (Funk, Bechtoldt Baldacci, Pasold, &
Baumgardner, 2004) but most research has focused on emotional components (Funk, Buchman,

experimental condition. Carnagey and colleagues (2007) showed that violent video game playing resulted in a reduction in emotion-related physiological reactivity to real violence. Participants were randomly assigned to play either a violent or a non-violent video game after being assessed
for baseline HR and SC. After they played the games for 20 minutes, HR and SC were assessed again while participants watched a 10 minute video of "real-life" violent episodes: court-room

Jenks, & Bechtoldt, 2003; Funk et al., 2004) and on physiological arousal in response to
affective content (e.g., Bradley et al., 1993; Bradley, Cuthbert, & Lang, 1996; Smith, Bradley, &
Lang, 2005).

outbursts, police confrontations, shootings, or prison fights. The researchers found that, compared to participants who had played the non-violent video game, those who had played the

Repeated exposure and cognitive aspects ofdesensitization To my knowledge only two studies (e.g. Kronenberger et al., 2005; Bartholow, Bushman, Sestir, 2006) have examined how repeated exposure to violent video games affects cognitive processes. Kronenberger and colleagues (2005) compared a group of aggressive adolescents to an age-matched control group to investigate the relationship between executive functioning and media violence exposure (television and video games). Self-reports and parental
reports were utilized to measure long-term media violence exposure both in the past week and the past year. Executive functioning was measured using a number of questionnaires and tasks such as the Stroop Colour task. The researchers found a moderate negative association between

violent video game showed a smaller increase in physiological arousal during the real-life violent
episodes. Similar effects had previously been reported for exposure to violent television

(Hanratty Thomas, Horton, Lippincott, & Drabman, 1977). Carnagey and colleagues proposed
several possible explanations for their findings. They suggested that repeated exposure to violence may reduce attention to violent incidents involving others, or individuals may come to

interpret violent incidents as less serious. Alternatively, exposure may alter affective
mechanisms and change beliefs and attitudes about violence, thereby reducing sympathy for the
victim.

exposure to media violence and executive functioning in both the control group and aggressive

Recent findings reported by Staude-Muller, Bliesener and Luthman (2008) paint a

adolescents. Given that executive functioning plays a role in memory processes, these findings suggest that individuals with chronic exposure to violence may be at a disadvantage with respect
to their long-term encoding and retrieval.

slightly different picture. These researchers found that physiological reactions to aggressive
stimuli were stronger for participants who had played 20 minutes of a violent video game compared to participants who had played a non-violent version of the game, suggesting

Bartholow and colleagues (2006) measured event-related brain potentials (ERPs) during repeated exposure to violent, negative non-violent and neutral IAPS images. They were specifically interested in the P300 component, a positive-going ERP component that peaks

sensitization to aggressive images. On the other hand, physiological reactions to non-aggressive
aversive stimuli in participants who played the violent video game were significantly weaker
than those in individuals who played the non-violent version, consistent with habituation to nonaggressive aversive stimuli. The researchers also found that highly experienced video game

around 300 ms after stimulus onset. The P300 depends on the level of attention and arousal evoked by the stimulus. Its amplitude is positively related to target discriminability, whereas its
latency increases when targets are harder to discriminate from non-targets (Linden, 2005). The
P300 is thought to be an index of evaluative categorization during processing of emotionally

players reacted less strongly to aversive stimuli compared to less experienced participants, indicating that there may be a cumulative effect to emotional desensitization or an "emotional
hardening" (p. 48) due to repeated exposure to violence in video games.

relevant stimuli. To the extent that an individual is desensitized to violence, the P300 amplitude elicited by violent images should be reduced. Compared to non-violent video game players,
violent video game players did show reduced P300 amplitude and increased P300 latency to

violent images but not to equally negative non-violent images. The latency of the P300

task (Tulving, 1985), yielding separate measures of recollection and familiarity. "Remember" experiences are characterized by specific memories of feelings, thoughts or sensory details,

component is generally associated with stimulus evaluation or categorization time. The increased P300 latency among violent video game players thus indicates that it took these individuals

whereas "know" experiences are characterized by a sense of familiarity in the absence of specific
contextual recollection. Negative items were recognized more accurately and recollected more

longer to categorize violent images compared to non-players. These findings suggest that chronic
exposure to violent video games may have lasting effects on cognition and brain function.
Emotional memory

often than positive or neutral items, whereas memory for the positive pictures was comparable to memory for neutral pictures. Ochsner (2000) proposed several explanations for this negativity bias. First, there may be an attentional bias for negative stimuli which is not found for positive stimuli. Second, individuals may rehearse or elaborate negative information more than positive information. Third, negative stimuli may be encoded as survival-relevant information (e.g.,
threat-related stimuli; Ohman, 1988).

The evidence reviewed thus far suggests that repeated exposure to entertainment violence
may alter cognitive, affective, and behavioural processes (see also Funk et al., 2004). However,

most research has focused on emotional rather than cognitive aspects, and no studies have examined how repeated exposure to violent media affects long-term memory, specifically
memory for emotional content.

Dewhurst and Parry (2000) reported similar results in a study of the effects of emotion on recollective experience. In Experiment 1, negative and neutral words were presented in random intermixed order (i.e., mixed list presentation) and memory for the words was tested using a remember/know task. Participants made more correct "remember" and "know" responses to negative words than to neutral words, suggesting that negative words were both better recollected and more familiar than neutral words. In a second experiment, negative and neutral words were presented in separate lists (i.e., purely negative or purely neutral). The effects of emotional valence observed in Experiment 1 were eliminated when emotional and neutral items were presented in separate pure lists rather than intermixed. The distinctiveness-fluency

Memory for highly emotional positive and negative events such as a wedding day or the death of a loved one is typically far superior to that for less emotional events, such as breakfast
yesterday (Reisberg & Heuer, 1992). Enhanced memory for emotional information has been

reported many times (for a review, see Hamann, 2001) although it has not been uniformly
supported (e.g., Aupee, 2007; Budson et al., 2006; Dougal & Rotello, 2007; Maratos, Allen, &

Rugg, 2000; Windmann & Kutas, 2001). Nevertheless, there is widespread consensus that both valence and arousal can affect the memorability of emotional information (Kensinger & Corkin, 2004). Of particular interest in the current context is the "negativity bias" - the finding that
humans attend to and remember negative information better than neutral or positive information
(e.g. Dewhurst & Perry, 2000; Ochsner, 2000; Kensinger & Schacter, 2006).

framework (Rajaram, 1996) states that recollection-dependent "remember" responses are boosted by variables that enhance the distinctiveness of the to-be remembered items--they stand out
relative to the neutral word background. These results thus suggest that the negativity bias

In one of the early studies of emotional memory, Ochsner (2000) compared memory for negative, neutral, and positive images. Recognition memory was tested using a remember/know

observed for mixed lists may be due to the distinctiveness of negative items. When these items
are presented in pure lists, the distinctiveness is reduced, thereby eliminating the negativity bias.
Building on the distinctiveness findings, Talmi, Luk, McGarry, and Moscovitch (2007)

that younger adults exhibit a "negativity bias" in memory for emotional information. This

negativity effect is demonstrated by better accuracy and shorter reaction times for negatively
valenced material. One way to analyse memory accuracy is using signal detection theory which
is detailed in the next section.
Signal Detection Theory

investigated the roles of semantic relatedness and distinctiveness in the negativity effect. Negative images, semantically-unrelated neutral images and semantically-related neutral images from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1997) were

Experiments with binary decision tasks often analyse data using signal detection theory

utilized as stimuli. Memory for emotional items was better than memory for neutral items when

(Green & Swets, 1966) which provides separate measures of sensitivity and response bias. Sensitivity refers to the ability to discriminate between stimulus classes (e.g., old and new
stimuli in an old-new recognition task; Macmillan & Creelman, 2005). Response bias refers to a

these items were presented in mixed lists. However, when pure lists were presented and both
relatedness and distinctiveness were controlled, emotional items were no longer significantly
better remembered than neutral items. When only distinctiveness was controlled for, the

preference for one response over the other (e.g., a tendency to respond "old" in an old-new recognition task; Macmillan & Creelman, 2005). Separating sensitivity and response bias is of
interest because it clarifies the mechanisms underlying the effects of emotion on memory. However, a rigorous application of signal detection theory requires analysis of receiveroperating-characteristic (ROC) curves, which are obtained by plotting hit and false alarm rates

negativity effect reappeared, suggesting that higher distinctiveness and relatedness of emotional items in combination may be responsible for the effect of emotion on memory. Alternatively, Talmi et al. (2007) suggest that pure-list presentation could have desensitized participants so that
they were no longer aroused by negative pictures presented in late serial positions. In other words, the memory differences found between the mixed-list and pure-list conditions may have
resulted not from differences in distinctiveness, but from desensitization in the pure-list condition. This view implies that emotional arousal is the factor that drives immediate memory
enhancement. As described earlier, however, the evidence for habituation of arousal responses
during repeatedly presented emotional material is mixed.

across multiple levels of recognition confidence. Studies using this approach have suggested that

enhanced memory for positive and negative stimuli may be due to a more liberal response bias (i.e., a tendency to respond "old") for emotional items compared with neutral items (Dougal & Rotello, 2007; Kapucu, Rotello, Ready, & Seidl, 2008; see also Budson et al., 2006; Windmann
&Kutas, 2001).

In sum, very little research on desensitization to violence has focused on the possible

One problem with signal-detection analysis is that it only takes into account memory

effects on cognitive processes. To my knowledge, no research has examined how repeated exposure to violent media affects memory, and specifically memory for emotional content. It is

accuracy and not reaction time (RT) data. The simultaneous analyses of both accuracy and RT may be more telling of the entire decision making process. Reaction time could be especially

generally accepted that memory for emotional information is better than neutral information and

interesting to examine in the VG player population because these individuals may show faster responding due to their sharp motor skills (see Messaris & Humphreys, 2004, for a review).
The temporal aspect of memory retrieval can be captured with sequential-sampling

detection theory (Green & Swets, 1966), can be manipulated experimentally, for example, via response-specific payoffs (Voss, Rothermund, & Voss, 2004). Boundary separation (parameter a) is the distance between the lower and upper

models, such as Ratcliff s (1978) diffusion model. This class of models is well suited to binary

boundaries and indicates how much information is required on average before a decision is made. Experimental manipulations such as speed-accuracy instructions can affect boundary separation. When accuracy is emphasized, the boundaries are set far apart, so that accuracy is
high but reaction times are long. When speed is emphasized, boundaries are moved closer together resulting in shorter response times, but the accumulation process is now more likely to hit the wrong boundary by accident, which lowers accuracy. The drift rate (parameter v) is the rate at which information accumulates towards either the upper or the lower boundary. Once a boundary is reached, the decision process ends and a response is given (i.e., button press). A positive drift rate drives the decision process toward the upper boundary, as illustrated in the example by the single arrow pointing up,

decision making. The main assumption is that information is accumulated over time toward one
of two decision criteria, and that this evidence accumulation-process is noisy. The model takes

into account all aspects of the experiment data, including both correct and error RTs, full
distributions of RTs, and the probabilities of correct versus error responses (Ratcliff, 1985;
Ratcliff & Tuerlinckx, 2002). The Diffusion Model

The diffusion model assumes that RTs in two-choice decisions can be broken down into
two components: nondecisional processes involved in stimulus perception and motor response

(model parameter t0), and decisional processes. Figure 1 illustrates the process underlying the
decisional RT component. In the example, the decision involves discrimination between two
stimulus categories, A (upper boundary) and B (lower boundary).

whereas a negative drift rate drives the decision process toward the lower boundary. Drift rate captures the strength or quality of the retrieved information, and is similar to signal detection parameter d\ Unlike d\ however, drift depends on both accuracy and speed. Steeper (i.e., larger) drift rates are associated with higher accuracy and shorter reaction times. Within-trial variability in drift, illustrated by the jagged lines, contributes to the probability of error responses (Ratcliff & Tuerlinckx, 2002). This variability in drift rate leads to

The decision process moves from a starting point (parameter z) toward either of two

response boundaries. The position of the starting point z between the boundaries can introduce

response bias. If, for example, z is closer to the upper boundary the individual favours "A" responses whereas if z is closer to the lower boundary, a bias for "B" responses results.

Variability in position of the starting point (sz) reflects the inability to hold the starting point of
the accumulation of information constant across trials. Large values of sz are associated with fast error responses. The starting point, conceptually similar to the response bias parameter in signal-

distributions of finishing times (i.e., RT distributions). One distribution for correct RTs (to
Category A items) is shown on the top of Figure 1, and one distribution for error RTs (to Category A items) is illustrated on the bottom of the figure. During accumulation of information,
drift varies across trials with a standard deviation of sv.

necessary for emotional enhancement of memory. I chose brightness judgments as an incidental
Correct RT
distribution

encoding task to ensure that participants stayed engaged while viewing the images without

(A items)/

explicitly focusing on a later memory test, or on the valence and arousal dimensions. Like other
Response "A"
Sample path 2
Sample path 1

researchers (for a review see Anderson & Bushman, 2001) I chose video games players as a

population in which to study the effects of long-term exposure to media violence. Violent video
games are extremely popular among the undergraduate student population, and are played over long periods of time, often with high frequency (i.e., daily). Undergraduate students are an

accessible group with varying degrees of exposure to violent video games, making comparisons
Sample path 3

between groups possible.

Response "B*
Error RT distribution (A items)

VG players were age and gender matched to a non-playing control group. All participants

completed questionnaires assessing personality and mood. Although much research has assessed links between aggression and video game playing, as noted above, to my knowledge no studies

Figure I. The Diffusion Model (Ratcliff, 1978; diagram from Spaniol, Madden, & Voss, 2006).
Illustration of the diffusion process for the classification of a Category-A item into Category A

have looked at other personality characteristics that could be associated with video game playing. Personality characteristics and mood were measured for both general research interest and to explore their role in potential group differences on the dependent measures listed below.
Measures and hypotheses

or Category B. The decision process starts at point z and moves toward the upper boundary or lower boundary by a drift rate v. In this example, "A" response corresponds to the upper (and correct) boundary a, and is driven by a positive drift rate. Three sample paths are illustrated with responses 1 and 2 ending in a correct response at the upper boundary ("A") but path 3 drifts
toward the lower boundary 0, ending in an incorrect response "B". RT= reaction time.

Accuracy and reaction time. The sensitivity index d' (Green & Swets, 1966) served as an
estimate of memory accuracy, d was calculated from each participant's hit and false alarm rates

The Present Study

on the recognition test. A 2 (VG player vs. non-player) x 4 (negative vs. violent vs. positive vs.

To date no research has studied the effects of long-term exposure to violent media on
long-term memory. The goal of the present study was to determine whether long-term exposure

neutral) repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was utilized to determine whether

group differences in memory accuracy were present, and whether these differed as a function of
valence. Correct reaction times were submitted to a similar analysis.

to violent media is associated with reduced memory for negative stimuli. An incidental encoding
task (brightness judgments) was used during the study phase, and an old-new recognition task was used during the test phase. Ochsner (2000) found that explicit encoding of affect is not

Based on the desensitization research reviewed above, I predicted that violent video game players would show a reduced negativity effect, that is, lower accuracy and longer reaction times for recognition of negative images, compared to a control group of non-players. This prediction was derived from the finding that violent video game playing reduces physiological arousal
during the encoding of negative stimuli (Carnagey et al., 2007; Staude-Muller et al., 2008). To
players was an open question.

Drift rate. As noted above, drift refers to the rate of approach to a particular boundary, with steeper (i.e., larger) drift rates indicating more efficient categorization of stimuli. "Old" responses are driven toward the upper boundary, which is assigned a positive value, and "new"
responses are driven toward the lower boundary, which is assigned a negative value. As a result
is arbitral

the extent that the negativity bias in long-term memory is caused by arousal during encoding,
reduced arousal should lead to a reduction in subsequent memory for negative information. The findings by Staude-Muller and colleagues additionally suggest that exposure to violent media

are expected to elicit negative drift rates. To allow a meaningful comparison of target and distractor drift rates, as well as group and valence effects on drift, the distractor drift rates were sign-reversed before being entered into the analyses. Based on the desensitization hypothesis, I predicted that VG players, compared to non-players, would have smaller drift rates for
negatively valenced items.
Method
Participants

may cause selective sensitization to violent stimuli. I therefore also examined the possibility of
selectively enhanced memory accuracy for violent stimuli in VG players.

The diffusion model. Diffusion modelling was used to assess accuracy and RT

simultaneously rather than separately as described above. The diffusion parameters also allow for an examination of a possible response bias for emotional stimuli. There were too few observations in the violent category (28 images) to reliably estimate separate diffusion models for this category, thus the violent and negative non-violent stimuli were collapsed into a single
"negative" category for the purpose of these analyses.

A total of 134 undergraduate students, recruited from the Ryerson psychology participant pool, participated in return for partial course credit. All procedures were approved by the Ryerson Ethics Board. Participants provided written consent and completed a health questionnaire assessing a history of brain or head injuries, psychiatric illnesses, use of medication, and current depression. Eight participants were excluded from analysis because of responses on the health assessment. Four other participants were excluded because they chose to discontinue the study before completion, resulting in a total of 122 eligible participants (20 male and 97 female). The median age of the sample was 19.0 years, with a range from 17 to 38 years.

Response bias. To calculate response bias, the starting point parameter (z) is divided by

the response boundary separation (a). A value ofz/a greater than .5 indicates a bias toward the
upper boundary and a value of zla lower than .5 indicates a bias toward the lower boundary.
Based on some previous literature (Kapucu et al., 2008; Spaniol, Voss, & Grady, 2008) I

predicted that emotional stimuli, and negative stimuli in particular, would elicit a more liberal

response bias, such that participants overall would be more likely to say "old" to these items.

Of the 122 participants, 45 had a least some video game playing experience and 77 did not have
any video game playing experience within the last six months.
Means ofall questionnaire datafor VG-Players and Non-Players
VG Player
Characteristic Age (years)
Age range

The 122 eligible participants were separated into two matched groups based on age and gender (if possible): 45 video game players (VG players) and 45 non-players. Matching was done to create two groups of equal size, thus 32 non-players were excluded from the following
analyses. Characteristics of the matched groups are presented in Table 1. Note that the mean

Non-Player

(N=45)
20.5 (3.5)

(N=45)

20.7 (4.2)

violence exposure score (VES) for non-players is 0 and the average for VG players is 19.5 (with
a range from 2 to 79), a statistically significant difference, /(88) = 9.66, p < .001. Non-players

Sex (male) Sex (female) Negative mood
13.3(4.5)

13.5(4.1)
27.9 (5.6) 75.4(14.2)

oftheNEO, /(88) = 2.10, p = .039, and /(88) = 2.55, p = .013 respectively; however the two
groups did not significantly differ on any other personality characteristics.
Questionnaires

Positive mood

30.5* (6.3)
69.9(18.3)

76.8(17.0)
TAS-20

76.8(21.9)
45.9(11.0)

Violent video game exposure was assessed with a video game inventory with a test-retest

46.7(11.6)

reliability (a) of .86 (Anderson & Dill, 2000). Participants are asked to name up to 5 of their
favourite video games, and to rate on a Likert scale of 1-7 the frequency with which they play
each game, as well as the violence of content and graphics. A violence exposure score (VES)
Neuroticism

19.5* (13.5)
21.9* (12.4) 25.9 (8.7)
29.5 (8.2) 15.4(11.6)

Extraversion
Openness

28.6 (8.2)
28.3 (5.8)

was computed for each participant by summing the content and graphics ratings, multiplying the result by the frequency rating, and averaging over the number of listed games (see Appendix A).
Higher scores indicate a higher degree of exposure to violence.

Agreeableness Conscientiousness

30.2 (7.6)
32.6 (6.0)

30.4 (5.7) 32.6 (6.7)

Note: Negative mood and positive mood are Positive and Negative Affect Schedule scores. AQ
1. As mentioned in the introduction, personality and mood assessments were included to explore whether

Aggression Questionnaire. IS = Irritability Questionnaire. TAS-20 = 20 item Toronto Alexithymia Scale. VES = Violence Exposure Score from the video game questionnaire.

VG players would differ from non-players on these variables. They were also included to test whether personality and mood could account for potential group differences on the dependent measures. Since
there were no effects of group on any of the measures of interest, the personality and mood variables were
not used as covariates.

Neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness are from the revised
NEO Five-Factor Inventory.

* Significant group differences p<.05. Standard Deviations are in parentheses.

To assess individual differences on irritability and aggression, the Irritability Scale (IS;
Caprara et al., 1985) and Buss and Perry's (1992) Aggression Questionnaire (AQ) were

Stimuli and Apparatus

The stimuli included 100 positive, 100 negative and 80 neutral images from the IAPS

administered. The IS contains items such as "Sometimes when I am angry I lose control over my actions". Responses are made on scales anchored at 1 (This doesn 't characterize me at all) and 5 (This characterizes me very well). The AQ contains 4 subscales, labelled Physical Aggression (9 items; a = .78; e.g., "I have threatened people I know"), Verbal Aggression (5 items; a = .85; e.g., "I often find myself disagreeing with people"), Anger (7 items; a = .84; e.g., "I have trouble
controlling my temper"), and Hostility (8 items; a = .77; e.g., "Other people always seem to get

(Lang et al, 1997). Twenty additional neutral images were added from another source (Spaniol et
al., 2008), to ensure similar levels of semantic relatedness within each valence category. The 20 additional images contained people or faces in order to match emotional images on this semantic
category. The mean valence of IAPS norms at each level of valence were significantly different

from each other, F(2,299) = 1294.61, p < .001, MSE = 487.54, n2= .90, with negative, neutral
and positive images receiving average ratings of 2.69, 5.07, and 7.10, respectively. Arousal ratings for the positive (M = 5.58) and negative (M = 5.73) images did not differ significantly, but were both significantly higher than arousal ratings for neutral images (M = 3.55), F(2, 299) =

the breaks"). Responses are made on scales anchored at 1 (Extremely uncharacteristic of me) and
6 (Extremely characteristic ofme).

To explore the possibility that video game playing is associated with personality

9.50, p < .001, MSE = 148.28, r\2 = .060.
The negative images were categorized as either violent (N = 28) or non-violent (N = 72).

characteristics that may affect emotional memory, participants completed several personality measures, including the 60-item NEO Five-Factor Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1989). The
measure has five subscales measuring different personality characteristics: Neuroticism,
Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness. The 20-item Toronto

Images were considered violent if they portrayed aggressive behaviour, signs of physical abuse,
attacks and intimidation or intentional acts causing harm to another living being. There was no

significant difference in IAPS valence norms between violent (M = 2.55) and negative non violent (M = 2.75) images, /(98) = 1.395, p = .166. IAPS arousal norms, however, were significantly higher for violent images (M = 6.09) than for non-violent images (M = 5.60). The assignment of specific stimuli to target or distractor status was counterbalanced

Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20; Taylor, Bagby, Ryan, & Parker, 1990) was also administered. Lower scores on this scale indicate less possibility or a smaller degree of alexithymia, defined as
the inability to identify one's own emotions or the emotions of others. Current mood was assessed using the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988) to investigate the possibility that pre-existing negative or

across participants. To this end, two lists were created. For half of the participants, List 1 images
served as targets and List 2 images served as distractors; the other half of the participants

positive mood states affected participants' responses on the memory test. High scores on these
scales indicate strong current positive and negative affect, respectively.

received the reverse assignment. The lists were equated for average IAPS valence norms, as well
as for semantic content. Matching for semantic content was accomplished by categorizing the

images by semantic category (e.g., animals, faces, inanimate objects). The average valence

scores of the two lists (Mi = 4.99 and M2 = 4.91) were not significantly different, /(298) = .401,/? = .689, nor were the average arousal scores (Mi = 5.11 and M2= 4.79), f(298) = .701,/? = .484.

During the 1-hour retention interval, participants completed the personality assessments,

including the NEO and TAS, IS and AQ, on the computer. During the subsequent recognition test, participants viewed the 150 target images and 150 distractor images, presented in a random intermixed order. Participants used the "X" and "," keys to indicate old-new. The assignment of response keys to the two responses was counterbalanced across participants. Each stimulus
remained onscreen for up to 5s or until a response was made. Following the recognition test,

Additionally, the negative images and positive images were not significantly different from each
other on arousal levels, /(198) = .228, p = .820, across the two lists and within each list.
The experimental task was created in E-Prime (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.).

Stimulus presentation was controlled by a Toshiba laptop with a viewing distance of approximately 50 cm. All study and test stimuli appeared in the centre of the screen against a
black background. Procedure

participants were shown all 300 images again and provided arousal ratings using the SelfAssessment Manikin (Bradley, Greenwald, & Hamm, 1993) on a 5-point scale. Following the arousal ratings participants completed the VES if they indicated that they had played video
games in the last 6 months. Results

The experimental session included a study phase, a filled retention interval, and a

recognition test. Participants were told that they were completing a study investigating the effect of emotion on brightness perception and were unaware that their memory for the images would
be tested later. Prior to the study phase, the health questionnaire and the PANAS were

The following analyses include only the 90 matched participants, 45 VG players and 45 non-players. Analyses of brightness judgments, accuracy, and reaction time are presented first
using analysis of variance (ANOVA) to detect significant main effects or interactions of group

completed. During the study phase, participants viewed a series of 156 images. The order of the
images was randomized with the exception of the first 6 stimuli, which were identical for all participants and served as practice items that were excluded from the analyses. Each trial started with a fixation cross lasting 750 ms, followed by a 500-ms pause, and a 2-s picture stimulus.

and valence on the behavioural measures. Analyses of the diffusion parameters are presented next. The subsequent section, Supplementary Analyses, includes only 44 participants: 22 VG

players with the highest VES scores and their 22 matched controls. Analyses on the 32 excluded
participants are presented in Appendix B. Incidental findings from the analysis of the diffusion

After the image was presented, participants were asked to rate its brightness on a 7-point scale. Participants were instructed that on this scale, a 1 (not at all bright) corresponds to the amount of
light given off by a small night light in a very large room at night, a 7 (very bright) corresponds to the amount of light present on a sunny, cloudless day (Ochsner, 2000). Immediately following
the response, the next trial started.

model parameters involving the entire sample are reported in Appendix C.
Brightness judgments

The brightness judgments were submitted to a 2 x 4 mixed analysis of variance

(ANOVA) with group (VG player vs. non-player) as the between-subjects variable and valence

(violent vs. negative vs. positive vs. neutral) as the within-subjects variable. Mauchly's test

indicated that the assumption of sphericity was violated for valence, X2(5) = 170.43, p < .001,
therefore degrees of freedom were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity,
8 = .47. The only significant effect was a main effect of valence, F(1.41, 124.41) = 102.83, p <

negative and violent images were significantly longer than those for positive and neutral images.
RTs were also significantly longer for positive images than for neutral images (see Figure 3).

.001, MSE = 67.91, r\2= .539. Pairwise comparisons revealed that participants rated negative

images and violent images as less bright than neutral and positive images and neutral as less
bright than positive. Refer to Figure 2 for the means of these brightness judgments.

00

550

negative

violent

neutral

positive

Valence

Figure 3. Median of the brightness judgment reaction times across groups. Error bars represent
the standard errors.

negative

violent

neutral

positive
Accuracy

Valence

To examine memory sensitivity in the old-new recognition task, the signal-detection

Figure 2. Means of brightness judgment responses across groups. Error bars represent the
standard errors.

index d' (Green & Swets, 1966) was calculated. Hit rates, false alarm rates and cP for VG players and non-players are presented in Table 2. A 2 x 4 mixed ANOVA was performed on d' with
group (VG player vs. non-player) as a between-subjects variable and valence (negative vs. violent vs. neutral vs. positive) as a within-subjects variable. Group and valence did not interact

Brightness judgment RTs were submitted to a 2 x 4 mixed ANOVA. Mauchly's test

indicated that sphericity was violated for valence, X2(5) = 60.64, p < .001, therefore degrees of
freedom were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity, s = .71. Again, only the effect of valence on RT was significant, F(2.115, 186.13) = 12.12, p < .001, MSE =

significantly, F(3, 264) = .696,/? = .555, MSE = .155, r|2= .008. Contrary to the hypothesis, VG
players did not show reduced sensitivity for negative non-violent images, nor did they show
increased sensitivity for violent images. In addition, there was no main effect of valence, F(3,

153546.58, r|2= .121. Pairwise comparisons revealed that the brightness judgment RTs for

264) = 1.455, p = .227, MSE = .323, rj2 = .016, nor a main effect of group F(l, 88) = 1.514,/?

The number of violent images (N = 28) may have been too low to provide a reliable measure of memory sensitivity for this class of items. I therefore conducted an additional

.222, MSE = .1.598, ti2=.017.
Table 2

analysis, collapsing violent and negative non-violent scores into a single "negative" valence category. Again there was no significant interaction of group and valence on d\ F(2, 176) =

Hit Rates, False Alarm Rates andd' in VG Players and Non-players for all levels of Valence

.082,/? = .921, MSE = .014, ti2 = .001, nor a main effect of valence, F(2, 176) = 2.372,/? = .096,
VG Player Non-player Negative

VG Player

Non-player

MSE = .4O5,r|2=.O26.
Reaction Time

HR

.74

.77

.12

.13

RT data for correct responses (both hits and correct rejections) are presented in Table
3. Mauchly's tests indicated that the assumption of sphericity was violated for both hits and

correct rejections, X2(5) = 86.550,/? < .001, and X2(5) = 61.32,/? < .001, respectively. Degrees of
Violent

freedom were therefore corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity, s = .60 and
s = .7O.

The Hit results show, contrary to hypotheses, that neither the main effect of group,

F(l, 88) = 1.295,/? = .258, MSE = 156562.66 r\2= .015, nor the interaction of group and valence
Neutral

were significant, F(l.806, 158.963) = 1.129,/? = .338, MSE = 17605.426, ti2= .013. VG players
were not slower than the non-players in their recognition of violent images or any other types of
images. However, there was a significant main effect of valence, F(1.806, 158.963) = 12.02,

p < .001, MSE = 187525.319, r|2= .120. Pairwise comparisons revealed that the RT for violent
Positive

images was significantly longer than for all other types of images. In addition, RTs for negative

and positive images were significantly longer than those for neutral images. Figure 4 shows the
median RTs for hits at each level of valence.

Note: HR = hit rate; FAR = false alarm rate.

Table 3

Median Reaction Times for Hits and Correct Rejections (in ms) for VG players and Non-players
at all levels of Valence

VG Players

Non-players
Negative

VG Players

Non-players

Violent

negative

violent

neutral

positive

Valence
Figure 4. Median reaction time for correctly identified target items at each level of valence
across groups. Error bars represent the standard errors.

Neutral

Correct rejection RTs showed no significant interaction of valence and group,
Positive

F(2.110, 185.668) = .138,/? = .882, MSE = 1757.584, r|2= .002, nor a main effect of group,
F(\, 88) = 2.598,/? = .111, MSE = 359987.38, r|2= .029. The main effect of valence was again

significant, F(2A 10, 185.668) = 67.548,/? < .001, MSE = 862354.225, t\2 = .434. Pairwise
Note: Hit= correctly identifying target as "old"; CR= correct reject of distractor item as "old
comparisons revealed that RTs at each level of valence were significantly different from all others. Correct rejection RTs were longest for violent images, followed by negative, positive,
and neutral images (see Fig. 5).

1200
1150

(i.e., the new boundary in the old-new recognition task), and the other is associated with the upper boundary (i.e., the old boundary in the old-new recognition task). A negative sign is arbitrarily assigned to the lower boundary RT distribution (i.e., new responses) and the two
distributions are concatenated to form a single distribution with negative and positive RT ranges

(see Fig. 1). A single KS test can then be used to assess model fit.
Parameters of the model were estimated using the fast-dm program (Voss & Voss,

2007). Separate drift rates (v) were estimated for targets and distractors at each level of valence (neutral, negative, positive). Separate starting values (z) were estimated at each level of valence,
negative violent neutral positive

as well as non-decision time (to), boundary separation (a), and variance in non-decision time (st),

Valence

starting point (sz) and drift rate (sv), for a total of 14 parameters per participant. As noted earlier,
there were too few violent stimuli for reliable diffusion model analysis, so three levels of valence

Figure 5. Median reaction time for correct rejection of distractor items at each level of valence
across groups. Error bars represent the standard errors.

were created by collapsing across the negative non-violent and violent categories.
Model Fit

Diffusion Models

Of the 90 participants included in this analysis, 25 participants had poor model fit (i.e.,/? < .05). One possible cause of model misfit is a low error rate. Indeed, there was a

To estimate the parameters of the diffusion model, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS)

test statistic Twas used to optimize the fit between the predicted and the empirical RT

significant correlation (r = .29, p = .01) between the false alarm rate for negative items and the model fit index (significance value/?), indicating that participants with fewer false alarms to negative items tended to have worse model fit. All analyses were calculated both with and

distributions (see Voss et al., 2004). T indicates the maximal vertical distance between the empirical cumulative RT distribution and the RT distribution predicted by the model. A small T statistic indicates good fit since the difference between the empirical and predicted distributions
is small, whereas a large Tstatistic (i.e.,/? < .05) signals a large discrepancy between the two
distributions that likely did not come about by chance.

without the 25 participants with poor model fit and the trend in results remained consistent. All
90 participants were therefore included in the analyses reported next.
Model Parameters

To estimate the diffusion parameters using the KS test as optimization criterion, two

Group and overall means of the diffusion parameters are presented in Table 4. The groups did not differ on nondecision time, /(88) = -1.176,/? = .243 or boundary separation, ^(88)

theoretical cumulative RT distributions need to be simultaneously fitted to two empirical
cumulative RT distributions. One distribution is associated with the lower response boundary

= -1.078,/? = .284. The variability of nondecision time (s,) did differ between groups /(88) - -

Table 4

2.049,/? = .043, as did starting point variability (s2) /(88) = 2.884,/? = .005. The variability in
drift rate (sv) did not show any significant group differences, /(88) = -1.032,/? = .305.
Response bias. The placement of the starting point relative to the response

Means of the Diffusion Parameter Values
VG player
0.69 (0.46)

Non-player 0.61 (0.10) 1.76(0.35)

Overall

boundaries, z/a, served as a measure of response bias, z/a values greater than .5 indicate a bias toward the response associated with the upper boundary (i.e., "old"), whereas values of z/a lower than .5 indicate a bias toward the response associated with the lower boundary (i.e., "new").
Mauchly's test showed the assumption of sphericity to be violated for valence, X (5) - 15.975,

1.84(0.36)

1.07(0.28)

1.02(0.25)

1.02 (0.39)
1.04(0.28)

0.88(0.31)
0.99 (0.24)

p < .001, so degrees of freedom were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity, 8 = .86. There was no significant Group x Valence interaction, F(\ .713, 150.717) =
1.773,/? = .178, MSE = .018, rf = .020, but as predicted, a significant effect of valence on

0.82 (0.64)

0.94 (0.68)

response bias was present across groups, F(1.713, 150.717) = 9.221,/? = .001, MSE - .093,

0.73 (0.96)

1.11 (0.91)
0.99 (0.92)

r|2= .095. Participants were more liberal in their responses (i.e., more likely to respond "old") to
negative items and positive items compared to neutral items. Figure 6 shows response bias means at each level of valence. One-sample t-tests indicated that response bias for negative and positive stimuli was significantly greater than .5, /(89) = 9.664,/? < .001, f(89) = 6.455,/? < .001,
whereas response bias was not significantly different from .5 for neutral stimuli, /(89) - 1.530,
/? = .130.

0.92 (0.80)

-1.57(0.60) -2.10(1.12) -1.62(0.90) 0.27(0.14)

-1.68(0.62) -2.10(1.06) -1.89(0.84)

0.22(0.10) 0.61 (0.22) 0.48 (0.28)

0.45 (0.28) 0.54 (0.30)

Note. Standard Deviations are in parentheses. Neg = negative; Neu = neutral; Pos - positive.
Overall refers to the means across groups.

1.36) compared with neutral items (M = 1.51), F(1.774, 156.079) = 13.029,/? < .001, MSE =

3.076, r|2= .129. A main effect of status was also present, with drift rates significantly lower for
target items (M = 0.92) than for distractor items (M = 1.83), F(\, 88) = 100.85,/? < .001, MSE =
m 0.55

111.314, r\2= .534. Finally, the Status x Valence interaction was significant, F(\.88, 165.55) =

7.70, MSE = 3.61, p = .001, rj2= .080. Pairwise comparisons revealed that neutral distractors
elicited significantly higher drift rates than negative or positive distractors (see Figure 7).

negative

positive

neutral

Valence
Figure 6. Mean values of response bias {zla) for negative, positive, and neutral images across
Distractors

groups. Error bars represent the standard errors. Values above .5 (see dotted line) indicate a bias to classify items as "old", whereas values below .5 indicate a bias to classify items as "new".
Targets

Drift rates: Effects ofgroup, status and valence. The assignment of "old" responses

to the upper boundary and "new" responses to the lower boundary is arbitrary, resulting in positive average target drift and negative average distractor drift estimates. The following
negative positive

neutral

analyses therefore used sign-reversed drift rate estimates. These drift rates were submitted to a
2x2x3 ANOVA with group (VG player vs. non-player) as the between subjects variable and status (distractor vs. target) and valence (neutral vs. negative vs. positive) as the within subjects
variables. There were no significant effects of group or Group x Valence on drift rates, contrary

Valence

Figure 7. Mean drift rates for negative, positive, and neutral items separately for targets and
distractors across groups. Error bars represent the standard errors.

to the hypothesis. Mauchly's test indicated that the assumption of sphericity was violated for

Arousal Ratings

valence, X2(2) = 11.88,/? = .003. Therefore degrees of freedom were corrected using
Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity (e = .88). Across groups, a main effect of valence

Mean arousal ratings for each group are presented in Table 5. Two participants'

arousal ratings were not recorded because of equipment failure. A 2 x 4 ANOVA was conducted
on the arousal ratings with group (VG player vs. non-player) as the between subjects variable

was found, with drift rates significantly lower for negative (M = 1.25) and positive items (M =

and valence (violent vs. negative vs. positive vs. neutral) as the within subjects variable.

that included only the VG players (N = 22) with VES scores above the median and an equal number of matched non-players. No significant effects of group emerged on any of the dependent measures. The main effect of valence on d' remained non-significant, indicating

*, X2(5)
79.095,/? = .001. Therefore degrees of freedom were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity (e = .67). There was a main effect of valence on arousal, F(2.011,

memory for emotional items was not better than neutral across groups. Collapsing across violent
and negative non-violent to create a single category of "negative" also did not elicit an effect of

172.958) = 303.973,p < .001, MSE = 90.11, r|2= 0.779, such that violent images were rated as
the most arousing (M = 3.47), followed by negative images (M = 3.21) which in turn were rated as more arousing that positive (M = 2.47) and neutral images (M = 1.63). VG players did not

valence on d'.
Because of the nature of the VES, it is possible for people who play non-violent

differ from non-players in their arousal ratings, F(l, 86) = 1.097,/? = .298, rj2 = 0.013.

video games frequently to end up with a high score. A sample of 18 VG players with high exposure to violent video games in particular and their matched controls were submitted to this

Table 5

same 2x4 ANOVA on dand the results remained non-significant. The main effect of valence on reaction time remained consistent with the trend observed in the matched group data for hits
Non players

Mean Arousal Ratings for VG players and Non players
Type of Image Violent VG Players 3.31 (0.74) 3.59 (0.95)
2.51 (0.75)

and correct rejections: Violent stimuli were categorized slowest and neutral stimuli fastest. Of the 44 extreme group participants, 16 had poor model fit (p < .05) and 28 had

3.12(0.71) 3.35 (0.83) 2.44 (0.78) 1.60(0.39)

Negative
Positive

good model fit. The groups did not differ on any diffusion model parameters. The main effect of
valence on response bias did not remain significant when restricting the sample to extreme groups. The Status x Valence interaction on drift rate remained significant, again revealing that

Neutral

1.65(0.47)

Note. Standard deviations are in parentheses.

neutral distractors evoked significantly higher drift rates than emotional distractors.

Supplementary Analyses

Discussion

In the analyses reported so far, the group variable (VG player vs. non-player) was

VG players were age and gender matched to a group of non-player controls but no significant group differences emerged on any of the dependent measures. Furthermore, the data did not support the prediction of a negativity bias in memory, in either group. Valence did not affect memory sensitivity, and the RTs for hits and correct rejections were significantly longer

not associated with any significant effects. To rule out the possibility that group differences had
been "washed out" by the inclusion of VG players with low VES scores, a median split (Md: 19.0) was performed on the VES scores among VG players. I then conducted additional analyses

(not shorter) for negative stimuli. As has been recently shown in the literature, emotional material did elicit a more liberal response bias compared to neutral material. A somewhat perplexing interaction on drift rate indicated that neutral distractors were processed more efficiently than emotional distractors, although this was not true of target items. Finally, participants were better at identifying evidence in favour of a "new" response than they were at
identifying evidence in favour of an "old" response.
Accuracy and RT analyses

pornographic in nature and participants may have been reluctant or embarrassed to assign high

ratings to these images. This potentially lower arousal experience of positive images did not ultimately seem to affect the accuracy for positive images since there was no significant
difference in accuracy between positive and negative images. In addition to no group differences, there was also no main effect of valence on memory accuracy. Contrary to the hypothesis, memory for negative stimuli was not significantly better

than memory for positive or neutral stimuli. Although some previous research has found an effect of valence on memory, and a negativity effect in particular (Kensinger & Corkin, 2003;
Mather, Shafir, & Johnson, 2000; Ochsner, 2000), null effects have also been reported (e.g., Dougal & Rotello, 2007; Maratos et al., 2000; Kensinger & Corkin, 2003, Experiment 5;
Windmann & Kutas, 2001).

Accuracy. It has previously been shown that violent video game playing reduces

physiological arousal during the encoding of non-violent negative stimuli (Carnagey et al., 2007; Staude-Muller et al., 2008), whereas it may increase physiological arousal during the
encoding of violent stimuli (Staude-Muller et al., 2008). I therefore hypothesized that VG players would show reduced arousal and reduced recognition accuracy for negative non-violent stimuli.

There are several possible reasons for the absence of a valence effect on accuracy. Overall memory performance was high, and the retention period between study and test was short (i.e., one hour). Kensinger and Corkin (2003) found that the negative images were better recalled than neutral images only after a 1-2 day delay between study and test. In the same study, emotional content had no effect on the accuracy of working memory performance during an nback task, although there was an effect of emotion on speed of processing, with slower responses to fearful faces than to neutral faces. Part of the enhancement of emotional information in longterm memory could result from a modulation of consolidation processes. Emotional content, and more specifically, emotionally arousing information, may be more frequently consolidated than neutral information so that emotional memory enhancement increases over time (Cahill, et al.,

Additionally, I predicted the reverse finding (increased arousal and recognition accuracy) for violent images in particular. Neither of these hypotheses was supported; there were no significant effects of group, valence, or their interaction, on d'. The same result was obtained when only VG
players with high scores on the VES scale were included.

The hypothesis of a Group x Valence effect on memory sensitivity was contingent on

differences in arousal between VG players and non-players. Analysis of the self-reported arousal ratings, however, showed no significant differences between the groups. Positive and negative images were equated on average arousal according to the IAPS norms, but participants in this
study gave significantly higher arousal ratings to negative items than to positive items. One

possible reason for this discrepancy is that the researcher was always in the room while
participants were making their arousal ratings. Many of the positive high-arousing images were

1996; Cahill & McGaugh, 1998). Arousal is thought to activate the amygdala which in turn modulates memory consolidation because of its projections into many other brain areas

associated with memory, such as the hippocampus (McGaugh, 2006). By this logic, after a

violent negative images, which in turn exceeded reaction times for positive images. Neutral

longer delay period not only should valence effects emerge, but group differences may also be
revealed.

images elicited the fastest responses.
There are several possible explanations for why violent and negative images produced longer reaction times compared to positive and neutral images. Ochsner (2000) suggested that

Another factor that may have contributed to the null findings was the selection of the

stimulus materials. Great care was taken to equate the average semantic relatedness of the stimuli
within each valence category. As noted in the introduction, some researchers have found that

negative stimuli may demand attention to the extent that they are 'survival-relevant' and
threatening. Consistent with this view, participants took longer to make brightness judgements when the stimuli were violent or negative rather than positive or neutral. It is also possible that the images in the different valence categories varied along
.Such

valence effects on memory accuracy may become smaller or disappear when the emotional and
neutral items are equated on semantic relatedness (Dougal & Rotello, 2007; Talmi &
Moscovitch, 2004).

Reaction time. Based on the finding by Bartholow and colleagues (2006), that VG players

dimensions may include visual complexity, novelty, or salience. Although great care was taken to equate the semantic relatedness of the stimuli within each valence category, visual complexity was not considered. Comblain, D'Argembeau, Van der Linden, and Aldenhoff (2004) had
participants rate 140 I APS images on visual complexity and found that positive, negative and

took longer to categorize negative images than non-players, I predicted that VG players would
show longer reaction times for recognition of negative stimuli compared to the non-players.
Consistent with the results for arousal ratings and recognition accuracy, however, there were no

significant differences between groups on reaction times for categorization of target or distractor

neutral images, as well as low, medium and high arousal images differed in their visual complexity. Given these findings, it is difficult to disentangle whether the longer reaction times

items. Participants in the study by Bartholow and colleagues (2006) regularly played violent
video games at home, similar to the participants in the current study. It is worth noting, however,

for emotional compared to neutral stimuli in the current study were due to valence or to visual
complexity. Having a separate group of participants rate the stimuli on visual complexity would have allowed for the lists to be equated not only on arousal and semantic relatedness but also on
visual complexity.

that although Bartholow and colleagues (2006) found a significant difference in reaction time for
categorization during ERPs, participants were not actually making decision judgments. It is

possible that cognitively VG players are slower at categorizing violent images, however this does
not affect their actual reaction time when making decisions and pressing a button. Although no group differences arose, there was a significant main effect of valence on

In addition to visual complexity, novelty may have been another dimension on which the stimulus categories differed. For example, most people do not encounter war scenes, starving children, or erotic couples on a regular basis. In contrast, neutral faces and scenes are more typical of what is encountered in everyday life. In an examination of the effects of novelty in

reaction time for correct responses (hits and correct rejections), although not in the predicted
direction. Specifically, reaction times for violent images were longer than reaction times for non

news photographs on attention and memory, Mendelson (2001) found that novel images were

Diffusion modelfindings

deemed more interesting, were chosen by participants for further viewing more often than typical
content photos, and were subsequently remembered better.

Twenty-five participants (28% of the matched sample) had poor model fit (p < .05), but

because removing these participants did not change the results, I retained all matched
participants in the final analyses.

Although the novelty of emotional stimuli may capture attention, it is possible that

neutral stimuli were actually more distinctive in the context of this experiment. For example, Strack and Bless (1994) found that salience (i.e., distinctiveness) of objects significantly affected
recognition responses, such that if objects did not belong to the majority category, old-new

Response bias. Based on previous findings (Dougal & Rotello, 2007; Kapucu et al., 2008;

Spaniol et al., 2008; Windmann & Kruger, 1998; Windmann & Kutas, 2001), it was predicted that emotional stimuli would evoke a more liberal response bias, compared to neutral images. The prediction was borne out by the model results: A significant 'old' bias was present for
negative and positive stimuli, but neutral stimuli evoked no bias. It is not clear why these patterns occurred, however I suspect that participants (unconsciously) view emotional

discrimination was enhanced relative to non-salient objects. The stimulus set in the current study
included 100 low-arousal neutral items and 200 high-arousal emotional items. Neutral items

therefore may have been more salient and may have "popped out," thereby becoming easier to
identify as old or new. Schacter, Israel and Racine (1999) have termed this phenomenon the "distinctiveness heuristic". Increasing the number of neutral stimuli relative to the number of
emotional stimuli would allow testing the possibility that a distinctiveness heuristic was
operating in the current study.

information, both negative and positive, as important. They therefore may be reluctant to "miss"

an emotional item by identifying it as new, because this item may be instructive or "missing" it
could result in negative consequences.

Drift Rate. In the diffusion model, the drift rate indicates the quality of the information

In sum, contrary to hypotheses, VG players did not differ from non-players on accuracy

driving the decision process (Ratcliff, 1978). The desensitization hypothesis led to the prediction
that, relative to non-players, VG players would show reduced drift for negative stimuli. Contrary

or reaction time, possibly because the materials elicited similar levels of arousal in both groups.

Across groups, the data did not provide evidence for a negativity effect, or indeed any valence effect, on memory accuracy. At the same time, reaction times for negative stimuli were longer,

to this hypothesis, drift rate analyses yielded no interaction of group and valence, which was
consistent with the memory accuracy and reaction time results.

rather than shorter, than reaction times for positive and neutral stimuli. Factors that may explain
this valence-specific slowing include survival relatedness, visual complexity, novelty, and

A significant Status x Valence interaction on drift rate did emerge, due to the fact that neutral distractors were detected more efficiently than emotional distractors, whereas no valence

salience/distinctiveness. It is not clear, however, why the same factors did not affect recognition
accuracy. The diffusion model analyses, discussed next, provided insight into this question by
shedding light on the cognitive processes underlying behavioural performance.

effect was present for targets. This is an important finding because it indicates that valence did affect the rate of information accumulation, and not merely the response bias settings. It also highlights the utility of the modeling approach, because the separate analyses of accuracy and

RT yielded ambiguous results (shorter RTs but equal accuracy for neutral stimuli, compared with
emotional stimuli). Moreover, the RT results suggested that the decision process was faster for neutral stimuli, however the drift analysis probed this effect revealing that neutral distractors in
particular are processed more efficiently.

that distractors were processed more efficiently than targets in general. The reason why distractors were processed more efficiently than targets remains unclear and requires further
exploration.

Lack of Group Differences: Evidence Against Desensitization?

Why were distractors detected more efficiently than targets, at each level of valence?

Contrary to the hypotheses there were no significant differences between VG players and non-players on any of the dependent measures. VG players did not show a compromised

This finding is slightly counterintuitive, though not unique (Ratcliff, Thapar, & McKoon, 2004;
Spaniol et al., 2008). The large discrepancy between target and distractor drift rates could be
explained by diagnostic monitoring (e.g., "I would remember that picture if I had seen it... I
don't remember it... so it must be new"). When target items are made so memorable that

negativity bias with lower accuracy and longer reaction times for negative images, nor did they
show increased accuracy for violent images as speculated. Given that the sample of VG players

came from a university population it is possible they were not representative of VG players in
general or may not reflect true "chronic" violent VG players. However, the relatively large

participants feel confident that they would remember them vividly, the absence of recollection

provides diagnostic evidence that the item is new (Gallo, 2004; Schacter, Israel & Racine, 1999; Strack & Bless, 1994). Overall memory performance in the current experiment was indeed quite high, and participants were likely making "old" judgments on the basis of recollection. The total
absence of recollection may have provided immediate diagnostic evidence that a stimulus was

sample size (N - 44 per group) afforded reasonable statistical power (\-fi = .971; Erdfelder & Buchner, 1996) to detect a medium effect. Furthermore, the pattern was identical even in an
extreme sample of 18 VG players with high exposure to violent video games. It seems

reasonable to conclude from these results that there may be no lasting effects of violent video games on arousal levels and subsequent memory for negative information. However, this
conclusion can only be regarded as preliminary since the study is quasi-experimental

new. One problem for the diagnostic monitoring account is that it is not clear why targets would
not benefit from this type of monitoring to the same extent as distractors. Further discussion of

this issue is beyond the scope of this thesis, as are incidental findings (see Appendix C) which
show a correlation between distractor drift rate and response bias that is nonexistent for target
drift rate and response bias.

(participants were not randomly assigned to VG player or non-player status), and thus allows no
strong inferences about the presence or absence of causal links.

Other researchers have found that playing even 20 minutes of violent video game play
can affect physiological arousal and categorization of negative stimuli. The results of the present

Overall, results from the diffusion model consistently showed that there were no

significant differences between VG players and non-players. As hypothesized, emotional items

study suggest that previous research may have found evidence for habituation, rather than

produced a liberal response bias that neutral items did not. Interestingly, drift rate analysis

desensitization. These experimental studies did not follow up with the participants so it is
unknown how long the video game effects lasted and whether participants returned to baseline

revealed that neutral distractors were processed more efficiently than emotional distractors, and

levels. The present study suggests that VG players, who play for their own enjoyment rather than
being assigned to a condition of playing in the lab, do not perform any differently from nonTo my knowledge, this study was the first to investigate possible differences in memory

players with respect to categorization (brightness ratings), rated arousal, or memory for negative
and neutral images. It may be that VG players rebound quickly from any effects of violence
exposure.

and the negativity effect in VG players and non-players. Given that violent video games are
gaining popularity and that short-term effects on physiological arousal and cognition have already been demonstrated, understanding the long-term effects of these media is vital. No
evidence for a relationship between video game exposure and memory emerged in the current

Limitations andfuture directions

One limitation of the study was the short interval between study and test. If the retention

study. However, the study was quasi-experimental, with all of the limitations inherent in this method. Follow-up studies, perhaps incorporating the approaches suggested above, are needed to

interval was increased to 24 hours, perhaps the valence and arousal effects sometimes shown for
memory sensitivity would emerge, thus also allowing the possibility of group effects to manifest. In the future, a better approach may be to test half of the studied items the same day and half the
next day to determine if the retention interval is indeed a factor.

establish more firmly whether or not violent video games have long-term effects on how we
think and remember.

The composition of the participant sample may also have been an issue. As mentioned

previously, the VG players in this sample may not be representative of VG players in the general
population. The participants were university students which may limit the amount of time and
money one has to spend on video games. Perhaps recruiting VG players through a video game
store or online gaming site would result in a more representative sample.

Finally, it is interesting to ask why neutral distractors were processed more efficiently
than emotional distractors, and why distractor processing was more efficient than target

processing. One would expect target processing to be equally efficient as distractor processing,

since both involve evaluation of the same mnemonic evidence. The answer to why the absence of
recollection is more compelling evidence than the presence of recollection is not apparent from
the current study and deserves further investigation.

Appendix A
Violence Content:

Video Game Questionnaire

Please list up to five (5) of your favourite video games. After naming each game, indicate using the scale below of 1 to 7, how violent the content and graphics are. Also, please indicate how often you play this game currently and which of the following six categories best describes each
of the games.

Violent Graphics: Game Theme: Educational; Skill; Fantasy; Sports; Fighting with Hands; Fighting with Weapons

How often:

Rarely

Occasionally

Often

1= rarely, little or no violent content / little or no violent graphics 7= often, extremely violent content / extremely violent graphics
Violence Content:

Violent Graphics:
Violent Content:

Game Theme: Educational; Skill; Fantasy; Sports; Fighting with Hands; Fighting with Weapons
Violent Graphics:

Game Theme: Educational; Skill; Fantasy; Sports; Fighting with Hands; Fighting with Weapons.
How often: Rarely Occasionally Often

How often:

Rarely

Occasionally

Often

At what age did you begin to play video games?

Please estimate the number of hours per week you have played video games in the following:
The last 3 months: The 3 months prior to that:
Violence Content:

Game Theme: Educational; Skill; Fantasy; Sports; Fighting with Hands; Fighting with Weapons
How often: Rarely Occasionally Often

Violence Content:

Violent Graphics:

Game Theme: Educational; Skill; Fantasy; Sports; Fighting with Hands; Fighting with Weapons
How often: Rarely Occasionally Often

Appendix B

valence (violent vs. negative vs. positive vs. neutral) as the within-subjects variable. Mauchly's
test indicated that the assumption of sphericity was violated for valence on response and RT,

Questionnaire data for excluded participants (N=32)
Characteristic Age (years)
Age range

Mean

X2(5) = 220.38,/? < .001, X2(5) = 68.82,/? < .001. Therefore degrees of freedom were corrected
using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity, 8 = .49 and s = .15, respectively. There was a main effect of valence on brightness judgments, ^(1.480, 95.321) = 146.76,/? < .001, MSE =

Negative mood
Positive mood

88.03, r|2= .526. The pairwise comparisons revealed that negative (M = 3.64) and violent (M =
3.58) stimuli were judged as significantly less bright as positive (M = 4.22) and violent was less bright than neutral (M = 4.80). Positive images were judged as significantly brighter than neutral. A main effect of valence was also found on brightness RT, F(2.260, 298.321) = 22.46,/? < .001,

TAS-20

MSE = 263868.50, r|2= .145. Pairwise comparisons revealed that RTs for negative stimuli (M =
721ms) and violent stimuli (M = 720ms) were significantly smaller than neutral (M = 650) and

Neuroticism
Extraversion

17.3
25.9

14.9
7.23

positive (M = 638ms).
Accuracy

Openness Agreeableness Conscientiousness

27.9 31.4 32.1

7.08 4.74 6.58

As found with the matched sample, there was no effect of valence on memory sensitivity

(of) for the excluded participants, F(3, 93) = 2.452,/? = .068, MSE = .416, n2= .073. Accuracy
for negative (M = 1.97), violent (M = 1.83), positive (M = 2.06) and neutral images (M = 2.07) did not differ significantly. When violent and non-violent negative categories were collapsed, the

Note: Negative mood and positive mood are Positive and Negative Affect Schedule scores. AQ
Aggression Questionnaire. IS = Irritability Questionnaire. TAS-20 = 20-item Toronto

main effect of valence on d' (Mneg = 2.065, Mpos = 2.116, Mneu = 2.190) approached significance,

Alexithymia Scale. VES = Violence Exposure Score from the video game questionnaire.

Neuroticism, extraversion, openness, agreeableness, and conscientiousness are scores based on
responses from the revised NEO Five-Factor Inventory. SD=standard deviation.

F(2, 242) - 3.01 \,p = .051, MSE = .483, n2 = .024.

The RTs for hits and correct rejections of the excluded participants maintained a pattern
Brightness Judgments

consistent with the matched participants. Mauchly's test indicated that the assumption of

Brightness judgments among the 32 excluded participants were similar to those for the
included participants. The brightness judgments were submitted to a repeated measures ANOVA

sphericity was violated for the main effect of valence on hits and correct rejections, X2(5) =

RYERSOM UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

PROPERTY OF

118.68,/? < .001, X2(5) = 86.19,/? < .001 , therefore degrees of freedom were corrected using
Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity, s = .59 and 8 = .71, respectively.

the p value of the diffusion model (/? < .05), confirming that high false alarm rates were
associated with higher p values.

There was a main effect of valence on RT for Hits F(l.778, 215.130) = 21.028,/? < .001, MSE = 202080.455, r|2= .148. Participants took longer to categorize violent images (M -

Response bias. As a measure of response bias, z/a was calculated for each level of
valence. A main effect of valence was found on response bias, F(2, 62) = 5.789,/? < .005, MSE =

1083ms) compared to negative (M = 1006ms), positive (M= 1012ms) and neutral (M = 992ms)
images. RTs for neutral images were significantly shorter than RTs for negative and positive
images.

.044, r|2= .157. Participants were again more likely to respond "old" to both negative (M = .59)
and positive (M = .58) items, compared to neutral items (M = .52). One-sample t-tests revealed that mean response bias values for negative and positive items were significantly above 'no-bias'
value of .5, /(31) = 5.760,/? < .001, and /(31) = 4.237,/? < .001. In contrast, there was no
significant response bias for neutral images, /(31) = .71,/? = .481.

There was also a main effect of valence on RT for correct rejections F(2.115, 255.926)

78.847,/? < .001, MSE = 1113711.194, x\2= .395. Pairwise comparisons revealed that all RT
means were significantly different from each other. Neutral images (M = 950ms) were

Drift rates. Analysis of the absolute drift rates revealed a significant main effect of status

categorized faster than negative (M = 1078ms), positive (M = 1021ms) and violent images (M 1138ms).

on drift, F(l, 31) = 37.224,/? < .001, MSE = 63.152, r|2= .546, such that targets (M = .685) had
lower drift rates than distractors (M = 1.832). There was also a main effect of valence on drift,

Diffusion Models

F(2, 62) = 5.608,/? = .006, MSE = .795, r|2= .153, such that negative items (M = 1.132) had
significantly smaller drift that neutral (M = 1.341) and positive (M = 1.304) items. The status x valence interaction also observed in the matched group analysis was again significant, F(2, 62) =

Diffusion model parameters were calculated for the excluded participants to examine

model fit, response bias, and drift rates. Separate drift rates (v) were estimated for targets and
distractors at each level of valence (neutral, negative, positive). Separate starting values (z) were

6.203,/? = .004, MSE = .004, r|2= .167, indicating a valence effect on distractor drift but not
target drift. Drift rates for neutral distractors (M = 2.103) were significantly larger than drift rates
for positive distractors (M = 1.816) and negative distractors (M = 1.578).
Conclusions

estimated at each level of valence, as well as non-decision time (to), boundary separation (a), and
variance in nondecision time (st), starting point (sz) and drift rate (sv) for a total of 14 parameters
per participant.

Modelfit. Of the 32 participants, 4 had poor model fit (i.e.,/? < .05), most likely due to

The patterns observed in the analyses of the matched groups were largely replicated in

the relatively low number of false alarms made by these participants. Negative (r = .519), violent

the analysis of the excluded participants. There were no effects of valence on memory sensitivity
(cP), but there were valence effects on reaction time. Valence also affected response bias, and
drift rate similar to what was seen in the analyses with the matched groups. Overall, these

(r = .371), neutral (r = .433) and positive (r = .531) false alarm rates significantly correlated with

findings confirm that the included and excluded non-players showed identical patterns, alleviating concerns about selection bias.

Bivariate correlations were calculated for the entire sample (N =122) to look at
relationships between the personality assessments and the diffusion modelling parameters. Although the personality scores did not correlate significantly with any of the diffusion
parameters, some interesting correlations between diffusion parameters emerged.

suggest that participants with high distractor drift (i.e., those who were good at identifying new items) also tended to display a response bias favouring "old" responses.

Correlations between diffusion parameters drift and response bias.
vnew_neg vnew_neu vnew_pos void_neg void neu void_pos

z/fl_neg
zla neu

.494**

.330**

.398**
.231**

-.085

-.010

.089

z/a_pos

.207**

.361**

.592**

.216**

.099

-.095

Note. **p < .01. The vnew values are sign reversed (i.e. absolute values), zla is the response bias
calculation.

References

Buss, A.H., & Perry, M.P. (1992). The aggression questionnaire. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 63, 452-459.

Anderson, C.A., & Bushman, B.J. (2001). Effects of violent video games on aggressive
behaviour, aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, and prosocial behaviour: A metaanalytic review of scientific literature. Psychological Science, 12, 353-359.

Cahill, L., Haier, R. J., Fallon, J., Alkire, M. T., Tang, C, Keator, D., et al. (1996). Amygdala
activity at encoding correlated with long-term, free recall of emotional information. Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences, 93, 8016-8021.
Cahill, L., & McGaugh, James, L. (1998). Mechanisms of emotional arousal and lasting declarative memory. Trends in Neuroscience, 21, 294-299. Caprara, G.V., Cinanni, V., D'Imperio, G., Passerini, S., Renzi, P., & Travaglia, G. (1985). Indicators of impulsive aggression: Present status of research on irritability and emotional
susceptibility scales. Personality and Individual Differences, 6, 665-674.

Anderson, C.A., & Dill, K.E. (2000). Video games and aggressive thoughts, feelings, and
behavior in the laboratory and in life. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 78,
772-790.

Aupee, A.M. (2007). A detrimental effect of emotion on picture recollection. Cognition and
Neurosciences, 48, 7-11.

Bartholow, B.D., Bushman, B J., & Sestir, M.A. (2006). Chronic violent video game exposure and desensitization to violence: Behavioural and event-related brain potential data.
Journal ofExperimental Social Psychology, 42, 532-539.

Carnagey, N. L., Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2007). The effect of video game violence on physiological desensitization to real-life violence. Journal ofExperimental Social Psychology, 43, 489-496. Comblain, C, D'Argembeau, A., Van der Linden, M., & Aldenhoff, L. (2004). The effect of ageing on the recollection of emotional and neutral pictures. Memory, 12, 673-684.

Bradley, M.M., Cuthbert, B.N., & Lang, P.J. (1996). Picture media and emotion: effects of a
sustained affective content. Psychophysiology, 33, 662-670.

Bradley, M.M., Greenwald, M.K., Hamm, A.O. (1993). Affective picture processing. In N.
Birbaumer & A. Ohman (Eds.), The structure of emotion (pp. 48-65). Gottingen,
Germany: Hogrefe & Huber.

Costa, P. T. Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1989). The NEO-PI/NEO-FFI manual supplement. Odessa,
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.

Bradley, M.M., Lang, P.J., & Cuthbert, B.N. (1993). Emotion, novelty, and the startle reflex:
Habituation in humans. Behavioural Neuroscience, 107, 970-980.

Dewhurst, S. A., & Parry, L. A. (2000). Emotionality, distinctiveness and recollective
experience. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 12, 541-551.

Budson, A.E., Todman, R.W., Chong, H., Adams, E.H., Kensinger, E.A., Krangel, T.S., &

Dougal, S., & Rotello, CM. (2007). "Remembering" emotional words is based on response bias,
not recollection. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 423-429. Entertainment Software Association (n.d.). Top 10 industry facts. Retrieved February 1, 2008, from http://www.theesa.com/facts/index.asp.

Wright, C.I. (2006). False recognition of emotional word lists in aging and Alzheimer
disease. Cognitive and Behavioural Neurology, 19, 71-78.

Erdfelder, E., Faul, F. & Buchner, A. (1996). GPOWER: A general power analysis program. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 28, 1-11.

Kensinger, E.A., & Corkin, S. (2003). Effect of negative emotional content on working memory
and long-term memory. Emotion, 3, 378-393.

Funk, J.B., Bechtoldt Baldacci, H., Pasold, T., & Baumgardner, J. (2004). Violence exposure in
real-life, video games, television, movies, and the internet: is there desensitization?
Journal ofAdolescence, 27, 23-39.

Kensinger, E. A., & Corkin, S. (2004). Two routes to emotional memory: Distinct neural
processes for valence and arousal. Proceedings of the National Academy ofSciences,
707,3310-3315.

Funk, J.B., Buchman, D.D., Jenks, J., & Bechtoldt, H. (2003). Playing violent video games,
desensitization, and moral evaluation in children. Applied Developmental Psychology,
24, 413-436.

Kensinger, E.A., & Schacter, D.L. (2006). When the Red Sox shocked the Yankees: Comparing
negative and positive memories. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 757-763.

Kronenberger, W.G., Matthews, V.P., Dunn, D.W., Wang, Y., Wood, E.A., Giauque, A.L., et al. (2005). Media violence exposure and executive functioning in aggressive and control
adolescents. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 61, 725-737.

Gallo, D.A. (2004). Using recall to reduce false recognition: Diagnostic and disqualifying
monitoring. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30,
120-128.

Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1997). International affective picture system (IAPS): Technical manual and affective ratings. NIMH Center for the Study of Emotion
and Attention.

Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal Detection Theory andPsychophysics. New York:
Wiley.

Haniger, K. & Thompson, K.M. (2004). Content and ratings of teen-rated video games. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 7, 856-865.

Linden, D.E.J. (2005). The P300: Where in the brain is it produced and what does it tell us? The
Neuroscientist, 11, 563-567.

Hamann, S. (2001). Cognitive and neural mechanisms of emotional memory. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 5, 394-400.

MacMillan, N.A., & Creelman, CD. (2005). Detection theory: A user's guide (2nd ed.). New
York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Hanratty Thomas, M., Horton, R.W., Lippincott, E.C., & Drabman, R.S. (1977). Desensitization
to portrayals of real-life aggression as a function of exposure to television violence.
Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 35, 450-458.

Maratos, E.J., Allan, K., & Rugg, M.D. (2000). Recognition memory for emotionally negative
and neutral words: An ERP study. Neuropsychologia, 38, 1452-1465.

Mather, M., Shafir, E., & Johnson, M.K. (2000). Misremembrance of options past: Source
monitoring and choice. Psychological Science, 11, 132-138.

Kapucu, A., Rotello, CM., Ready, R.E., & Seidl, K.N. (2008). Response bias in "remembering"
emotional stimuli: A new perspective on age differences. Journal ofExperimental

McGaugh, James, L. (2006). Make mild moments memorable: Add a little arousal. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10, 345-347.

Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34, 703-711.

Mendelson, A. (2001). Effects of novelty in news photographs on attention and memory.
Mediapsychology, 3, 119-157.

Ratcliff, R., & Tuerlinckx, F. (2002) Estimating parameters of the diffusion model: Approaches
to dealing with contaminant reaction times and parameter variability. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9, 438-481.

Messaris, P., & Humphreys, L. (2004). Digital media: Transformations in human
communication (eds.). New York: Peter Lang Publishing.

Reisberg, D., & Heuer, F. (1992). Remembering the details of emotional events. Memory and
Cognition, 20, 277-290.

NDP Group (2008). 2007 U.S. Video Game And PC Game Sales Exceed $18.8 Billion Marking
Third Consecutive Year Of Record-Breaking Sales. Retrieved February 1, 2008, from
http://www.npd.com/press/releases/pressO80131 b.html.

Schacter, D.L., Isreal, L., & Racine, C. (1999). Suppressing false recognition in younger and
older adults: The distinctiveness heuristic. Journal ofMemory and Language, 40, 1-24.

Ochsner, K. N. (2000). Are affective events richly recollected or simply familiar? The
experience and process of recognizing feelings past. Journal ofExperimental
Psychology: General, 129, 242-261.

Signorelli, N. (2003). Prime time violence 1993-2001: Has the picture really changed? Journal of
Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 47, 36-57.

Smith, J.C., Bradley, M.M., & Lang, P.J. (2005). State anxiety and affective physiology: effects
of sustained exposure to affective pictures. Biological Psychology, 69, 247-260.

Ohman, A. (1988). Preattention processes in the generation of emotions. In V. Hamilton, G. H. Bower, & N. H. Frijda (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on emotion and motivation (Vol.
44, pp.127-143). Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic.

Spaniol, J., Madden, D.J., & Voss, A. (2006). A diffusion model analysis of adult age differences in episodic and semantic long-term memory retrieval. Journal ofExperimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 101-117.

Rajaram, S. (1996). Perceptual effects on remembering: Recollective processes in picture recognition memory. Journal ofExperimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22, 365-377.

Spaniol, J., Voss., A., & Grady, C.L. (2008). Aging and emotional memory: Cognitive
mechanisms underlying the positivity effect. Psychology and Aging, 23, 859-872.

Ratcliff, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.

Staude-Muller, F., Bliesener, T., & Luthman, S. (2008). Hostile and hardened? An experimental
study on (de-)sensitization to violence and suffering through playing video games. Swiss
Journal ofPsychology, 67, 41-50.

Ratcliff, R. (1985). Theoretical interpretations of the speed and accuracy of positive and negative
responses. Psychological Review, 92, 212-225.

Ratcliff, R., Thapar, A., & McKoon, G. (2004). A diffusion model analysis of the effects of
aging on recognition memory. Journal ofMemory and Language, 50, 408-424.

Strack, F., & Bless, H. (1994). Memory of nonoccurrences: Metacognitive and presuppositional
strategies. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 203-217.

Talmi, D., Luk, B.T.C., McGarry, L.M., & Moscovitch, M. (2007). The contribution of

relatedness and distinctiveness to emotionally-enhanced memory. Journal ofMemory and
Language, 56, 555-574.

Talmi, D., & Moscovitch, M. (2004). Can semantic relatedness explain enhancement of memory
for emotional words? Memory & Cognition, 32, 742-751.

Taylor, G. J., Bagby, R. M., Ryan, D. P., & Parker, J. D. (1990). Validation of the alexithymia
construct: A measurement-based approach. Canadian Journal ofPsychiatry, 35, 290-297.

Tulving, E. (1985). How many memory systems are there? American Psychologist, 40, 385-398.

Voss, A., Rothermund, K., & Voss, J. (2004). Interpreting the parameters of the diffusion model:
An empirical validation. Memory & Cognition, 32, 1206-1220.

Voss.A., & Voss, J. (2007). Fast-dm: A free program for efficient diffusion model analysis.
Behavioural Research Methods, 39, 767-775.

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures

of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal ofPersonality and Social
Psychology, 54, 1063-1070.

Windmann, S., & Kutas, M. (2001). Electrophysiological correlates of emotion-induced
recognition bias. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 577-592.

Windmann, S., & Kruger, T. (1998). Subconscious detection of threat as reflected by an
enhanced response bias. Consciousness and Cognition, 7, 603-633.

Wolpe, J. (1982). The practice of behavior therapy (3rd ed.). New York: Pergamon Press.
Woodard, E. H., IV, & Gridina, N. (2000). Media in the home 2000: The fifth annual survey of

parents and children. Available on the World Wide Web:
http://www.appcpenn.org/inhome.pdf.

