DOCUMENTING  THE  WORLD  AT  HOME  AND  ABROAD   THE  JACQUES  MADVO  COLLECTION   By   Alexandra  Jokinen   Bachelor  of  Arts   University  of  Guelph   Guelph,  Ontario,  Canada   2012   A  thesis   Presented  to  Ryerson  University   In  partial  fulfillment  of  the   requirements  for  the  degree  of   Master  of  Arts   In  the  program  of   Film and Photography  Preservation  and   Collections  Management   Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2015   ©  Alexandra  Jokinen  2015  

Author's  Declaration   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  thesis.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the   thesis,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  thesis  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  thesis  by  photocopying  or   by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I  understand  that  my  thesis  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.                 

  

ii  

Abstract   Documenting  the  World  at  Home  and  Abroad:  The  Jacques  Madvo  Collection   Master  of  Arts,  2015   Alexandra  Jokinen   Film  and  Photography  Preservation  and  Collections  Management Ryerson  University   This  thesis  draws  on  the  cataloguing  and  examination  of  the  Madvo   Collection  at  the  Liaison  of  Independent  Filmmakers  of  Toronto  (LIFT)  as  the  basis   to  determine  the  value  of  his  independent  non-fiction  films  and  resolve  possible   scenarios  for  their  preservation.     The  collection  contains  240  canisters  of  16mm  non-fiction  films  and   production  elements  that  LIFT  intends  to  use  as  a  resource  for  found  footage  films.   This  raises  several  concerns  for  the  future  of  the  materials,  the  most  critical  of   which  is  the  physical  destruction  of  the  films.   This  thesis  aims  to  create  a  record  of  Madvo's  oeuvre  so  that  his  work  can  be   protected  from  LIFT's  claim  to  use  it  as  found  footage.  It  offers  different  uses  for  the   materials,  as  well  as  a  broader  perspective  on  the  cultural  value  of  the  collection,   paying  particular  attention  to  its  importance  for  the  history  of  amateur  films  and   home  movies.  

iii  

Acknowledgements   First  and  foremost,  I  would  like  to  thank  my  parents,  Brian  and  Janice   Jokinen,  for  their  endless  support  and  constant  encouragement  throughout  my   academic  career.  None  of  it  would  have  been  possible  without  them.     Thank  you  to  my  first  reader,  Gerda  Cammaer,  for  inspiring  me  to  pursue  this   thesis,  believing  in  me  to  succeed,  and  guiding  me  through  every  step  of  the  way.   Thank  you,  as  well,  to  my  second  reader,  Alex  Anderson.     I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  professors  of  the  FPPCM  program,  and  to  the   entire  Image  Arts  staff,  for  enlightening  me  and  challenging  me  in  so  many  new  and   important  ways.   Thank  you  to  my  fellow  colleagues,  TJ  Alston,  Chelsea  Keen,  and  Stacey   Turner,  the  first  cohort  of  film  preservation  students  in  the  program,  for  making  the   past  two  years  absolutely  unforgettable.     Many  thanks  to  Chris  Kennedy  and  the  staff  at  the  Liaison  of  Independent   Filmmakers  of  Toronto  for  allowing  me  to  work  with  the  Madvo  Collection  and  for   all  their  assistance  in  mining  though  the  films.   Finally,  a  special  thank  you  to  Jacques  Madvo  for  making  these  wonderful   films  and  to  the  Madvo  family,  particularly  Denis  and  Hermine,  for  providing  me   with  insight  into  the  life  of  such  an  extraordinary  filmmaker.           

  

iv  

Table  of  Contents      List  of  Figures  
  

vi  
  

List  of  Appendices    
     

viii  
     

Introduction   1.  Theoretical  Framework      1.1  Literature  Review      1.2  Cataloguing  Moving  Images  
     

1   4   4   9  
     

2.  Jacques  Madvo:  Biographical  Sketch   3.  Processing  the  Collection        3.1  Method      3.2  Cataloguing         3.2.1  Title  and  Statement  of  Responsibility           3.2.2  Edition           3.2.3  Date(s)  of  Creation         3.2.4  Physical  Description           3.2.5  Publisher's  Series         3.2.6  Archival  Description           3.2.7  Note(s)         3.2.8  Standard  Number   4.  Descriptive  Analysis  of  Films      4.1  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  (1974,  30  min.)      4.2  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961,  20  min.)      4.3  Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.  1970,  20  min.)  
        

12   21   21   24   25   26   26   26   29   30   31   32  
  

33   33   46   53  
     

5.  Amateur  and  Non-fiction  Film  Collections     6.  Scenarios  and  Solutions        6.1  Scenario  1:  The  Madvo  Collection  as  Found  Footage      6.2  Scenario  2:  Archiving  the  Madvo  Collection      6.3  Scenario  3:  Digitization      6.4  My  Recommendations  
     

62   68   68   71   74   75  
     

Conclusion   Appendix  A  
        

77   81  
     

Appendix  B   Bibliography     

83   127

  

v  

List  of  Figures      1.  Production  still,  Madvo  working  on  the  set  of  A  Boy  from  Bahrain  (1969).   2.  Informational  booklet  on  the  Countries  and  People  series  put  out  by  The  Ontario   Educational  Communications  Authority.   3.  Production  still,  Madvo  shooting  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  in  High  Park  in  Toronto,  ca.   1984.   4.  Madvo  in  his  film  editing  room  at  home.   5.  Examples  of  film  elements  contained  in  the  Madvo  Collection.     6.  Example  of  Title  /  Statement  of  Responsibility  information  field.   7.  Example  of  Objects,  Duration  and  Length  information  fields.   8.  Example  of  Scope  and  Content  information  field.   9.  Example  of  Subject  information  field.   10.  Example  of  Accompanying  Material  information  field.   11.  Example  of  Note(s)  information  field.   12.  Example  of  Condition  Report  information  field.   13.  Frame  enlargement,  rock  formations  in  Lebanese  mountains,  Lebanon:  Modern   Mosaic  (1974).   14,  Frame  enlargement,  ancient  ruins  shot  from  below,  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic   (1974).   15.  Frame  enlargement,  superimposition  of  ancient  Venetian  pottery,  Lebanon:   Modern  Mosaic  (1974).   16.  Frame  enlargement,  caves  in  the  Lebanese  mountainside,  Lebanon:  Modern   Mosaic  (1974).   17.  Frame  enlargement,  Christian  woman  overlooking  a  small  town  in  Lebanon,   Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  (1974).   18.  Frame  enlargement,  traffic  in  Beirut,  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  (1974).   19.  Frame  enlargement,  destroyed  buildings  in  downtown  Beirut,  Lebanon  at  War   (1977).     20.  Frame  enlargement,  bullet-ridden  street  sign.  Lebanon  at  War  (1977).   21.  Frame  enlargement,  Muslim  woman  with  child  walking  away  from  camera,   Lebanon  at  War  (1977).   22.  Frame  enlargement,  boy  amongst  rubble  in  war-torn  Beirut,  Lebanon  at  War   (1977).   23.  Frame  enlargement,  spiral  detail  of  fountain  at  La  Place  de  la  Concorde,  Fontaines   de  Paris  (1961).   24.  Frame  enlargement,  water  falling  on  sculpted  horses  of  the  fountain  at  Jardin  du   Luxembourg,  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).   25.  Frame  enlargement,  students  sitting  at  the  fountain  at  Place  Saint-Michel,   Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).      vi  

26.  Frame  enlargement,  bronze  sculptures  of  the  fountain  at  Trocadéro  with  Eiffel   Tower  in  background,  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).   27.  Frame  enlargement,  silhouette  of  lovers  in  front  of  a  fountain  at  night,  Fontaines   de  Paris  (1961).   28.  Frame  enlargement,  fireworks  in  the  night  sky,  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).   29.  Frame  enlargement,  child's  toy,  opening  scene,  Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.   1970).   30.  Frame  enlargement,  example  of  dramatic  lighting,  Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.   1970).   31.  Frame  enlargement,  shot  of  child's  shadow  taken  from  outside  the  crib,  Denis  et   Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.  1970).     32.  Frame  enlargement,  shot  of  child  taken  from  inside  the  crib,  Denis  et  Bruno:   Enfants  (ca.  1970).     33.  Frame  enlargement,  mother  and  child  with  cityscape  in  background,  Denis  et   Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.  1970).   34.  Frame  enlargement,  Madvo  playing  with  his  two  sons,  Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants   (ca.  1970).           

  

vii  

List  of  Appendices      Appendix  A:  Jacques  Madvo  Filmography      Appendix  B:  The  Madvo  Collection  Catalogue           

  

viii  

Introduction      In  2014,  LIFT  (Liaison  of  Independent  Filmmakers  of  Toronto),  a  non-profit,   artist-run  organization  serving  the  filmmakers  community  in  Toronto,  acquired  part   of  the  estate  of  independent  filmmaker  Jacques  Madvo  (1924  ­  2014).  The  collection   contains  the  16mm  film  and  production  elements  that  comprise  Madvo's  cinematic   heritage,  roughly  spanning  the  years  1955  to  1990.   Madvo  was  born  in  Armenia,  but  grew  up  in  Lebanon.  He  studied  Movie   Direction,  Production  and  Editing  at  L'Institut  des  hautes  études   cinématographiques  (IDHEC)  in  Paris  from  1953  to  1956.    Over  the  next  several   decades,  Madvo  travelled  extensively,  documenting  images  of  the  world  with  his   16mm  Bolex  camera.  Throughout  the  60s,  he  produced  films  as  a  freelancer  for   various  organizations  and  companies  in  the  Middle  East.  In  1971,  he  moved  to   Toronto.    Here,  he  produced  an  educational  travel  series  for  TVO  titled  Countries  and   People  and,  in  1984,  made  his  first  feature-length  film,  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.     Supplementary  to  his  professional  productions,  Madvo  made  a  number  of  smaller   self-contained  documentary  works  and  home  movies.   240  film  canisters  of  the  collection  contain  Madvo's  non-fiction  films.  LIFT,   being  a  filmmaking  cooperative,  plans  to  use  this  material  as  a  resource  for  found   footage  films.  The  main  issue  with  LIFT  using  the  Madvo  Collection  in  this  way,   however,  is  that  it  would  mean  the  physical  destruction  of  his  films.  Because  LIFT  is   not  an  archive,  and  is  not  concerned  with  the  preservation  of  the  material,  Madvo's   films  would  be  cut,  spliced  and  altered  permanently  (most  of  the  material  is  reversal   film  and  therefore  has  no  original  negative).    

  

1  

Another  major  concern  is  that  his  images  would  be  extracted  from  their   original  contexts  and  appropriated  to  tell  new  stories.    Often,  found  footage  is  used   ironically  or  as  parody.    This  is  particularly  troubling  for  Madvo's  work,  as  so  much   of  it  depicts  foreign  cultures.       An  additional  matter  is  that  LIFT  plans  to  keep  reusable  material  from   Madvo's  documentary  (i.e.  prints,  reversal  positive)  and  donate  the  remainder  of  the   material  (negatives,  a/b  rolls,  sound  elements,  etc.)  to  an  archive.  If  this  happens,   the  collection  would  be  split  up.   Understanding  the  dangerous  realities  of  LIFT's  purposes,  I  claim  that  it  is   essential  for  the  Madvo  Collection  to  be  protected.  It  is  a  unique,  comprehensive   body  of  work  that  adds  to  the  diverse  history  of  independent  and  amateur  film  and   should  not  be  cut  up,  separated  or  compromised  in  any  other  way.   By  cataloguing  and  examining  the  Madvo  Collection  at  LIFT,  this  thesis  will   determine  the  cultural  and  historical  value  of  his  independent  non-fiction  films  and   explore  possible  scenarios  for  their  preservation.     My  main  research  question  is:  How  can  the  Madvo  Collection  be  catalogued   and  preserved  so  that  it  can  be  made  available  to  others  (beyond  LIFT)  as  a  valuable   historical,  cultural  and  artistic  resource?    By  answering  this  question,  I  will  offer   alternative  uses  for  the  collection  than  what  LIFT  is  proposing,  and  practical   solutions  for  its  future.     Other  questions  I  am  trying  to  answer  are:  What  can  Madvo's  body  of  work   contribute  to  our  understanding  of  independent  and  amateur  non-fiction   filmmaking?  And,  What  cultural  value  and  challenges  do  non-fiction  films  like  these  

  

2  

possess  for  archives?  Answering  these  will  help  me  to  determine  the  value  of  the   collection,  and  support  my  advocacy  for  its  preservation.                 

  

3  

1. Theoretical  Framework   1.1 Literature  Review   Although  the  travelogue  has  played,  and  continues  to  play,  a  fundamental   role  in  the  production  of  motion  pictures,  its  significance  is  understated  in  film   studies.    Before  Jeffrey  Ruoff's  2006  anthology  Virtual  Voyages:  Cinema  and  Travel,   there  was  very  little  published  on  the  travelogue.    What  was  written  appeared  only   sporadically  in  works  dedicated  to  other  subjects.1  Scholarly  interest  in  the  travel   film,  however,  is  on  the  rise.2    In  the  last  decade  and  a  half,  conferences  such  as  the   Orphan  Film  Symposium  have  facilitated  the  study  of  non-fiction  film.    In  fact,  four   of  the  contributors  to  Virtual  Voyages  gave  presentations  at  the  2004  symposium   "On  Location:  Place  and  Region  in  Forgotten  Films."3    As  a  result,  scholars  are   increasingly  exploring  representations  of  travel  in  a  wide  variety  of  cinematic  forms   and  a  body  of  literature  on  the  subject  is  beginning  to  take  shape.       Charles  Musser  (1984)  and  X.  Theodore  Barber  (1993)  provide  pioneering   research  on  the  travel  lecture,  an  illustrated  presentation  of  silent  travelogues  with   live  narration.    Looking  at  individual  lecturers,  these  authors  demonstrate  a  key   characteristic  of  the  travel  lecture  film:  the  mixing  of  education  and  entertainment.4     Musser  discusses  how  Lyman  H.  Howe  used  the  desire  for  up-scale,  urban   entertainment  to  educate  small-town  and  middle  class  audiences  with  scenes  of   foreign  travel.    Barber  documents  the  roots  of  travel  cinema,  from  the  pre-cinematic                                                                                                                    1  Jeffrey  Ruoff.  "Introduction:  The  Filmic  Fourth  Dimension:  Cinema  as  Audiovisual   Vehicle,"  in  Virtual  voyages  :  cinema  and  travel,  edited  by  Jeffrey  Ruoff,  1-24.   Durham:  Duke  University  Press,  2006,  p.  19.   2  Ibid.,  20  ­  21.   3  Ibid.,  20.   4  Ibid.,  2.      4  

magic  lantern  shows  of  John  L.  Stoddard  to  the  first  use  of  motion  pictures  by   leading  travel  lecturer  Burton  Holmes  (1870­1958).    While  these  case  studies  shed   some  light  on  early  travelogues,  their  scope  is  limited  to  the  practices  of  specific   lecturers.   Furthering  the  research  mapped  out  by  his  predecessors,  Jeffrey  Ruoff   examines  the  travel  lecture  film  as  the  archetypal  form  of  the  travelogue  in  his  1998   article  "Around  the  World  in  Eighty  Minutes:  The  Travel  Lecture  Film."    Ruoff   demonstrates  how  itinerant  film  lecturers  are  a  significant  part  of  film  history.    The   essay  highlights  the  influence  of  travelogues  in  the  formative  years  of  cinema,   chronicles  how  these  performances  became  a  wide-reaching  form  of  entertainment,   and  traces  examples  of  live  lectures  happening  to  this  day.    It  also  offers  insights  on   early  alternative  film  exhibitions  and  audiences.   Eight  years  later,  Ruoff  edited  the  most  substantive  research  on  the  topic  of   travelogues  in  his  2006  anthology  Virtual  Voyages  :  Cinema  and  Travel.    This   collection  of  essays  argues  that  early  travel  films  evolved  into  a  variety  of  travelogue   forms  in  cinema,  ranging  from  ethnographic  films  to  Hollywood  features.  Despite   acknowledging  the  relevance  of  these  different  practices,  Ruoff  limits  his  focus  to   the  film  medium.  By  doing  this,  Ruoff  admittedly  neglects  "the  extraordinary   diversity  of  travel  material  on  television."  5  Furthermore,  while  Ruoff  attempts  to   correct  the  idea  that  "the  travelogue  faded  from  view  after  a  brief  period  of  primacy  

                                                                                                                 5  Ibid.,  21.      5  

in  the  first  decades  of  cinema,"  most  of  the  chapters  are  devoted  to  this  early   period.6     Several  of  the  essays  contained  in  Ruoff's  anthology  are  re-prints,  originally   published  in  books  or  journals  outside  the  discipline  of  film  studies.      Tom  Gunning's   "'The  Whole  World  within  Reach':  Travel  Images  without  Borders"  first  appeared  in   1995  in  Cinema  sans  frontieres  /  Images  Across  Borders,  edited  by  Roland  Cosandey   and  Francois  Albera.  The  article  by  Lauren  Rabinovitz,  "From  Hale's  Tours  to  Star   Tours:  Virtual  Voyages  and  the  Delerium  of  the  Hyper-Real,"  debuted  in  the  25th   volume  of  Iris,  the  European  Journal  of  Philosophy  and  Public  Debate.    Four  of  the   chapters  appeared  in  the  January-March  2002  issue  of  Visual  Anthropology:   "Homemade  Travelogues:  Autosonntag  ­  a  Film  Safari  in  the  Swiss  Alps"  by   Alexandra  Schneider;  "Hollywood  and  the  Attractions  of  the  Travelogue,"  by  Dana   Benelli;  "'The  Last  of  the  Great  (Foot-Slogging)  Explorers:'  Lewis  Cotlow  and  the   Ethnographic  Imaginary  in  Popular  Travel  Film"  by  Amy.  J.  Staples;  and  "Show  and   Tell:  The  16mm  Travel  Lecture  Film"  by  Jeffrey  Ruoff.    An  earlier  version  of  Ruoff's   "Show  and  Tell:  The  16mm  Travel  Lecture  Film"  appeared  in  CineAction  47  in   1998.7    These  six  essays,  which  constitute  half  of  Virtual  Voyages,  speak  to  the   interdisciplinary  study  of  travel  films  developing  in  recent  years.     Three  contributors  to  Ruoff's  anthology  have  since  expanded  their  chapters   into  books.    Alison  Griffiths  published  Shivers  Down  Your  Spine:  Cinema,  Museums,   and  the  Immersive  View  in  2008;  Lauren  Rabinovitz  published  Electric  Dreamland:  
6  Ibid.,  13.  

                                                                                                                 Jeffrey  Ruoff,.  Durham:  Duke  University  Press,  2006,  p.  xiii  ­  xiv.   6  

7  Jeffrey  Ruoff.  "Acknowledgments"  in  Virtual  voyages  :  cinema  and  travel,  edited  by  

  

Amusement  Parks,  Movies,  and  American  Modernity  in  2012;  and  Jennifer  Lynn   Peterson  published  Education  in  the  School  of  Dreams:  Travelogues  and  Early   Nonfiction  Film  in  2013.       Through  a  series  of  historically  grounded  case  studies,  Shivers  Down  Your   Spine  explores  the  visceral  power  of  immersive  spaces.    In  her  discussion  of  the   IMAX  Theater,  Griffiths  criticizes  its  reliance  on  the  travelogue  as  its  key  structuring   principle,  stating  how  motion  itself,  the  defining  characteristic  of  travel,  is  inscribed   in  IMAX.8    Derived  from  cultural  theory,  Griffiths'  ideas  about  the  travelogue  and   human  perception  are  more  abstract  than  what  has  been  covered  in  the  past.   Rabinovitz  also  investigates  notions  about  travel  and  motion  in  Electric   Dreamland:  Amusement  Parks,  Movies,  and  American  Modernity.    Exploring   modernism  through  new  forms  of  recreation,  her  work  documents  the  rise  of   cinemas  and  amusement  parks  in  early  20th-century  America.  The  main  focus  of  the   third  chapter  is  how  "movie  rides"  such  as  Hale's  Tours  and  Scenes  of  the  World  use   motion  pictures,  sound  and  mechanical  movement  to  offer  virtual  travel  to  places   looking  for  tourism.9    While  both  Griffiths  and  Rabinovitz  discuss  the  travel  film  in   aspects  of  their  research,  these  new  works  are  not  pertinent  to  film  studies.     Peterson's  book,  on  the  other  hand,  is  wholly  dedicated  to  the  study  of  the   film  travelogue.  Education  in  the  School  of  Dreams:  Travelogues  and  Early  Nonfiction   Film  provides  exhaustive  research  on  early  travel  films  produced  in  the  United   States.    In  attempting  to  define  an  early  travelogue  "genre,"  Peterson  defines  two                                                                                                                    8  Alison  Griffiths.  Shivers  down  your  spine  :  cinema,  museums,  and  the  immersive  view.   New  York  :  Columbia  University  Press,  c2008.   9  Lauren  Rabinovitz.  Electric  dreamland  :  amusement  parks,  movies,  and  American   modernity.  New  York  :  Columbia  University  Press,  c2012.      7  

characteristics  that  must  be  present.  First,  location  is  the  primary  subject  of  the   travelogue.    Second,  movement  is  a  key  element  that  sets  the  films  apart  from   lectures.    In  these  early  years,  she  argues,  the  lack  of  a  narrator  allowed  spectators   to  engage  with  the  films  in  new  ways.10    Focusing  outside  the  area  of  traditional   travel  lecture  films,  as  Ruoff  has  already  done,  Peterson  presents  new  research  on   the  early  travelogue.   The  most  recent  addition  to  the  literature  on  travel  film  is  Liz  Czach's  chapter   "'A  Thrill  Every  Minute!'  Travel-Adventure  Film  Lectures  in  the  Post-War  Era,"  in   Cinephemera:  Archives,  Ephemeral  Cinema,  and  New  Screen  Histories  in  Canada.   (2014).    In  this  chapter,  Czach  investigates  post-war  travel  film  lecturing,   promotion,  and  exhibition  in  North  America,  highlighting  the  degree  to  which   Canadian  filmmakers  and  images  of  Canada  circulated.    Throughout  her  study,  she   uses  the  work  of  lecturers  Melvin  and  Ethel  Ross  to  illustrate  her  points.11    This   work  fills  in  some  of  the  gaps  left  open  by  other  scholars.    She  provides  a  Canadian   context  for  travel  film  lectures,  which  has  never  been  written  about  in  the  past.    In   addition,  her  study  takes  place  in  the  post-war  period,  moving  away  from  early   cinema.   As  demonstrated  by  the  literature  reviewed  here,  scholarship  on  travel  films   is  dominated  by  studies  on  early  film  history  and  travel  lectures.    However,  the                                                                                                                    Nonfiction  Film.  Duke  University  Press,  2013.   11  Liz  Czach.  "'A  Thrill  Every  Minute!':  Travel-Adventure  Film  Lectures  in  the  Post- War  Era,"  in  Cinephemera  :  archives,  ephemeral  cinema,  and  new  screen  histories  in   Canada,  edited  by  Zoe  Druick  and  Gerda  Cammaer,  73-93.  Montreal  &  Kingston:   McGill-Queen's  University  Press,  2014,  p.  73-74.         8  
10  Jennifer  Lynn  Peterson.  Education  in  the  School  of  Dreams:  Travelogues  and  Early  

trend  in  more  recent  publications  has  been  to  explore  the  different  representations   of  travel  in  various  cinematic  forms.    Areas  that  have  yet  to  be  explored  in-depth  are   Canadian  travel  films,  and  travel  material  on  television.    An  account  of  the   travelogues  produced  by  Madvo  would  advance  knowledge  in  both  of  these  areas.      1.2  Cataloguing  Moving  Images   In  1951,  the  National  Film  Library,  British  Film  Institute,  Rules  for  Use  in  the   Cataloguing  Department  of  the  National  Film  Library  published  the  first  cataloguing   code  for  film.    The  following  year,  the  Library  of  Congress  came  out  with  Rules  for   Descriptive  Cataloguing  in  the  Library  of  Congress,  Motion  Pictures  and  Filmstrips.  In   1970,  the  first  MARC  format  for  film  was  published.  The  first  edition  of  Archival   Moving  Images  Materials:  A  Cataloguing  Manual  (AMIM)  was  established  in  1984.     FIAF  came  out  with  their  The  FIAF  Cataloguing  Rules  for  Film  Archives  in  1991.    In   2002,  the  rules  for  Archival  Moving  Images  Materials:  A  Cataloguing  Manual  (AMIM)   were  revised  and  the  second  edition  was  put  out.12   Today,  there  are  a  number  of  different  standards  for  cataloguing  moving   images,  including:  AACR2  2005  rev.  (Anglo-American  Cataloguing  Rules,  2nd  edition,   revised)  is  a  set  of  standards  that  consists  of  cataloguing  rules  created  and  used  by   national  libraries  and  library  associations  of  the  United  States,  Great  Britain,  Canada,   and  Australia.  These  rules  are  useful  for  collections  in  libraries.  

                                                                                                                 12  Martha  M.  Yee.  Moving  image  cataloging  :  how  to  create  and  how  to  use  a  moving   image  catalog.  Westport,  Conn.  :  Libraries  Unlimited,  2007,  p.  20  -  21         9  

AMIM2  (Archival  Moving  Images  Materials:  A  Cataloguing  Manual,  2nd  ed.)   was  created  by  the  Motion  Picture,  Broadcasting  and  Recorded  Sound  Division  at   the  Library  of  Congress  (MBRS).    These  rules  involve  a  manual  based  on  AACR  2005   rev.,  but  are  slightly  different.  For  example,  AMIM2  takes  a  different  approach  as  to   when  to  make  a  new  record  for  deviation  between  versions  of  a  work.  Like  AACR   2005  rev.,  AMIM2  makes  a  new  record  for  any  change  in  content.  Unlike  AACR  2005   rev.,  however,  AMIM2  does  not  make  a  new  record  for  change  in  title.13   FIAF  Cataloguing  Rules  are  international  rules  created  by  the  Fédération   Internationale  des  Archives  du  Film  (FIAF).  These  rules  are  governed  by  European   cataloguing  practice  and,  as  a  result,  do  not  readily  identify  corporate  bodies.    All   corporate  bodies  are  put  further  down  in  the  record  and  none  directly  after  the  title.   DACS  (Describing  Archives:  a  Content  Standard),  published  by  the  Society  of   American  Archivists,  and  MARC  21  linked  to  an  archival  finding  aid  created  using   EAD  (Encoded  Archival  Description)  are  typically  used  for  cataloguing  moving   images  in  document  archives  in  the  United  States.    In  Canada,  document  archivists   use  RAD,  and,  internationally,  document  archivists  use  ISAD(G).     Dublin  Core,  MPEG-7,  METS,  MODS,  VRA  standards  are  metadata  standards   being  used  by  the  emerging  digital  library  community.    They  are  well  documented   on  the  web  and  do  not  require  extensive  training.14   Due  to  the  fact  that  LIFT  is  not  a  library  and  will  not  be  circulating  materials,   AACR2  2005  rev.,  and  AMIM2  are  not  suitable  for  this  thesis  project.    FIAF   standards,  being  geared  toward  facilitating  the  information  exchange  between                                                                                                                    13  Ibid,  18.   14  Ibid.,  16  ­  17.      10  

international  archives,  do  not  provide  the  best  regulations  for  my  purposes,  either.     While  metadata  standards  such  as  Dublin  Core,  MPEG-7,  METS,  MODS,  VRA  are   useful  for  cataloging  digital  moving  image  formats,  they  are  unnecessary  since  I  am   dealing  with  a  16mm  collection.   RAD  standards,  based  on  traditional  archival  principles  set  out  by  the  Anglo- American  Cataloguing  Rules  and  put  out  by  the  Bureau  of  Canadian  Archivists,   proved  to  be  the  most  relevant  regulations  for  my  thesis  project.    They  provided  me   with  a  consistent  basis  for  the  description  of  archival  material  and  the  provision  of   access  for  all  forms  of  material,  e.g.,  text,  graphic  material,  and  moving  images.     Chapter  7:  Moving  Images  is  the  most  relevant  to  me.       Moving  Image  Cataloging  :  How  to  Create  and  How  to  Use  a  Moving  Image   Catalog  (2007)  provides  information  about  standards  and  looks  at  how  each   approach  handles  cataloguing  issues.  More  than  a  step-by-step  guide,  the  textbook   teaches  readers  how  to  think  about  collections  and  make  effective  decisions  that   will  meet  the  unique  needs  of  users.15    The  kind  of  critical  thinking  and  problem   solving  relayed  in  this  textbook  offers  valuable  advice  for  the  part  of  my  project  that   requires  the  organization  of  information  and  cataloguing.             

15  Ibid.,  xiii  -  xiv  

                                                                                                                

  

11  

2. Jacques  Madvo:  Biographical  Sketch16   Jacques  Madvo  was  Armenian.  He  was  born  in  1924  (in  what  today  is   considered  Turkey,  but  was  then  part  of  Armenia)  into  the  aftermath  of  The   Armenian  Genocide  (1915  ­  1921)  and  Turkish-Armenian  War  (1920).  His  mother   died  giving  birth  to  him  and,  shortly  after  that,  his  father  was  killed,  leaving  Madvo   orphaned  at  a  very  young  age.    After  his  father's  death,  he  went  to  live  with  his  aunt   (his  father's  sister)  in  Beirut,  Lebanon.  There,  he  grew  up  believing  his  aunt  was  his   mother  and  that  her  two  daughters  (his  cousins),  were  his  sisters.  His  aunt  then  died   when  he  was  12  years  old.     In  his  early  20s,  Madvo  studied  medicine  at  the  Sorbonne  in  Paris,  France.  His   education  was  interrupted,  however,  when  he  became  ill  and  was  sent  to  The  Black   Forest, a  mountainous  region  in  southwest  Germany  bordering  France,  for  recovery.   There,  he  discovered  a  passion  for  the  arts.  Inspired  by  the  beauty  of  The  Black   Forest,  Madvo  began  taking  pictures  of  the  landscape  with  his  camera.     When  he  returned  to  Paris,  he  did  not  continue  studying  medicine.  Instead,   he  enrolled  at  Le  Conservatoire  National  de  Musique  de  Paris  and  studied  Opera  and   Opera  Staging  from  1950  to  1953.  Throughout  his  years  there,  he  founded  the   Groupe  Lyrique  et  Choreographique  de  l'Université  de  Paris  and  staged  Christoph   Willibald's  Orfeo  ed  Euridice  (French  version:  Orphée  et  Eurydice;  English:  Orpheus   and  Eurydice),  an  opera-ballet  based  on  the  Greek  myth  of  Orpheus,  at  the  Sorbonne   amphitheatre.                                                                                                                      16  Unless  otherwise  referenced,  the  details  of  Madvo's  life  provided  in  this  chapter   were  gathered  from  Madvo's  resume,  as  well  as  interviews  conducted  with  Madvo's   son,  Denis,  and  widow,  Hermine.  The  conversations  took  place  in  March  of  2015.        12  

Following  his  education  in  Opera  and  Opera  staging,  Madvo  decided  to  study   filmmaking  at  L'Institut  des  hautes  études  cinématographiques  (IDHEC;  English:  the   "Institute  for  Advanced  Cinematographic  Studies"),17  also  in  in  Paris,  from  1953  to   1956.  There,  he  received  training  in  Movie  Direction,  Production  and  Editing.  He   directed  his  first  film,  La  Petite  Fille  Aux  Allumettes  (English:  The  Little  Match  Girl),  a   film  based  on  the  short  story  by  Danish  poet  and  author  Hans  Christian  Andersen.18       At  this  time,  Madvo  met  his  first  wife,  Jacqueline,  who  was  from  France.  The   couple  married  and  two  children,  Denis  and  Bruno.   After  graduating  l'ICHEC,  Madvo  got  a  job  as  Director  in  Movie  Production   with  the  United  Nations  (UNRWA)  in  Beirut.  He  worked  there  from  1956  to  1960,   before  taking  a  one-year  paid  absence  to  attend  a  refresher  course  in  movie   production  and  direction  of  photography,  again,  in  Paris.  With  the  training,  he   obtained  a  diploma  offered  by  the  French  Government.     In  that  year,  Madvo  directed  and  photographed  four  documentary  films,   Fontaines  de  Paris,  Vitraux  de  Paris,  Paris:  le  Passé  et  le  Présent,  and  London  at   Christmas.     He  returned  to  the  United  Nations  in  1962  as  Director  and  Cameraman.                                                                                                                      17  L'Institut  des  hautes  études  cinématographiques  is  a  French  film  school,  founded   during  World  War  II  under  the  leadership  of  Marcel  L'Herbier  who  was  its  president   from  1944  to  1969.  IDHEC  offered  training  for  directors  and  producers,  cameramen,   sound  technicians,  editors,  art  directors  and  costume  designers.  It  became  highly   influential,  and  many  prominent  filmmakers  received  their  training  there.  It  was   reorganized  between  1986  and  1988  and  renamed  La  Fémis.   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institut_des_hautes_%C3%A9tudes_cin%C3%A9mat ographiques   18  The  Little  Match  Girl  (Danish:  Den  Lille  Pige  med  Svovlstikkerne,  meaning  "The   little  girl  with  the  matchsticks")  is  a  story  about  a  dying  child's  dreams  and  hopes,   first  published  in  1845.      13  

Between  1965  and  1968,  Madvo  was  engaged  as  a  Consultant  in   Cinematography  for  Arabian  American  Oil  Co.  (or  Aramco),19  where  he  produced  an   average  of  one  documentary  film  per  week  for  the  Aramco  TV  Station.  During  this   time,  he  lived  and  worked  in  Saudi  Arabia.     Then,  in  1968,  he  directed  and  produced  two  documentary  films  for  the   Ministry  of  Information  in  Lebanon.   The  following  year  was  productive  for  Madvo.  For  the  first  half  of  1969,  he   worked  as  Cinematographer  for  Walt  Disney  Productions  on  the  film  A  Boy  from   Bahrain,  a  two-hour  feature  about  "the  adventures  of  a  young  lad  who  is  lost  at  sea   and  falls  into  the  hands  of  smugglers  making  off  with  stolen  treasure."20  Later  that   year,  he  directed,  photographed  and  produced  Liban  Pays  de  Soleil,  a  film  for  the   Ministry  of  Tourism  in  Lebanon.  He  also  founded  his  own  production  company,   World  Film  Productions,  and  started  working  again  as  a  Director  and  Cameraman  on   a  contract  basis  for  the  United  Nations.  

                                                                                                                 19  Saudi  Arabian  Oil  Company,  most  popularly  known  as  Aramco  (formerly  Arabian- American  Oil  Company)  is  the  state-owned  oil  company  of  the  Kingdom  of  Saudi   Arabia  based  in  Dhahran,  Saudi  Arabia.   http://www.saudiaramco.com/en/home.html   20  "Boy  from  Bahrain,"  Awali  Magazine,  October  1969,  p.  12.  This  article  was  written   while  A  Boy  from  Bahrain  was  in  production.  The  film  was  later  retitled  Hamad  and   the  Pirates  and  released  in  1971  as  part  of  the  Disney  series  The  Wonderful  World  of   Colour,  directed  by  Richard  Lyford  (who  also  made  several  films  for  Aramco).   Madvo's  name  does  not  appear  in  the  film's  credits.  Hamad  and  the  Pirates  is   available  to  watch  on  Youtube.  See:   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lqfyV9LHXxE      14  

  

  

Figure  1.  Production  still,  Madvo  working  on  the  set  of  A  Boy  from  Bahrain  (1969).        In  1971,  Madvo  directed,  photographed  and  produced  Dispersés  Par  le  Vent   (English:  Blown  by  the  Wind),  a  compilation  of  still  images  documenting  Palestinian   children  seeking  refuge  in  Lebanon.  It  was  officially  selected  for  the  Venice  Film   Festival,  and  won  awards  at  the  Leipzig  Film  Festival,  as  well  as  in  Czechoslovakia   and  Tunis.21                                                                                                                     
21  In  an  article  discussing  the  Festival  International  du  Film  de  l'Ensemble  

Francophone  (FIFEF)  in  Beirut,  published  by  the  Journal  de  la  Cinémathèque  de   Betagne,  Dispersés  Par  le  Vent  is  described  as  being  the  film  that  gave  credit  to   Lebanon  as  a  country  where  FIFEF  could  boost  a  "burgeoning  creativity":  «C'est  le   film  de  Jacques  Madvo,  Dispersés  par  le  vent,  qui  permit  de  diagnostiquer  que  le  Liban      15  

In  that  same  year,  Madvo's  wife  died  in  a  tragic  car  accident.   After  her  death,  Madvo  and  his  sons  came  to  Canada  to  be  with  family.  Before   permanently  settling,  he  returned  to  Beirut  to  organize  the  Festival  International  du   Film  de  l'Ensemble  Francophone  (FIFEF)  in  1973.  He  officially  transferred  his   company,  World  Film  Productions,  to  Toronto  in  1974.   From  1974  to  1983,  Madvo  directed  and  coproduced  19  half-hour   documentaries  about  various  countries  for  the  television  series  Countries  and  People   (French:  "Pays  et  Peuples")  in  both  official  languages  for  the  Ontario  Educational   Communications  Authority  (or  TVO)  22  under  producer  Leopold  Lacroix.  The  series   deals  with  the  geography,  history,  sociology,  ethnography,  and  economy  as  well  as   with  the  traditions,  customs,  and  cultures  of  various  countries  in  the  world,  among   them:  Kuwait,  Jordan,  Iraq,  Lebanon,  Iran,  Israel,  Yemen,  Saudi  Arabia,  Egypt,   Morocco,  Greece,  Yugoslavia,  Italy,  Spain,  Portugal,  Brazil,  Venezuela,  Mexico,  and   Vatican  City.  The  countries  of  China,  Japan,  Vietnam,  and  Thailand  were  filmed  for   the  series  but  these  documentaries  were  never  completed.     In  addition,  Madvo  produced  a  short  five-minute  film  called  Lebanon  at  War,   which  documents  civil  war  in  Lebanon  between  Christians  and  Muslims.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                était  une  contrée  où  ce  projet  pouvait  impulser  une  créativité  naissante  »  (Alain   Aubert).  http://www.cinematheque-bretagne.fr/files/400/2_Fil_A_Fil_No13.pdf   22  The  Ontario  Educational  Communications  Authority  (OECA)  was  created  by   Education  Minister  Bill  Davis  in  1970.  It  launched  TVOntario  (or  TVO),  its  first   educational  television  channel,  in  1975.  Today,  TVO  is  an  English-language  network.   Originally,  it  produced  both  English  and  French  television  programming,  but,  in   1987,  TVO  launched  La  Chaîne  française,  a  French-language  public  television   network  that  became  TFO  in  1994.  http://www.tvo.org/about   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TVOntario#History   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TFO#History   http://www.groupemediatfo.org/history/?lang=en         16  

   Figure  2.  Informational  booklet  on  the  Countries  and  People  series  put  out  by  The   Ontario  Educational  Communications  Authority.         Outside  of  working  with  TVO,  Madvo  made  two  independent  documentary   films  about  Canada,  Vivre  en  Paix  (English:  Living  in  Peace;  1974)  and  Canada   (1977).  Vivre  en  Paix  is  a  compilation  film  (similar  to  Dispersés  Par  le  Vent)  made  up   of  still  photographs  of  Canadian  children  and  pictures  they  painted.  Canada  is  a   more  traditional  documentary  that  explores  the  country,  highlighting  tourist   attractions  in  each  of  the  nation's  provinces.    

  

17  

In  1979,  Madvo  met  his  second  wife,  Hermine,  who  was  Romanian  and  had   immigrated  to  Canada  in  1953.  They  travelled  together,  capturing  images  around   the  world  for  his  Countries  and  Peoples  films,  as  well  as  for  pleasure.  His  unfinished   documentary,  The  Danube,  documents  subsequent  summers  spent  together   travelling  down  the  Danube  River.  The  idea  was  to  go  from  one  end  to  the  other,   from  the  Black  Forest  to  the  Black  Sea.23    They  made  it  as  far  as  Budapest.     In  1983,  after  leaving  TVO  due  to  a  change  in  management,24  Madvo  directed,   photographed,  and  edited  a  half-hour  documentary  film,  800  Years  of  Arab  Presence   in  Spain,  financed  by  R.  H.  Sanbar  Group.25     He  then  began  researching  and  filming  for  his  feature  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,   which  he  produced  with  a  grant  from  the  Canadian  Council  for  the  Arts  and   completed  in  1984.  This  was  Madvo's  first  and  only  feature,  based  on  the  stage   production  he  put  on  as  a  student  at  Le  Conservatoire  National  de  Musique  de  Paris.   Part  of  the  film  was  shot  in  High  Park  in  Toronto,  and  the  rest  was  constructed  with   assorted  footage  he  had  captured  around  the  world.  26  

                                                                                                                 23  The  Black  Forest  had  special  meaning  to  Madvo.  It  was  the  place  where  he   discovered  the  arts,  sent  there  to  recover  from  an  illness  while  he  was  a  student.   24  Leopold  Lacroix  was  General  Manager  at  TVO  from  1966  to  1983.  Groupe  Média   TFO.  "History."  http://www.groupemediatfo.org/history/?lang=en   25  R.H.  Sanbar  Group  was  a  British-based  group  of  companies  with  a  primary   emphasis  on  international  real  estate  development.  http://www.sgi- inc.net/company.swf   26  Madvo  always  had  a  vision  to  turn  Gluck's  play  into  a  film.  While  travelling  the   world,  Madvo  would  carry  two  16mm  Bolex  cameras:  one  for  filming  his  Countries   and  People  series  and  one  to  shoot  footage  for  his  future  film,  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.   These  images  were  mostly  of  art  and  architecture.  There  is  one  scene  in  Orpheus  and   Eurydice  of  a  sculpture  lamenting  in  Paris,  for  example,  that  he  uses  to  tell  the  story   of  Eurydice  dying.      18  

   Figure  3.  Production  still,  Madvo  shooting  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  in  High  Park  in   Toronto,  ca.  1984.      Besides  the  above-mentioned  productions,  Madvo  shot  home  movies.  These   films  document  everyday  life  and  take  place  in  domestic  settings  in  Lebanon  and,   later,  Toronto,  as  well  as  on  trips  abroad.  Unlike  most  amateur  filmmakers,  Madvo   edited  his  home  movies  to  be  watched  by  extended  audiences.   The  last  film  Madvo  worked  on  before  his  death,  La  Mer  (English:  The  Sea),   he  considered  to  be  his  masterpiece.  It  consists  of  shots  of  the  sea,  captured  over   several  years,  set  to  the  music  of  Claude  Debussy's  orchestral  composition,  La  Mer.  

  

19  

The  film  was  in  the  last  stages  of  post-production  when  he  stopped  working  on  it,   and  it  was  never  finished.27   Madvo  died  in  2014.  Surviving  family  remembers  him  as  a  vibrant,  strong- willed  man  and  passionate  filmmaker  dedicated  to  his  craft.  

   Figure  4.  Madvo  in  his  film  editing  room  at  home  (note  the  globe  in  the  back  left   corner).                                                                                                                            

27  For  a  complete  list  of  films  by  Madvo,  see  Appendix  A.  

  

20  

3. Processing  the  Collection   I  began  cataloguing  the  Madvo  Collection  in  the  summer  of  2014.  I  was  hired   by  LIFT  to  process  the  collection,  determine  a  scheme  for  arrangement,  describe  the   materials,  and  compile  the  records  in  a  database.  Over  the  course  of  ten  weeks,  I   meticulously  examined  and  described  180  canisters  of  film.  I  finished  cataloguing   the  collection  in  intermittent  periods  throughout  the  fall  of  2014  and  the  spring  of   2015.    In  total,  I  catalogued  240  canisters  of  non-fiction  films.  The  equipment  I  used   to  inspect  the  films  primarily  included  a  rewind  bench,  a  light  table  and  loupe.28        3.1  Method   Processing  the  collection  involved  the  following  steps:   1. Assess  items  in  the  collection:  Undertake  a  review  of  the  documents  to   establish  extent,  date  range,  scope  and  content,  physical  condition,  etc.   2. Process  and  catalogue  material  based  on  archival  principles  and  using   procedures  and  supplies  appropriate  for  various  media.   3. Compile  data  in  a  database  and  label  each  file  accordingly.   Before  I  started  cataloguing,  in  order  to  get  a  general  understanding  of  what   the  collection  contained,  I  reviewed  a  sample  of  films  to  determine  the  approximate   extent,  date  range,  scope  and  content,  and  physical  condition  of  material  in  the   collection.    I  found  that  the  collection  contains  16mm  film  and  production  elements   dating  from  approximately  1960  to  1985,  the  majority  of  which  make  up  Madvo's   TVO  series,  Countries  and  People.                                                                                                                        28  A  loupe  is  a  small  magnifying  glass  or  lens  used  to  examine  the  details  of   individual  analogue  film  frames.      21  

Elements  in  the  collection  are  various  and  include:  original  negative,  original   reversal,  a/b  rolls,  work  prints,  out-takes,  answer  prints,  masters,  prints,  magnetic   and  optical  sound  elements,  and  titles  and  text  in  both  English  and  French.  Some   canisters  also  contained  textual  documents  related  to  the  productions  such  as   production  notes,  editing  time  sheets,  scripts,  newspaper  articles,  and  souvenirs.   Overall,  material  in  the  collection  is  in  excellent  physical  condition.  There  has   been  normal  shrinkage  of  the  film  base,  as  well  as  some  oxidation,  fading  and  dye   shifts.  However,  a  significant  amount  of  the  film  material  is  shot  on  reversal  film,   and  has  retained  vibrant  colour  in  its  images.    The  films  are  not  heavily  scratched,   nor  contain  dust.    Sound  elements  in  the  collection  are  primarily  optical  tracks.   However,  the  small  amount  of  magnetic  sound  reels  has  experienced  substantial   deterioration  to  the  point  where  they  have  turned  to  red  dust.  

         Figure  5.  Examples  of  film  elements  contained  in  the  Madvo  Collection.  Left:  20   reels  of  original  reversal  film.  Right:  22  reels  of  deteriorated  magnetic  sound.   22     

  

I  catalogued  the  materials  in  accordance  with  the  Rules  for  Archival   Description  (RAD).  RAD,  put  out  by  the  Bureau  of  Canadian  Archivists,  provides  a   set  of  rules  that  "aim  to  provide  a  consistent  and  common  foundation  for  the   description  of  archival  material  within  fonds,  based  on  traditional  archival   principles."  Because  LIFT  does  not  have  cataloguing  regulations  in  place,  and   because  it  is  not  known  what  future  archive  (if  at  all)  will  be  taking  the  films  that   LIFT  does  not  keep,  RAD  standards  were  the  most  appropriate  rules  to  follow  as   they  are  the  most  widely  used,  and  the  most  amenable,  to  archives  across  Canada.     RAD  standards  organize  collections  based  on  the  archival  principle  of  respect   des  fonds,  a  principle  in  archival  theory  that  states  that  "the  records  created,   accumulated,  and/or  maintained  and  used  by  an  individual  or  corporate  body  must   be  kept  together  in  their  original  order,  if  it  exists  or  has  been  maintained,  and  not   be  mixed  or  combined  with  the  records  of  another  individual  or  corporate  body."29   Madvo  organized  his  work  in  film  canisters  based  on  production  title.  Thus,  I   described  the  collection  by  each  canister.  In  archival  theory,  this  lower-level  of   arrangement  is  referred  to  as  the  "file  level."30  Cataloguing  at  the  "item  level,"  (i.e.   each  individual  reel)  would  have  been  time  consuming  and,  ultimately,  unnecessary   since  many  of  the  elements  contained  within  each  canister  are  very  similar,  or   duplicates.                                                                                                                     

29  Bureau  of  Canadian  Archivists.  Rules  for  Archival  Description.  1990.  Revised  2008.,  

xxiii. http://www.cdncouncilarchives.ca/rad/rad_principles_july2008.pdf
30  Ibid,  1-4.  Where  the  description  of  a  fonds,  series,  or  collection  as  a  whole  

constitutes  the  highest  level  of  description,  the  descriptions  of  its  parts  constitute   lower  levels  of  description.  Lower-level  parts  that  may  include  series,  files,  and   items.     23  

  

For  cataloguing  moving  images,  RAD  provides  instructions  for  the  following   areas  of  description:   Title  and  statement  of  responsibility  -  Edition  -  Date(s)  of  creation  -  Physical   description  -  Publisher's  series  Archival  description  -  Note(s)  -  Standard   number        Based  off  of  those  areas,  I  created  the  following  fields  of  information  and   described  the  material  accordingly:   Title  and  Statement  of  Responsibility  ­  Edition  ­  Date(s)  of  Creation  ­   Publisher  ­  Objects  ­  Duration  ­  Length  ­  Material  ­  Generation  -  Aspect  -   Production  Element  ­  Colour  ­  Sound  ­  Gauge  ­  Recording  ­  Soundtrack  ­   Titles  ­  Language  -  Inscription  &  Marks  ­  Category  -  Scope  and  Content  ­   Subject  -  Accompanying  Material  ­  Note(s)  -  Condition  Report         I  compiled  the  data  in  an  excel  worksheet  and  assigned  each  record  a   reference  number.  This  number  was  labeled  on  each  canister  with  the   corresponding  record  title  and  element  designation.  I  chose  to  use  Microsoft  Excel   because  it  is  the  most  common  spreadsheet  technology  used  to  organize  data.  It  can   easily  be  exported  or  transferred  to  other  organizations.  31      3.2  Cataloguing   Here,  my  descriptions  of  each  area  of  information  are  explained  in  detail.32  As   prescribed  by  RAD,  when  describing  each  file,  the  chief  source  of  information  was  all  

31  For  the  catalogue  of  Madvo's  non-fiction  films,  see  Appendix  B.   32  These  explanatory  notes  are  based  off  of  RAD  rules  laid  out  in  Chapters  1  (General  

                                                                                                                

Instructions)  and  7  (Moving  Images)  of  the  guidelines.   24  

  

of  the  material  in  the  file,  including  the  file  folder  or  other  container  (i.e.  the  film   can).33      3.2.1  Title  and  Statement  of  Responsibility     RAD  standards  states  that  "at  all  levels  of  description,  when  the  chief  source   of  information  for  a  unit  being  described  bears  a  formal  title  proper,  transcribe  it   exactly  as  to  wording,  order,  and  spelling,  but  not  necessarily  as  to  punctuation  and   capitalization."34  I  did  this  whenever  possible  (for  example,  when  Madvo  had   labeled  the  film  can).  However,  when  the  material  lacked  a  formal  title  proper,  and   since  "the  transcribed  title  must  be  common  to  all  the  material  being  described  at   the  level  at  which  it  is  being  described,"35  I  included  the  optional  addition,  "General   material  designation"  (GMD)  and  "Other  title  information"  in  the  title  field.  I   recorded  the  production  title(s)  contained  within  the  file,  followed  by  the  element.   Further  to  the  title  proper,  if  a  film  had  a  parallel  title  (i.e.  a  translation  to   English  from  French),  I  transcribed  the  parallel  title  with  the  equal  sign  (=).       I  also  transcribed  explicit  statements  of  responsibility  that  appeared  in   combination  with  a  formal  title  proper  appearing  in  or  on  the  chief  source  of   information  (Madvo  often  titled  each  film  canister  with  the  title  of  the  production   followed  by  his  company  name,  World  Film  Productions).                                                                                                                         

33  Ibid.,  7-4.   35  Ibid.  

34  Bureau  of  Canadian  Archivists.  Rules  for  Archival  Description,  1-13.  

  

25  

Reference  Code  

Title  /  Statement  of  Responsibility  

1   Ten  Rue  Toronto  [GMD]  :  [Original  Negatives]     2   Fontaines  de  Paris  =  Fountains  of  Paris  [GMD]  :  [Print]    /  World  Film  Productions  

   Figure  6.  Example  of  Title  /  Statement  of  Responsibility  information  field.      3.2.2.  Edition   This  area  is  only  used  in  item  level  descriptions  to  record  statements  relating   to  versions  of  items  existing  in  two  or  more  versions  or  states  in  single  or  multiple   copies  and  did  not  apply  to  my  work.      3.2.3.  Date(s)  of  Creation   Dates  of  creation  were  documented  according  to  any  dates  found  on  the   objects  (i.e.  written  on  the  film  leader)  or  on  the  film  can  (i.e.  film  developing  dates).   If  unknown,  approximate  dates  of  creation  were  determined  by  the  Kodak  edge   code  numbers  (ECN)  on  the  film  stock.      3.2.4  Physical  Description     Objects     I  recorded  the  extent  of  the  file  being  described  by  giving  the  number  of   physical  objects  that  comprised  it,  followed  by  the  specific  material  designation  (i.e.   "film  reels").        

  

26  

Duration   Because  I  did  not  have  access  to  a  footage  counter,  and  was  not  able  to  watch   the  films  at  their  intended  24  fps  speed,  unless  the  length  of  the  film  was  indicated   on  the  objects  (i.e.  written  on  the  film  leader)  or  on  the  film  can,  approximate   duration  was  calculated  according  to  the  cumulative  length  of  the  film  reels   contained  in  the  file.    
Objects   24  film  reels   1  film  reel   Duration   ca.  38  min.   20  min.   Length   ca.  1437.5  ft.   800  ft.  

Figure  7.  Example  of  Objects,  Duration  and  Length  information  fields.      Length   The  length  of  the  total  amount  of  film  material  contained  within  each  canister   was  calculated  by  the  summation  of  the  diameter  of  each  reel.  The  unit  of   measurement  is  in  feet.        Material     When  describing  the  material  of  the  objects,  I  recorded  the  physical   composition  of  the  film  base  (e.g.,  nitrate,  acetate,  polyester).        Generation     I  made  notes  to  distinguish  between  different  generations  of  material.            27  

Positive  /  Negative  Aspect     I  made  notes  to  distinguish  between  the  positive  /  negative  aspect  of  the   material.      Production  Element   I  gave  the  type  of  production  element  being  described  (e.g.,  A/B  rolls,  work   print,  answer  print,  music  track,  international  track,  etc.).      Colour   I  made  notes  to  distinguish  between  colour  and  black  and  white  materials.      Sound   I  made  notes  to  distinguish  between  sound  and  silent  materials.        Gauge     I  named  the  gauge  (width)  of  the  carrier  in  millimeters  for  film  (e.g.,  8  mm,   Super  8  mm,  16mm,  Super  16  mm,  35  mm,  etc.).      Recording   I  made  notes  to  distinguish  between  image  and  sound  recording.             

  

28  

Soundtrack   I  gave  sd.  (sound),  si.  (silent)  to  indicate  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  sound   track  on  the  unit  being  described.          Titles   If  a  film  contained  credits,  I  made  notes  to  distinguish  between  head  or  end   titles.      Language   I  made  notes  on  the  language  of  the  films  (mostly  English  and  French,  and   some  Arabic).      Inscription  &  Marks     I  included  this  field  to  record  any  data  that  was  not  available  from  the  images   themselves  (i.e.  written  on  the  film  leader  or  on  the  film  can)  so  that  supplementary   information  is  not  lost  if  the  material  is  moved  to  a  different  container.      3.2.5  Publisher's  Series   This  area  is  only  for  describing  an  item  bearing  a  publisher's  or  artist's  series   title,  and  did  not  apply  to  my  work.           

  

29  

3.2.6  Archival  Description   Category   I  categorized  the  films  in  order  for  users  to  easily  understand  the  kinds  of   images  contained  in  each  file  (in  this  case:  Documentary,  Travelogue,  Home  Movie).          Scope  and  Content   According  to  RAD,  for  the  scope  of  the  file,  information  is  given  on  the  subject   matter  and  the  production  to  which  it  pertains.  For  the  content  of  a  file,  information   is  given  about  the  processes  and  procedures  generating  the  file  and/or  about  the   transactions  to  which  the  file  pertains.  However,  because  the  scope  and  content  field   is  discretionary  if  the  title  of  the  file  is  clear  enough,  I  recorded  minimal  information.    
Scope  and  Content   This  file  contains  moving  images   relating  to  the  production  Greece:   Centre  of  the  World,  part  of  the   series  Countries  and  People  =  Pays   et  Peuples  /  TVOntario  (1977).  

   Figure  8.  Example  of  Scope  and  Content  information  field.      Subject   Because  RAD  specifies  that  information  fields  in  the  archival  description  area   can  be  prescribed  by  any  source,  I  described  the  subject  of  the  films  in  each  file   using  general  subject  terms  and  explanations  according  to  my  own  viewing,  as  well   as  by  supporting  documentation  (filmmaker's  notes,  shot  lists,  summaries,  etc.)   found  in  the  collection.    

  

30  

Subject Greece - Ancient History, Art, Architecture, Landscape, Description and Travel, Culture, Development ; "Greece: Centre of the World - Describing Greece's pivotal role in the development of democracy and theatre, the programme focuses on the ruins at Delphi, Athens and the temple of Zeus at Olympia. It also depicts Greece's contemporary commercial life farming, mining, the making of handicrafts and the merchant trade."

   Figure  9.  Example  of  Subject  information  field.      Accompanying  Material     I  added  this  field  to  describe  any  accompanying  material  contained  in  the   film  cans  that  are  not  moving  images  (i.e.  textual  records)  so  that  supplementary   information  is  not  lost.  
Accompanying Material 1 textual record: colour timing chart

   Figure  10.  Example  of  Accompanying  Material  information  field.      3.2.7  Note(s)     For  describing  each  file  in  the  Note(s)  Area,  I  examined  all  of  the  material  in   the  file  and  made  observations  I  felt  were  important.       
Note(s)   ECN  reads  1961.  Ektachrome.  Copied   from  double-perf.  White  leader  added   June  20,  2014.  

   Figure  11.  Example  of  Note(s)  information  field.            31  

Condition  Report   For  reporting  on  the  condition  of  the  contents  of  each  film  canister,  I   evaluated  the  overall  condition  of  the  material  according  to  the  National  Film   Preservation's  Condition  Report  that  is  provided  in  their  Film  Preservation  Guide   and  noted  any  major  signs  of  deterioration.    I  also  cleaned  the  films,  corrected   splices  and  added  film  leader  where  necessary.  
Condition  Report   Mild  vinegar  odour,  significant   colour  fading,  slight  warpage,   some  parts  overexposed.  

   Figure  12.  Example  of  Condition  Report  information  field.      3.2.8  Standard  Number     This  area  is  only  used  in  item  level  description  to  record  international   standard  numbers  pertaining  to  the  item  and  did  not  apply  to  my  work.        

  

32  

4. Descriptive  Analysis  of  Films  36   This  chapter  analyzes  a  selection  films  in  the  collection,  one  from  each   different  type  of  Madvo's  non-fiction  oeuvre:  one  documentary  from  the  Countries   and  People  series,  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic;  one  self-contained  documentary  film,   Fontaines  de  Paris;  and  one  home  movie  titled  Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants.  These   descriptive  case  studies  speak  to  the  diversity  and  humanity  in  Madvo's  oeuvre.        4.1  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  (1974,  30  min.)   "The  Earth,  like  a  tiring  thing,  has  its  own  spirit,  and  without  one's  native  lands,   without  close  touch  with  one's  motherlands,  it  is  impossible  to  find  oneself,  one's  soul."   ­  Martiros  Saryan,  Armenian  painter  (1880  ­  1972).37      Countries  and  People  was  a  coproduction  between  Madvo  (World  Film   Productions)  and  the  Ontario  Education's  Council  (now  TVO)  "designed  to  help   North  Americans  understand  the  present  circumstances  of  nations  that  have   evolved  from  ancient  civilizations  into  modern  industrial  states."38  The  series   consists  of  20  episodes.  Two  English  language  series  and  two  corresponding  French   language  series  were  broadcast  between  1976  and  1981.     A  promotional  write-up  of  the  series  provides  an  accurate  description  of  the   films:  

                                                                                                                 36  These  descriptions  are  based  off  my  own  observations  of  the  films.   37  The  above  quote  was  found  on  a  note  in  Madvo's  paper  archive.    Martiros  Saryan   was  an  Armenian  painter.  His  travels  to  Constantinople  (1910;  now  Istanbul),  Egypt   (1912),  southwestern  Armenia  (1913),  and  Persia  (1914;  Iran);  inspired  a  series  of   large  works  in  which  he  attempted  to  communicate  the  sensuousness  of  the  Middle   Eastern  landscapes.  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martiros_Saryan   38  Description  found  on  Madvo's  resume.      33  

"The  regions  visited  by  Countries  and  Peoples  ­  Southern  Europe,  Latin   America  and  the  Near  East  ­  are  all  cradles  of  enduring  civilizations  and   religions.  But  modern  tensions,  stemming  from  diverse  political,  social  and   economic  issues,  have  tormented  the  nations  of  these  regions.  The   programmes  identify  the  disparate  trend  in  these  countries  ­  for  example,   how  Jordan's  Bedouins  still  embrace  ancient  cultural  roots;  the  tradition  of   Kuwaitis  from  tribal  poverty  to  a  high  standard  of  living  through  oil   revenues;  Mexico's  overwhelming  poverty  in  the  face  of  the  country's  vast  oil   reserves;  and  conflicts  within  Israel."  39      Madvo  made  the  first  four  documentaries  for  the  series  at  once:  Kuwait:   Metamorphosis  of  the  Desert,  Jordan:  Daughter  of  the  Desert,  Iraq:  Cradle  of   Civilization  and  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic.  The  structures  of  these  films  generally   follow  the  same  formula.  Each  takes  a  historical  look  at  the  people  and  architecture   of  the  country,  and  updates  viewers  through  presenting  contemporary  statistics  on   population  growth,  education,  employment,  and  industry.     Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  visits  the  country  where  Madvo  grew  up.  It  begins   with  a  series  of  images  that  capture  the  country's  diverse  landscapes.  Shots  of   Lebanon's  ancient  cedar  trees  growing  on  mountainsides,  the  sun  above  the   Mediterranean  Sea,  dry  desert  terrain,  scenes  of  snow,  fishermen  on  the  coast,   peasants  working  in  fields,  farmlands,  and  a  cityscape  are  all  featured  in  this   opening  sequence.    A  traditional  Lebanese  song  plays  as  the  film's  soundtrack.  The   narrator  (credited  as  Philippe  Rochot)  announces:  "Lebanon  is  the  sun,  the  sea,   mountains  and  fresh  water  springs  bursting  forth  from  the  soil."     Madvo's  talent  for  photography  is  apparent  within  the  first  moments  of  this   documentary.    He  uses  the  physical  landscape,  combined  with  remarkable  camera                                                                                                                   
39  Description  taken  from  a  printed  webpage  contained  in  Madvo's  paper  archive.  

The  site  no  longer  exists.  

  

34  

angles,  to  frame  his  images  and  convey  the  natural  beauty  of  the  region.  For   example,  he  filmed  Lebanon's  mountain  ranges  from  their  very  peaks.  He  also   shoots  scenes  of  the  desert  sky  taken  from  within  crevices  in  the  rock.  Obviously,   Madvo  went  to  great  lengths  to  capture  these  shots.  

   Figure  13.  Frame  enlargement,  rock  formations  in  Lebanese  mountains,  Lebanon:   Modern  Mosaic  (1974).      After  the  brief  introduction,  the  documentary  goes  back  to  the  earliest  of   Lebanon's  history.  The  narrator  talks  about  the  country's  ancient  roots.  He  explains   that  the  name  Lebanon  means  "milk"  in  Arabic,  implying  that  the  nation  has  always   had  a  motherly  role  amongst  other  Middle  Eastern  countries.  A  cow  pulling  an   ancestral  plow  is  shown  turning  the  country's  rich  soil.  Images  of  ancient  cedar   35  

  

trees  are  documented  growing  on  steep  mountainsides.  The  trees  are  the  country's   national  symbol,  and  are  "as  old  as  civilization  itself."  For  Madvo,  the  past  plays  a   major  role  in  the  identity  and  culture  of  Lebanon  today.   Historic  civilizations  are  represented  in  the  film  by  ancient  architecture  and   art  objects  kept  in  the  Beirut  Museum.  Madvo  documents  ancient  ruins,   communicating  the  social  and  economic  status  achieved  by  earlier  civilizations.  He   films  from  the  bottom  of  a  building  and  pans  up,  creating  a  sense  of  grandeur.         

   Figure  14.  Frame  enlargement,  ancient  ruins  shot  from  below,  Lebanon:  Modern   Mosaic  (1974).     

  

36  

Madvo  utilizes  in-camera  effects  and  other  camera  movements  to  enliven   some  of  the  "dull"  parts  of  the  documentary.  For  instance,  when  talking  about   Venetian  pottery,  he  uses  superimpositions  to  transition  between  art  objects  filmed   at  the  Beirut  Museum.  Madvo  often  starts  zoomed  in  on  a  detail  of  these  objects  and   slowly  zooms  out  to  reveal  its  whole.  The  segment  on  history  ends  with  a  shot  of  a   mosaic  decorating  the  floor  of  an  ancient  Venetian  temple,  calling  attention  to  the   film's  title,  Modern  Mosaic.  

   Figure  15.  Frame  enlargement,  superimposition  of  Venetian  pottery,  Lebanon:   Modern  Mosaic  (1974).      The  documentary  then  discusses  religion,  politics  and  the  conflict  between   the  Arabs  and  Christian  communities  in  Lebanon.  It  shows  people  dressed  in   37  

  

religious  garb  and  religious  houses  across  the  country.  Madvo  managed  to  capture   images  inside  both  mosques  and  churches.  However,  it  is  obvious  that  it  was   difficult  for  him  to  film  inside,  as  these  moments  are  very  brief.40  The  film  also   depicts  shots  of  a  number  of  dark  caves  in  the  granges  and  crevices  of  Lebanon's   mountainsides,  and  the  viewer  learns  that  this  is  where  the  Christians  had  settled  on   their  flight  from  Islam.  Images  of  the  Holy  Valley  of  Qadisha41  are  also  documented,   one  of  the  most  important  early  Christian  monastic  settlements  in  the  world.     

40  Hermine  tells  about  how  Madvo,  in  order  to  capture  footage  in  "restricted"  areas,  

                                                                                                                

let  the  camera  roll  while  it  hung  from  his  neck  and  without  looking  through  it.  This   gave  the  appearance  that  he  was  not  actively  recording.     41  Qadisha  valley  is  a  settlement  site  of  the  first  Christian  monasteries  in  the  world..   The  valley  is  located  at  the  foot  of  Mount  al-Makmal  in  northern  Lebanon.   http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/850      38  

   Figure  16.  Frame  enlargement,  caves  in  the  Lebanese  mountainside,  Lebanon:   Modern  Mosaic  (1974).         The  narrator  informs  the  viewer  about  the  delicate  balance  of  power  in  

Lebanon,  addressing  the  chronic  unrest  in  the  Middle  East.  As  he  talks  about  the   conflict,  portraits  of  people  from  different  religions  and  backgrounds  are  shown  on   screen.  The  concentration  on  individual  faces,  especially  on  the  eyes,  creates  an   intimacy  with  the  viewer.  It  is  as  if  Madvo  is  attempting  to  capture  their  personality   and  convey  a  sense  of  humanity.  For  these  portraits,  the  camera  remains  still.  

  

39  

   Figure  17.  Frame  enlargement,  Christian  woman  overlooking  a  small  town  in   Lebanon,  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  (1974).      The  next  part  of  the  documentary  jumps  to  present  day  Beirut.  The  music   changes  to  an  upbeat  rhythm  and  images  depict  busy  modern  buildings  and  streets   filled  with  cars  and  traffic.  Here,  the  idea  that  Lebanon  is  not  so  different  from  the   Western  world  is  clearly  conveyed.    

  

40  

   Figure  18.  Frame  enlargement,  traffic  in  Beirut,  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  (1974).      Madvo  documents  financial  institutions  and  people  buying  and  selling   merchandise  in  the  marketplace  downtown  Beirut,  while  the  narrator  tells  that   Lebanon  is  the  center  of  trade  for  the  Middle  East  and  the  financial  center  of  the   Arab  world.    It  also  shows  a  seaport  busy  with  crude  oil  ships,  demonstrating  the   country's  connections  to  Iraq  and  Arabia,  the  richest  of  oil  nations.  From  this  part  of   the  documentary,  the  viewer  understands  that  Lebanon  is  a  successful,  modern,   developed  nation.     There  is  a  scene  near  the  end  of  the  film  that  has  been  borrowed  from  a   previous  documentary  Madvo  made,  Olives  of  Lebanon  (1972).  It  depicts  an  ancient      41  

technique  of  making  olive  oil  with  a  stone  press.  This  part  has  experienced  colour   fading  and  exhibits  a  slight  blue  hue.     The  film  concludes  by  reiterating  that  Lebanon  is  a  mosaic,  from  its   geography  to  its  civilizations  and  its  religions.42  Music  plays  and  people  are  filmed  in   social  situations,  feasting  on  traditional  Lebanese  food  and  drinking  milk,   referencing  the  name  Lebanon.  Credits  appear  and  the  film  ends.   Some  copies  of  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  include  a  five-minute  cinematic   prologue,  titled  Lebanon  at  War.  The  additional  footage  was  shot  in  1977,  three   years  after  the  initial  documentary  was  made.43     The  short  begins  with  a  handwritten  message:  "Shortly  after  this  film  was   shot  in  Lebanon,  civil  war  broke  out  casting  the  country  adrift  at  the  mercy  of  the   tide  of  the  middle  east,  a  history  being  written  in  fire  and  blood!  But  hope  lives  on!"   The  text  fades  and  the  sounds  of  war,  gunfire  and  explosions  are  heard.  The  picture   returns  with  images  of  the  devastated  streets  of  Beirut,  shot  from  the  inside  of  a   moving  car.  The  dashboard  can  be  seen  in  the  bottom  of  the  frame,  as  demolished   buildings  and  bullet-ridden  street  signs  pass  by  the  car  window.  

                                                                                                                
42  When  talking  about  Lebanon's  multicultural  identity,  the  narrator  specifically   43  According  to  Hermine,  Madvo  was  taken  capture  and  imprisoned  during  the  

mentions  the  Armenian  population  living  in  Lebanon  ­  a  detail  personal  to  Madvo.   making  of  this  film.  His  brother-in-law  had  to  come  to  his  rescue.   42  

  

   Figure  19.  Frame  enlargement,  destroyed  buildings  in  downtown  Beirut,  Lebanon  at   War  (1977).     

  

43  

   Figure  20.  Frame  enlargement,  bullet-ridden  street  sign.  Lebanon  at  War  (1977).      Lebanon  at  War  is  narrated  by  an  unaccredited  voice  (perhaps  Madvo)  that   states  that  the  "peaceful  conflict  between  the  Christians  and  Muslims  in  Lebanon   could  no  longer  resist  the  conflict  in  the  Middle  East."  The  film  explains  how  there   are  conflicting  ideologies  between  Palestine  and  Israel  and  describes  the  fighting   that  occurred  in  Lebanon  between  the  Christian  Militia,  Palestinians  and  the  Syrian   army.     In  stark  contrast  to  the  busy,  multicultural  city  portrayed  in  Lebanon:  Modern   Mosaic,  this  short  film  documents  Beirut  almost  entirely  deserted.  Some  people  are   shown  digging  through  the  debris  on  the  streets.  One  scene  shows  two  Christian  

  

44  

women  hurrying  away  from  the  camera,  not  wanting  their  faces  to  be  recorded.   They  walk  off  the  camera  to  the  left  of  the  frame.  A  juxtaposing  shot  captures  a   Muslim  woman  also  walking  away  from  the  camera,  but  in  the  opposite  direction.   She  exits  the  scene  to  the  right  of  the  camera  frame.     

   Figure  21.  Frame  enlargement,  Muslim  woman  with  child  walking  away  from   camera,  Lebanon  at  War  (1977).      Although  Lebanon  at  War  deals  with  dark  subject  matter,  it  ends  on  a  hopeful   note.  Beirut's  inhabitants  are  still  carrying  on  with  their  customs  and  traditions.   There  is  still  a  marketplace  downtown,  despite  it  now  being  situated  amongst   crumbled  buildings.  A  child  is  shown  smiling,  climbing  on  rubble.  The  last  shot  is  a   45  

  

freeze-frame  of  the  boy's  hand  as  he  lifts  it  in  the  air  and  stretches  his  fingers  out  to   the  sky.44  

   Figure  22.  Frame  enlargement,  boy  amongst  rubble  in  war-torn  Beirut,  Lebanon  at   War  (1977).      4.2  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961,  20  min.)   Fontaines  de  Paris  is  one  of  Madvo's  self-contained  documentary  works,   made  in  the  early  60s,  while  he  was  on  leave  from  working  with  the  United  Nations.   He  made  three  other  documentary  films  at  the  same  time,  Vitraux  de  Paris,  Paris:  le   passé  et  le  présent,  and  London  at  Christmas.                                                                                                                        44  Muslims  and  Christians  conflict  in  Lebanon,  caught  him  and  kept  like  hostage,   brother  in  law  rescued  him      46  

Fontaines  de  Paris  documents  fountains  located  at  nine  different  locations   throughout  the  city  of  Paris:  Porte  de  Saint-Cloud,  Rond-Point  des  Champs  Elysées,   Place  de  l'Odéon,  Jardin  du  Luxembourg,  Place  Saint-Michel,  Trocadéro,  Place  Saint- Sulpice,  Place  du  Châtelet  and  Place  de  la  Concorde.  The  film  was  shot  with  an  Ets.   Andre  Debrie  camera45  on  Kodak  ektachrome  film  stock.  There  is  no  narration  in   this  film.  The  only  soundtrack  is  the  music  of  Johann  Sebastian  Bach,  Concerto  for   Flute,  Violin,  Piano  &  Orchestra,  in  A  Minor,  BWV  1044:  I.  Allegro.   The  film  opens  with  white  titles  against  the  dark  silhouette  of  a  spiral  detail   on  the  fountain  at  La  Place  de  la  Concorde.  Water  from  the  fountain  falls  heavily   around  it  as  the  sun  sets  in  the  distance.  The  titles  fade  out  and  when  the  image   returns,  it  is  a  long  shot  of  the  two  tall  cylindrical  fountains  at  Porte  de  Saint-Cloud   on  a  bright  and  sunny  day.       

                                                                                                                 45  Debrie  was  a  French  camera  and  projector  manufacturer  founded  in  1900.   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debrie      47  

   Figure  23.  Frame  enlargement,  spiral  detail  of  fountain  at  La  Place  de  la  Concorde,   Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).      As  Madvo  films  each  fountain,  he  pays  close  attention  to  its  details.  He  uses   slow  zooms  to  concentrate  on  features  he  obviously  finds  particularly  beautiful.  He   carefully  documents  sculptures  and  relief  carvings,  and  captures  the  sunlight   reflecting  on  the  water.  For  example,  he  takes  close-up  shots  of  the  sculpted  horses   bursting  from  the  base  of  the  fountain  at  the  Jardin  du  Luxembourg  with  water   spraying  all  around  them.    

  

48  

   Figure  24.  Frame  enlargement,  water  falling  on  sculpted  horses  of  the  fountain  at   Jardin  du  Luxembourg,  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).      In  addition  to  the  fountains,  the  film  also  documents  the  happenings  that   occur  around  them.  Madvo  films  birds  bathing  and  children  playing  around  the   fountain  at  the  Place  du  Châtelet.  He  also  documents  student  life  surrounding  the   fountain  of  Place  Saint-Michel.  Busy  pedestrians  walk  by,  while  some  people   patiently  sit  and  watch.  A  woman's  reflection  is  filmed  in  the  base  of  the  fountain  at   the  Place  Saint-Sulpice  until  drops  of  water  break  it  up.  People's  silhouettes  are   captured  through  shooting  streams  of  water  at  the  fountains  of  Trocadéro.  

  

49  

   Figure  25.  Frame  enlargement,  students  sitting  at  the  fountain  at  Place  Saint-Michel,   Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).      For  the  most  part,  the  people  seem  unaware  that  they  are  being  filmed.  This   communicates  to  the  viewer  that  they  are  observant  to  the  action,  not  part  of  it.  This   distant,  watchful  point  of  view  also  coveys  a  sense  of  being  an  outsider.  However,   there  are  two  scenes  in  which  people  make  eye  contact  with  the  camera.  The  first  is   of  a  young  boy  who  stares  boldly  into  the  camera.  The  second  is  an  intriguing  shot  of   a  blonde  woman  with  a  scarf  around  her  head  that  looks  at  the  camera,  mouths   some  words,  and  smiles.  The  shot  lasts  an  exceptionally  long  amount  of  time,   starting  close  up  on  her  eyes  and  slowly  zooming  out.  

  

50  

The  beautiful  city  and  architecture  of  Paris  is  captured  in  the  background  of   these  shots.  When  Madvo  filmed  the  fountains  of  Trocadéro,  he  set  up  the   composition  of  his  shots  to  include  the  Eiffel  Tower  with  various  camera  angles.  He   also  photographed  the  fountains  of  the  Rond-Point  des  Champs  Elysées,  with  the  Arc   de  Triomphe  in  the  background,  and  the  fountain  of  the  Place  de  l'Odéon  with  its   surrounding  buildings.  The  grand  Egyptian  obelisk  is  captured  in  the  background  of   the  fountains  at  the  Place  de  la  Concorde,  along  with  French  flags  blowing  in  the   wind  to  celebrate  Bastille  Day.     

   Figure  26.  Frame  enlargement,  bronze  sculptures  of  the  fountain  at  Trocadéro  with   Eiffel  Tower  in  background,  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).     

  

51  

Near  the  end  of  the  film,  the  sun  begins  to  set  behind  the  two  monumental   fountains  at  the  Place  de  la  Concorde.  Soon,  the  fountain  becomes  a  silhouette  and   the  viewer  can  no  longer  see  any  detail,  only  its  waters  illuminated  in  the  night.   Various  night  scenes  of  all  the  fountains  featured  in  the  film  are  shown.  Two  people   embrace  in  front  of  the  fountain  at  the  Jardin  du  Luxembourg,  encapsulating  the   spirit  of  Paris,  the  city  of  love.    

   Figure  27.  Frame  enlargement,  silhouette  of  lovers  in  front  of  a  fountain  at  night,   Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).      The  film  returns  to  the  fountains  at  the  Place  de  la  Concorde  with  a  series  of   shots  of  fireworks  exploding  in  the  sky.  Madvo  is  able  to  capture  how  the  fireworks  

  

52  

fall  in  the  sky  like  the  water  in  the  fountains.  "FIN"  appears  in  bold  white  text  and   the  music  of  the  soundtrack's  violin  fades  out.     

   Figure  28.  Frame  enlargement,  fireworks  in  the  night  sky,  Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961).      4.3  Denis  et  Bruno  ­  Enfants  (ca.  1970,  20  min.)   Madvo's  home  movies  follow  the  actions  of  his  family  throughout  the  60s,   70s  and  80s.  They  are  close,  intimate  portraits  of  his  everyday  life.  What   distinguishes  Madvo's  films  from  the  traditional  home  movie,  however,  is  their  level   of  pre  and  post-production  planning.  Unlike  most  home  movie  footage,  these  films   were  edited  to  be  watched  together  by  his  family  or,  perhaps,  for  an  even  larger  

  

53  

audience.  They  also  include  several  cinematic  techniques  that  most  other  home   movies  lack.   Denis  et  Bruno  -  Enfants  is  a  silent  black  and  white  film  with  one  scene  in   colour  at  the  very  end.  It  chronicles  the  first  years  of  his  sons'  lives.   The  film  begins  with  shots  of  various  children's  toys:  plastic  cats  slide  down  a   string  apparatus,  rubber  ducks  float  in  the  bath,  a  rocking  horse  moves  back  and   forth.  These  images  are  used  as  symbols  of  childhood,  and  work  to  set  the  theme  for   the  film.    

   Figure  29.  Frame  enlargement,  child's  toy,  opening  scene,  Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants   (ca.  1970).     

  

54  

Next  is  a  shot  of  his  eldest  son  as  a  small  baby,  sitting  in  a  metal  bathtub  and   playing  with  the  toy  ducks.  His  wife's  hands  reach  into  the  shot  and  start  washing   the  child.  She  then  picks  him  up,  towels  him  off  and  brings  him  over  to  a  changing   table.  She  dries  and  dresses  him  and  the  scene  fades  out.     Throughout  the  course  of  the  film,  Madvo's  wife  is  photographed  interacting   with  her  child  in  everyday  scenarios  such  at  this  ­  washing  him,  feeding  him,   changing  him,  playing  with  him.  While  these  are  everyday  moments,  Madvo   photographed  them  in  an  extraordinary  way.  The  entire  opening  scene,  for  example,   is  dramatically  lit.  

   Figure  30.  Frame  enlargement,  example  of  dramatic  lighting,  Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants   (ca.  1970).      55  

  

There  is  another  scene  where  he  films  the  shadow  of  his  son  in  a  crib,  cast   against  fabric  patterned  with  flowers.  Looking  through  the  fabric,  you  can  just  make   out  the  baby's  movements,  playing  with  toys  suspended  above  him.  That  scene  then   cuts  to  a  shot  taken  from  the  other  side  of  the  fabric,  where  you  can  plainly  see  the   baby  lying  in  his  crib,  playing.  

   Figure  31.  Frame  enlargement,  shot  of  child's  shadow  taken  from  outside  the  crib,   Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.  1970).       

  

56  

   Figure  32.  Frame  enlargement,  shot  of  child  taken  from  inside  the  crib,  Denis  et   Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.  1970).        Madvo  included  various  cinematic  techniques  in  his  home  movies.  There  is  a   scene  in  the  film  where  Madvo  uses  a  shot/countershot  to  convince  the  viewer  that   mother  and  child  are  looking  at  each  other.  A  shot  is  taken  looking  down  on  the   child  in  the  crib,  from  the  mother's  perspective.  That  is  then  contrasted  with  a  shot   of  her  over  the  crib  from  the  child's  perspective.     A  scene  filmed  outside  of  Madvo's  home  in  Lebanon  shows  the  family   spending  quality  time  together,  sitting  outside  on  the  balcony,  enjoying  tea  and  the   view.    During  this  part  of  the  film,  Madvo  continually  focuses  the  camera  on  distant   objects,  and  then  has  people  move  into  the  shot.  For  example,  he  films  the  view  of   57  

  

the  country  from  the  balcony.  Then,  his  wife  and  child  walk  into  the  shot  from  the   left  until  they  reach  the  center  of  the  frame.  From  there,  the  camera  follows  their   movement,  panning  to  the  right.  They  walk  all  around  the  balcony  to  reveal  a   panoramic  view.  It  seems  as  though  Madvo  is  practicing  or  experimenting  with   filming  during  this  part  of  the  home  movie.    

   Figure  33.  Frame  enlargement,  mother  and  child  with  cityscape  in  background,   Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.  1970).      As  the  film  goes  on,  the  baby  gets  older  and,  eventually,  there  is  another  boy.   Extended  family  is  shown  visiting,  likely  an  aunt,  an  uncle  and  cousins.  The  family   talks  and  laughs  together,  and  hugs  each  other.  It  feels  very  heartfelt  and  

  

58  

spontaneous.  From  their  actions,  this  scene  appears  more  "natural"  (less  staged)   than  the  previous  scenes.   By  the  end,  the  film  no  longer  features  his  wife.  Some  footage  must  have  been   shot  after  her  death.  Concluding  the  film  is  a  part  shot  on  colour  stock.  It  shows  his   boys,  older  now,  in  what  appears  to  be  a  children's  hospital  room.  Various  activities   occur  over  a  few  minutes:  a  doctor  helps  them  read  a  book,  one  brother  gets  his  hair   cut  while  the  other  one  watches,  a  nurse  visits.  Madvo  is  seen  on  film  again,  this  time   playing  with  his  two  sons  and  having  a  good  time.  The  film  then  ends  abruptly.       

   Figure  34.  Frame  enlargement,  Madvo  playing  with  his  two  sons,  Denis  et  Bruno:   Enfants  (ca.  1970).      59  

  

From  the  descriptive  analyses  of  these  three  films,  Madvo's  oeuvre  seems  to   blur  the  confines  of  what  is  typically  considered  "amateur"  films.  Often,  when  we   think  amateur  cinema,  we  envision  home  movie  footage  of  birthdays  and  family   vacations.  But,  the  term  "amateur  film"  is  complex  and  heterogeneous.    Patricia   Zimmermann,  a  leading  scholar  of  film  history  and  historiography,  defines  amateur   film  as  encompassing  "a  much  wider  field  than  home  movies  and  includes  any  work   that  operates  outside  of  exchange  values  and  is  not  produced  to  function  as  an   exchange  commodity...  It  includes  a  variety  of  ethnographic,  industrial,  labor,   scientific,  education,  narrative,  travel,  missionary,  explored  and  documentary  forms   produced  for  specialized  exhibition  in  clubs,  churches,  and  school  and  on  lectures   tours."  46   Charles  Tepperman,  another  scholar  in  the  field,  in  his  book  "Amateur   Cinema:  The  Rise  of  North  American  Moviemaking,  1923-1960,"  also  states   explicitly  that  amateur  cinema  is  much  more  expansive  than  home  movies,  and   includes  "polished  filmmaking,"  as  well.  Tepperman's  book  focuses  on  what  he   refers  to  as  the  "advanced  amateur."  As  he  defines  it,  the  advanced  amateur  "was  a   figure  who  participated  in  a  film  culture  outside  the  commercial  mainstream  and   developed  "advanced"  skills  in  film  production...  The  films  by  advanced  or  serious   amateur  are  often  expressively  creative  works  with  a  complex  relation  to  other   artistic  practices."  47                                                                                                                    46  Karen  L  Ishizuka  and  Patricia  R.  Zimmermann,  editors.  Mining  the  home  movie  :   excavations  in  histories  and  memories.  University  of  California  Press,  c2008,  p.  9   47  Tepperman,  Charles.  Amateur  Cinema.  University  of  California  Press,  2014.  Kindle   Edition      60  

Madvo's  oeuvre  fits  this  description.  Without  a  doubt,  his  "polished"   filmmaking  style  was  shaped  by  the  years  he  studied  cinematography  at  l'DHEC.  He   carefully  composed  his  images  and  was  a  skilled  director  of  photography  (or   cinematographer),  especially  when  exposing  Kodachrome  film  stock.  But  more  than   that,  his  films  are  meaningful  and  creative,  clearly  inspired  by  his  passion  for  the   arts.  They  are  directed  by  harmony  and  rhythm,  and  his  photography  is  intended  to   capture  the  beauty  of  the  everyday.        

  

61  

5. Amateur  and  Non-fiction  Film  Collections      While  the  development  of  amateur  film  and  home  movies  has  paralleled  the   history  of  commercial  cinema  since  1895,  home  movies  are  largely  overlooked  and   ignored.  Often,  they  are  perceived  as  being  irrelevant  or  unimportant.  One  reason   for  this  stems  from  the  origin  of  the  term  "amateur."  The  word,  borrowed  from  the   French  language,  means:  "Amateur,  in  the  Arts,  is  a  foreign  term  introduced  and  now   passing  current  amongst  us,  to  denote  a  person  understanding,  and  loving  or   practicing  the  polite  arts  of  painting,  sculpture,  or  architecture,  without  any  regard   to  pecuniary  advantage."  This  understanding  of  the  term  set  the  amateur  aside  from   the  paid  worker  and  established  amateur  activities  as  unskillful,  or  second-rate.  48   Scholarly  interest  in  amateur  film  and  home  movies,  however,  is  on  the  rise.   New  history  in  cinema  studies  and  advances  in  critical  historiography  have  recently   discovered  the  importance  of  non-fiction  amateur  film  and  home  movies  as   historical  artifacts.  It  is  now  recognized  that  "amateur  film  provides  a  vital  access   point  for  academic  historiography  in  its  trajectory  from  official  history  to  the  more   variegated  and  multiple  practices  of  popular  memory,  a  concretization  of  memory   into  artifacts  that  can  be  remobilized,  recontextualized,  and  reanimated."  49   The  documentary  importance  of  amateur  films  was  made  unquestionable   with  the  recording  of  the  John  F.  Kennedy  assassination,  which  was  caught  on  an  

                                                                                                                 48  Ibid.   49  Ishizuka  and  Zimmermann,  1.      62  

8mm  home  movie  camera  by  Abraham  Zapruder,  a  bystander,  on  November  22,   1963.  This  home  movie  has  become  the  most  studied  film  in  history.  50   Another  example  that  illustrates  the  importance  of  non-fiction  amateur  films   and  home  movies  are  the  home  movies  of  Eva  Braun.  With  her  cine-camera,  she   chronicled  intimate  moments  with  Hitler,  allowing  viewers  a  glimpse  into  his   private  life  (which  are  now  all  available  online).51  These  films  show  how  home   movies  can  depict  alternative,  sometimes  hidden,  histories  that  could  significantly   impact  the  way  we  understand  history.   Even  films  that  do  not  capture  significant  events  and  historical  moments,  but   merely  demonstrate  everyday  life  through  domestic  settings  and  private  occasions,   or  scenes  in  the  public  sphere,  are  valuable  documents.  As  Laura  Rascaroli,  Gwenda   Young  and  Barry  Monahan  state  in  their  book  Amateur  Filmmaking  :  The  Home   Movie,  the  Archive,  the  Web,  "through  these,  the  customs,  values,  identities,  practices,   rituals,  and  historical  realities  of  generations  of  amateur  filmmakers  are   preserved...What  makes  them  so  relevant  today  is  precisely  what  previously   relegated  them--  their  ephemeral,  private,  marginal,  and  personal  nature.  As  a   result  of  the  waning  of  the  myths  of  authority  and  objectivity  as  compelling  social   narratives,  alternative,  subjective,  and  contingent  accounts  of  reality  have  today   become  more  persuasive  and  appealing."52                                                                                                                    50  Liz  Czach  "Home  Movies  and  Amateur  Film  as  National  Cinema"  in  Amateur   Filmmaking  :  The  Home  Movie,  the  Archive,  the  Web.  Edited  by  Rascaroli,  Laura;   Young,  Gwenda;  Monahan,  Barry.  New  York:  Bloomsbury  Publishing,  2014.   http://ryerson.eblib.com/patron/FullRecord.aspx?p=1630363  Kindle  Edition.   51  https://archive.org/details/EvaBraunHomeMoviesPart1HitlerNazisInColour   52  Rascaroli,  Laura;  Young,  Gwenda;  Monahan,  Barry.  Amateur  Filmmaking  :  The   Home  Movie,  the  Archive,  the  Web.  New  York:  Bloomsbury  Publishing,  2014,  p.  3  ­  4.      63  

Archives  play  a  critical  role  in  providing  preservation  and  access  to  these   important  historical  and  cultural  documents.  However,  there  are  several  challenges   that  films  like  these  possess  for  archives.    John  Homiak  and  Pamela  Wintle  discuss   some  of  these  problems  in  their  chapter  "The  Human  Studies  Film  Archives,   Smithsonian  Institution."  According  to  the  authors,  part  of  the  reason  that  the  study   of  non-fiction  amateur  images  and  home  movies  is  underdeveloped  is  because  of   problems  with  intellectual  access,  which  effects  both  cataloguing  and  the  need  for   documenting  such  films.  Problems  with  intellectual  access  include  providing  a   description  of  the  content  of  amateur  films  and  the  need  to  capture  information   outside  the  frame.  Providing  a  description  of  the  content  of  amateur  films  is   problematic  because  it  is  a  task  that  calls  into  question  the  knowledge  and   intentions  of  the  filmmaker.  The  need  for  information  contained  outside  the  frame   (such  as  the  intended  audience  for  a  film  or  the  actual  history  of  its  use  by  the   filmmaker)  is  often  difficult  to  find,  as  well,  due  to  the  unrecorded  history  of   amateur  works.53       Homiak  and  Wintle  advocate  for  the  study  of  amateur  and  non-fiction  film  by   discussing  three  compelling  examples  from  The  Human  Studies  Film  Archives   (HSFA)  that  illustrate  the  importance  of  amateur  image  collections  to   historiography  and  film  history.     The  HSFA,  founded  in  1972  as  the  National  Anthropological  Film  Center  in   the  National  Museum  of  Natural  History  (it  was  given  its  current  name  as  part  of  the                                                                                                                    53  John  Homiak  and  Pamela  Wintle,  "The  Human  Studies  Film  Archives,  Smithsonian   Institution"  in  Mining  the  home  movie  :  excavations  in  histories  and  memories.  Edited   by  Karen  L  Ishizuka  and  Patricia  R.  Zimmermann.  University  of  California  Press,   c2008,  p.  41.      64  

department  of  anthropology,  National  Museum  of  Natural  History  in  1981),  was   initially  conceived  as  a  repository  for  ethnographic  film  records.  Today,  the  archival   collection  has  over  eight  million  feet  of  original  film  and  a  thousand  hours  of  original   video.  In  addition  to  films  made  for  ethnographic  use,  the  HSFA's  collection  also   contains  theatrical  travelogues,  travel  lecture  films,  theatrical  and  television   documentaries,  video  and  film  oral  histories,  and  amateur  films.  Approximately  20   percent  of  the  archival  collection  could  be  described  as  amateur  film  or  video.     Two  examples  of  amateur  films  in  the  HSFA  collection  that  Homiak  and   Wintle  discuss  are  straightforward  film  records  of  traumatic  historical  situations.   Czech  invasion  (1968)  is  an  edited  amateur  film  by  Frank  Kreznar.  It  was  donated  to   the  archive  in  a  collection  of  Kreznar's  work.  The  film  has  unquestionable  historical   importance.  It  documents  a  trip  through  Eastern  Europe  in  1968.  A  peaceful  tour  of   Czechoslovakia  dramatically  turns  to  show  the  impact  of  the  Soviet  invasion.     Similarly,  Civilization  on  Trial  in  South  Africa  (1950)  by  Reverend  Michael   Scott  documents  the  oppressive  treatment  of  the  African  and  Indian  populations  of   South  Africa  in  the  fifties.  Intended  to  generate  support  for  aid,  the  film  dramatically   displays  the  reality  of  appalling  conditions  experienced  by  people  of  colour  in  South   Africa  by  using  contrasting  shots  of  the  privileged  "white  lifestyle."     The  third  example  Homiak  and  Wintle  discuss  is  a  conventional  amateur   travelogue  that,  with  careful  reading,  reveals  more  than  was  intended  by  the   filmmaker.  Present  day  Greece  and  its  Mediterranean  islands  (1946  ­  1951),  a  film  by   amateur  filmmaker  John  Nicholson,  attempts  to  present  a  positive  image  of  Greek   people  to  American  audiences.  The  film  tries  to  depict  modern  Greece.  However,  

  

65  

visibility  of  the  military  in  the  film  indicates  that  the  country  was  actually  in  a  state   of  civil  war  at  the  time.  The  value  of  this  film  is  in  how  it  presents  the  complexities  of   cultural  identities.54   Madvo's  films  have  a  comparable  historical  and  cultural  value  as  the  three   films  discussed  by  Homiak  and  Wintle.  His  Countries  and  People  films  are  historical   documents  of  the  world.  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  and  Lebanon  at  War,  in  particular,   documents  a  traumatic  historical  event:  civil  war  and  conflict  in  the  Middle  East.   Other  countries  captured  by  Madvo  in  the  collection,  such  as  Yugoslavia  and  Iraq,   have  also  undergone  significant  change  since  the  films  were  made.  Although  not  all   his  documentaries  record  traumatic  events,  they  capture  places  around  the  world  at   a  specific  time  and  place  in  history.  By  preserving  the  past,  they  also  tell  us  about   the  world  today.     The  Countries  and  Peoples  films  have  Canadian  sociopolitical  value,  as  well.   They  tell  us  about  the  government  of  Ontario  and  their  efforts  to  educate  the  public   about  foreign  cultures  through  the  Ontario  Educational  Communications  Authority,   a  Crown  corporation.  They  also  inform  us  about  the  complicated  relations  between   Canadian  and  Middle  Eastern  identities,  represented  by  a  filmmaker  from  the   Middle  East  living  in  Canada,  who  saw  the  need  for  social  change.   Madvo's  travel  films  and  home  movies  also  have  international  and  regional   significance.  They  trace  histories  of  places  that,  perhaps,  do  not  have  a  strong   cinematic  heritage.    Zimmerman  emphasizes  the  importance  of  moving  images  like   these  when  she  writes,  "For  many  ethnic/  cultural/  and  regional  communities,  
54  Ibid,  41  -  46.  

                                                                                                                

  

66  

amateur  film  footage  may  be  the  only  source  of  moving  image  documentation  that   exists.  For  underrepresented  communities,  family  albums  and  home  movies  provide   visions  of  history  and  culture  that  would  otherwise  go  unseen  and  unknown  by  the   general  public."  55   Based  on  the  above  reasons  alone,  I  would  argue  that  Madvo's  films  merit   preservation  and  access.  However,  another  case  can  be  made  for  their  value.  Madvo   thoroughly  documented  and  meticulously  cared  for  his  films,  and  they  are  in  great   condition.  The  objects  in  the  collection  themselves  (the  filmic  elements  and   accompanying  material),  inform  us  about  Madvo  as  a  filmmaker.  They  give  insight   into  his  practice  and  workflow.  Preserving  the  Madvo  collection,  a  very   comprehensive  body  of  work,  therefore,  would  contribute  to  the  development  of  the   study  of  amateur  and  non-fiction  moving  images  and  their  importance  for  film   history  in  Canada  and  beyond.             

55  Zimmermann,  22.  

                                                                                                                

  

67  

6. Scenarios  and  Solutions      The  Madvo  collection  was  donated,  without  signature  or  compensation,  to   LIFT  in  2014  to  be  used  as  a  resource  for  found  footage  films.  Currently,  LIFT  is   planning  to  let  its  members  use  the  material  from  Madvo's  non-fiction  to  make  new   work  and  find  an  appropriate  archive  for  the  remainder  of  the  material,  as  it  is  not   in  their  mandate  to  store  it.  From  an  archival  perspective,  this  presents  a  number  of   problems.  This  chapter  explores  a  range  of  possible  alternative  scenarios  for  the   future  of  the  collection  and  offers  different  solutions  for  its  preservation.      6.1  Scenario  1:  The  Madvo  Collection  as  Found  footage   Found  footage  filmmaking  is  a  method  of  compiling  films,  partly  or  entirely,   of  footage  which  has  not  been  created  by  the  filmmaker,  and  changing  its  meaning   by  placing  it  in  a  new  context  or  by  revealing  a  previously  unrecognized  implication.   Non-fiction  films  and  home  movies,  in  particular,  have  become  a  rich  source  for   found  footage  filmmaking,  as  they  have  proved  amenable  to  adaptation,   appropriation  and  recontextualization.56     The  biggest  problem  with  LIFT  using  the  Madvo  Collection  as  found  footage   is  that  the  films  would  get  physically  damaged  or  destroyed  in  the  process.  LIFT  is  a   filmmaking  cooperative,  not  an  archive.  Thus,  the  preservation  of  the  material  is  not   a  concern  of  theirs.  Madvo's  films  would  be  subject  to  the  cutting,  splicing  and  other   permanent  manipulations  made  by  future  filmmakers.                                                                                                                   
56  Rascaroli,  Laura;  Young,  Gwenda;  Monahan,  Barry.  Amateur  Filmmaking  :  The  

Home  Movie,  the  Archive,  the  Web.  New  York:  Bloomsbury  Publishing,  2014,  p.  2.   68  

  

Currently,  LIFT  offers  one  other  collection  to  its  members  as  a  resource  for   found  footage.  It  is  a  collection  of  35mm  colour  release  prints  of  Kung-foo  action   films  from  Hong  Kong.  To  date,  at  least  one  artist  has  used  this  footage  to  make  new   work.  An  independent  filmmaker  by  the  name  of  Julie  Murray  produced  a  seven- minute  digital  piece  using  the  last  reel  of  the  35mm  Hong  Kong  action  film,  The   Green  Hornet.  "Recorded  with  a  lo-res  pocket  camera,  the  analogue  kung-foo  film  is   examined  over  a  light-box  on  an  editing  bench  with  hand-crank  rewinds."  57       These  Kung-foo  films,  however,  are  feature  release  prints,  and  likely  exist  in   other  formats.  Similar  to  stock  footage  (supplementary  footage  intended  for  use  in   other  films),  these  films  can  be  reused  without  jeopardizing  the  preservation  of  the   original  material.  This  would  not  be  the  case  for  Madvo's  films  if  kept  at  LIFT  and   used  as  a  found  footage  repository.  Madvo  was  an  amateur  filmmaker.  His  films  do   not  exist  in  multiple  formats  and  most  of  the  material  contained  in  the  collection  is   unique.  If  his  films  are  destroyed,  they  are  gone  forever.   Another  issue  is  that  his  images  could  be  extracted  from  their  original   contexts.  In  his  survey  on  found  footage  films,  William  C.  Wees  writes  "recycling   found  footage  may  require  nothing  more  than  finding  it  and  showing  it  to  someone   who  appreciates  it...  in  most  cases,  however,  filmmakers  do  not  assume  that  found   footage  only  needs  to  be  shown  to  be  appreciated...  The  more  common  practice  is  to   rework  the  footage  in  some  way,  so  that  its  richer  implications  become  more   apparent."58  In  order  to  do  this,  filmmakers  apply  certain  montage  or  collage   techniques  (such  as  changing  the  order  of  the  shots,  recutting  or  repeating  shots                                                                                                                    57  https://vimeo.com/102644375   58  Wees,  5  ­  8.      69  

from  a  single  film)  to  draw  attention  to  a  certain  aspect  of  the  film,  or  create  new   readings  of  the  images  than  the  original  filmmaker  intended.59  Often,  found  footage   collage  is  used  to  create  satire,  criticism  or  parody.  Because  so  much  of  Madvo's   films  portray  foreign  cultures  and  sensitive  subject  matter,  allowing  them  to  be  used   in  this  way  is  especially  concerning.   Found  footage  films  constructed  according  to  the  principles  of  montage   should  not  be  mistaken  for  compilation  films.  In  his  book  Film  Beget  Films,  Jay  Leyda   defines  compilation  as  "any  means  by  which  the  spectator  is  compelled  to  look  at   familiar  shots  as  if  he  had  not  seen  them  before,  or  by  which  the  spectators  mind  is   made  more  alert  to  the  broader  meanings  of  old  material."  Wees  makes  clear  the   crucial  difference  between  compilation  and  collage  films:  "the  important  point  is   that  compilation  films  may  reinterpret  images  taken  from  film  and  television   archives,  but  generally  speaking,  they  do  not  challenge  the  presentational  nature  of   the  images  themselves."60     Archival  materials  have  long  been  used  to  make  documentary  compilation   films.61  Filmmakers  such  as  Péter  Forgács  and  Joseph  Morder  use  home  movies  and   amateur  footage  in  this  way.  These  practices  can  actually  be  positive  for  film   preservation.  The  reuse  of  archival  footage  can  bring  old  or  lost  films  back  to  life  in  a   way  that  reactivates  film  history.  In  fact,  Madvo's  documentary  would  make  a  great   resource  for  these  kinds  of  found  footage  compilation  films.  That  is  only,  however,  if  

59  Ibid.,  9  ­  11.   60  Wees,  38.   61  Wees,  34.  

                                                                                                                

  

70  

the  material  is  not  damaged  or  destroyed  in  the  process,  but  copied  (optically   reprinted)  and/or  digitized  (see  further).   The  final  problem  with  LIFT  using  the  Madvo  Collection  as  a  found  footage   resource  is  that  the  collection  would  be  split-up.  The  positive  material  from  Madvo's   documentary  will  be  kept  as  a  resource  for  artists  to  use  as  found  footage  (i.e.   positive  material)  and  the  remainder  of  the  material  will  be  donated  to  an  archive   (negatives,  a/b  rolls,  sound  elements,  etc.).  If  this  happens,  the  value  of  the   collection  as  a  complete  body  of  work  would  be  lessened.      6.2  Scenario  2:  Archiving  the  Madvo  Collection     In  an  opposite  scenario,  the  Madvo  Collection  would  remain  together  as  a   whole  and  donated  to  an  archive.  As  discussed  in  the  previous  chapter,  Madvo's   films  have  undeniable  historical  and  social  value.  They  are  important  documents  of,   not  only  the  world,  but  of  an  amateur  filmmaker  whose  work  can  aid  in  the   understanding  of  amateur  moving  images.  If  these  films  are  not  saved,  they  will   disappear.   The  major  advantages  to  housing  the  collection  at  an  archive  would  be  that:   1)  archivists  will  do  what  is  necessary  to  see  that  records  are  properly  maintained   and  preserved;  and  2)  the  larger  public,  scholars  and  historians  will  have  access  to   the  materials  (not  restricted  to  LIFT's  members).     A  limited  number  of  films  in  the  collection  have  been  preserved  to  a  certain   extent.  Madvo  retained  VHS  transfers  of  masters  of  some  his  films.  The  majority  of   these  tapes  are  the  documentaries  that  comprise  the  Countries  and  People  series.  

  

71  

There  is  a  VHS  transfer  of  his  documentary  800  Years  of  Arab  Presence  in  Spain,  as   well.  These  tapes  are  now  in  the  possession  of  his  son.   In  addition,  TVO's  archive  holds  digital  and  video  copies  (Betacam  SP)  of  the   Countries  and  Peoples  films.    For  the  English  series,  18  of  the  20  episodes  have  been   preserved.  One  episode  remains  to  be  digitized,  while  one  has  no  digital  or  video   assets.  However,  they  do  not  hold  any  French  programs  for  the  series.  It  is  possible   that  they  were  transferred  to  TFO  (Télévision  française  de  l'Ontario)  upon  its   creation  and  legal  separation  from  TVO  in  2007.  TVO  did  not  retain  any  film   materials,  as  they  would  have  been  transferred  to  videotape  for  broadcast.  62   While  these  copies  do  exist,  VHS  and  Betacam  are  not  ideal  methods  of  long- term  preservation.  They  require  specific  care  and  handling  to  ensure  that  the   recorded  information  will  be  preserved.  Tapes  can  deteriorate,  especially  if  stored   in  a  hot  and  humid  environment,  and  playback  capability  is  becoming  more  and   more  challenging  as  technology  advances.  The  digital  format  of  the  English  series  of   Countries  and  People,  too,  runs  the  risk  of  technological  obsolescence  in  the  future.   If  Madvo's  films  were  moved  to  an  archive,  they  would  be  preserved  in  their   original  format.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  celluloid  is  the  preferred  medium   standard  for  film  preservation.  It  is  a  stable  material  that,  if  kept  in  the  right   conditions,  can  last  hundreds  of  years.  Unlike  digital  and  magnetic  media,  images  on   physical,  analogue  film  will  not  be  lost  if  they  cannot  be  played  back.  Fortunately,   the  film  material  in  the  Madvo  collection  is  in  remarkable  physical  condition.  Much  

                                                                                                                 62  Randall,  Media  Coordinator  at  TVO.  E-mail  to  Alexandra  Jokinen.  March  18,  2015.      72  

of  it  was  shot  on  kodachrome  colour  reversal  film  and  has  retained  its  vibrant   colours,  making  them  an  excellent  candidate  for  preservation.   As  an  example,  the  Madvo  Collection  could  be  donated  to  the  Archives  of   Ontario.  At  the  Archives  of  Ontario,  the  acquisition  mandate  is  to  "acquire  recorded   information  of  provincial  significance"  that  provides  the  best  documentary  evidence   of  the  decisions  and  activities  of  the  Ontario  government  and  of  the  development  of   Ontario  society.63  Since  Countries  and  Peoples  was  a  series  coproduced  by  the   Ontario  Educational  Communications  Authority,  a  Crown  corporation  owned  by  the   Government  of  Ontario,  it  might  be  of  their  interest  to  preserve  the  Madvo   Collection.     Library  and  Archives  Canada  (LAC)  may  also  have  an  interest  in  the  films.   While  the  mandate  at  LAC  is  geared  towards  preserving  the  documentary  heritage   of  Canada,  it  also  strives  "to  be  a  source  of  enduring  knowledge  accessible  to  all,   contributing  to  the  cultural,  social  and  economic  advancement  of  Canada  as  a  free   and  democratic  society;  and  to  facilitate  in  Canada  co-operation  among  communities   involved  in  the  acquisition,  preservation  and  diffusion  of  knowledge."64  Besides   Vivre  en  Paix  and  Canada,  the  majority  of  Madvo's  footage  does  not  document   Canada's  heritage  directly.  However,  Madvo  was  still  Canadian,  and  his  work  would   certainly  contribute  to  the  cultural  and  social  advancement  of  Canada's  film  history.   If  the  films  were  moved  to  the  LAC,  his  work  could  be  made  accessible  to  a  wide   variety  of  scholars,  historians,  and  the  general  public  for  study.                                                                                                                    63  Archives  of  Ontario.   http://www.archives.gov.on.ca/en/about/archives_unboxed/archivist.aspx   64  Library  and  Archives  Canada.  "Our  Mandate."  http://www.bac- lac.gc.ca/eng/about-us/Pages/our-mandate.aspx      73  

      6.3  Scenario  3:  Digitization      A  third  option  would  be  to  have  the  films  available  as  found  footage  at  LIFT   only  after  they  are  digitized.  LIFT  has  the  facilities  and  equipment  to  digitize  films  at   their  location  and  members  have  access  to  those  services.  Their  "telecine  transfer   suite"  has  a  Panasonic  AG-HVX200  camera  set  up  to  transfer  16mm  to  MiniDV  or   hard  drive.  The  cost  of  transferring  is  a  ten-dollar  set-up  fee  (per  format)  and  ten- dollar  per  hour  rate,  or  60  dollars  per  day.  Media  is  recorded  directly  to  digital  file   using  Final  Cut  Pro.65  Members  of  LIFT  who  would  like  to  use  the  Madvo  footage  in   his  or  her  own  practices,  could  potentially  do  so  after  they  have  paid  for  and   digitized  the  desired  material.  This  way,  artists  could  use  the  digital  version  of  the   film  in  their  work  and  be  free  to  edit,  cut  or  alter  the  footage.  Plus,  digitizing  would   act  as  a  form  of  preservation  for  the  content  of  the  film.     The  largest  benefit  to  digitization  is  access.  Rick  Prelinger,  founder  of   Prelinger  Archives,  a  collection  of  over  60,000  ephemeral  films,  is  a  leader  in  the   advocacy  for  digitization.  He  has  partnered  with  the  Internet  Archive  to  make  2,100   films  from  the  Prelinger  Archives  available  online  for  free  viewing,  downloading  and   reuse.  Its  goal  is  to  collect,  preserve,  and  facilitate  access  to  films  of  historic   significance,  with  an  emphasis  on  home  movies  and  amateur  films.66  Having  access   to  these  films  online  is  a  monumental  step  for  the  historiographical  shift  for  social  

                                                                                                                 65  Liaison  of  Filmmakers  of  Toronto.  "Telecine  Transfer  Quite."   http://lift.ca/equipment/telecine-transfer-suite   66  Prelinger  Archives.  https://archive.org/details/prelinger      74  

and  film  history.  It  spreads  awareness  of  the  films'  existence,  and  allows  for  the   dissemination  of  knowledge  to  a  greater  audience.     While  the  advantages  to  digitization  and  access  are  undeniable,  there  are  a   couple  of  issues  with  this  scenario.  The  first  is  that  the  physical  object  would  not   profit  from  this  solution.  The  individual  parts  contained  in  the  Madvo  Collection   have  an  intellectual  value  that  digitized  versions  cannot  preserve.  As  I  covered  in   Chapter  4,  the  production  elements  in  the  collection,  as  well  as  accompanying   material,  provide  insight  into  Madvo's  practice  and  workflow.     Another  issue  with  the  digitization  of  Madvo's  films  is  that  there  may  be   problems  encountered  with  the  Countries  and  Peoples  episodes  and  copyright  law.  If   TVO  coproduced  the  series,  they  may  not  agree  to  having  the  films  available  online,   or  reproduced  by  another  party  in  any  capacity.  A  claim  in  favour  of  digitization   would  be  fair  dealing.  Fair  dealing  is  an  exception  to  copyright  infringement  that   defends  the  use  of  copyrighted  material  on  the  basis  of  research,  private  study,   education,  parody,  satire,  criticism  or  review  and  news  reporting.67  More   information  about  the  rights  to  these  films,  however,  is  necessary  in  order  to  make  a   judgement  about  this  issue.      6.4  My  Recommendations   Ideally,  the  Madvo  Collection  would  be  moved,  in  its  entirety,  to  an  archive   where  it  would  be  preserved  and  cared  for.  However,  because  the  films  are  at  LIFT   by  the  allowance  of  their  owner,  Madvo's  son,  a  compromise  must  be  met.                                                                                                                      67  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fair_dealing_in_Canadian_copyright_law      75  

I  would  recommend  that  LIFT  only  keep  the  positive  outtakes  and  duplicate   films  that  exist  in  the  collection.  This  way,  complete  films,  rare  materials  and   original  elements  are  not  put  in  jeopardy  of  being  lost.  Also,  only  a  small  fraction  of   the  films  would  stay  at  LIFT,  ensuring  that  the  collection  retains  an  overall   intellectual  value  as  a  comprehensive  body  of  work.     Furthermore,  I  would  recommend  that  LIFT  implement  and  enforce  a  strict   "no-cut  policy."  Members  who  wish  to  work  with  Madvo's  documentary,  must  either   digitize  the  films  or  ensure  that  the  material  will  be  treated  in  a  non-destructive   way.       When  it  comes  to  how  the  footage  will  be  treated  intellectually  and  morally,   filmmakers  should  be  trusted  to  use  the  images  in  good  faith.  However,  it  may  be  a   good  idea  for  artists  to  discuss  what  they  plan  to  do  with  the  footage  for  approval,  so   that  there  is  minimal  risk  of  the  films  beings  used  in  an  inappropriate  way  or  taken   out  of  context.     I  would  also  recommend  that  Madvo's  home  movies  should  not  be  permitted   for  use  as  found  footage  films  because  they  are  the  most  rare  materials  and  do  not   exist  in  any  other  form.  They  also  include  sensitive  and  personal  subject  matter.        

  

76  

Conclusion   This  thesis  set  out  to  answer  the  research  question:  How  can  the  Madvo   Collection  be  catalogued  and  preserved  so  that  it  can  be  made  available  to  others   (beyond  LIFT)  as  a  valuable  historical,  cultural  and  artistic  resource?       When  I  first  began  processing  the  Madvo  Collection  in  the  summer  of  2014,  it   was  for  LIFT's  purposes.  I  was  hired  by  LIFT  to  go  through  the  collection,  identify   the  non-fiction  film  material  that  could  be  used  as  found  footage,  describe  the   elements,  and  compile  the  records  in  a  database  for  LIFT's  members  to  access  as  a   searchable  inventory.    After  discovering  the  value  of  the  collection,  however,  and   realizing  the  dangerous  realities  of  LIFT's  intentions,  my  objectives  changed,  and   cataloguing  became  an  active  contribution  to  film  preservation.   Using  RAD  standards,  I  described  the  Madvo  Collection  at  the  file  level.  In   total,  I  described  240  canisters  of  film.  I  labeled  each  can  with  its  corresponding   reference  number  and  title,  and  compiled  the  records  in  an  Excel  spreadsheet.   Three  scenarios  generally  describe  what  can  happen  to  the  Madvo  Collection.     The  first  is  that  the  films  are  left  at  LIFT  to  be  used  as  a  found  footage  repository.   This  is  problematic  for  several  reasons.  The  most  obvious  is  the  physical  destruction   of  the  films.  Another  concern  is  how  his  images  may  be  treated.  Additionally,  if  LIFT   keeps  only  what  they  can  use  as  found  footage,  the  collection  would  be  separated.     The  second  scenario  is  that  the  Madvo  Collection  is  donated  to  an  archive.  If   the  films  were  stored  properly,  they  would  be  preserved  in  their  original  format  and   maintained.  In  this  situation,  they  could  also  be  accessed  by  the  general  public  and   studied  by  researchers.    

  

77  

As  an  alternative  to  both  the  first  and  second  scenarios,  the  third  option  is   the  digitization  of  the  films.  In  this  case,  LIFT's  members  could  make  digital  copies   of  the  footage  and  use  those  images  in  their  work.     While  the  most  ideal  solution  for  the  future  preservation  of  Madvo's  work   would  be  to  move  the  films  to  an  archive,  because  they  are  already  in  LIFT's   possession,  a  negotiation  must  be  made.  I  believe  that  the  most  practical  solution  is   for  LIFT  to  keep  only  positive  outtakes  and  duplicate  prints  in  the  collection,  and  the   remainder  of  the  material  go  to  an  archive.  This  solution  would  allow  LIFT  to  use  a   small  percentage  of  the  films  as  found  footage  while,  at  the  same  time,  ensure  the   safety  of  complete  and  rare  materials  in  the  collection.   This  thesis  also  asked  the  questions:  What  can  Madvo's  body  of  work   contribute  to  our  understanding  of  independent  and  amateur  non-fiction   filmmaking?  And,  What  cultural  value  and  challenges  do  non-fiction  films  like  these   possess  for  archives?     First  and  foremost,  Madvo's  films  are  historical  records.  His  documentaries   capture  the  world  at  a  specific  time  and  space.  Their  relevance  is  made  clear  with   his  film  Lebanon  at  War,  which  captures  civil  war  in  Lebanon  and  conflict  in  the   Middle  East.   His  Countries  and  Peoples  series  also  have  Canadian  sociopolitical  value.   These  films  can  inform  us  about  the  efforts  made  by  the  government  of  Ontario  to   educate  the  public  about  foreign  cultures.  A  careful  reading  of  them  can  also  reveal   complex  relationships  between  Canadian  and  Middle  Eastern  cultural  identities.  

  

78  

Furthermore,  Madvo's  body  of  work,  including  all  the  production  elements   and  accompanying  material  in  the  collection,  can  tell  us  much  about  Madvo's   practice  and  intentions  as  a  filmmaker.  This  is  important  because  it  can  contribute   to  our  knowledge  of  amateur  and  non-fiction  moving  images,  an  underdeveloped   area  of  study.   In  order  to  determine  specific  qualities  of  Madvo's  films  that  can  enrich  our   understanding  of  his  work  and  support  my  advocacy  for  its  preservation,  I   conducted  analyses  of  three  of  Madvo's  non-fiction  films:  one  documentary  from  his   Countries  and  People  series,  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic;  one  self-contained   documentary  film,  Fontaines  de  Paris;  and  one  home  movie  titled  Denis  et  Bruno:   Enfants.  These  descriptive  case  studies  help  to  describe  Madvo's  non-fiction  oeuvre.   Madvo's  documentary  stands  apart  from  the  standard  "point  and  shoot"   travelogue  film  by  his  effort  to  create  an  individual  and  symbolic  relationship  with   the  documentary  material.  Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic  is  a  carefully  photographed   exploration  of  Lebanon  (Madvo's  home)  conveyed  to  the  Western  World  through  his   unique  connection  to  the  land.     His  self-contained  documentaries  express  an  even  higher  level  of  creativity   and  thought.  Fontaines  de  Paris  documents  fountains  at  nine  locations  in  Paris.  Yet,   Madvo  presents  so  much  more  than  that.  He  captures  life  in  Paris  and  the  discreet   details  of  its  fountains.  In  many  ways,  Fontaines  de  Paris  is  an  experiment  with  light   and  water,  as  well  as  music.     Madvo's  home  movies,  as  well,  demonstrate  his  professional  filmmaking   skills.  Everyday  events  are  carefully  photographed  and  captured  in  a  beautiful  light.  

  

79  

These  films  are  not  boring  or  nostalgic  memories  for  family  members  only  to  enjoy.   They  reveal  an  intimate  portrait  of  Madvo's  life  that  he  cared  about  deeply.  His  level   of  pre-  and  post-production  planning  in  these  films  attests  to  his  dedication  as  a   filmmaker.     Madvo's  films  exhibit  a  level  of  advanced  skills  that  situate  him  somewhere   between  amateur  and  professional.    While  he  was  an  independent  filmmaker,  he   was  a  proficient  cinematographer  and  editor.  Further,  though,  Madvo  captured  the   world  from  a  unique  point  of  view,  and  his  films  are  rich  in  detail,  emotion,  and   beauty.   My  objective  with  this  thesis  was  to  create  a  record  of  Madvo's  oeuvre  so  that   his  work  can  be  saved  from  LIFT's  plans  to  use  it  as  found  footage.  After  cataloguing   and  the  careful  examination  of  the  films  in  the  Madvo  Collection,  I  hope  that  his   body  of  work  is  recognized  as  a  valuable  historical,  cultural  and  artistic  resource   that  can  contribute  to  our  understanding  of  independent  and  amateur  non-fiction   filmmaking  in  general,  and  that  his  films  will  be  preserved  and  made  accessible  to   scholars  for  study  and  for  future  generations  to  enjoy.           

  

80  

Appendix  A:  Jacques  Madvo  Filmography        (All  films  are  16mm.)      Self-Contained  Works   La  Petite  Fille  Aux  Allumettes  (ca.  1956,  French,  black  and  white)   Fontaines  de  Paris  (1961,  20  min,  French,  colour)   Vitreaux  de  Paris  (1961,  31  min.,  French,  colour)   Paris:  le  Passé  et  le  Présent  (1961,  30  min.,  French,  colour)   London  at  Christmas  (1961,  20  min.,  English,  colour)   Vivre  en  Paix  (ca.  1974,  17  min.,  French,  colour)   Canada  (1977,  unfinished)   The  Danube  (ca.  1979,  unfinished)   La  Mer  (ca.  1981,  unfinished)      Documentary  Productions   The  Sea  in  Lebanon  (1968,  ca.  20  min.,  colour)   Liban:  Pays  de  Soleil  (1969,  unknown)   Dispersés  Par  le  Vent  (1971,  17  min.,  English  and  French,  colour)   Olives  of  Lebanon  (1972,  English,  colour)   Countries  and  Peoples  (1974  ­  1983,  ca.  30  min.,  English  and  French,  colour)   Kuwait:  Metamorphosis  of  the  Desert       Jordan:  Daughter  of  the  Desert   Iraq:  Cradle  of  Civilization       Lebanon:  Modern  Mosaic   Lebanon  at  War  (5  min.,)     Iran:  A  Modern  Dilemma     Israel:  Land  of  Destiny   Yemen:  Happy  Arabia     Saudi  Arabia:  Kingdom  in  Black  Gold     Egypt:  Land  of  the  Pharaohs     Morocco:  Berber  Profile     Greece:  Centre  of  the  World     Yugoslavia:  Crossroads  of  Civilization     Italy:  Where  the  Past  is  Always  Present       Spain:  Land  of  the  Conquistadores     Portugal  and  the  Sea   Brazil:  New  World  in  the  Tropics   Venezuela:  Petroleum  Powered  Economy     Mexico:  Land  of  Paradox   Vatican:  Fortress  of  Christianity     China  (unfinished)   Japan  (unfinished)   Vietnam  (unfinished)   Thailand  (unfinished)   800  Years  of  Arab  Presence  in  Spain  (1983,  ca.  20  min.,  English,  colour)      81  

   Home  movies      Denis  et  Bruno:  Enfants  (ca.  1970,  20  min.,  black  and  white  /  colour,  silent)   Bijoux:  Denis  and  Cathy  in  the  Park  (ca.  1988,  11  min.,  colour,  silent)   Various  Untitled      Feature  Films   Orpheus  and  Eurydice  (1984,  colour)        

  

82  

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

1

Ten Rue Toronto [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions

1975 - 1977

24 film reels

ca. 1437.5 ft. acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

2

Fontaines de Paris = Fountains of Paris [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1961

1 film reel

20 min.

800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

3

Spain [GMD] : [Original Negative Trims] / World Film Productions

ca. 1976

4 film reels

ca. 1250 ft.

acetate

original

negative

trims

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head Titles

English / French

4

Holy Land [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 1979

19 film reels

ca. 1575 ft.

acetate

original

positive

reversal

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

5

Yugoslavia [GMD] : [Work Prints] / World Film Productions

2 film reels ca. 1980 1 film strip ca. 1800 ft. acetate work print col. si. 16mm Image only

Jordan [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions; Lebanon [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions; Iraq [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions

6

ca. 1974

18 film reels

ca. 900 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Jordan [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions; Lebanon [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions; Iraq [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions

7

ca. 1974

16 film reels

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

83

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

1

Label on lid reads: "World Film Prod. / 'Ten Rue Toronto' / R #'s 1 - 8 / R #'s 9 - 16 / 2 x 16 / Rolls Col. Orig. Neg / 40 9254. Sept. 12 / 77" ; label on side reads: "Orig. Neg. 10 Rue Toronto"; label contained inside can (likely originally located on This file contains moving images the exterior) reads: "Footage for Canada film"; Documentary / relating to the production Ten Rue each roll numbered. Toronto. Travelogue

2

Label on side: "Copie - Fontaines - 16mm Perforation

Toronto - Housing, Culture, Architecture and Landmarks; CIty Hall, Niagara Falls Paris - Architecture and Landmarks, Fountains ; "Fountains of Paris: Fountain of Port St. Cloud life around fountain; details of sculptures ; Fountains of Rond Point des Champs Elysee - with Arc de Triomphe in background ; Fountain of Place de l'Odeon - and surrounding buildings ; Fountains of Luxembourg - sculptures of horses, turtles, etc. with gardens of Luxembourg ; Fountain of St. Michel - with atmosphere of student life ; Fountains of Trocadero - with tourists and Eiffel Tower ; Fountain of Place St. Sulpice - with old couples and Church of St. Sulpice ; Fountain of Chatelet - birds bathing, children playing with Tours St. Jacques and Theatre Sarah This file contains moving images Documentary / relating to the production Fountains of Bernard in background ; Fountain of Place de la Concorde - with decor of July 14th and circulating traffic dating from 1961 ; various night scenes of above fountains with fireworks" Paris = Fontaines de Paris. Travelogue

Accompanying Material Notes Creation dates determined by ECNs on film stock, label on can indicates development on September 12, 1977.

Condition Report

Mild venegar odor, significant color fading, slight warpage, some parts overexposed.

ECN reads 1961. Ektachrome. Copied from 1 textual record : double-perf. 1 page of hand White leader Minor color fading, added June 20, slight shrinkage, written notes 2014. (shot list) slight warpage ECN reads 1976. 2 main reels contain head titles in English and French ; 1 reel contains effects (indicated on leader ; small reels labelled Strong vinegar odor, "Trims of Resignificant color cut" fading Strong vinegar odor, minor discoloration, some overexposure, some warpage, film sticks together in ECN reads 1979, label on some areas due to glue residue from can indicates development on tape splices and June 25, 1980. labels Strong vinegar odor, severe warpage, ECN reads1982 shrinkage, severe ; copy of film w/ color fading ; reddening ECN 1980

3

Label on lid reads: "World FIlm Pr. / Spain / Trims This file contains moving images Col-neg 16 / 5 Feb '79" in blue ink - "Spain Orig. relating to the production Spain: Land Trims" in red ink ; label on side reads: Spain Orig of the Conquistadores, part of the Neg (Trims)." Leader on reels indicate titles and Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et effects Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight."

4

Label on lid reads: "25/9/80 3713 / Worldfilm This file contains moving images Prod. / Holyland / 1-19 / 1x16 Orig. Ekta ; label on relating to the production Holy Land. side reads: Holy Land / Orig. Neg -" ; each reel Documentary / 18 reels of documentary footage; 1 numbered reel of camera tests. Travelogue

Palestine - History, Description and Travel, Religious iconography, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Landscapes, Countryside, Coastal scenery, Urban scenery, Architecture

5

Label on side reads: Yugoslavia

This file contains moving images relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations, part of the Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a Peuples / TVOntario (1977). mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean" Travelogue

This file contains moving images relating to the productions: Iraq Cradle of Civilisation, Label on lid reads: "J.346 Jack Madvo 'Jordan', 'Lebanon', 'Iraq' Orig. Can #4" with list of numbered rolls ; each roll numbered and described ; label on side reads: "Original Negatives Jordan Lebanon Iraq" Jordan - Daughter of the Desert, and Lebanon - Modern Mosaic, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Iraq - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions ; Jordan - History, Description and Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Travel, Culture, Traditions ; Lebanon - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions

6

Vinegar odor, color fading

This file contains moving images relating to the productions: Iraq Cradle of Civilisation, Label on lid reads: "J.346 Jack Madvo 'Jordan', 'Lebanon', 'Iraq' Orig. Can #3" with list of numbered rolls ; each roll numbered and described ; label on side reads: "Original Negatives Jordan Lebanon Iraq" Jordan - Daughter of the Desert, and Lebanon - Modern Mosaic, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Iraq - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions ; Jordan - History, Description and Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Travel, Culture, Traditions ; Lebanon - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions

7

Vinegar odor, color fading

84

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

10 film reels Holy Land [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions 2 magazine articles reversal positive

8

ca. 1979

ca. 1875 ft.

acetate

original

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

9

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Reversal Out-Takes] / World Film Productions

ca. 1979

2 film reels

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

out-takes

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

10

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Duplicate Negative] / World Film Productions

ca. 1980

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

11

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

6 film reels ca. 1980 shot list ca. 1800 ft. acetate original reversal positive col. si. 16mm Image only

12

Greece [GMD] : [Work Print + Trims] / World Film Productions

1 film reel ca. 1975 trims ca. 45 min. ca. 700 ft. acetate work print + trims col. si. 16mm Image only

13

Danube River [GMD] : [Work Print + Trims] / World Film Productions

ca. 1984

7 film reels

ca. 2250 ft.

acetate

work print + trims

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

5 film reels Portugal [GMD] : [A/B Rolls + Negative] / World Film Productions ca. 1976 / 1977 color timing chart

14

acetate

A/B rolls + negative production rolls

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Tail Titles

English / French

15

Kuwait [GMD] : [OutTakes] / World Film Productions

ca. 1975

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

out-takes

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

16

Les Fontaines de Paris = Fountains of Paris [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1962

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

b+w.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head Titles / Tail Titles

French

17

Portugal [GMD] : [Work Print + Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 1976

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print + original reversal

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

85

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

8

Label on lid reads: " World Film Prod. / Holy Land / 2 x 16 rolls col. rev. / roll no 1, 2 / Lo. 16630 Sept. 1979 / 20 - 29" ; each roll numbered ; small Documentary / roll labelled "war sequence" Travelogue

9

Label on lid reads: "S. Arabia Reversal" ; label on side reads: "S. Arabia Reversal Cuts" ; 1 reel Documentary / labelled: " Oil-drilling - King Fahd, Riyadh Travelogue

10

Label on lid reads: "Word Films / Saudi Arabia / 16 Col. Neg. / Roll 39-60 / Lo. 18730 Date. 2.30.82"

Documentary / Travelogue

11

Label on lid reads: "World Films / Saudi Arabia / Rolls #1 - 11, 1 x 16 Orig. Ekta."

Documentary / Travelogue

Accompanying Material Notes 2 magazine articles : "What Should Have Been Learned" by Patrick A. This file contains moving images and Parnell, "The textual records relating to the Palestinian production Holy Land and textual records relating to the October War Palestine - History, Description and Travel, Religious iconography, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Question A.D. 30 ECN reads - Present" and Palestinian Conflicts. Landscapes, Countryside, Coastal scenery, Urban scenery, Architecture, Conflict, War 1979 ECN reads 1979, some This file contains moving images parts read 1980 relating to the production Saudi copied from film Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom stock w/ ECN the series Countries and People = of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's 1979 Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). largest exporter of oil." This file contains moving images ECN reads relating to the production Saudi 1980, can lid Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom indicates the series Countries and People = development in of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). largest exporter of oil." 1982 This file contains moving images and textual records relating to the ECN reads production Saudi Arabia: Kingdom of 1980, can lid Black Gold, part of the series indicates Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions, Sports - soccer match ; 8 pages of Countries and People = Pays et "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how textual records : development in Peuples / TVOntario (1977) 1982 it became the world's largest exporter of oil." shot list Scope and Content Subject

Condition Report

Strong vinegar odor, severe warpage, damage from tape glue, parts of the film over/underexposed, *should be handled with care Strong vinegar odor, some bad splices, some color fading, some perforation damage

Vinegar odor, color fading, warpage Vinegar odor, color fading, warpage, some damage from tape glue residue, *should be handled with care Vinegar odor, color fading ; reddened, film sticks at splices, warpage, emulsion scratches, *should be handled with care

12

Label on lid reads: "Greece W.P."

This file contains moving images relating to the production Greece: Centre of the World, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Greece - Ancient History, Art, Architecture, Landscape, Description and Travel, Culture, Development ; "Greece: Centre of the World - Describing Greece's pivotal role in the development of democracy and theatre, the programme focuses on the ruins at Delphi, Athens and the temple of Zeus at Olympia. It also depicts Greece's contemporary commercial life farming, mining, the making of handicrafts and the merchant trade."

ECN reads 1975

13

Label on lid reads: "The Danube" ; label on side reads "Danube W/P" ; film roll kept in 3 3/4" can marked "28" and labelled "Regensburg" ; film roll This file contains moving images labelled "Just before Ingolstadt" ; film roll labelled Documentary / relating to the production The Danube The Danube River - Navigation and Transport, Waterway, Boating, Fishing, Central and Eastern "Outs Danube" ; film roll labelled "End Danube" River Travelogue Europe - Description and Travel, Regensburg, Donau This file contains moving images and textual records relating to the production Portugal and the Sea, part Label on lid reads: "World Film Pr. / Portugal (Tail Titles) / A+B Rolls Inter Pos. A Wind / E Roll Eng. Documentary / of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Titles / F Roll French Titles / 23 May / 78" Travelogue Portugal - Sunset, Titles, Background shots

Strong vinegar odor, color fading ; blue / green, slight ECN reads1984 warpage ECN reads 1976 / 1977, can lid indicates 1 textual record: processing in Vinegar odor, color color timing chart 1978 fading Vinegar odor, color fading ; reddened, some parts overexposed, slight warpage, film sticks at splices, *should be handled with care

14

15

16

17

Kuwait - Descripition and Travel, Architecture, People, Industry, Farming, Cityscapes, Desert, Camels ; "Kuwait: Metamorphosis of the Desert - In the space of 30 shorts years, the Kuwaitis have passed from desert povertyto unheard of opulence. Because of its massive oil revenues, the country now offersits citizens free education and medical service, as well as one of the highest standards of living in the world." Label on lid reads: " Kuwait Outs" Paris - Architecture and Landmarks, Fountains ; "Fountains of Paris: Fountain of Port St. Cloud life around fountain; details of sculptures ; Fountains of Rond Point des Champs Elysee - with Arc de Triomphe in background ; Fountain of Place de l'Odeon - and surrounding buildings ; Fountains of Luxembourg - sculptures of horses, turtles, etc. with gardens of Luxembourg ; Fountain of St. Michel - with atmosphere of student life ; Fountains of Trocadero - with tourists and Eiffel Tower ; Fountain of Place St. Sulpice - with old couples and Church of St. Sulpice ; This file contains moving images Fountain of Chatelet - birds bathing, children playing with Tours St. Jacques and Theatre Sarah relating to the production Les Bernard in background ; Fountain of Place de la Concorde - with decor of July 14th and Documentary / Fontaines de Paris = Fountains of circulating traffic dating from 1961 ; various night scenes of above fountains with fireworks" Paris. Travelogue Label on side reads: "Les Fontaines de Paris" Portugal - History, Description and Travel, Coastline, People on the beach, Industry, Cattle, Fishing, Boating, Architecture, Landscapes, Cityscapes, Culture, Ceremonies ; "Portugal and This file contains moving images relating to the production Portugal and the Sea - Stressing the importance of the sea to Portugese life, the programme includes a history of the country's navigational feats and its current industries of fishing, shipbuilding, vine the Sea, part of the series Countries growing and cork production. It also reveals the central place of the country's Catholic religion, Label on lid reads: Portugal = Original Reversal / Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / with film segments of the people's elaborate ceremonial processions" TVOntario (1977). Portugal W/Print - Reversal / Portugal - Reversal" Travelogue

This file contains moving images relating to the production Kuwait Metamorphosis of the Desert, a part of Documentary / the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

ECN reads 1975

ECN reads 1962

Mild vinegar odor, slight warpage

ECN reads 1976

Vinegar odor, severe warpage, some color fading - blue, some parts overexposed

86

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility The Empty Quarter [GMD] : [Master + Original Reversal] / World Film Productions Arabs in Spain [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

18

ca. 1962

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

master + original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

19

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Subtitles

English

20

Iran [GMD] : [Sound Effects] / World Film Productions

18 audio reels

acetate

original

sound effects

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Magnetic

21

Iran [GMD] : [Titles] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

acetate

original

positive

titles

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head Titles

English

22

Paris: passé et présent = Paris: Past and Present [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1961

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

End Titles

French

23

Portugal [GMD] : [Outtakes] / World Film Productions

2 film reels ca. 1976 trims ca. 2200 ft. acetate positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

24

25

Portugal [GMD] : [Negative Trims] / World Film Productions Vitreaux de Paris = Windows of Paris [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions Sanbar [GMD] : [Work Print + Out-takes] / World Film Productions

ca. 1976

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

original

negative

trims

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

ca. 1960

8 film reels

ca. 300 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

26

ca. 1982

3 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

positive

work print + out-takes

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

27

Morocco [GMD] : [Titles] / World Film Productions

ca. 1978

3 film reels

ca. 100 ft.

acetate

positive

A/B rolls + titles

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Tail Titles

English / French

DOGS in Persia [GMD] : [Print] / Dhahran Outing Group; Iran [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions print (stock footage) ; ca. 1963 2 film reels ca. 800 ft. acetate positive work print col. si. 16mm Image only English

28

87

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

Accompanying Material Notes ECN reads 1966, copied from film stock w/ ECN 1962

Condition Report

18

Label on side reads: "The Empty Quarter - Orig. Reversal + Orig. Master"

This file contains moving images Documentary / relating to the production The Empty Quarter. Travelogue Documentary / Travelogue This file contains audio material relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

The Empty Quarter - Description and Travel, Desert climate, Shots of sand dunes, camels, sky, sunset, people, Arabian Peninsula, Landscape, Geography

19

Label on side reads: "Arabs in Spain"

Vinegar odor, slight warpage, good color quality Vinegar odor, slight warpage, minor color fading Severe deterioration due to vinegar syndrome, pungeant odor, desintigration into red powder

20

Label on lid reads: "Iran Sound Effects"

*Moved to hazardous material

21

Label on lid reads: "Iran French Titles" (actually English)

This file contains moving images relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

English Head Titles for the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma

22

Paris - La Seinne, Architecture - Notre Dame de Paris, Scenes of Bateau Mouche, Louvre, Eiffel Tower, Pont Alexandre III, Pont Neuf, Organ grinder, Passing cars, , Scenes of Montmartre, Church, Night scenes of Champs Elysee, Place de la Concorde, Arc de Triomphe, Place de Label on lid reads: "Original and W/ Print" ; leader This file contains moving images reads: "Paris Passe ; Paris Present / World Film Documentary / relating to the production Paris: Past l'Opera, Shots of people embracing, Musicians (consult accompanying shot list provided by Productions" and Present / World Film Productions donor) Travelogue

Originally stored with Can 20: Iran Sound Effects, separated from deteriorated items, stored in its own can Strong vinegar odor Vinegar odor, warprage, emulsion scratches, detereoration along edges, good quality color, film sticks at ECN indicates splices, *should be handled with care 1961

23

Label on lid reads: "Portugal Outs"

24

Label on lid reads: "World Film Pr. / Portugal / Trims. Col. Neg. 16mm / 7436 10 July 78"

This file contains moving images and textual records relating to the production Portugal and the Sea, part Documentary / of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Portugal and the Sea, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Portugal - Scenes of People, Cows, Countryscapes, Cityscapes, Windmill, Agriculture, Architecture, Industry - Fishing, Boats, Sea, Coastline, Rock, Statues, Culture and Tradition, Bullfighting

1 textual record: Personal notes with names and telephone numbers

ECN reads 1976 ; film reel labeled "Toros" feature footage of a Portugesestyle bullfight

Vinegar odor, severe warpage, color fading - reddened, dirt, dust, bad splices, film sticks at splices, damage due to glue, some parts over/under-exposed, *should be handled with care

Portugal - Scenes of People, Cows, Countryscapes, Cityscapes, Windmill, Agriculture, Architecture, Industry - Fishing, Boats, Sea, Coastline, Rock, Statues, Culture and Tradition, Bullfighting Paris - Architecture, Stained Glass Windows ; Vitreaux de Paris - "Various scenes from stained glass windows of: la Sainte Chapelle, Notre Dame de Paris, St. Germain de l'Auxerrois, St. Gervais et St. Protais, St. Etienne du Mont, Sacre Coeur de Mont Martre, St. Pierre de Mont Martre"

ECN reads 1976

Vinegar odor, color fading - yellowed

25

This file contains moving images Documentary / relating to the production Vitreaux de Paris. Label on side reads: "Vitreaux - Chutes. Original" Travelogue

ECN reads 1960, film not kept on cores

26

Label on lid reads: "W/P Sanbar" Label on lid reads: "World Film Prod. / Morocco (Tail Title) / 16% Interpos / 16% Hi Con French Title / 16% Hi Con English Titles" ; Each roll labelled Label on lid reads: "Perse Rolls et DOG Outgoing / ARAMCO / w/ Iran Original" ; Notes: 1 reads: "Dahram Outing Group / D.O.G. / Original Copy / Contains interesting carpet scenes also few scenes of Persepolis with and without people / Tourisme can be interesting also / first scenes Orig. of flowers!" ; 1 reads: "Persepolis Work Print / but can be used as orig. neg. in case we don't find the original."

Documentary / Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Morocco Berber Profile, a part of the series Documentary / Countries and People= Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images and textual records relating to the productions DOGS in Persia (likely CBC stock footage) and;

Maps, Advertisements, Computers, Palm Trees, Pueblo Villas ; Camera Tests

Slight vinegar odor, warpage, Slight vinegar odor, warpage, varying degrees of color fading

27

Morocco - Tail titles, English and French ; Interpositive - Background shots of boy / people in the A/B rolls Timing street Card

ECN reads 1978

Slight vinegar odor, minimal warpage, minimal color fading

28

DOGS in Persia: Scenes outside airplane window, airplanes, airport, people looking out over landscape, flowers, Persian carpets ; Iran: a modern dilemma, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Iran - Tourism, Description and Travel, Persopolis - Achaemenid Empire, Ancient ruins, Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Religious ceremony Travelogue

Strong vinegar odor, warpage, excellent quality color images, 2 textual records: handwritten Iran ECN reads some parts over/under exposed notes 1963

88

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

29

Les Fontaines de Paris = Fountains of Paris [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1962

1 film reel

ca. 21 mins

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

30

Egypt [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

3 film reels

ca. 150 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

4 film reels Egypt [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions ca. 1976 / 1977 3 textual records reversal positive

31

ca. 1500 ft.

acetate

original

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

1 film reel; Yugoslavia [GMD] : [Master] / World Film Productions 1 textual record Head / End Titles

32

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

master

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

English

Kuwait [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions ; Yemen [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions ; Lebanon [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions

33

ca. 13 film reels

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

original

negatives

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

34

35

36

La Mer = The Sea [GMD] : [Work Print; Magnetic Soundtrack] Dispersés par le vent = Blown By The Wind [GMD] : [Print] Dispersés par le vent = Blown By The Wind [GMD] : [Print] Paris: passé et présent = Paris: Past and Present / World Film Productions

1 film reel ; ca. 1980 1 audio reel 17 mins; 6 sec 17 mins; 6 sec ca. 1500 ft. acetate reversal positive

reversal work print ; soundtrack col.

sd.

16mm

Image and sound separate

Magnetic

Head / Inter / English / End Titles French

ca. 1972

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

ca. 1973

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

37

2 film reels

acetate

16mm

89

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

29

Label on lid reads: "les Fontains de Paris [?] Material / World Film Productions

30

Label on lid reads: "Egypt Originals"

31

Label on lid reads: " Egypt / W/P from Orig. Ektachrome Reversal / also Papyrus and Cairo University W.P. but [?] can be used as orig. if needed for orig. neg"

32

Label on side reads: "Yugoslavia / World Film Productions" ; label on reel reads: "Yugoslavia positive master (scratches the first 100 feet)"

Accompanying Material Subject Paris - Architecture and Landmarks, Fountains ; "Fountains of Paris: Fountain of Port St. Cloud life around fountain; details of sculptures ; Fountains of Rond Point des Champs Elysee - with Arc de Triomphe in background ; Fountain of Place de l'Odeon - and surrounding buildings ; Fountains of Luxembourg - sculptures of horses, turtles, etc. with gardens of Luxembourg ; Fountain of St. Michel - with atmosphere of student life ; Fountains of Trocadero - with tourists This file contains audiovisual material and Eiffel Tower ; Fountain of Place St. Sulpice - with old couples and Church of St. Sulpice ; Fountain of Chatelet - birds bathing, children playing with Tours St. Jacques and Theatre Sarah relating to the production Les Bernard in background ; Fountain of Place de la Concorde - with decor of July 14th and Documentary / Fontaines de Paris = Fountains of circulating traffic dating from 1961 ; various night scenes of above fountains with fireworks" Paris / World Film Productions Travelogue Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated of the Pharaohs, part of the series by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et taken from accompanying material provided by the donor). Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Papyrus - Papyrus plant, Crops, Papyrus Paper, Manufacture and Production ; Cairo University Building Architecture, Shots of campus, Student life, Classrooms, Education ; Egypt 3 textual records : handwritten This file contains moving images and Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, History, Culture, Cairo - Cityscapes, Nile River, Pyramids, Ancient history ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An informative look at ancient notes (French) textual records relating to the Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In about Egypt and production Egypt - Land of the information about Pharaohs, part of the series Countries contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description taken from accompanying content of the Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / material provided by the donor). footage TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual and textual records relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture, Landscape, Art and Civilizations, part of the series Architecture, Geography ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia 1 textual record : developed into a country with no official language and a mixture of cultures from Europe and the 9 pages of type Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Mediterranean" (probably script). Travelogue Category Scope and Content

Notes

Condition Report

ECN reads 1962

Strong vinegar odor, severe color fading reddened, warpage

Ektachrome

Mild vinegar odor, severe warpage, good quality color images

ECN reads 1976 / 1977

Vinegar odor, warpage, color fading

Mild vinegar odor, slight warpage, color fading - blue / green, surface cratches

This file contains moving images and various production elements relating to the productions Kuwait Metamorphosis of the Desert Yemen - Happy Arabia, and Lebanon - Modern Mosiac, part of Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

33

Label on side reads: "Orig. Neg. Kuwait and Yemen"

Kuwait, Yemen, Lebanon - General Imagery, Description and Travel

Various negative production elements including check print, titles, effects, some Vinegar odor, high leader, some degree of color scrap film fading, warpage

34

Label on lid reads: "La Mer Image et Snd." Label on side reads: "Disperse Par Le Vent Jacques Madvo" Label on side reads: "Disperse Par Le Vent Jacques Madvo"

35

36

This file contains moving images and audio materials relating to the production La Mer = The Sea. This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Disperse Par Le Vent = Blown By The Wind. This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Disperse Par Le Vent = Blown By The Wind.

La Mer - Separate images and sound based on the orchestral composition by French composer Claude Debussy, divided into three movements: "De l'aube à midi sur la mer", "Jeux de vagues" and "Dialogue du vent et de la mer" ; Scenes of the coastline, beaches, waves, fish, seaweed, plantlife, sunrises and sunsets over the water, the ocean/sky horizon, reflections, boats Black and white scenes of demolished houses and debris, masses of people re-locating, camps, close-ups of faces, children's faces, color animation of children's drawings, color close-ups of children's faces looking happy. Black and white scenes of demolished houses and debris, masses of people re-locating, camps, close-ups of faces, children's faces, color animation of children's drawings, color close-ups of children's faces looking happy.

ECN reads 1980

Critical vinegar syndrome: Image reel - strong vinegar odor, breakdown of acetate base, brittle, severe warpage, minor color fading, damage from glue, should be isolated ; Audio reel - high degree of vinegar syndrome, extremely warped, some deterioration into red dust, broken and brittle Mild vinegar odor, minor warpage, good condition Mild vinegar odor, minor warpage, good condition Mold, severe vinegar syndrome, deterioration into red powder

37

Label on lid reads: "Parism le present, le passe, la nuit / Sequence Paris la nuit / Ekta et son / Partie 1"

This file contains audiovisual material Documentary / relating to the production Paris: Past and Present Travelogue

Kept in bag with records 38, 39 *Moved to hazardous material

90

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility Paris: passé et présent = Paris: Past and Present / World Film Productions

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

38

2 film reels

acetate

16mm

39

40

41

Les Fontaines de Paris = Fountains of Paris / World Film Productions Dispersés par le vent = Blown By The Wind [GMD] : [Print] Vitreaux de Paris = Windows of Paris [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

1 film reel 17 mins; 6 sec

acetate

16mm

ca. 1973

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

ca. 6 film reels

ca. 300 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

42

London at Christmas [GMD] : [Reversal Master; Magnetic Track]

1 film reel ; 1961 1 audio reel ca. 800 ft. acetate master reversal positive

reversal master ; magnetic soundtrack

col.

sd.

16mm

Image / sound separate Magnetic

Head Titles

English

43

Kuwait [GMD] : [Master] / World Film Productions

1976

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

master

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

44

Jordan [GMD] : [Master] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

master

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

45

Yemen [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1973

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head Titles

French

46

Yemen [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1973

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head Titles

English

47

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1980

1 film reel

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

48

Mexico [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

49

Vatican [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1977

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head / End Titles

English

91

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

38

Label on lid reads: "Parism le present, le passe, la nuit / Sequence Paris la nuit / Ekta et son / Partie 2"

This file contains audiovisual material Documentary / relating to the production Paris: Past and Present Travelogue

39

Label on lid reads: "Les Fontaines de Paris / Ektachrome + Magnetique"

40

This file contains audiovisual material Documentary / relating to the production Fountains of Paris. Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material Black and white scenes of demolished houses and debris, masses of people re-locating, camps, relating to the production Disperse Par close-ups of faces, children's faces, color animation of children's drawings, color close-ups of Le Vent = Blown By The Wind. children's faces looking happy. Paris - Architecture, Stained Glass Windows ; Vitreaux de Paris - "Various scenes from stained glass windows of: la Sainte Chapelle, Notre Dame de Paris, St. Germain de l'Auxerrois, St. Gervais et St. Protais, St. Etienne du Mont, Sacre Coeur de Mont Martre, St. Pierre de Mont Martre"

Accompanying Material Notes Kept in bag with records 37, 39 *Moved to hazardous material Kept in bag with records 37, 38 *Moved to hazardous material

Condition Report Mold, severe vinegar syndrome, deterioration into red powder Mold, severe vinegar syndrome, deterioration into red powder Mild vinegar odor, warpage

41

Label on side reads: "Vitreaux - Orig. - Chutes"

This file contains moving images Documentary / relating to the production Vitreaux de Paris. Travelogue

Film not on cores *Moved to hazardous material

42

Label on lid reads: " London at Xmas / Rev Master / Also Magnetic Track"

London - Description and Travel, Culture, Tradition, Christmas Holidays, Architecture and This file contains audiovisual material Landmarks - Big Ben, Tower of London, Picadilly Circus, Royal Guards, Royal Family ; Shots of people, Streets, Double-decker busses, Rain, Christmas Trees, Parade, Churches, Toys, Documentary / relating to the production London at Chirstmas Decoration, Lights, Santa Christmas. Travelogue This file contains audiovisual materials relating to the production Kuwait: Metamorphosis of the Desert, part of Documentary / the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOnario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Jordan: Daughter of the Desert, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Kuwait - Descripition and Travel, Architecture, People, Industry, Farming, Cityscapes, Desert, Camels ; "Kuwait: Metamorphosis of the Desert - In the space of 30 shorts years, the Kuwaitis have passed from desert povertyto unheard of opulence. Because of its massive oil revenues, the country now offersits citizens free education and medical service, as well as one of the highest standards of living in the world." Jordan - Travel and Description, Culture, Tradition, Climate shots of the desert, camels, architecture, interesting shadows, light, rock formations ; "Jordan - Daughter of the Desert: Jordan still embraces the past. Working hard to re-cultivate the desert, men and women can still be seen wearing clothes like those of their ancestors in the time of Christ. Bedouins still sing their ancient songs and dance at timeless wedding celebrations"

ECN reads 1961

Vinegar odor, severe warpage, signs of mold Strong vinegar odor, some color fading, warpage ; Magnetic track has a severe vinegar syndrome should be kept separate

43

Label on lid reads: "Kuwait Master"

Leader reads "1976 version"

Mild vinegar odor, major color fading reddened

44

Label on lid reads: "Jordan (French and English Master)"

Mild vinegar odor, Only 1 Master - major color fading French version reddened Mild vinegar odor, warpage, sticky splices, color fading, some parts severely faded - redenned, glue damage, *film should be handled Mostly reversal with care

45

Label on side reads: "Yemen W/P Only"

This file contains moving images relating to the production Yemen: Happy Arabia, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Yemen: Happy Arabia, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Saudi Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Mexico: Land of Paradox, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

46

Yemen - Travel and Description, History, Industry, Farming, Religious Iconography, Tradition, Culture, Ceremony, Architecture, titles that read: "le diaphragme" followed by the depiction of a uterus at the start, desert climate, people harvesting ; "Yemen - Although one of the most fertile and strategically located countries in the Middle East, Yemen has managed to keep its doors closed to foreigners for centuries. Peasants cultivating wheat, sorghum and cotton are reminded of a glorious past in the ruins of the fabulously wealthy Biblical kingdom of Sheba" Yemen - Travel and Description, History, Industry, Farming, Religious Iconography, Tradition, Culture, Ceremony, Architecture, titles that read: "le diaphragme" followed by the depiction of a uterus at the start, desert climate, people harvesting ; "Yemen - Although one of the most fertile and strategically located countries in the Middle East, Yemen has managed to keep its doors closed to foreigners for centuries. Peasants cultivating wheat, sorghum and cotton are reminded of a glorious past in the ruins of the fabulously wealthy Biblical kingdom of Sheba"

Strong vinegar odor, severe color fading reddened

47

Label on lid reads: "Saudi Arabia (English Version)"

48

Label on lid reads: "Mexico (English)"

49

Label on lid reads: "Vatican (Eng) / World Films

Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions, Culture, Architecture, Development, shots of camels, desert climate, oil excavation, production, crowded people, horses running ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's largest exporter of oil." Mexico - Travel and Description, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, History and Development, Art, Sculpture, Climate, Landscape, Temple Ruins, "Mexico: Land of Paradox - A portrait of Mexico as a mature, stable, progressive country with a rich heritage and a promising future. Current issues discussed include overcrowding, the povery of farmres in a land of plenty, and utilisation of the country's vast il reserves" Vatican City - Rome, Travel and Description, Art and Architecture, St. Peter's Basilica, Italian Painting, Sculpture, Catholic Iconography, History and Development, the Pope, the Colosseum ; This file contains moving images "Vatican: Fortress of Christianity - A documentary tracing the historical development of the relating to the production Vatican: Catholic religion in Europe and the world, and the establishment of the Vatican as the spiritual Fortress of Christianity, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et centre of Christianity. Vatican City, 40 hectares within Rome, contains St. Peter's Basilica and other majestic examples of Italian architecture" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Mild vinegar odor, color fading, good condition

Slight color fading, overall excellent condition

Mild vinegar odor, color fading reddened, slight warpage

92

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

1 film reel 50 Vatican [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions ca. 1977 textual record ca. 800 ft. acetate duplicate positive print col. sd. 16mm Composite Optical Head / End Titles English

51

Mexico [GMD] : [Answer Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

52

Ten Rue Toronto [GMD] : [Work Print; Sound] / World Film Productions

ca. 1977

2 film reels

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

positive

work print; soundtrack

col.

sd.

16mm

Image / sound Optical / separate Magnetic

French

53

Yugoslavia [GMD] : [Prints] / World Film Productions

2 film reels; cuts ca. 1600 ft. acetate

answer print release print positive prints col. sd. 16mm Composite Optical Head / End Titles French

54

Labanon [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

55

Iraq [GMD] : [Check Print; Cuts] / World Film Productions Vues de Paris = Views of Paris [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

1 film reel; cuts ca. 400 ft. acetate

check print:

positive;

check print; cuts col. si. 16mm Image only

negative cuts negative

56

1961

3 film reels

ca. 150 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

57

Orly, Acteurs, et Paris [GMD] : [Original Reversal]

1960 / 1961

9 film reels

ca. 450 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

58

Morocco [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

1976

2 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

59

Labanon [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

60

Mexico [GMD] : [Master Print] ; Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Master Print] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

master

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

93

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

50

Label on side reads: "Vatican Film (English)"

51

Label on side reads: "OP Mexico"

This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Vatican: Fortress of Christianity, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Mexico: Land of Paradox, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Subject Vatican City - Rome, Travel and Description, Art and Architecture, St. Peter's Basilica, Italian Painting, Sculpture, Catholic Iconography, History and Development, the Pope, the Colosseum ; "Vatican: Fortress of Christianity - A documentary tracing the historical development of the Catholic religion in Europe and the world, and the establishment of the Vatican as the spiritual centre of Christianity. Vatican City, 40 hectares within Rome, contains St. Peter's Basilica and other majestic examples of Italian architecture" Mexico - Travel and Description, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, History and Development, Art, Sculpture, Climate, Landscape, Temple Ruins, "Mexico: Land of Paradox - A portrait of Mexico as a mature, stable, progressive country with a rich heritage and a promising future. Current issues discussed include overcrowding, the povery of farmres in a land of plenty, and utilisation of the country's vast il reserves"

Accompanying Material Notes

Condition Report

1 textual record : 12 pages of type (probably script)

Mild vinegar odor, color fading reddened, slight warpage Mild vinegar odor, minor color fading, slight warpage, overall good condition Sound reel contains commercials with optical sound mixed with full coat magnetic sound. Strong vinegar odor, severe warpage, color fading - some parts reddened, sticks at splices ; sound reel several warped

52

53

54

This file contains audiovisual material Documentary / relating to the production 10 Rue Toronto. Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Yugoslavia Crossroads of Civilisations, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Lebanon: Modern Mosaic, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Label on lid reads: "J.346 'Lebanon' Jack Madvo" Travelogue Label on side reads: "10 Rue Toronto" This file contains moving images relating to the production Iraq: Cradle of Civilisation, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Toronto - Travel and Description, History, Tourism, Architecture and Landmarks, City Hall, CN Tower, Lake Ontario, Rural scenery, Downtown Toronto ; credits written on postage envelope, shots of houses, streets, marching band, highway, skyscrapers, streetcar, traffic, aerial view, building construction, maple trees, historic imagery, skyline ; *Sound reel also contains images for television commercials Yugoslavia - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Art and Architecture, shots of landscape, castles, Countryside, Coastline, Sculptures, Monuments, ships, sunsets, mountain scenery, old black and white photographs of combat / war "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean" Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture, Shots of countryside, herds of animals, desert, windmill, wheat fields, ancient ruins, city life, the sea, waterskiing, fishing ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of the illustrious past, reveal their archaeological treasures"

Info on lid is incorrect Info on lid is incorrect, film wound loose on core Cuts are loose and in no particular order, some badly damaged

Mild vinegar odor, color fading - some parts blue Mild vinegar odor, severe warpage, significant color fading - reddened,

55

Label on lid reads: "Neg Cuts for reproduction / also Iraq short copy" / World Film Prod."

Iraq - Travel and Description, Landscape, Geography, Culture ; Shots of city, desert, people, parade, buildings, structures

Mild vinegar odor, significant color fading - reddened, some warpage

56

Label on lid reads: Original / Vues de Paris / Louvre - 14 / Juillet"

This file contains moving images of Documentary / Paris, likely relating to the production Paris: Past and Present. Travelogue

Paris - Travel and Description, Art and Architecture - Shots of Louvre, Paris streets, Art

57

Label on side reads: "Orly 2 Bobines. Acteurs (3 Bobines) Avec Scene Paris", each roll labelled This file contains moving images relating to the productions Morocco: Berber Profile, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Lebanon: Modern Mosaic, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Paris - Travel and Description, Architecture and Landmarks - Versailles, Pont Alexandre, Orly ; shots of actors working on set, movie production, tourists, scenes of Paris - streets, parks Morocco - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Fez and Marrakesh" Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture, Shots of countryside, herds of animals, desert, windmill, wheat fields, ancient ruins, city life, the sea, waterskiing, fishing ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of the illustrious past, reveal their archaeological treasures" Mexico - Travel and Description, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, History and Development, Art, Sculpture, Climate, Landscape, Temple Ruins, "Mexico: Land of Paradox - A portrait of Mexico as a mature, stable, progressive country with a rich heritage and a promising future. Current issues discussed include overcrowding, the povery of farmres in a land of plenty, This file contains audiovisual material and utilisation of the country's vast il reserves" (Content description taken from accompanying background information provided by the fonds donor) + Saudi Arabia - History, Description and relating to the productions Mexico: Travel, Economic Conditions, Culture, Architecture, Development, shots of camels, desert Land of Paradox ; Saudi Arabia: climate, oil excavation, production, crowded people, horses running ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom Kingdom of Black Gold, parts of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's largest exporter of oil." Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

58

Label on lid reads: "Approx. 1450 FT. W.P. Lab / Morocco + Portugal"

ECN reads 1961 ECNs read 1960 / 1961, some of the original labelling has become unnattached, label on lid incorrect - only 2 'Acteurs' reels, not 3 ECN reads 1976, label on lid is incorrect just material related to Morocco

Slight warpage, good condition

Slight warpage, shrinkage, some parts color faded blue, good condition

Vinegar odor, warpage, some color fading - blue, some parts over-exposed Mild vinegar odor, minor warpage, significant color fading - reddened,

59

Label on lid reads: "Lebanon / English"

60

Label on lid reads: "Mexico / Saudi Arabia / Master Prints / Jacques Madvo"

Minor warpage, color fading - reddened, overall good condition

94

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

61

Spain [GMD] : [Soundtrack] / World Film Productions

ca. 1982

1 audio reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

master

mix final

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Optical

English

62

Morocco [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Magnetic

63

Denis / Bruno: Enfants [GMD] : [Home Movie] Danube River [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions Music of Man [GMD] : [Release Print] / Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ; Emily Carr Part 2: Little Old Lady on the Edge of Nowhere [GMD] : [Release Print] / National Film Board of Canada Dispersés par le vent = Blown By The Wind [GMD] : [Print]

ca. 1974 / 1975

1 film reel

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

positive

b+w.

si.

16mm

Image only

64

ca. 1976

2 film reels

ca. 1500 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

65

ca. 1980

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles Head / End Titles

English

66

ca. 1974

1 film reel

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

English

67

Lebanon [GMD] : [Answer Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

68

Jordan [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

Engish

Living in Peace (Canadian Children Painting) = Vivre en Paix ; Scenes of Paris [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions ca. 13 film reels ; 2 audio reels ca. 750 ft. acetate positive; duplicate; original reversal positive col. ; b+w. si. ; sd. 16mm Image / sound separate Magnetic

69

95

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

61

Scope and Content Subject This file contains audio material relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the Label on lid reads: " World Films / 'Spain' English Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). / 16mm Opt. Trk." Travelogue Spain - Travel and Description This file contains moving images relating to the productions Morocco: Berber Profile, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Morocco - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Fez and Marrakesh"

Inscription & Marks

Category

Accompanying Material Notes

Condition Report

62

Label on lid reads: "Maroc with Sound"

63

Label on lid reads: "Denis Bruno / [?] [?] etc. / en famille"

Home movie

This file contains moving images of Jacques Madvo's home life.

Home movies - Shots of filmmaker's sons, children's toys, etc.

Label indicates 1982, *Not able to play audio Slight vinegar odor Slight vinegar odor, severe warpage, Unable to hear brittle, buckled, good magnetic track, quality color image, *should be handled unsure of with care language Major warpage, fading, weak splices, damage from glue, some emulsion scratches, some perforation damage *should be handled ECN reads with care 1974 / 1975 ECN reads 1976 ; label dates 1992

64

Label on lid reads: " World Films / Hungary Austria 2 rls 16 neg / 9/28/92"

This file contains moving images Documentary / related to the production The Danube River. Travelogue Footage of Austria and Hungary - Travel and Description, Danube River

Strong vinegar odor, major color fading

This file contains audiovisual material relating to Episode 7: The Known and The Unknown of the series Music of Man / Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and Emily Carr Part 2: Little Old Lady On The Edge of Nowhere / National Film Label on lid reads: "Jacques Madvo / Reel I / Raw Stock / (Onexposed) Documentary Board of Canada This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Disperse Par Le Vent = Blown By The Wind. Label on lid reads: "Blown By The Wind Copy" This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Lebanon: Label on lid reads: "Millard Film / 'Labanon' / 12 Modern Mosaic, part of the series April 76", tape reads "Drop-out 400' in Word 'Thousand', reel labelled "Lebanon French Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Scratches and Flashes" Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Jordan: Daughter of the Desert, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Label on lid reads: "Jordan"

Music -- History and Criticism, Shots of war, combat, "Program 7. Covers the developments in various areas of music between the World Wars. Discusses jazz, big band, and new contemporary classical music" (Content description taken from the Northern Arizona University Library) ; Carr, Emily, 1871-1945., Painters--Canada--Biography, "The second part of this life story of Emily Carr looks into the creative journey toward a realization of her artistic truth. After her meeting with members of Ontario's illustrious Group of Seven, she felt isolated, but still she pursued her craft vigorously as a painter and, later, as a writer" (Content description take from the Toronto Public Library). Black and white scenes of demolished houses and debris, masses of people re-locating, camps, close-ups of faces, children's faces, color animation of children's drawings, color close-ups of children's faces looking happy. Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture, Shots of countryside, herds of animals, desert, windmill, wheat fields, ancient ruins, city life, the sea, waterskiing, fishing ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of the illustrious past, reveal their archaeological treasures" Jordan - Travel and Description, Culture, Tradition, Climate shots of the desert, camels, architecture, interesting shadows, light, rock formations ; "Jordan - Daughter of the Desert: Jordan still embraces the past. Working hard to re-cultivate the desert, men and women can still be seen wearing clothes like those of their ancestors in the time of Christ. Bedouins still sing their ancient songs and dance at timeless wedding celebrations"

65

66

Music of Man ECN reads Vinegar odor, color 1980 ; Emily fading - reddened, Carr ECN 1977 warpage Mild vinegar odor, some color fading, ECN reads good condition 1974

67

Vinegar odor, major color fading reddened

68

Very strong vinegar odor, major color fading - reddened This file contains a variety of film some on reels, some not - as well as a number of small strips and cuts. Most of the footage contains imagery of drawings done by children for the S.P.C.A. 2 reels contain b+w. film of scenes of Paris and 2 reels are magnetic soundtracks.

69

Label on side reads: "Enfants Canadiens (Chutes)"

This file contains audiovisual material relating to a variety of productions. Children's paintings of animals ; Scenes of Paris - "Chutes" - Fountains, La Seinne River, Rain

Broken, brittle film, warpage, minor color fading, some mold damage

96

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility Winter Storm [GMD] : [Print; Work Print ] / CBC Stockshot

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

70

ca. 1976

2 film reels

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

2 film reels; Ten Rue Toronto [GMD] : [Work Prints] / World Film Productions 1 textual document

71

ca. 1977

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

positive

work prints

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

72

Spain [GMD] : [Optical Track] / World Film Productions

1 audio reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

soundtrack

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Optical

Arabic

73

Living in Peace (Canadian Children Painting) = Vivre en Paix [GMD] : [Work Prints; Composite Print] / World Film Productions

reversal positive; 3 film reels ca. 1600 ft. acetate positive

work prints; si. ; composite print col. sd. 16mm Image only; Composite Optical

74

Venezuela [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions La Mer = The Sea [GMD] : [Original Reversal] ; Alps Paris [GMD] : [Original Reversal]

ca. 1979

19 film reels

ca. 1800 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

75

ca. 1980 / 1981

12 film reels

ca. 650 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

76

Spain [GMD] : [Outtakes] / World Film Productions

ca. 13 film reels

ca. 2100 ft.

acetate

positive

out-takes

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

77

Spain [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions Mexico [GMD] : [Original Negative] ; Brazil [GMD] : [Original Negative] ; Vatican [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Spanish

78

14 film reels

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

79

Mexico [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

18 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

97

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

70

Label on lid reads: "Snowstorms Prog. Orig. Rev. / Item 1 400 ft. + W.P." News

This file contains moving images relating to the production Winter Storm Winter weather - snow, blizzard, shots of snowy rooftops, empty trees, cars driving on ice, / CBC Stockshot. people walking on street, icicles, ice covered countryside

Accompanying Material Notes Condition Report ECN reads Lab work order 1976, copy print kept in own form - P.F.A. Some color fading, cannister Labs minor warpage 1 textual document: The Royal Bank of Canada Monthly Letter dated February 1978 w/ the note "Interesting text for my Canadian Film"

71

72

Canada - Travel and Description, shots of carnival midway, ferris wheel at night, fireworks, animated maple leaf, Cities, Montreal - Travel and Description, Architecture and Landmarks, shots of the Biosphere, bridges, Toronto - Travel and Description, Culture, Architecture and Label on lid reads: 10 Rue Toronto / Ottawa This file contains moving images Landmarks, Toronto Island, Harborfront, Ottawa - Parliament Buildings, Parliament Hill, British 'Housing in Urban Toronto / Rolls 1-7 / 133404 / 1 Documentary / relating to the production 10 Rue soldiers col. W/P" Toronto / World Film Productions. Travelogue This file contains audio material to the Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil production Spain: Land of the War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Conquistadores, part of the series Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Label on lid reads: "Ar in Spain Optical Track Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." (Arabic)" Travelogue

ECN reads 1975, can contains 3 additional scenes to be added to the work print

Vinegar odor, color fading - reddened, warpage, weak tape splices, some parts over-exposed

73

Label on lid reads: "Canadian Children Painting (Living in Peace)"

74

Label on lid reads: "J-1008 'Venezuala - J Madvo - Orig. Rev. Can 2"

This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Canadian Children Painting (Living in Peace). Children's paintings of various animals Venezuela - Description and Travel, History, Culture, Economic Conditions, Development, Industry, Art and Architecture ; "Venezuela: Petroleum Powered Economy - A portrait of This file contains moving images relating to the production Venezuela: Venezuela from its beginning as a sleepy backwater Spanish colony, to its present status as an Petroleum Powered Economy, part of independent oil-producing nation. Reaping the results of its wealth, the country is enjoying a state of commercial, industrial and artistic growth - buts its rural villages are being deserted" Documentary / the series Countries and People = (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the fonds donor). Pays et Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue Animation

Unable to test quality Vinegar odor, early generation work print suffers from 3 generations warpage, weak tape of prints: 2 work splices, sticks at splices, damage prints, 1 composite print from glue residue, ; replaced some film should be handled with care tape splices

Unable to test quality

75

Label on lid reads: "Original Reversal the Sea and Alps Paris" ; each reel labelled accordingly

This file contains moving images relating to the production La Mer. This file contains moving images relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue

76

Label on lid reads: "Spain W/P", each reel labelled accordingly

77

Label on lid reads: "Spanish (Arabs in Spain)"

La Mer - underwater scenes, shots of swimming, waves, oceanview, horizon, tide, waterfall, marine animals ; The French Alps - aerial views of the mountains, snow, roses, shots of France, Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, Cities - Grenada, Seville, Toledo, Cordoba ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, Cities - Grenada, Seville, Toledo, Cordoba ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight."

ECN reads 1979 ECNs read 1980 / 1981 ; 11 film reels relating to La Mer, 1 film reel relating to The French Alps Reels categorized by different regions in Spain

Minor vinegar odor, color fading - blue

Minor color fading, damage from glue

Vinegar odor, significant color fading - reddened, weak splices

ECN reads 1984, unable to test sound Slight color fading

78

Label on lid reads: "Orig. Neg. / Mexico / Brazil / Vatican"

Documentary / Travelogue Mexico - Travel and Description, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, History and Development, Art, Sculpture, Climate, Landscape, Temple Ruins, "Mexico: Land of Paradox - A portrait of Mexico as a mature, stable, progressive country with a rich heritage and a promising future. Current issues discussed include overcrowding, the povery of farmres in a land of plenty, and utilisation of the country's vast il reserves"

Mild vinegar odor

79

This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Mexico: Land of Paradox, part of the series Label on lid reads: "Mexico World Film Prod. Orig. Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Col. Neg Can #1" Travelogue

Mild vinegar odor

98

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

80

Mexico [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

ca. 19 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Danger Alive [GMD] : [Print] ; Youth Policing [GMD] : [Print] ; First on the Scene [GMD] : [Print] / Crawley Films Canada

81

ca. 1979

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

82

Fill James Bay [GMD] : [Work Print] / CBC ; Labor and Delivery [GMD] : [Print] / Crawley Films Canada

16 film reels

ca. 2250 ft.

acetate

si. ; 1989 2 film reels ca. 1500 ft. acetate positive print col. sd. 16mm Image only ; Composite ; Optical ; Head / End Titles ; English

83

84

Iran [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

1963

5 film reels

ca. 1850 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

85

86

Portugal [GMD] : [Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions Vitreaux de Paris = Windows of Paris [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions Olives of Lebanon [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

2 film reels; trims ca. 2200 ft. acetate positive

work print; out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

1961

1 film reel

31 min

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

87

1972

2 film reels

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

3 film reels; 2 audio reels; Lebanon [GMD] : [A/B Rolls; Optical Track] / World Film Productions negative ; textual records ca. 1000 ft. acetate original soundtrack col. si. ; sd. 16mm Image / sound separate Optical Titles French and English

88

89

Brazil [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

15 film reels

ca. 750 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

90

Brazil [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

20 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

99

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

80

Scope and Content This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Mexico: Land of Paradox, part of the series Label on lid reads: "Mexico World Film Prod. Orig. Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Col. Neg Can #2" Travelogue

Inscription & Marks

81

82

Label on side reads: "Fill"

83

84

Label on lid reads: "Iran / Orig. Outs"

Accompanying Material Subject Mexico - Travel and Description, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, History and Development, Art, Sculpture, Climate, Landscape, Temple Ruins, "Mexico: Land of Paradox - A portrait of Mexico as a mature, stable, progressive country with a rich heritage and a promising future. Current issues discussed include overcrowding, the povery of farmres in a land of plenty, and utilisation of the country's vast il reserves" Danger Alive - Construction Safety Association of Ontario, Safety Film, Electical Work, Electrcians, Construction, Electrical Film Committee, "The film reminds us that we cannot take our dependence on electricity for granted and how much depends on an electrician's sense of responsibility for the safety and welfare of everyone around him. The electricians contribution to This file contains audiovisual material construction is further enhanced by their working and living safely" (Content description taken relating to the production Danger Alive, from the Massachusetts State Dept. of Education, Boston. Div.of Occupational Education: http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED078185.pdf) ; Youth Policing: A Community Approach in St. John's N. B., and Youth Policing: A Community Approach in St. John N.B. - Police Officers, Youth, Interviews, Shots of neighbourhood community, St. John ; First Aid, Emergency, Rescue, Shots of Educational / First on the Scene / Crawley Films accidents, Newspaper headlines, Rescue workers, Safety Canada. Safety Film This file contains audiovisual material relating to a variety of productions Some reels contain material relating to Danger Alive and First on the Scene / Crawley Films Canada. This file contains audiovisual materials relating to the productions James Bay / CBC and James Bay - Description and Travel, Lakelands, Camping, Shots of the outdoors, fishing, Pregnancy and Childbirth, part of the boating, campfire, rivers, flowers, cottage; series Labor and Delivery / Crawley Films Canada. Pregnancy and Childbirth: Labor and Delivery This file contains moving images relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Iran - Description and Travel, Persepolis, Achaemenid Empire, History, Culture, Art and Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Architecture, Shots of desert terrain, temples, ruins, streets, transportation, cityscapes, people Category Portugal - History, Description and Travel, Art and Architecture, Landscapes, Cityscapes, Culture, Churches Ceremonies, Religious iconography, flowers, people under umbrellas, donkey ; "Portugal and the Sea - Stressing the importance of the sea to Portugese life, the programme includes a history of the country's navigational feats and its current industries of fishing, shipbuilding, vine growing and cork production. It also reveals the central place of the country's Catholic religion, with film segments of the people's elaborate ceremonial processions" Paris - Architecture, Stained Glass Windows ; Vitreaux de Paris - "Various scenes from stained glass windows of: la Sainte Chapelle, Notre Dame de Paris, St. Germain de l'Auxerrois, St. Gervais et St. Protais, St. Etienne du Mont, Sacre Coeur de Mont Martre, St. Pierre de Mont Martre"

Notes

Condition Report

Mild vinegar odor

Dates determined by copyright date on Youth Policing print

Vinegar odor, severe warpage, color fading - brown/red

Vinegar odor, color Leader / scrap fading, brittle, weak film used for 'fill' splices

James Bay film ECN reads Mild vinegar odor, 1989 color faded - blue Vinegar odor, slight warpage, sticks at splices, some damage from glue Vinegar odor, slight warpage, significant color fading reddened, sticks at splices, some damage from glue Warpage, sticks at splices, some damage from glue Vinegar odor, color fading - blue, warpage

ECN reads 1963

85

Label on side reads: "Portugal W/P and good Outs"

This file contains moving images relating to the production Portugal and the Sea, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images Documentary / relating to the production Vitreaux de Paris. Travelogue

ECN reads 1976

86

Label on lid reads: "Formes et Couleur des Vitreaux de Paris / 16mm colour / 31 mins"

ECN reads 1961

87

This file contains moving images Label on lid reads: "Olives of Lebanon Rev. Orig. / Documentary / relating to the production Olives of Lebanon. WOrld Films" Travelogue

Lebanon - History, Industry, Agriculture, Labor, Olive Oil Production and Cultivation, shots of olive trees, people harvesting olives, traditional methods of production, stone machinery

ECN reads 1972

88

89

90

5 textual records: newspaper clippings concerning This file contains audiovisual material Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture, events in relating to the production Lebanon: Shots of countryside, herds of animals, desert, windmill, wheat fields, ancient ruins, city life, the Lebanon dating 1982 / 1983 Modern Mosaic, part of the series sea, waterskiing, fishing ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the Beirut Massacre, traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of the Label on lid reads: "World Films / Lebanon / ABC Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Politics, Conflicts Peuples / TVOntario (1977). illustrious past, reveal their archaeological treasures" 16mm + 2 x 16mm Opt. Trk" Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Brazil: New "Brazil: New World in the Tropics - Countries and People traces the history of Brazil's reliance World in the Tropics, part of the series upon the export of its natural wealth - sugar, gold, diamonds, coffee, rubber - and the import of manufactured goods. As the country undergoes rapid industrialization, it must meet the Label on lid reads: "World Films / Brazil / Col. Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). challenges of using its vast resources wisely and find ways to overcome illiteracy and poverty" Neg." Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Brazil: New "Brazil: New World in the Tropics - Countries and People traces the history of Brazil's reliance World in the Tropics, part of the series upon the export of its natural wealth - sugar, gold, diamonds, coffee, rubber - and the import of manufactured goods. As the country undergoes rapid industrialization, it must meet the Label on lid reads: "World Films / Brazil / Col. Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). challenges of using its vast resources wisely and find ways to overcome illiteracy and poverty" Neg." Travelogue

Vinegar odor, significant color fading - yellowed, warpage

100

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects ca. 9 film reels

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

91

Fill

ca. 750 ft.

acetate reversal positive;

92

Lebanon [GMD] : [CRI + Original Negative] / World Film Productions

ca. 11 film reels

ca. 1350 ft.

acetate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

93

Various Titles [GMD] : [Reversal]

ca. 1979

ca. 12 film reels

ca. 1550 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

94

Various Titles [GMD] : [Out-takes]

ca. 21 film reels

ca. 875 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

95

Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice [GMD] : [Titles] Jordan [GMD] : [Original Negatives] ; Lebanon [GMD] : [Original Negatives] ; Iraq [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions

ca. 11 film reels

ca. 1150 ft.

acetate

reversal

b+w.

si.

16mm

Image only

Sub-titles

English / French

96

1974

13 film reels

ca. 650 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

97

Iran [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

1977

2 film reels

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

98

Iran [GMD] : [Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions

work print; 1977 / 1978 5 film reels ca. 2350 ft. acetate reversal positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

99

Fill [GMD] : [Magnetic Track]

ca. 8 audio reels

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

magnetic soundtrack (full mag.)

16mm

Sound only

100

Venezuela [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

1979

ca. 5 film reels

ca. 1750 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head Titles

English

101

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

Accompanying Material Notes Leader / scrap film used for 'fill'

Condition Report

91 This file contains moving images relating to the production Lebanon: Modern Mosaic, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of the illustrious past, reveal their archaeological treasures"

92

Label on lid reads: "Jacques Madvo / Lebanon / Work Print Bits / CRI Sections / + W.P."

CRI reels are internegatives

Mild vinegar odor, severely color faded, warpage

93

Some reels have notes describing content

Poesie des Fleurs - shots of different kinds of flowers, Theatre a l'Italien, Papyrus, Statues, Notre-Dame de Paris; Living in Peace - Children's Painting, Fish, Underwater; South Africa Tiger and Lions ; Italy - Description and Travel, Landmarks, Architecture, Shots of Pisa, Tower ; Israel - Description and Travel, Temple Mount, Architecture - "Jerusalem City (Dome of the This file contains moving images Rock) Various Close ups, Modern stain glass windows in the Holy Land, Flowers (wild) on the relating to various productions Several notes including Israel, South Africa, Italy, and way of Old Jerusalem houses + Jewish Tomb with Jerusalem City in background + Wild flowers conained with in South Africa with Tigers swimming water + Horse fish and other + lions + various giraffes, etc" reels Living in Peace. 2 empty photographic film cartridge, 1 reel black tape, 1 reel grey leader

ECN reads 1979 Most material is reversal, 1 film reel is original negative (kept in bag)

Vinegar odor, slight color fading

94

Each reel labelled accordingly

95

Each reel labelled accordingly

Opera-Ballet

This file contains moving images relating to various productions. This file contains moving images relating to the production Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice, an Opera-Ballet in three acts by Christopher Willibald von Gluck with Libretto by Raniero da Calzabigi based on Greek mythology and revised in French by Pierre-Louis Moline (1774).

Some films color faded, emulsion scratches, brittle film, warpage

Film strips

Mild vinegar odor, some warpage

96

This file contains moving images relating to the productions: Iraq Cradle of Civilisation, Jordan Daughter of the Desert, and Lebanon Modern Mosaic, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Iraq - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions ; Jordan - History, Description and Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Travel, Culture, Traditions ; Lebanon - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions This file contains audio material relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audio material relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

97

Label on lid reads: "Iran / W/Print and Outs from Ektachrome Originals (Reversal)"

Iran - Description and Travel, Persepolis, Achaemenid Empire, History, Culture, Art and Architecture, Shots of desert terrain, temples, ruins, streets, transportation, cityscapes, people Iran - Description and Travel, Persepolis, Achaemenid Empire, History, Culture, Art and Architecture, Industry, Argiculture, Shots of desert terrain, temples, ruins, streets, transportation, cityscapes, people, lumber, countryside, poverty, tapesty making, flowers, paper mill, helicopter school,

ECN reads 1977, Ektachrome

Vinegar syndrome, color fading Vinegar odor, warpage, sticks at splices, extremely weak tape splices, should be handled with care Mild vinegar odor, slight warpage, minor color fading, some weak splices Severe deterioration due to vinegar syndrome, pungeant odor, desintagration into red powder Mild vinegar odor, slight warpage, good quality color image, weak at splices, should be handled with care

98

Label on lid reads: "Iran Work Print and Outs"

ECN reads 1977 / 1978

99 This file contains moving images Venezuela - Description and Travel, History, Culture, Economic Conditions, Development, relating to the production Venezuela: Industry, Art and Architecture, 1 reel of Caracas, oil excavation, shots of a bird, animation, Petroleum Powered Economy, part of portraits, aerial shots, cityscapes ; "Venezuela: Petroleum Powered Economy - A portrait of the series Countries and People = Venezuela from its beginning as a sleepy backwater Spanish colony, to its present status as an Pays et Peuples / TVOntario ; 1 reel independent oil-producing nation. Reaping the results of its wealth, the country is enjoying a state of commercial, industrial and artistic growth - buts its rural villages are being deserted" Documentary / relating to Mexico, 1 reel relating to Brazil (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the fonds donor). Travelogue

*Moved to hazardous material

100

Label on side reads: "Venezuela", each reel labelled accordingly

ECN reads 1979

102

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

4 film reels; Brazil [GMD] : [Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions work print; 1979 5 textual records ca. 2025 ft. acetate reversal positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only Head / End Titles English / French

101

102

Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice [GMD] : [Work Prints]

3 film reels

ca. 2500 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work prints

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head titles

English

103

Spain [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions Ten Rue Toronto (Canada Film) [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions Fill Fill

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

104 105 106

16 film reels 13 film reels 9 film reels

ca. 800 ft. ca. 1800 ft. ca. 2000 ft.

acetate acetate acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

107 108 109 110

Non-Root Feeding of Plants as Revealed by Radioisotopes [GMD] : [Work Print; Out-takes; Soundtrack] Magnetic Tape Magnetic Tape Magnetic Tape

work print; 3 film reels ; 1979 1 audio reel ca. 1800 ft. acetate positive out-takes; soundtrack col. sd.; sd. 16mm composite ; sound only Optical ; Magnetic Head / End Titles Multi

Brazil [GMD] : [Work Print + Out-takes + Titles] ; Venezuela [GMD] : [Work Prints +] / World Film Productions Various Sound Effects [GMD] : [Magnetic Tracks]

111

ca. 1979

ca. 12 film reels

ca. 1900 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

various elements

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Head / End Titles

English / French

112

ca. 25 audio reels

Sound effects

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Magnetic

103

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

Accompanying Material Notes

Condition Report

101

Label on side reads: "Brazil good outs / St. Salvato - Rio - Brazilia Manaus etc", each reel labelled accordingly

102

103

Label on lid reads: "Ar. in Spain"

This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Brazil: New World in the Tropics, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice, an Opera-Ballet in three acts by Christopher Willibald von Gluck with Libretto by Raniero da Calzabigi based on Greek mythology and revised in French by Pierre-Louis Opera-Ballet Moline (1774). This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People / TVOntario. Travelogue

Brazil - Description and Travel, History, Culture, Art and Architecture, Landmarks, Shots of the statue of Cristo Redentor, beaches, water, boats, nature, flowers, people, poverty, local art, art production, "Brazil: New World in the Tropics - Countries and People traces the history of Brazil's reliance upon the export of its natural wealth - sugar, gold, diamonds, coffee, rubber and the import of manufactured goods. As the country undergoes rapid industrialization, it must meet the challenges of using its vast resources wisely and find ways to overcome illiteracy and poverty"

5 textual records: 2 newspaper clippings, 1 book of postcards, 1 postcard, 1 hotel information ECN reads booklet 1979

Slight warpage, good quality color images, weak at splices, some damage from glue, should be handled with care

104 105 106

Label on lid reads: "Canada Neg" Label on film reels read: "Fill / Use for Fill"

This file contains moving images Documentary / relating to the production 10 Rue Toronto / World Film Productions. Travelogue Leader / scrap film used for 'fill' Leader / scrap film used for 'fill'

1 reel - Acts 1 and 2, 1 reel - Act 2, 1 reel - second part of Act 3 Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." Canada - Travel and Description, shots of carnival midway, ferris wheel at night, fireworks, animated maple leaf, Cities, Montreal - Travel and Description, Architecture and Landmarks, shots of the Biosphere, bridges, Toronto - Travel and Description, Culture, Architecture and Landmarks, Toronto Island, Harborfront, Ottawa - Parliament Buildings, Parliament Hill, British soldiers Leader / scrap film used for 'fill' Leader / scrap film used for 'fill'

Slight vinegar odor, warpage, good quality color images Major color fading reddened, film sticks in some areas, warpage

Film kept on reel

Significant color fading - yellowed

107 108 109 110

Magnetic track is labelled as "English voice over" Educational

This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Non-Root Feeding of Plants as Revealed by Plant life, Horticulture, Agriculture, shots of various plants, scientists feeding plants, labs, Radioisotopes. experiments

Note reading: "Micro Mist Originals"

ECN reads 1979, *Films originally kept in bag, moved to extra cannister Unable to check Unable to check Unable to check

Vinegar odor, color fading - reddened, some emulsion scratches, some perforation damage, damage from glue residue, weak splices, film should be handled with care ; Magnetic sound reel suffering from higher degree of vinegar syndrome

Brazil - Carnaval sequence, Culture, Celebration, shots of the parade, different costumes, people dancing; Venezuela - Description and Travel, History, Culture, Economic Conditions, Development, Industry, Art and Architecture, shots of offshore drilling, ships, paintings, people, flowers, buildings, musicians, coastal city, raft, sunrise sequence, church and cathedral, sequence of fisherman ; "Venezuela: Petroleum Powered Economy - A portrait of Venezuela from its beginning as a sleepy backwater Spanish colony, to its present status as an independent oilproducing nation. Reaping the results of its wealth, the country is enjoying a state of commercial, industrial and artistic growth - buts its rural villages are being deserted" (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the fonds donor).

111

Each item labelled accordingly

This file contains moving images relating to the productions Brazil: New World in the Tropics and Venezuela: Petroleum Powered Economy, parts of Documentary / the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

112

ECN reads 1979 Unable to check *Moved to hazardous material

Mild vinegar odor, color fading, sticks at splices Severe vinegar odor, deterioration into red dust

104

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

113

Adapt or Die [GMD] : [Prints] / Nielsen-Ferns

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

114

Egypt [GMD] : [Negative Trims] / World Film Productions

1976

2 film reels

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

negative

trims

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

115

Spain [GMD] : [Release Prints] / World Film Productions Kuwait [GMD] : [Original Negative] ; Yemen [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

positive

release prints col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

English ; Arabic

116

ca. 30 film reels

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

117

Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice [GMD] : [Out-takes] Various Sound Effects [GMD] : [Magnetic Tracks] Various Sound Effects [GMD] : [Magnetic Tracks] Various Sound Effects [GMD] : [Magnetic Tracks]

1989

ca. 12 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

positive

out-takes

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

118

ca. 30 audio reels

Sound effects

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Magnetic

119

ca. 30 audio reels

Sound effects

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Magnetic

120

ca. 30 audio reels

Sound effects

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Magnetic

121

Egypt [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions Morocco [GMD] : [Original Negative] ; Portugal [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

positive

Print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

122

6 film reels

ca. 750 ft.

acetate

Original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

123

Morocco [GMD] : [Reversal Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions

work print; 2 film reels ca. 1200 ft. acetate reversal out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

124

Yugoslavia [GMD] : [Internegatives] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

negative

internegatives col.

si.

16mm

Image only

105

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

113

114

Accompanying Material Subject Notes "Ark on the Move was a documentary television miniseries hosted by zoologist Gerald Durrell on location in Madagascar and Mauritius. The series was produced by Canadian company NielsenFerns and aired from January to March 1982 on CBC Television. It was directed by Alastair Brown and produced by Paula Quigley for Nielsen-Ferns, and was a follow-up to the earlier This file contains audiovisual material successful series The Stationary Ark. It was a documentary illustrating the work of the Jersey relating to the production Adapt or Die, Wildlife Preservation Trust (now Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust) overseas and in the field. It illustrated the ideas of captive breeding and the professional life of a naturalist. The primary Documentary / part of the series Ark on the Move / target audience were children" (Content description taken from Wikipedia). CBC (1982). Travelogue 2 prints Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated of the Pharaohs, part of the series by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et taken from accompanying material provided by the donor). Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Category Scope and Content This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People / TVOntario. Travelogue Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight."

Condition Report

Color fading reddened, warpage

115

Label on lid reads: "Arabs in Spain English and Arabic"

Color fading yellowed Arabic version in good condition, English version is color faded reddened and warped

116

Label on lid reads: "Kuwait + Yemen J. Madvo Orig Can #2"

117

This file contains moving images relating to the production Kuwait: Metamorphosis of the Desert and Yemen: Happy Arabia, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice, an Opera-Ballet in three acts by Christopher Willibald von Gluck with Libretto by Raniero da Calzabigi based on Greek mythology and revised in French by Pierre-Louis Opera-Ballet Moline (1774). Scenes of paradise, Underworld sequence, sunrise, dancers

Color fading

118

119

120 This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Morocco Berber Profile and Portugal and the Sea, parts of the series Countries and Label on lid reads: "Morocco + Portugal Orig. Col. Documentary / People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Neg." Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the productions Morocco: Berber Profile, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Morocco - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Fez and Marrakesh" Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the donor).

ECN reads 1989 Unable to check *Moved to hazardous material Unable to check *Moved to hazardous material Unable to check *Moved to hazardous material

Mild vinegar odor, some parts stick at splices, image quality very good Severe vinegar odor, deterioration into red dust Severe vinegar odor, deterioration into red dust Severe vinegar odor, deterioration into red dust

121

Mild vinegar odor, significant color fading - reddened, slight warpage

122

Reels inside plastic bag relate to Morocco

Color fading yellowed

123

Label on lid reads: "Color Rev. Neg."

Good quality color image, slight warpage

124

Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean"

Color fading yellowed

106

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

125

Vatican [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

1977

11 film reels

ca. 550 ft.

acetate

Original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

126

Vatican [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

1977

10 film reels

ca. 500 ft.

acetate

Original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

127

Vatican [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

1977

4 film reels

ca. 200 ft.

acetate

Original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

128

Tito [GMD] : [Print] / Dunav Film

1977

2 film reels

ca. 1100 ft.

acetate

positive

prints

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head Titles

SerboCroatian

129

Tito - new ally? [GMD] : [Print]

1951

1 film reel

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

b+w.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

English

130

Italy [GMD] : [Release Print] / World Film Productions

1979

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

release print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

131

Greece [GMD] : [Release Print] / World Film Productions

1978

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

release print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

132

Iran [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions Spain [GMD] : [Sound Effects] / World Film Productions Spain [GMD] : [Sound Effects] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 400 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

133

2 film reels

Magnetic Sound Effects

Sound only

Magnetic

134

2 film reels

Magnetic Sound Effects

Sound only

Magnetic

135

Portugal [GMD] : [Answer Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Head / End Titles

French

136

Spain [GMD] : [Optical Track] / World Film Productions

1 audio reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

soundtrack

sd.

16mm

Sound only

Optical

English

137

Spain [GMD] : [Release Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

release print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Arabic

107

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

125

Lid reads: "World Films Vatican 16mm Col. Neg. 78"

126

Lid reads: "World Films Vatican 16mm Col. Neg. 78"

127

Lid reads: "World Films Vatican 16mm Col. Neg. 78"

Accompanying Material Subject Notes Vatican City - Rome, Travel and Description, Art and Architecture, St. Peter's Basilica, Italian Painting, Sculpture, Catholic Iconography, History and Development, the Pope, the Colosseum ; This file contains moving images "Vatican: Fortress of Christianity - A documentary tracing the historical development of the relating to the production Vatican: Catholic religion in Europe and the world, and the establishment of the Vatican as the spiritual Fortress of Christianity, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et centre of Christianity. Vatican City, 40 hectares within Rome, contains St. Peter's Basilica and other majestic examples of Italian architecture" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Vatican City - Rome, Travel and Description, Art and Architecture, St. Peter's Basilica, Italian Painting, Sculpture, Catholic Iconography, History and Development, the Pope, the Colosseum ; This file contains moving images "Vatican: Fortress of Christianity - A documentary tracing the historical development of the relating to the production Vatican: Catholic religion in Europe and the world, and the establishment of the Vatican as the spiritual Fortress of Christianity, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et centre of Christianity. Vatican City, 40 hectares within Rome, contains St. Peter's Basilica and other majestic examples of Italian architecture" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Vatican City - Rome, Travel and Description, Art and Architecture, St. Peter's Basilica, Italian Painting, Sculpture, Catholic Iconography, History and Development, the Pope, the Colosseum ; This file contains moving images "Vatican: Fortress of Christianity - A documentary tracing the historical development of the relating to the production Vatican: Catholic religion in Europe and the world, and the establishment of the Vatican as the spiritual Fortress of Christianity, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et centre of Christianity. Vatican City, 40 hectares within Rome, contains St. Peter's Basilica and other majestic examples of Italian architecture" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Category Scope and Content This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Tito (1977 Yugoslavia), directed by Krsto Documentary Skanata. Documentary on Josip Broz Tito. This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Tito - New Ally? (Belgrade, Yugoslavia), part of the television series The March of Time (1950 - 1951) that chronicles the Documentary Cold War. The rise to power of Josip Broz Tito. Italy - Description and Travel, Culture, Art of Architecture, Landmarks, History, Economic This file contains audiovisual material conditions, Indusrty, shots of the countryside ; "Italy: Where the Past is Always Present - An relating to the production Italy: Where exmination of the Italian influence on the progress of civilisation through the ages, from the rise the Past is Always Present, part of the and fall of the Roman Empire, through the Renaissance, to post-war industrialisation. Along with Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et a look at Italy's present day problems, producer Jacques Madvo stresses the joie de vivre that sustains Italians throughout the world" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material Greece - Ancient History, Art, Architecture, Landscape, Description and Travel, Culture, relating to the production Greece: Development ; "Greece: Centre of the World - Describing Greece's pivotal role in the Centre of the World, part of the series development of democracy and theatre, the programme focuses on the ruins at Delphi, Athens and the temple of Zeus at Olympia. It also depicts Greece's contemporary commercial life Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). farming, mining, the making of handicrafts and the merchant trade." Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Condition Report

Color fading yellowed

Color fading yellowed

128

Lid reads: "TITO"

Color fading yellowed Vinegar odor, significant color fading - reddened, warpage, weak splices

129

Lid reads: "Tito - New Ally"

Vinegar odor, severe warpage

130

Label on reel reads: "Italy Opt. French"

Significant color fading - reddened, slight warpage

131

Label on lid reads: "Pays et Peuple / Greece / Comp Col R.P."

132

Label on lid reads: "Iran Orig Ng. Shah Palace"

Iran - Description and Travel, Persepolis, Achaemenid Empire, History, Culture, Art and Architecture, Shots of Shah's Palace, various Iranian costumes, Tehram Arc, desert terrain, temples, ruins, streets, transportation, cityscapes, people

Note about content Unable to check *Moved to hazardous material Unable to check *Moved to hazardous material

133

134 Portugal - History, Description and Travel, Art and Architecture, Landscapes, Cityscapes, Culture, Churches Ceremonies, Religious iconography, flowers, people under umbrellas, donkey ; "Portugal and the Sea - Stressing the importance of the sea to Portugese life, the programme includes a history of the country's navigational feats and its current industries of fishing, shipbuilding, vine growing and cork production. It also reveals the central place of the country's Catholic religion, with film segments of the people's elaborate ceremonial processions" Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight."

Significant color fading - reddened, severe warpage Slight warpage, excellent image quality, some base scratches, some damage from glue residue Severe vineger syndrome, deterioration into red dust Severe vineger syndrome, deterioration into red dust

135

Label on side reads: "Portugal Ans. Opt."

136

Label on lid reads: "Ar in Spain Optical Track English"

137

Label on lid reads: "Arabs in Spain (Arabic)"

This file contains moving images relating to the production Portugal and the Sea, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audio material to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audio material to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Severe color fading reddened

Unable to test quality

Unable to test quality

Slight color fading overall good quality color image

108

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

138

Egypt [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive original reversal;

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

139

La Mer [GMD] : [Original Reversal; Work Print]

1981

2 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

140

La Mer [GMD] : [Original Reversal]

1981

2 film reels

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

141

Spain [GMD] : [Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions

3 film reels + trims

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

positive

work print + trims

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

142

Spain [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 900 ft.

acetate

positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

143

Yugoslavia [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

ca. 6 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

144

Greece [Negative] / World Film Productions

3 film reels

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

145

Yugoslavia [Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions

work print; 4 film reels ca. 2100 ft. acetate positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

146

Holy Land [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

10 film reels

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

147

Iraq [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

ca. 20 film reels

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

148

Iraq [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

ca. 20 film reels

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

149

Egypt [GMD] : [Negative Trims] / World Film Productions

4 film reels

ca. 1500 ft.

acetate

negative

trims

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

150

Yugoslavia [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1500 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

109

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

138

Label on lid reads: "Egypt Col. Rev."

This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

139

This file contains moving images and audio materials relating to the production La Mer = The Sea.

140

141

Each reel labelled accordingly

Documentary / Travelogue

142

Documentary / Travelogue

143

Documentary / Travelogue

144

Documentary / Travelogue

145

Documentary / Travelogue

This file contains moving images and audio materials relating to the production La Mer = The Sea. This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the series Countries and People / TVOntario. This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the series Countries and People / TVOntario. This file contains moving images relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations, part of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Greece: Centre of the World, part of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). This file contains moving images relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations, part of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977).

Accompanying Material Subject Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the donor). La Mer - based on the orchestral composition by French composer Claude Debussy, divided into three movements: "De l'aube à midi sur la mer", "Jeux de vagues" and "Dialogue du vent et de la mer" ; Scenes of the coastline, beaches, waves, fish, seaweed, plantlife, sunrises and sunsets over the water, the ocean/sky horizon, reflections, boats La Mer - based on the orchestral composition by French composer Claude Debussy, divided into three movements: "De l'aube à midi sur la mer", "Jeux de vagues" and "Dialogue du vent et de la mer" ; Scenes of the coastline, beaches, waves, fish, seaweed, plantlife, sunrises and sunsets over the water, the ocean/sky horizon, reflections, boats Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight."

Notes

Condition Report

Mild vinegar odor, slight color fading overall good quality image Mild vinegar odor, slight color fading overall good quality image

Vinegar odor, slight color fading - overall god quality image

Mild vinegar odor, Films loose on significant color fading - reddened cores

Mild vinegar odor, Films loose on significant color fading - reddened cores

Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean" Greece - Ancient History, Art, Architecture, Landscape, Description and Travel, Culture, Development ; "Greece: Centre of the World - Describing Greece's pivotal role in the development of democracy and theatre, the programme focuses on the ruins at Delphi, Athens and the temple of Zeus at Olympia. It also depicts Greece's contemporary commercial life farming, mining, the making of handicrafts and the merchant trade."

Color fading yellowed

Vinegar odor, color fading - yellowed

Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean"

146

147

148

This file contains moving images relating to the production Holy Land, Israel: Land of Destiny, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Iraq: Cradle of Civilisation, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Iraq: Cradle of Civilisation, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Palestine - History, Description and Travel, Israel, Religious iconography, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Landscapes, Countryside, Coastal scenery, Urban scenery, Architecture, Conflict, War

Vinegar odor, significant color fading Weak at splices, film should be handled with care, some damage from glue, overall good quality image

Iraq - Travel and Description, Landscape, Geography, Culture ; Shots of city, desert, people, parade, buildings, structures

149

150

Iraq - Travel and Description, Landscape, Geography, Culture ; Shots of city, desert, people, parade, buildings, structures Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated of the Pharaohs, part of the series by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et taken from accompanying material provided by the donor). Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations, part of the Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a Peuples / TVOntario (1977). mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean" Travelogue

Color fading yellowed

110

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility London [GMD] : [Original Negative] ; Sanbar [GMD] : [Soundtrack; Negative Trims] / World Film Productions

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

151

6 film reels

ca. 1700 ft.

Magnetic

152

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Negative] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

153

Morocco [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

ca. 20 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

154

155 156

Morocco [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions Chateaux de la Loire [GMD] : [Check Print] / CBC Water Effects [GMD] : [Sound Effects]

ca. 15 film reels

ca. 750 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

positive

check print sound effects

col.

si.

16mm

Image only Sound only Magnetic

157

Venezuela [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 30 film reels

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

158

Iran [GMD] : [Reversal Work Print] / World Film Productions

3 film reels

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

159

160

Iran [GMD] : [Reversal Work Print] / World Film Productions Arabs in Spain [GMD] : [Release Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 3 film reels

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

release print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

Arabic

161

Orpheus and Eurydice [GMD] : [Work Print; Outtakes] / World Film Productions Yugoslavia [GMD] : [Work Print + Out-takes] / World Film Productions

work print; ca. 4 film reels ca. 1800 ft. acetate reversal positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

work print; 5 film reels ca. 2300 ft. acetate reversal positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

162

163

Yugoslavia [GMD] : [Duplicate Positive] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

111

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

Accompanying Material Notes

Condition Report

151 This file contains moving images relating to the production Saudi Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's Documentary / the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). largest exporter of oil." Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the productions Morocco: Berber Profile, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the productions Morocco: Berber Profile, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Documentary / Travelogue Morocco - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Fez and Marrakesh" Morocco - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Fez and Marrakesh"

Magnetic soundtrack suffering from vinegar syndrome

152

153

154

155 156

157

158

159

Venezuela - Description and Travel, History, Culture, Economic Conditions, Development, Industry, Art and Architecture ; "Venezuela: Petroleum Powered Economy - A portrait of This file contains moving images relating to the production Venezuela: Venezuela from its beginning as a sleepy backwater Spanish colony, to its present status as an Petroleum Powered Economy, part of independent oil-producing nation. Reaping the results of its wealth, the country is enjoying a state of commercial, industrial and artistic growth - buts its rural villages are being deserted" Documentary / the series Countries and People = (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the fonds donor). Pays et Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Iran - Description and Travel, Persepolis, Achaemenid Empire, History, Culture, Art and Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Architecture, Shots of desert terrain, temples, ruins, streets, transportation, cityscapes, people This file contains moving images relating to the production Iran: a Modern Dilemma, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Iran - Description and Travel, Persepolis, Achaemenid Empire, History, Culture, Art and Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Architecture, Shots of desert terrain, temples, ruins, streets, transportation, cityscapes, people Documentary / Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice, an Opera-Ballet in three acts by Christopher Willibald von Gluck with Libretto by Raniero da Calzabigi based on Greek mythology and revised in French by Pierre-Louis Opera-Ballet Moline (1774). This file contains moving images relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

160

Label on lid reads: "Arabs in Spain (Arabic)"

161

Each reel labelled accordingly

Trees, flowers, fall, spring, gardens

162

Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean"

163

Yugoslavia - History, Description and Travel, Development, Culture ; "Yugoslavia: Crossroads of Civilizations - A study of how Yugoslavia developed into a country with no official language and a mixture of cultures from Europe and the Mediterranean"

112

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

164

Egypt [GMD] : [Duplicate Negative] / World Film Productions

3 film reels 2 film reels; trims;

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

duplicate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

165

Mexico [GMD] : [Outtakes] / World Film Productions

textual records

ca. 2200 ft.

acetate

positive

out-takes

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

166

Ten Rue Toronto [GMD] : [Answer Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

167

Holy Land [GMD] : [Magnetic Sound] / World Film Productions

15 audio reels

duplicate

sound recording

Sound only

168

Ten Rue Toronto [GMD] : [Answer Prints] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

Composite

Optical

169

Magnetic Sound Reels

Sound only

Magnetic

170

Sound Effects [GMD] : [Magnetic Tracks]

Sound only

Magnetic

171

Magnetic Sound Reels

Sound only

Magnetic

172

Orpheus and Eurydice [GMD] : [Work Print; Outtakes] / World Film Productions

ca. 3 film reels trims ca. 1200 ft. acetate reversal positive

work print; out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

173

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Negative] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

174

Morocco [GMD] : [Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions

7 film reels 1976 trims ca. 2200 acetate reversal positive

work print: out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

175

Kuwait [GMD] : [OutTakes] / World Film Productions

2 film reels trims ca. 1000 ft. acetate reversal positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

113

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

164

Accompanying Material Subject Notes Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated of the Pharaohs, part of the series by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et taken from accompanying material provided by the donor). Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Category Scope and Content Mexico - Travel and Description, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, History and Development, Art, Sculpture, Climate, Landscape, Temple Ruins, "Mexico: Land of Paradox - A portrait of Mexico as a mature, stable, progressive country with a rich heritage and a promising Textual records: future. Current issues discussed include overcrowding, the povery of farmres in a land of plenty, hotel receipts, and utilisation of the country's vast il reserves" maps, etc. Toronto - Travel and Description, History, Tourism, Architecture and Landmarks, City Hall, CN Tower, Lake Ontario, Rural scenery, Downtown Toronto ; credits written on postage envelope, This file contains audiovisual material shots of houses, streets, marching band, highway, skyscrapers, streetcar, traffic, aerial view, building construction, maple trees, historic imagery, skyline ; *Sound reel also contains images Documentary / relating to the production 10 Rue for television commercials Toronto. Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Mexico: Land of Paradox, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Condition Report

165

Film weak at splices, should be handled with care

166

SIgnificant color fading reddened Severe vinegar syndrome, deterioration into red dust *Moved to Hazardous material

167

Documentary / Travelogue Toronto - Travel and Description, History, Tourism, Architecture and Landmarks, City Hall, CN Tower, Lake Ontario, Rural scenery, Downtown Toronto ; credits written on postage envelope, This file contains audiovisual material shots of houses, streets, marching band, highway, skyscrapers, streetcar, traffic, aerial view, building construction, maple trees, historic imagery, skyline ; *Sound reel also contains images Documentary / relating to the production 10 Rue for television commercials Toronto. Travelogue

168

SIgnificant color fading reddened Severe vinegar syndrome, deterioration into red dust *Moved to Hazardous material Severe vinegar syndrome, deterioration into red dust *Moved to Hazardous material Severe vinegar syndrome, deterioration into red dust *Moved to Hazardous material

169

Unable to check

170

Unable to check

171 This file contains moving images relating to the production Orphee et Eurydice = Orpheus and Eurydice, an Opera-Ballet in three acts by Christopher Willibald von Gluck with Libretto by Raniero da Calzabigi based on Greek mythology and revised in French by Pierre-Louis Opera-Ballet Moline (1774). This file contains moving images relating to the production Saudi Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's Documentary / the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). largest exporter of oil." Travelogue Morocco - Fantasia Out-takes, Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks - Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of This file contains moving images people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at relating to the productions Morocco: Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berber Profile, part of the series Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Fez and Marrakesh" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Kuwait Metamorphosis of the Desert, a part of Documentary / the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Kuwait - Boat construction, Petrale University Travelogue

Unable to check

172

173

174

175

114

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

176

Yemen [GMD] : [Work Print; Out-takes] / World Film Productions Jordan [GMD] : [Original Negatives] ; Lebanon [GMD] : [Original Negatives] ; Iraq [GMD] : [Original Negatives] / World Film Productions London, Cannes, Paris [GMD] : [Duplicate Reversal] / World Film Productions

work print: 5 film reels ca. 1500 ft. acetate reversal positive out-takes col. si.

16mm; 35mm Image only

177

ca. 1974

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

178

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

duplicate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

179

Untitled [GMD] : [Negative]

1 film reel

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

180

Holy Land [GMD] : [Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 6 film reels

ca. 2200 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

181

Holy Land [GMD] : [Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 10 film reels

ca. 2500 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

182

Spain [GMD] : [Work Print ; Out-takes] / World Film Productions

work print; 2 film reels + trims ca. 2000 ft. acetate positive out-takes col. si. 16mm Image only

Spain [GMD] : [Duplicate Negative] / World Film Productions; Portugal [GMD] : [Duplicate Negative] / World Film Productions

183

2 film reels

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions; Greece [GMD] : [Reversal Cuts] / World Film Productions 1 film reel; cuts ca. 1000 ft. acetate original reversal positive col. si. 16mm Image only

184

Kuwait [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions ; Yemen [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

185

20 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

186

Vatican [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions + Outs

ca. 1978

2 film reels + outs

acetate

reversal positive

work print + outs

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

115

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

176

This file contains moving images relating to the production Yemen: Happy Arabia, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the productions: Iraq Cradle of Civilisation, Label on lid reads: "J.346 Jack Madvo 'Jordan', 'Lebanon', 'Iraq' Orig. Can #4" with list of numbered rolls ; each roll numbered and described ; label on side reads: "Original Negatives Jordan Lebanon Iraq" Jordan - Daughter of the Desert, and

Accompanying Material Subject Notes Yemen - Travel and Description, History, Industry, Farming, Religious Iconography, Tradition, Culture, Ceremony, Architecture, titles that read: "le diaphragme" followed by the depiction of a uterus at the start, desert climate, people harvesting ; "Yemen - Although one of the most fertile and strategically located countries in the Middle East, Yemen has managed to keep its doors closed to foreigners for centuries. Peasants cultivating wheat, sorghum and cotton are reminded 1 film reel (ca. of a glorious past in the ruins of the fabulously wealthy Biblical kingdom of Sheba" 100 ft.) 35mm

Condition Report

Iraq - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions ;

177

Lebanon - Modern Mosaic, part of the Jordan - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions ; Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Lebanon - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions

178

Documentary / Travelogue

London - shots of subway, High Park, marble statues; Cannes - Cannes Film Festival 1987, beach; Paris - Travel and description Negative Report states: Refogged Negative

Vinegar odor, slight color fading

179 This file contains moving images relating to the production Israel: Land of Destiny, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Israel: Land of Destiny, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Art, statues, engravings

180

Palestine - History, Description and Travel, Israel, Religious iconography, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Landscapes, Countryside, Coastal scenery, Urban scenery, Architecture, Conflict, War

181

182

Palestine - History, Description and Travel, Israel, Religious iconography, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Landscapes, Countryside, Coastal scenery, Urban scenery, Architecture, Conflict, War Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition ; "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight."

183

Documentary / Travelogue

184

Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's largest exporter of oil." ; This file contains moving images relating to the production Saudi Arabia, part of the series Countries cut roll of animated sequence of the Battle of Isus; Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). cut roll of Greece Travelogue This file contains moving images and various production elements relating to the productions Kuwait Metamorphosis of the Desert Yemen - Happy Arabia, and Lebanon - Modern Mosiac, part of Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Spoked; slightly reddened, weak at splices

185

186

Kuwait, Yemen, Lebanon - General Imagery, Description and Travel Vatican City - Rome, Travel and Description, Art and Architecture, St. Peter's Basilica, Italian Painting, Sculpture, Catholic Iconography, History and Development, the Pope, the Colosseum ; This file contains moving images "Vatican: Fortress of Christianity - A documentary tracing the historical development of the relating to the production Vatican: Catholic religion in Europe and the world, and the establishment of the Vatican as the spiritual Fortress of Christianity, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et centre of Christianity. Vatican City, 40 hectares within Rome, contains St. Peter's Basilica and other majestic examples of Italian architecture" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

Slight vinegar odor, color fading, dye shifts

Color fading, some parts emulsion scratches, weak splices

116

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

187

188

Vatican [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions + Outs Canada [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1978

1 film reel + outs

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

reversal positive reversal positive

work print + outs

col.

si.

16mm

Image only

ca. 1977

1 film reel

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

work print

col.

si.

16mm

image only

189

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

2 film reels + outs

ca. 2200 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

image only

190

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 10 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

image only

191

Egypt [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1976

2 film reels + outs

ca. 1800 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

image only

192

193

Egypt [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Magnetic Soundtracks] / World Film Productions

4 film reels

ca. 1300 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

work print magnetic soundtrack (full mag.)

col.

si.

16mm

image only

ca. 20 sound reels

acetate

sd.

16mm

Sound only

194

195

Egypt [GMD] : [Negative] / World Film Productions Canada [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions

ca. 1976

2 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

1 film reel

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

image only

196

Kuwait [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1100 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

work print

col.

si.

16mm

image only

197

Spain [GMD] : [Negative] / World Film Productions Lebanon [GMD] : [Work Print + Various Production Elements] / World Film Productions

4 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

198

ca. 20 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

work print + various

16mm

117

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

187

Accompanying Material Subject Notes Vatican City - Rome, Travel and Description, Art and Architecture, St. Peter's Basilica, Italian Painting, Sculpture, Catholic Iconography, History and Development, the Pope, the Colosseum ; This file contains moving images "Vatican: Fortress of Christianity - A documentary tracing the historical development of the relating to the production Vatican: Catholic religion in Europe and the world, and the establishment of the Vatican as the spiritual Fortress of Christianity, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et centre of Christianity. Vatican City, 40 hectares within Rome, contains St. Peter's Basilica and other majestic examples of Italian architecture" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Category Scope and Content Documentary / This file contains moving images Travelogue relating to the production Canada This file contains moving images relating to the production Saudi Arabia, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Saudi Arabia, part of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / Documentary / TVOntario (1977) + footage from Arabs in Spain and Yemen Travelogue

Condition Report

188

Canada - Christmas, Salvation Army, toys, fold dance, shots of spring time

Color fading, weak splices Color fading, weak splices, slight boxing, loose wind

189

Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions, Oil Drilling sequence ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's largest exporter of oil."

slight color fading, weak splices, loose wind, spoked

190

191

192

Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions, Oil Drilling sequence ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's largest exporter of oil." Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated of the Pharaohs, part of the series by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et taken from accompanying material provided by the donor). Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Footage of the Suez Canal, Pyramids, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a of the Pharaohs, part of the series prosperous future" (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et donor). Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue *Moved to hazardous material Egypt - Description and Travel, Architecture and Landmarks, Pyramids, Ancient history, Footage of the Suez Canal, Pyramids, Shots of the sunset behind the pyramids, people in the streets ; Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs: "An informative look at ancient Egypt, its startling architecture, and countless contributions to modern science and the arts. In contemporary Egypt, agricultural and economic reforms initiated by Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat hold the promise of a prosperous future" (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the donor).

excellent quality image, slight shrinkage

dye shifts - reddened

dye shifts - reddened Severe vinegar odor, deterioration into red dust

193

194

This file contains moving images relating to the production Egypt - Land of the Pharaohs, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Documentary / This file contains moving images Travelogue relating to the production Canada This file contains audiovisual materials relating to the production Kuwait: Metamorphosis of the Desert, part of Documentary / the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOnario (1977). Travelogue

color fading, dye shifts

195

Canada - Christmas, Salvation Army, toys, fold dance, shots of spring time

fading, dye shifts

196

197

198

Kuwait - Descripition and Travel, Architecture, People, Industry, Farming, Cityscapes, Desert, Camels ; "Kuwait: Metamorphosis of the Desert - In the space of 30 shorts years, the Kuwaitis have passed from desert povertyto unheard of opulence. Because of its massive oil revenues, the country now offersits citizens free education and medical service, as well as one of the highest standards of living in the world." Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, Cities - Grenada, Seville, Toledo, Cordoba ; This file contains moving images relating to the production Spain: Land "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Lebanon: Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture Modern Mosaic, part of the series ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of the illustrious past, reveal their Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). archaeological treasures" Travelogue

color ektachrome

slight vinegar odor, excellent quality image

118

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

Portugal [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions; Spain [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

199

2 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

16mm

image only

200

Portugal [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

3 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

201

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions Germany [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions Germany [GMD] : [Work Print] / World Film Productions Europe [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 900 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

202

ca. 1980

1 film reel 3 film reels + 1 magnetic reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

203

ca. 1980

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

image only

204

2 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

205

Lebanon Civil War [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 1977

5 film reels (2 film reels, 2 text reels, 1 effects reel)

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

image only

titles

English; French

206

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 8 film reels

ca. 500 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

image only

titles

English; French

207 208

Spain [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions Fill

ca. 1981

ca. 10 film reels 2 film reels

ca. 2000 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

209

Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

6 film reels

ca. 1500 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

image only

210

Italy [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

4 film reels

ca. 200 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

211

Portugal [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end

english / french

212

Iraq [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

french

119

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

Scope and Content

Subject

Accompanying Material Notes

Condition Report

199

This file contains moving images relating to the productions Lebanon and Spain, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Portugal and the Sea, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Saudi Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Portugal - History, Description and Travel, Coastline, People on the beach, Industry, Cattle, Fishing, Boating, Architecture, Landscapes, Cityscapes, Culture, Ceremonies ; "Portugal and the Sea - Stressing the importance of the sea to Portugese life, the programme includes a history of the country's navigational feats and its current industries of fishing, shipbuilding, vine growing and cork production. It also reveals the central place of the country's Catholic religion, with film segments of the people's elaborate ceremonial processions" Saudi Arabia - History, Description and Travel, Economic Conditions, Culture, Architecture, Development, shots of camels, desert climate, oil excavation, production, crowded people, horses running ; "Saudi Arabia: A Kingdom of Black Gold - A history of the development of Saudi Arabia and how it became the world's largest exporter of oil."

Fading

200

Fading, dye shifting

201

Fading, dye shifting

202

Documentary / Travelogue 2 informational booklets on Regensburg and 7 postcards

Fading, dye shifting

203

Documentary / Travelogue

Regensburg, Germany - History, Description and Travel, Art and Architecture, Landscapes, Cityscapes, Culture

Slight fading, dye shifting significant color fading, dye shifting, weak splices excellent quality image, slight warpage, weak splices, text and effects reels are deteriorating due to magnetic tape

204

Documentary / Travelogue

205

Documentary / Travelogue

206

207 208

209

210

211

212

Lebanon Civil War - aftermath, destruction, streets This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Saudi Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Induvidual scenes - Bedouins, desert, mother and child, map, english and french titles Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, Cities - Grenada, Seville, Toledo, Cordoba ; This file contains moving images relating to the production Spain: Land "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue Indian and Aboriginal Affairs Canada - tv show, animal puppets This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Saudi Arabia: Kingdom of Black Gold, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977) Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Italy: Where the Past is Always Present, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Italy - beach, landscapes, cityscapes, vatican Portugal - History, Description and Travel, Coastline, People on the beach, Industry, Cattle, Fishing, Boating, Architecture, Landscapes, Cityscapes, Culture, Ceremonies ; "Portugal and This file contains moving images relating to the production Portugal and the Sea - Stressing the importance of the sea to Portugese life, the programme includes a history of the country's navigational feats and its current industries of fishing, shipbuilding, vine the Sea, part of the series Countries growing and cork production. It also reveals the central place of the country's Catholic religion, Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / with film segments of the people's elaborate ceremonial processions" TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the productions: Iraq Cradle of Civilisation, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Iraq - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions

Ektachrome

color fading, dye shifting - blue

color fading, dye shifting - yellow

color fading, dye 1 reel of images shifting - blue, warpage, shrinkage of Crete Contains footage of filmmaker's wide, Hermine

color fading, dye shifting, yellowed

1 English, 1 French reel

color fading, dye shifting - reddened

color fading, dye shifting - reddened

120

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

213

Spain [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

french

214

Spain [GMD] : [A/B Rolls] / World Film Productions

4 film reels

ca. 400 ft.

acetate

negative

A/B rolls

col.

si.

16mm

215

Venezuela [GMD] : [Answer Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

english

216

Morocco [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

english

217

Israel [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

reversal positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

english

218

Yemen [GMD] : [Original Reversal] / World Film Productions

ca. 10 film reels

ca. 1000 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

image only

219

Iraq [GMD] : [Answer Print] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

positive

answer print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

english

220

Morocco [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions Venezuela [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions; Brazil [GMD] : [Print] / World Film Productions Countries and People [GMD] : [Opening Titles] / World Film Productions Countries and People [GMD] : [Opening Titles] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

french

221

2 film reels

ca. 1600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive reversal

work print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

english

222

2 film reels

ca. 100 ft.

acetate

duplicate

negative

opening titles col.

si.

16mm

image only

head titles

english / french

223

3 film reels

ca. 350 ft.

acetate

duplicate

negative

opening titles col.

si.

16mm

image only

head titles

english / french

224

225

Greece [GMD] : [Reversal Original] / World Film Productions Italy [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions; Iran [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

original

reversal positive

col.

si.

16mm

image only

3 film reels

ca. 350 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

121

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

213

214

215

Accompanying Material Subject Notes Spain - History, Description and Travel, Geography, Landscapes, Architecture, Spanish Civil War, Economic Conditions, Culture, Tradition, Cities - Grenada, Seville, Toledo, Cordoba ; This file contains moving images relating to the production Spain: Land "Spain: Land of the Conquistadores - A view of Spain and its unqiue history, featuring the vast architectural wonders of the Romans, Moors and French, all of whom occupied Spain at of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et different times. Commentary includes a discussion of the Spanish Civil War and its aftermath, the economy, and the traditional bullfight." Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Spain: Land of the Conquistadores, part of the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue cue sheets opening Venezuela - Description and Travel, History, Culture, Economic Conditions, Development, Industry, Art and Architecture ; "Venezuela: Petroleum Powered Economy - A portrait of This file contains moving images relating to the production Venezuela: Venezuela from its beginning as a sleepy backwater Spanish colony, to its present status as an Petroleum Powered Economy, part of independent oil-producing nation. Reaping the results of its wealth, the country is enjoying a state of commercial, industrial and artistic growth - buts its rural villages are being deserted" Documentary / the series Countries and People = (Content description taken from accompanying material provided by the fonds donor). Pays et Peuples / TVOntario. Travelogue Category Scope and Content This file contains moving images relating to the productions Morocco: Berber Profile, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Israel: Land of Destiny, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue Morocco - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Fez and Marrakesh"

Condition Report

color fading, dye shifting

color fading, dye shifting - reddened

excellent quality image, slight warpage, shrinkage

216

color fading, dye shifting - reddened, slight warpage, shrinkage

217

Palestine - History, Description and Travel, Israel, Religious iconography, Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Landscapes, Countryside, Coastal scenery, Urban scenery, Architecture, Conflict, War Yemen - Travel and Description, History, Industry, Farming, Religious Iconography, Tradition, Culture, Ceremony, Architecture, titles that read: "le diaphragme" followed by the depiction of a uterus at the start, desert climate, people harvesting ; "Yemen - Although one of the most fertile and strategically located countries in the Middle East, Yemen has managed to keep its doors closed to foreigners for centuries. Peasants cultivating wheat, sorghum and cotton are reminded of a glorious past in the ruins of the fabulously wealthy Biblical kingdom of Sheba" 1 reel of original reversal ektachrome, small reels of original good quality image, negative slight color fading

218

219

This file contains moving images relating to the production Yemen: Happy Arabia, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the productions: Iraq Cradle of Civilisation, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains moving images relating to the production Morocco: Berber Profile, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

1 newspaper Globe and Mail Travel section article on Yemen, Nov. 1990

Iraq - History, Description and Travel, Culture, Traditions Morocco - Travel and Description, History, Culture, Landscape, Art and Architecture, Landmarks Ruins of Volubilis, Casablanca, Shots of marketplace, crowds of people, ceremonies, desert climate, oasis, mountains ; "Morocco: Berber Profile - A look at Morocco, sometimes called the sentinel of the Mediterranean, and its original inhabitants - the Berbers. Included are scenes of Islamic architecture, and the famous centres of Casablanca, Fez and Marrakesh"

color fading, dye shifting - reddened

220

color fading, dye shifting - reddened

221

This file contains moving images relating to the productions Venezuela and Brazil, part of the series Countries Documentary / and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue This file contains opening titles for the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario Travelogue This file contains opening titles for the Documentary / series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario Travelogue This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Greece: Centre of the World, part of the series Documentary / Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Travelogue

good quality image, slight color fading

222

color fading

223

color fading yellowed Greece - Ancient History, Art, Architecture, Landscape, Description and Travel, Culture, Development ; "Greece: Centre of the World - Describing Greece's pivotal role in the development of democracy and theatre, the programme focuses on the ruins at Delphi, Athens and the temple of Zeus at Olympia. It also depicts Greece's contemporary commercial life farming, mining, the making of handicrafts and the merchant trade."

224

ektachrome

excellent quality image, slight shrinkage

225

Documentary / Travelogue

Italy and sequences of Islamic Art in Iran

ektachrome

122

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Title / Statement of Responsibility

Edition

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

226

Greece [GMD] : [Negative] / World Film Productions

1 film reel

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

227

Greece [GMD] : [Negative] / World Film Productions Umbro Je Nas Tito [GMD] : [Print]

1 film reel

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only head / end titles

228

1980

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

229

Italy [GMD] : [Original Negative] / World Film Productions Spain [GMD] : [Optical Track] / World Film Productions Arabs in Spain [GMD] : [Various Elements] Saudi Arabia [GMD] : [Outs] / World Film Productions

12 film reels

ca. 600 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

image only

230

1 flm reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

soundtrack

sd.

16mm

sound only

optical

French

231

6 film reels

ca. 1200 ft.

acetate

various

col.

si.

16mm

232

Yemen [GMD] : [A/B Rolls] / World Film Productions

2 film reels

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

A/B rolls

col.

si.

16mm

image only

234

Lebanon [GMD] : [A/B Roll] / World Film Productions Sanbar [GMD] : [Magnetic Soundtrack] Home Exhibition [GMD] : [Original Negative]

2 film reels

ca. 1400 ft.

acetate

reversal positive

A/B rolls Magnetic Soundtrack

col.

si. sd.

16mm

magnetic

235

ca. 1987

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si.

16mm

236

Pregnancy and Childbirth Part 2 [GMD] : [Print] / Crawley Films

1 film reel

ca. 800 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

english

237

The Sea [GMD] : [Reversal Positive] Arabie Saoudite [GMD] : [Print] /Société Nouvelle Pathé Cinéma

ca. 5 film reels

ca. 300 ft.

acetate

positive reversal

col.

si

16mm

238

2 film reels

ca. 450 ft.

acetate

duplicate

positive

print

col.

sd.

16mm

composite

optical

head / end titles

french

123

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

226

Documentary / Travelogue

227

Documentary / Travelogue

228

Documentary

229

Documentary / Travelogue

230

Documentary / Travelogue

231

Documentary / Travelogue

232

Documentary / Travelogue

Accompanying Material Subject Notes Crete and sequence of Greek Theatre Greece - Ancient History, Art, Architecture, Landscape, Description and Travel, Culture, Development ; "Greece: Centre of the World - Describing Greece's pivotal role in the This file contains moving images relating to the production Greece,part development of democracy and theatre, the programme focuses on the ruins at Delphi, Athens of the series Countries and People = and the temple of Zeus at Olympia. It also depicts Greece's contemporary commercial life farming, mining, the making of handicrafts and the merchant trade." Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Greece - Ancient History, Art, Architecture, Landscape, Description and Travel, Culture, Development ; "Greece: Centre of the World - Describing Greece's pivotal role in the This file contains moving images relating to the production Greece,part development of democracy and theatre, the programme focuses on the ruins at Delphi, Athens of the series Countries and People = and the temple of Zeus at Olympia. It also depicts Greece's contemporary commercial life farming, mining, the making of handicrafts and the merchant trade." Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). This file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Umbro Je Nas Tito The Death of Tito Italy - Description and Travel, Culture, Art of Architecture, Landmarks, History, Economic This file contains audiovisual material conditions, Indusrty, shots of the countryside ; "Italy: Where the Past is Always Present - An relating to the production Italy: Where exmination of the Italian influence on the progress of civilisation through the ages, from the rise the Past is Always Present, part of the and fall of the Roman Empire, through the Renaissance, to post-war industrialisation. Along with series Countries and People = Pays et a look at Italy's present day problems, producer Jacques Madvo stresses the joie de vivre that sustains Italians throughout the world" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). This file contains audio material relating to the production Spain, part of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). This file contains moving images relating to the production Arabs in Spain, Sanbar Group and Saudi Arabia, part of the series Countries and People Seville, Spain Yemen - Travel and Description, History, Industry, Farming, Religious Iconography, Tradition, Culture, Ceremony, Architecture, titles that read: "le diaphragme" followed by the depiction of a This file contains moving images uterus at the start, desert climate, people harvesting ; "Yemen - Although one of the most fertile relating to the production Yemen: and strategically located countries in the Middle East, Yemen has managed to keep its doors Happy Arabia, part of the series closed to foreigners for centuries. Peasants cultivating wheat, sorghum and cotton are reminded Countries and People = Pays et of a glorious past in the ruins of the fabulously wealthy Biblical kingdom of Sheba" Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Ektachrome Scope and Content

Condition Report

color fading

color fading significant dye shifting - reddened, scratches

color fading

color fading, weak splices

234

slight color fading, vinegar odor, loose wind, weak splicesThis file contains audiovisual material relating to the production Lebanon: Modern Mosaic, part of the series Countries and People = Pays et Peuples / TVOntario (1977). Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture, Shots of countryside, herds of animals, desert, windmill, wheat fields, ancient ruins, city life, the sea, waterskiing, fishing ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of Documentary / the illustrious past, reveal their archaeological treasures" Travelogue

Lebanon - Travel and Description, Geography, Culture, History, Agriculture, Art and Architecture, Shots of countryside, herds of animals, desert, windmill, wheat fields, ancient ruins, city life, the sea, waterskiing, fishing ; "Lebanon: Daughter of the Desert - This film takes us from the traditional countryside to the ultramodern city of Beirut. Baalbek and Byblos, cities of the illustrious past, reveal their archaeological treasures"

slight color fading, vinegar odor, loose wind, weak splices magnetic reel has strong vinegar odor color fading yellowed

235 This file contains audiovisual materials relating to the production Pregnancy and Childbirth, part of the series Labor and Delivery / Crawley Films Canada. Pregnancy and Childbirth: Labor and Delivery

236

color fading, dye shifting - reddened good quality image, warpage, shrinkage, brittle film

237

238

This file contains moving images relating to the production The Sea Shots of the sea, people on the beach, overhead views of the sea This file contains audiovisual materials relating to the production Arabie Saoudite = Saudi Arabia / Société Nouvelle Pathé Cinéma Saudi Arabia

color fading, dye shifting - reddened

124

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

239

240

Title / Statement of Responsibility Edition The Sea in Lebanon [GMD] : [Work Print] / Dhahran Outing Group Bijoux: Denis & Cathy in the Park [GMD] : [Original Negative]

Dates of Creation

Publisher

Objects

Duration

Length

Material

Generation

Positive / Negative Aspect reversal positive

Production Element

Color

Sound

Gauge

Recording

Soundtrack

Titles

Language

1 film reel

ca. 700 ft.

acetate

work print

col.

si

16mm

ca. 1988

1 film reel

ca. 400 ft.

acetate

original

negative

col.

si

16mm

image only

125

Appendix B: The Madvo Collection Catalogue

Reference Code

Inscription & Marks

Category

239

Scope and Content This file contains moving images relating to the production The Sea in Lebanon

Subject

Accompanying Material Notes

Condition Report excellent quality image

Shots of the sea, people on the beach, overhead views of the sea, sea turtle, birds with dea

240

Home Movie

Footage of man and woman in the park

slight color fading

126

Bibliography         __________.  "Boy  from  Bahrain,"  Awali  Magazine,  October  1969.      Alexander,  Geoff.  Academic  films  for  the  Classroom  :  a  history.  Jefferson,  North   Carolina  :  McFarland  &  Co.,  c2010.      __________.  Films  you  saw  in  school:  a  critical  review  of  1,153  classroom  educational   films  (1958-1985)  in  74  subject  categories.  McFarland,  2014.      Baines,  Iola  and  Gwenan  Owen.  "Special  Section:  Preserving  the  Non-Fiction  Films:   The  Massive  Mess  of  Mass  Memory"  in  Journal  of  film  preservation,  1996  vol.25   pg.7  -14      Barnouw,  Erik.  Documentary:  A  History  of  the  Non-fiction  Film.  2nd  Rev.  ed.  New   York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1993.        Barsam,  Richard  Meran.  Nonfiction  film  :  a  critical  history.  New  York  :  Dutton,  1973.      Basilico,  Stefano,  and  Lawrence  Lessig,  eds.  Cut:  Film  as  Found  Object  in   Contemporary  Video  Art.  Milwaukee,  WI:  Milwaukee  Art  Museum,  2004.      Bureau  of  Canadian  Archivists.  Rules  for  Archival  Description.  1990.  Revised  2008.      Chanan,  Michael.  The  politics  of  documentary.  London  :  British  Film  Institute,  2007.        Compton,  Margaret  A.  "Small-gauge  and  Amateur  Film  Bibliography."  Film  History:   An  International  Journal:  252-71.        Frick,  Caroline.  Saving  Cinema  the  Politics  of  Preservation.  New  York:  Oxford   University  Press,  2010.        Horak,  Jan-Christopher.  "Archiving,  Preserving,  Screening  16mm,"  in  Cinema  Journal   University  of  Texas  Press.  Vol.  45,  No.  3  (Spring,  2006),  pp.  112-118.  Stable  URL:   http://www.jstor.org/stable/3877752      __________."Out  of  the  Attic:  Archiving  Amateur  Film,"  in  Journal  of  film  preservation.   1998  iss.56  pg.50      Ishizuka,  Karen  L.,  and  Patricia  R.  Zimmermann,  editors.  Mining  the  home  movie  :   excavations  in  histories  and  memories.  University  of  California  Press,  c2008.      Leyda,  Jay.  Films  Beget  Films.  New  York:  Hill  and  Wang,  1964.     

  

127  

McBain,  Janet.  "Non  Fiction  Film  and  National  Culture"  in  Journal  of  film   preservation,  1996  vol.25  iss.52  pg.5      Moran,  James  M.  There's  No  Place  like  Home  Video.  Minneapolis:  University  of   Minnesota  Press,  2002.        Nicholson,  Heather  Norris.  Amateur  film  :  meaning  and  practice,  1927-77.   Manchester  :  Manchester  University  Press,  2012.      Orgeron,  Devin,  Marcha  Orgeron,  and  Dan  Streible,  editors.  Learning  with  the  lights   off  :  educational  film  in  the  United  States,  edited  by  Devin  Orgeron,  Marsha   Orgeron,  and  Dan  Streible.  Oxford  ;  New  York  :  Oxford  University  Press,  2012.      Prelinger,  Rick.  "Archives  and  Access  in  the  21st  Century,"  in  Cinema  Journal  46:3,   (2007)  114  ­  118.      __________.  "Points  of  Origin:  Discovering  Ourselves  through  Access,"  The  Moving   Image  9.2  (2009)      Rascaroli,  Laura;  Young,  Gwenda;  Monahan,  Barry.  Amateur  Filmmaking  :  The  Home   Movie,  the  Archive,  the  Web.  New  York:  Bloomsbury  Publishing,  2014.   http://ryerson.eblib.com/patron/FullRecord.aspx?p=1630363      Russell,  Catherine.  Experimental  Ethnography:  The  Work  of  Film  in  the  Age  of  Video.   Durham,  NC:  Duke  University  Press,  1999.      Slide,  Anthony.  Before  Video:  A  History  of  the  Non-Theatrical  Film.  (Westport,  CT:   Greenwood  Press,  1992.      Stone,  Melinda  and  Dan  Streible.  "Introduction:  Small-Gauge  and  Amateur   Film."  Film  History  15,  no.  2  (2003):  123.   http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/2 19789420?accountid=13631.      Streible,  Dan.  "The  Role  of  Orphan  Films  in  the  21st  Century  Archive,"  in  Cinema   Journal.  Vol.  46,  No.  3  (Spring,  2007)  ,  pp.  124-128.  University  of  Texas  Press  on   behalf  of  the  Society  for  Cinema  &  Media  Studies      __________.  "Orphan  Films."  Oxford  Bibliographies.  LAST  MODIFIED:  10/29/2013   http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo- 9780199791286/obo-9780199791286-0064.xml#obo-9780199791286-0064- div1-0001      Tepperman,  Charles.  Amateur  Cinema.  University  of  California  Press,  2014.       

  

128  

__________."Mechanical  Craftsmanship:  Amateurs  Making  Practical  Films,"  in  Useful   cinema,  edited  by  Charles  R.  Acland  &  Haidee  Wasson,  Durham  [N.C.]  :  Duke   University  Press,  2011.      Usai,  Paolo  Cherchi,  "What  is  an  Orphan  Film?"  Definition,  Rationale,  Controversy."   Paper  delivered  at  the  symposium  Orphans  of  the  Storm:  Saving  Orphan  Films  in   the  Digital  Age,  University  of  South  Carolina,  September  23,  1999.      Wasson,  Haidee  and  Charles  R.  Acland,  editors.  Useful  cinema.  Durham  [N.C.]  :  Duke   University  Press,  2011.      Wees,  William  Charles.  Recycled  Images:  The  Art  and  Politics  of  Found  Footage  Films.   New  York:  Anthology  Film  Archives,  1993.      Yee,  Martha  M.  Moving  image  cataloging  :  how  to  create  and  how  to  use  a  moving   image  catalog.  Westport,  Conn.  :  Libraries  Unlimited,  2007.      Zimmermann,  Patricia  Rodden.  Reel  Families  a  Social  History  of  Amateur  Film.   Bloomington:  Indiana  University  Press,  1995.        Zryd,  Michael.  "Found  Footage  Film  as  Discursive  Metahistory:  Craig  Baldwin's   Tribulation  99."  The  Moving  Image:  40-61.                

  

129  


