Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2007

QoS support using SWAN model in mobile ad-hoc networks
Ning Zhang
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Zhang, Ning, "QoS support using SWAN model in mobile ad-hoc networks" (2007). Theses and dissertations. Paper 163.

This Thesis Project is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

-----.--.~.-~--

QoS Support Using SWAN Model in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks

By Ning Zhang

A project presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Engineering

in the Program of Electrical and Computer Engineering

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2007
© Ning Zhang 2007

Author's Declaration:
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.
I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for

the purpose of scholarly research.

NingZhang

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by

other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

NingZhang

ii

Borrow List
Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

iii

Abstract
Mobile Ad-Hoc Network (MANET) is a collection of mobile nodes, dynamically forming a temporary network without pre-existing network infrastructure or centralized administration. Due to the bandwidth constraint and dynamic topology of MANETs, supporting Quality of Service (QoS) in MANETs is a challenging task. MANETs have certain unique characteristics that pose several difficulties in provisioning QoS. Most routing protocols for MANETs are designed without explicitly considering QoS of the routes. QoS-aware routing requires to find a route that satisfies the end-to-end QoS requirement. QoS in MANETs is a rapidly growing area of research interest.

In this report, the challenges of QoS support for MANETs are discussed first. Then the current research on QoS support in MANETs is reviewed, followed by extensive discussion and analysis of QoS models and QoS routing. Finally, one of the QoS models SWAN is studied to provide a qualitative assessment of the applicability of the model.

IV

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Dr. Anpalagan for supporting me and encouraging me in my thesis and study work, and also for his continued guidance throughout my Masters program. I am extremely fortunate and grateful to have enjoyed the benefits of his brilliance and generosity. He has been a source of wisdom and great mentor to me all the time. I thank my immediate family, especially my husband, for his immeasurable understanding, emotional support, companionship, balance, depth, and ongoing dedication to our life together. I will always feel utterly blessed.

v

