Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2004

Assessment of androgenic response potential of effluents using in vitro and in vivo methods
Emil Bandelj
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Biology Commons Recommended Citation
Bandelj, Emil, "Assessment of androgenic response potential of effluents using in vitro and in vivo methods" (2004). Theses and dissertations. Paper 56.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

ASSESSMENT OF ANDROGENIC RESPONSE POTENTIAL OF EFFLUENTS USING IN VITRO AND IN VIVO METHODS

by

Emil Bandelj B.Sc. Ryerson University, 2000

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Applied Science in the program of Environmental Applied Science and Management Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004 © Emil Bandelj 2004

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

ii

Ryerson University requires the signatures of all persons using or photocopying this thesis. Please sign below, and give address and date.

iii

Abstract ASSESSMENT OF ANDROGENIC RESPONSE POTENTIAL OF EFFLUENTS USING IN VITRO AND IN VIVO METHODS Emil Bandelj, M.A.Sc. Thesis, 2004 Department of Environmental Applied Science and Management Ryerson University

The androgenic potential of a New Zealand pulp mill effluent (PME) and a Canadian PME was assessed along with a New Zealand sewage treatment plant effluent (STP) using a combination of in vivo and in vitro methods. The in vitro methods included: 1) a fish-based androgen receptor binding assay, 2) a fishbased aromatase inhibition activity assay, and 3) an analysis of gonadal sex steroid levels in exposed female mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis) ovaries by

radioimmunoassay. The in vivo method included a quantifiable analysis of anal fin ray length for female mosquitofish exposed to the effluents. Effluent extracts for the Canadian PME and New Zealand STP were found to have low in vitro androgenic potential compared to upstream reference extracts. All effluent extracts (Canadian PME, New Zealand PME and STP) showed a low degree of in vitro aromatase inhibition potential compared to upstream reference extracts. In vivo analysis showed no androgenic potential of the New Zealand PME and STP. The in vitro androgen receptor assay and in vivo mosquitofish bioassay did show androgenic responses for androstenedione (AD) and 1,4-androsta-diene-3,17-dione (ADD), which are two products of the microbial conversion of -sitosterol (a plant sterol commonly found in PME) by Mycobacterium smegmatis. Also, the potential of the mosquitofish bioassay to determine anti-androgenic effects in effluents was demonstrated. iv

Acknowledgements As is common with these types of endeavours, there are multitudes of people to thank. First and foremost, my supervisors, Mike van den Heuvel and Lynda McCarthy. Mike was always available for my queries in situ while I was in New Zealand, and ex situ while I was back home in Canada. His guidance, breadth of knowledge, and enthusiasm (particularly when mine started to silently wane) were crucial to me. Lynda's expertise and guidance were monumental to me in the writing process. My gratitude to both of them for being such an excellent pair of supervisors. A big thanks to Rob Donald, the New Zealand Foundation for Research Science and Technology, and Forest Research Institute in New Zealand, all of who were instrumental in providing funding for this project. A special thank-you to Rob Hunter, who played a major role by initiating the work in this project and helping me maintain a relevant focus. Kudos to Trevor Stuthridge, the busy man who always accommodated my intrusions when I was seeking advice. A plethora of other people to thank down in New Zealand as well. Megan Finley contributed more than a lot of help with the effluent collections and mosquitofish bioassays. Kim McGrouther, who had to put up with me as her flatmate for two tours of duty. Murray Smith, another part of the beer-drinking and BBQ-ing Canadian contingent. Sonia Foote, Rachel Fahy, Rosanne Ellis, Sheree Anderson, Kate Wingate, Murray Robinson and anyone else I've failed to remember who helped in any part. To all the other kiwi and international friends I've managed to make, upset and still keep, including Alastair Stewart, Tobi Stegk, the Forest Research soccer and volleyball teams, and still others from France, Sweden, Germany and the UK. My experience "down under" has been wonderfully memorable. A tremendous thanks to my family, who had to put up with all the stress, mess, anguish and periods of space-outs I subjected them to over the course of this work. And finally, to Judith, who experienced some of the ups and downs all the way across the Atlantic. It's finally over now, babe ­ let's get on with it!

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS Abstract Acknowledgements Table of Contents List of Tables List of Figures List of Appendices 1.0 INTRODUCTION 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 The endocrine system Androgen receptor binding Role of aromatase In vitro sex steroid analysis Mosquitofish Endocrine-disrupting potential of effluents 1.6.1 Pulp-mill effluent (PME) 1.6.2 Sewage-treatment plant effluent (STP) 1.6.3 Isolation and identification of endocrinedisrupting compounds in effluents Research objectives iv v vi viii ix xii 1 1 4 7 10 13 18 18 21 23 25 27 27 28 31 32 34 35 37 38 39 41 44 44 49 50 50

1.7 2.0

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 Description of mills and collection sites Extraction apparatus and procedure 2.2.1 Validation of extraction method Androgen receptor assay 2.3.1 Tissue preparation 2.3.2 Assay procedure Aromatase activity assay 2.4.1 Tissue preparation 2.4.2 Assay procedure In vitro sex steroid analysis 2.5.1 Statistical analysis In vivo mosquitofish bioassay 2.6.1 Statistical analysis

3.0

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 3.1 Androgen receptor assay vi

3.2 3.3 3.4 4.0 5.0

Aromatase activity assay In vitro mosquitofish ovary sex steroid levels Mosquitofish bioassay

56 58 62 69 72

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS REFERENCES

vii

List of Tables Table 2.1 Retention of colour and total carbon by XAD-7 resin from effluent sample Treatments used in mosquitofish bioassay and their respective concentrations EC50 values and relative binding affinities (RBA) for testosterone, AD, and ADD

31

Table 2.2

48

Table 3.1

52

viii

List of Figures Figure 1.1 Figure 1.2 Figure 1.3 Figure 1.4 Flowchart representation of hypothalamuspituitary-gonadal axis in vertebrates Mechanism of steroid hormone action on target cell Steroidogenesis pathway in vertebrates Competitive displacement of radiolabelled hormone by increasing unlabelled hormone concentration Sexually mature female G. affinis Sexually mature male G. affinis Anal fin of control female mosquitofish Anal fin of mosquitofish exposed to methyl-testosterone Schematic flowchart of extraction procedure Saturation binding data of 3H-testosterone to rainbow trout brain androgen receptor Flowchart representation of the rainbow trout androgen receptor binding assay Flowchart diagram of rainbow trout aromatase activity assay Relative aromatase activity in presence of increasing inhibitor (HAD) concentration Flowchart diagram of the in vitro steroid assay performed using exposed female mosquitofish ovarian tissue Mosquitofish bioassay setup Mosquitofish bioassay design Rainbow trout androgen receptor competitive binding curves for testosterone, AD, ADD ix

3 4 9

12 14 14 17 17 29 34 36 40

Figure 1.5 Figure 1.6 Figure 1.7 Figure 1.8 Figure 2.1 Figure 2.2 Figure 2.3 Figure 2.4 Figure 2.5 Figure 2.6

41

43 45 48 51

Figure 2.7 Figure 2.8 Figure 3.1

Figure 3.2 Figure 3.3

Rainbow trout androgen receptor competitive binding curves for testosterone and 17--estradiol Competitive binding curve of the New Zealand PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract Competitive binding curve of the Canadian PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract Competitive binding curve of the New Zealand STP sample extract and its reference blank sample extract Aromatase activity curve of the New Zealand PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract Aromatase activity curve of the Canadian PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract Aromatase activity curve of the New Zealand STP sample extract and its blank reference sample extract Testosterone levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to New Zealand PME and upstream reference Testosterone levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to STP, HAD, and EtOH (negative control) 17--estradiol levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to New Zealand PME and upstream reference 17--estradiol levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to STP, HAD, and EtOH (negative control) 4:6 anal fin ray ratios for female mosquitofish exposed to effluents (PME, STP) and upstream reference from New Zealand

51

53

Figure 3.4

54

Figure 3.5

54

Figure 3.6

56

Figure 3.7

57

Figure 3.8

57

Figure 3.9

59

Figure 3.10

59

Figure 3.11

61

Figure 3.12

62

Figure 3.13

64

x

Figure 3.14

4:6 anal fin ray ratios for female mosquitofish exposed to ADD, AD, HAD, and negative control (EtOH) Dose-response of ADD to anal fin ray elongation in female mosquitofish 4:6 anal fin ray ratios for female mosquitofish exposed to MT and increasing concentrations of cyproterone acetate (CA)

66 66

Figure 3.15 Figure 3.16

67

xi

List of Appendices Appendix A Androgen receptor binding data Appendix B Aromatase inhibition activity data Appendix C Mosquitofish anal fin ray data Methyltestosterone Ethanol AD ADD 100 ADD 10 ADD 1 CA 250 CA 25 CA 2.5 HAD PME STP Upstream reference Appendix D In vitro testosterone level RIA data Appendix E In vitro 17--estradiol level RIA data Appendix F List of abbreviations 83 86 88 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 103 105

xii

1.0

INTRODUCTION There have been increasing global concerns over the past two decades

regarding the exposure of wildlife and humans to chemicals that have the potential to interfere with the endocrine system. Rachel Carson (1962) first voiced these concerns, and since then there has been considerable research conducted to justify them. Knowledge of the endocrine system has increased vastly, only to show greater complexities and intricacies that further the need for research. Much study has also been devoted to isolating and identifying chemicals causing adverse effects. Studies involving fish have been successful in that they have been able to demonstrate adverse effects upon exposure to chemicals in effluents (Sumpter, 1995; Van Der Kraak et al., 1992). Understanding the

mechanisms of endocrine-disrupting compounds and identifying their effects continue to be major challenges. Therefore, any study investigating endocrine disruption must first begin with a review of the endocrine system.

1.1

The endocrine system The endocrine system involves complex interactions between the nervous

system, organs and chemical messengers known as hormones.

It is a well

conserved system within the vertebrate group with several hormones, such as the sex steroids testosterone and 17--estradiol, being common among all species (International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS), 2002). The endocrine system is responsible for regulating energy metabolism, growth, and reproduction. The intricate chemical messaging system and "cross-talk" between endocrine system pathways leads to dynamic control of release, suppression, and synthesis 1

of hormones within the organism (IPCS, 2002). A major class of hormones that are responsible for sexual activity and development are known as sex steroids. Sex steroids are lipid-soluble and their main route of travel within the organism is via the circulatory system (Lehninger et al., 1993). They are usually bound to a protein or globulin in the bloodstream with a small percentage being un-bound or free. This balance supports the quick release of the steroid when appropriate internal and external cues are signaled and also allows for attenuation of its synthesis with the steroid usually acting as the agent in a negative feedback loop (IPCS, 2002). The main axis of organs involved in the maintenance of sexual function within vertebrate organisms is the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis (Starr and Taggart, 1995). Combinations of external (physico/chemical) and

internal (chemical) cues stimulate the hypothalamus in the brain, which in turn begins the series of chemical messaging within the HPG axis. The hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-releasing hormones (GnRH), which stimulate the anterior pituitary to release gonadtropins, luteinizing hormone (LH), and folliclestimulating hormone (FSH) in mammals, and gonadotropin hormone I (GTH-I) and GTH-II in non-mammals (IPCS, 2002). The gonadotropins travel through the bloodstream and make their way to the gonads, where they stimulate the production of androgens and estrogens, both of which play roles in masculine and feminine development respectively. representation of the HPG axis discussed. Figure 1.1 shows a flowchart

2

stimulus + _ produces Hypothalamus stimulates negative feedback LH and FSH GnRH

produces Pituitary

stimulates

Gonads

produces

androgens and estrogens

Figure 1.1: Flowchart representation of hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis in vertebrates Secreted sex steroid hormones, synthesized and released from gonadal cells, find their way to target cells by diffusion or by transport via sex steroid binding proteins (SSBP) (Lehninger et al., 1993). The steroid enters the target cell and diffuses to the perinuclear region where it binds to its specific receptors. The receptor-ligand complex then combines with transcriptional factors that allow it to bind to specific DNA sequences coding for other proteins including hormones, enzymes, growth factors, or cellular structural components (Starr and Taggart, 1995). The binding of the receptor-ligand-transcriptional factor

complex, known as a hormone response element (HRE), initiates mRNA synthesis (IPCS, 2002). The mRNA diffuses out from the perinuclear region and 3

undergoes further translation into proteins by ribosomes on the endoplasmic reticulum in the cytosol. Figure 1.2 below diagrammatically shows the general mechanism of steroid hormone action.

Figure 1.2: Mechanism of steroid hormone action on target cell (from http://e.hormone.tulane.edu/learning/targetcells.html) 1.2 Androgen receptor binding Development of male sexual characteristics in vertebrate organisms is dependent on the binding of androgens to their specific receptors (Lehninger et al., 1993). Once bound to its receptor, the steroid-receptor complex goes on to elicit a response as according to the mechanism shown in Figure 1.2. Since steroids and their receptors generally have a very high and unique affinity for each other, the respective protein products from their interaction are also unique. For example, the interaction of the estrogen 17--estradiol with the estrogen receptor in fish elicits the production of the egg yolk protein vitellogenin (VTG). This has

4

been shown to happen in male fish exposed to estrogens in the wild (Larsson et al., 1999; Sumpter, 1995; Jobling et al., 1998). Under natural conditions, only mature female fish produce high levels of VTG, thus VTG induction in wild species of male fish is a highly selective indicator of environmental estrogenic contamination (Sumpter and Jobling, 1995). Recently, androgenic responses

measured by the production of the male glue protein, spiggin, in female sticklebacks have been shown to be achievable through water-borne exposures to the androgen dihydrotestosterone (Katsiadaki et al., 2002). A six-week exposure of female sticklebacks to pulp and paper mill effluent (PME) also showed significant induction of spiggin (Katsiadaki et al., 2002), but no other studies measuring spiggin induction are available yet. Steroid receptor binding assays have also been used for demonstrating androgenic (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000) and estrogenic (Thomas and Smith, 1993) responses in fish exposed to xenobiotics. Receptor binding assays exploit the fact that steroids have a high and unique affinity for their respective receptors (Lehninger et al., 1993). Thus, demonstrating the binding potential of a

xenobiotic to a specific receptor may possibly be used to infer a potential response in the organism. The fish androgen receptor was first characterized in the skin of male brown trout (Pottinger, 1987), and subsequently in goldfish brain (Pasmanik and Callard, 1988), and rainbow trout lymphocytes (Slater et al., 1995). The characterized fish androgen receptor was found to have a high affinity for testosterone, along with a low affinity for an important fish androgen, 11ketotestosterone. Different physiological roles have been deduced for

testosterone and 11-ketotestosterone in fish. Testosterone has been shown to

5

control gonadotropin secretion in both male and female rainbow trout by feedback (Breton and Samroni, 1996), while 11-ketotestosterone is believed to control gonadal differentiation (Piferrer et al., 1993) and sexual dimorphism (Brantely et al., 1993) in male chinook salmon. Subsequently, two different

isoforms of the androgen receptor have been isolated and characterized from Atlantic croaker brain and ovary tissue (Sperry and Thomas, 1999). The ovary androgen receptor was found to have a higher affinity for 11-ketotestosterone than the brain androgen receptor. The physiological role of androgen receptors in females is currently unknown. In theory, therefore, the binding of a xenobiotic to the androgen receptor in fish may elicit a masculine physiological response. Endocrine-mediated responses through the binding of androgen receptors are commonly studied in vitro through the utilization of competitive binding experiments involving an androgen receptor (AR) preparation, which consists of androgen receptor protein normally isolated from brain or gonadal tissue. The androgen receptor is then exposed to a pair of competitors: a radiolabelled steroid hormone and an unlabelled steroid (or xenobiotic). By increasing the unlabelled steroid concentration, its ability to displace the radiolabelled steroid can be quantified and compared with other compounds. Androgen receptor binding potential of DDT metabolites have been quantified to show limited binding (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000) using androgen receptor isolated from goldfish testes. The same assay has also been used to find significant binding of liver extracts from male white suckers exposed to PME (Hewitt et al., 2000). Compounds that bind to the androgen receptor but do not go on to elicit a response are known as anti-androgens, although there are other mechanisms

6

through which they may operate. Androgenic compounds are thus known as "agonists" since they elicit physiological responses, and anti-androgenic compounds are known as "antagonists" as they merely block the potential binding of an androgen to its receptor. An anti-androgen reduces the

manifestation of masculine responses but does not induce estrogenic responses. Metabolites of the fungicide vinclozolin have been shown to produce antiandrogenic effects in male rats by inhibiting growth of androgen-dependent tissues while showing no affinity for the estrogen receptor (Kelce et al., 1994). The mammalian anti-androgen cyproterone acetate has been found to be nonbinding to rainbow trout brain androgen receptor (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000) and Atlantic croaker brain androgen receptor (Sperry and Thomas, 2000). Studies of anti-androgenic effects in fish exposed to effluents are not available.

1.3

Role of aromatase Aromatase is an enzyme of the P450 class of steroidogenesis pathway

enzymes responsible for the conversion of androgens to estrogens, the most common reaction being testosterone to 17--estradiol (Lephart et al., 2001). It is near the end of the steroidogenesis pathway shown in Figure 1.3. The

aromatization of androgens to estrogens occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum and is classified as a mixed-function oxidase reaction (Lephart et al., 2001). As well as converting testosterone to 17--estradiol, aromatase also converts

androstenedione to estrone (Figure 1.3), which is a less potent estrogen (Lephart et al., 2001). The aromatization reaction requires NADPH as a reducing agent and O2 for the three sequential hydroxylations that occur for each estrogen 7

molecule formed (Lephart et al., 2001). Aromatase can be found in a wide variety of tissue, but it is believed to be most important at the sites of major steroidogenesis such as the gonads and brain (Antonopoulu et al., 1999) such that it can control GnRH production (see Figure 1.1). Thus, aromatase plays a crucial role in the maintenance of the androgen/estrogen ratio. Aromatase inhibition may skew the proportion of

androgens to estrogens (Séralini and Moslemi, 2001). Inhibition of aromatase activity has been shown to have effects in vivo in male rats by causing aggressive behaviour (Turner et al., 2000). This is believed to be due to the increase in the androgen/estrogen ratio due to the blockage of androgen conversion to estrogen. In fish, aromatase inhibition induced earlier spermiation in adult coho salmon males compared to control groups (Piferrer et al., 1994), which is again attributed to the increase in the androgen/estrogen ratio. The androgen/estrogen ratio is important in females for inducing ovulation or apoptosis of oocytes (Séralini and Moslemi, 2001). Aromatase inhibition in genetically female chinook salmon

induced development of phenotypic males when administered at a critically-timed developmental stage (Piferrer et al., 1994). Thus, aromatase inhibition has the potential to show androgenic or masculine effects in fish. Fungicides and other pesticides have been shown to inhibit aromatase in vitro (Andersen et al., 2002). In vivo effects believed to be seen in rats include a marked decrease in steroid production, as evidenced by a decrease in sexual activity in male rats exposed to the fungicide fenarimol (Gray et al., 1998). Since these male rats were exposed daily from weaning to adulthood, it was not unexpected that aromatase inhibition of such duration and dose would lead to

8

Figure 1.3: Steroidogenesis pathway in vertebrates (source: http://www.indstate.edu/thcme/mwking/steroid-hormones.html) decreased production of androgens as well as estrogens, as androgen levels may negatively control their own production (Figure 1.1). Metabolites of

androstenedione produced through fermentation processes involving Myrothecium stiatisporum have shown aromatase inhibition as well (Mahato and Garai, 1997). In vitro aromatase inhibition has also been seen in male and female rats that were fed PCB-contaminated lake trout (Gerstenberger, 2000). PME has been shown to decrease 17--estradiol levels in female white sucker ovarian follicles without affecting testosterone levels, and thus has been implicated in aromatase inhibition (McMaster et al., 1996). PME has also been found to increase aromatase activity

9

in vitro using mosquitofish brain tissue (Orlando et al., 2002). However, this may not be unexpected as aromatase inhibition has been shown to cause increases in aromatase mRNA and enzyme (Harada et al., 1999), and therefore tissue in vitro from organisms exposed to aromatase inhibitors may show increased aromatase activity. Direct evidence of the aromatase inhibition potential of PME is lacking.

1.4

In vitro sex steroid analysis
Endocrine disruption may occur at several different levels along the

hypothalamous-pituitary-gonadal axis. The most obvious results are displayed with decreased steroid hormone levels. Low levels of steroid hormones in the organism are due to low production of steroid hormones by their respective gonads. McMaster et al (1995) have devised a protocol for measuring steroid hormone production in fish gonadal tissue in vitro. These methods have been used successfully for the in vitro measurement of gonadal steroid production for mummichog (Hewitt et al., 2002), white sucker (McMaster et al., 2001) and goldfish (McCarthy et al., 1997). Information on alterations to gonadal steroid production along with androgen receptor binding and aromatase inhibition data give a better overall assessment of the impact(s) a particular effluent may pose to the organism. Gonadal tissue from exposed fish must first be removed from the organism and incubated in specialized buffer (Medium 199 or M199) (McMaster et al., 1995). A proportion of steroids produced in the tissue during incubation will leach out into the buffer. A subsequent aliquot of the media after incubation can then be analyzed for its testosterone and 17--estradiol by radioimmunoassay 10

(RIA). The ability to perform an RIA depends on the availability of: i) an antiserum specific to the steroid to be measured, ii) a radiolabelled form of the steroid, iii) pure, unlabelled steroid for the assay standards, and iv) a method by which antibody-bound steroid can be separated from free steroid (McMaster et al., 1995). For the assay procedure, a fixed concentration of radiolabelled steroid is incubated with a constant dilution of specific antiserum such that the antibody will bind only 50% of the total steroid concentration. Upon addition of

unlabelled steroid, there will be competition between labeled and unlabelled steroid for a limited number of antibody sites (Figure 1.4). Thus, the amount of radiolabelled steroid bound to the antibody will decrease as the concentration of unlabelled steroid increases. The concentration of bound radiolabelled steroid is inversely proportional to the amount of unlabelled steroid present. The

concentration of steroid present in the aliquot of media buffer from the incubation of gonadal tissue can be determined by comparison with the results obtained using known concentrations of unlabelled steroids to generate a standard curve.

11

unlabelled steroid steroid receptor radiolabelled steroid

increasing unlabelled steroid concentration

Figure 1.4: Competitive displacement of radiolabelled hormone by increasing unlabelled hormone concentration. Unbound radiolabelled hormone is removed by charcoal-stripping before measuring radioactivity of the assay mixture

12

1.5

Mosquitofish Gambusia affinis, also known as the western mosquitofish, is a member of

the Poeciliidae family which is of the order Cyprinodontiformes. The generic name Gambusia is reflective of the mosquitofish's small size as it is derived from "Gambusina", a term commonly used in Cuba meaning "small" or "of no importance" (Kuntz, 1913). They are a viviparous (live-breeding) freshwater species that feed on small insects and their larvae as well as small crustaceans and plant material. G. affinis are indigenous to the southern United States (Krumholtz, 1946), but have been introduced to many areas including Europe and the North Island of New Zealand as a mosquito-control measure. Mosquitofish are sexually dimorphic. Females tend to be larger and have a dark spot toward the posterior end on their bellies when gravid. The most telling characteristic between male and female mosquitofish is the differential development of the anal fin. Females have an undifferentiated anal fin, roughly triangular in shape with rounded edges and consisting of ten bony rays. Sexually mature males have a differentiated anal fin. Rays 3, 4 and 5 are elongated into a structure known as a gonopodium, which serves as an intromittent device to deliver sperm to female mosquitofish genitalia. The tip of the gonopodium is further differentiated with hooks and serrae to facilitate copulation. Figures 1.5 and 1.6 below display images of sexually mature female and male G. affinis respectively.

13

Figure 1.5: Sexually mature female G. affinis

Figure 1.6: Sexually mature male G. affinis

Figure 1.6 shows the gonopodium in a resting position. The gonopodium swings forward laterally to a copulatory position through the action of enlarged and specialized muscles (Rosen and Tucker, 1961). Gonopodium action is further supported by a suspensorium consisting of a series of complex internal bony supports that are anchored to the axial skeleton (Rosen and Tucker, 1961). Gonopodial development has been induced in female mosquitofish through the addition of androgenic compounds such as methyltestosterone and ethynyltestosterone (Turner 1941a, 1941b, 1941c), androstenedione and 14

androstanol (Husinger and Howell, 1991), and 11-ketotestosterone (Angus et al., 2001). Turner (1941b) found that the ability of methyltestosterone and

ethynyltestosterone to induce gonopodial development in female mosquitofish decreases with increasing age of the fish and also that these compounds induce precocious gonopodial development in males. The induced gonopodium in

females does not regress when androgen administration stops (Turner, 1941a), although normal female anal fin development will reoccur if the induced gonopodium is excised (Turner, 1960). There is no evidence of hermaphrodism in treated females (Turner, 1941a) and it is thus believed that gonopodium development in mosquitofish is under androgenic control. However, estrogens are known to play a role in bone tissue generation, thus their role and the role of aromatase (if any) in the development of mosquitofish gonopodia remains to be elucidated. Mosquitofish have been shown previously to be an indicator of the androgenic potential of effluents in receiving water systems as shown by an elongation of the female anal fin, signifying gonopodium development (Bortone and Cody, 1999; Cody and Bortone, 1997). They have been used in laboratory studies to determine androgenic potential of PME (Ellis et al., 2003; Drysdale and Bortone, 1989) and microbial degradation products from plant sterols (Howell and Denton, 1989; Denton et al., 1985). Mosquitofish have also been exposed to exogenous androgens in laboratory assays to study their effects on anal fin elongation in the female species (Husinger and Howell, 1991). In all these cases, the elongation of the female anal fin was made by visual inspection or caliper measurements and compared with the standard lengths of the fish. Recently, a

15

quantitative study using computer image analysis has been developed to measure gonopodial development in male and androgen-treated female mosquitofish (Angus et al., 2001). The anal fin of Gambusia affinis contains 10 skeletal rays that impart its structure (Turner, 1941b). Gonopodium development in males

involves the elongation of rays 3, 4 and 5. Females have also been shown to display elongation of rays 3, 4 and 5 upon exposure to androgens (Turner, 1941b; Husinger and Howell, 1991). Angus et al (2001) have shown that using computer image techniques, the 4:6 ray length ratio of the anal fin can be a determinant of mosquitofish exposure to androgens. Figures 1.7 and 1.8 on the following page show anal fin images from a control female mosquitofish and a female mosquitofish exposed to methyl-testosterone. The 4:6 anal fin ray ratio for

normal sexually mature females is 1:1 and for normal sexually mature males it is about 2.5:1 (Angus et al., 2001). Anal fin rays can be measured from digital images of mosquitofish anal fins using Image Tool software available for free from the University of Texas Health Sciences Center at San Antonio (http://ddsdx.uthscsa.edu/dig/download.html). Log-transforming the 4:6 ratio data provides normal distribution and allows the use of parametric statistical analysis (Angus et al., 2001). Elongation of rays 3, 4 and 5 in female mosquitofish are the first and most obvious response to exposure to androgens (Turner, 1941b). Thus it is possible to postulate that significant differences in 4:6 anal fin ray length ratios suffice to indicate mosquitofish exposure to environmental androgens.

16

Figure 1.7: Anal fin of control female mosquitofish

Figure 1.8: Anal fin of mosquitofish exposed to methyl-testosterone

17

1.6 1.6.1

Endocrine disrupting potential of effluents Pulp-mill effluent (PME) There has been extensive study on the effects of PME entering receiving

water environments over the past two decades. Many of these studies focus on measures of reproductive impairment in fishes such as decreased egg and gonad size, reduced fertilization and hatching success (McMaster et al., 1996; Munkittrick et al., 1992a, 1994); disrupted fecundity-weight relationships (Gagnon et al., 1994a); decreases in serum sex steroid levels and overall gonadal steroid production (Van Der Kraak et al., 1992; Munkittrick et al., 1992b; McCarthy et al., 1997); and changes in population dynamics (Kovacs et al., 1997; Munkittrick et al., 1997). Through substantial process and treatment improvements, the pulp and paper mill industry has alleviated many toxicity issues with PME in relation to fish health (Kovacs et al., 1997; Swanson et al., 1994; Kloepper-Sams et al., 1994a, 1994b). However, those changes were generally targeted at reducing toxicity, BOD loading and organochlorines, and reproductive impacts have still been observed at some sites (Munkittrick et al., 1992b, 1992c; MacLatchy et al., 1997) with decreased gonad size continuing to be a response seen in fish exposed to PME at some sites in Canada (Munkittrick et al., 2002). Differences in aquatic habitats and type of receiving water (river, estuary, marine or lake) make generalizations about these effects difficult and it is suggested that responses be qualified on a site-by-site basis (Munkittrick et al., 2002). Estrogenic activity of PME has been reported in studies involving vitellogenin gene expression induction in caged whitefish (Mellanen et al., 1999), and induced vitellogenin plasma levels in immature rainbow trout (Tremblay and

18

Van Der Kraak, 1999). The plant phytosterol -sitosterol has been implicated in producing these effects (Tremblay and Van Der Kraak, 1998) as it is a constituent of PME. Other PME compounds such as lignans, stilbenes, resin acids, and other sterols have shown weak estrogenic activity as well (Mellanen et al., 1996). However, a true consensus on the compound(s) responsible for these effects is lacking. Furthermore, some studies have failed to show any estrogenic effects with PME (van den Heuvel et al., 2002; Van Der Kraak et al., 1998b). Androgenic activity of PME has mostly focused on alterations in secondary sexual characteristics of mosquitofish, namely the induction of gonopodial development in females (Bortone and Cody, 1999; Cody and Bortone, 1997; Drysdale and Bortone, 1989; Howell et al., 1980). Other androgenic

responses believed to be caused by PME include American eels with precocious testicular development and enlarged eyes (Caruso et al., 1988) as well as a significant male sex ratio bias in eelpout embryos (Larsson et al., 2000). Other masculine characteristics in female mosquitofish exposed to PME include dorsal and pelvic fin height, eye diameter and body depth when compared to reference fish (Bortone and Davis, 1994). Gonopodial development in female mosquitofish has been seen in PME from a combined thermomechanical/kraft process (Ellis et al., 2003) as well as a kraft process alone (Cody and Bortone, 1997). Androstenedione (AD) has been detected in a Florida river receiving pulp and paper mill discharge, theoretically due to the microbial degradation of plant sterols, and has been implicated in masculinizing the female mosquitofish population (Jenkins et al., 2001). However, a subsequent study using assays with cells transfected with human androgen receptor and reporter gene constructs 19

showed that the active fractions from the same river samples did not contain androstenedione (Durhan et al., 2002). An earlier study has shown

masculinization of female mosquitofish in controlled exposures to -sitosterol in the presence of the bacteria Mycobacterium smegmatis (Howell and Denton, 1989). Although M. smegmatis can biotransform -sitosterol to both AD and 1,4androsta-diene-3,17-dione (ADD) with respective yields of 13% and 30% (Mahato and Garai, 1997), there has been relatively little attention paid to the potential effects of ADD. Also, there are no known studies on the potential antiandrogenic mechanism of PME, even though there are studies showing decreased steroid serum levels in exposed fish (Van Der Kraak et al., 1992; Munkittrick et al., 1992b). Aromatase inhibition has also been postulated as a mechanism for masculinization of female mosquitofish exposed to PME. With its inhibition, it is believed that an excess of testosterone in the female may cause an androgenic response (i.e. anal fin elongation). To date relatively few studies have examined this theory. Recently, a study measured the aromatase activity in ovarian and brain tissue from female mosquitofish collected downstream from a Florida pulp mill (which had previously showed masculinization effects) and showed increased aromatase activity in both tissue samples (Orlando et al., 2002). The authors attribute these results to mosquitofish resilience in contaminated conditions and conclude that aromatase inhibition is not a mechanism of masculinization. Although anal fin rays between the exposed female mosquitofish and female mosquitofish collected from a reference site showed no significant difference, the exposed fish had a significantly higher number of ray segments in their anal fins. 20

This may also be an indication of an androgenic response in mosquitofish (Turner, 1941b). Also, as mentioned previously, an aromatase inhibition

response in vitro using tissue from exposed fish may include increased aromatase activity due to the ability of aromatase inhibitors to cause an increase in aromatase mRNA and enzyme (Harada et al., 1999). More work is needed to elucidate the potential of PME to cause aromatase inhibition, androgenic and anti-androgenic responses in fish.

1.6.2

Sewage treatment-plant effluent (STP) Sewage treatment-plant effluent (STP) was first implicated in

endocrine disruption in fish with the detection of the female egg yolk protein vitellogenin (VTG) in male rainbow trout caged downstream from STP discharges in England (Purdom et al., 1994). Subsequent studies have shown that other rivers in the United Kingdom receiving STP discharge are inducing VTG in male or immature fish (Harries et al., 1996; Tyler and Routledge, 1998). Similarly, studies from France (Flammarion et al., 2000) and the United States (Folmar et al., 1996) have found VTG induction in male chub and male carp downstream of municipal sewage discharges. VTG induction is caused by natural and synthetic pharmaceutical estrogens as well as other environmental estrogens such as nonylphenol and its associated ethoxylates occurring primarily from industrial processes such as textile manufacturing (Sheahan et al., 2002). Other endocrinedisrupting responses from STP include inhibition of testicular growth in male rainbow trout (Harries et al., 1997) and the prevalence of ovarian tissue in male gonads (ovotestis) (Jobling et al., 1998). 17--estradiol, estrone and 17-ethyinyl 21

estradiol were all detected in STP samples from seven treatment plants in the United Kingdom, ranging from 80 ng/L for the natural hormones and 7.0 ng/L for the synthetic ones (Desbrow et al., 1998). The effect of STP on gonpodial development in mosquitofish has been examined. In Australia, significantly reduced lengths of gonopodia in male

eastern mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki) were found in fish collected from a tributary downstream of a municipal sewage treatment plant compared with those collected upstream (Batty and Lim, 1999). They also found no significant

difference in the presence or absence of spermatozeugmata (sperm packets) between the sample groups, which suggests that spermatogenesis may not have been affected. However, whether all the male mosquitofish in the study were sexually mature is unknown. Full development of the gonopodium in male

mosquitofish requires 30 to 60 days and its complete development is noted with the presence of hooks and spines on the gonopodial tip (Angus et al., 2001). A study from the USA showed no significant difference in gonopodial development between groups of male western mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis) sampled from a river downstream from a municipal wastewater treatment plant and another discharge-free river site (Angus et al., 2002). The study also failed to show the presence of VTG in mosquitofish blood samples from all sites. In both

mosquitofish studies mentioned, gonopodium development was measured as an extension of the 3-4-5 anal fin rays indexed against total length of the fish. One further study looked at the effect of 17--estradiol on the gonopodial development and sexual activity of G. holbrooki (Doyle and Lim, 2002). Using a flow-through laboratory setup, juvenile male mosquitofish showed a significant 22

decrease in gonopodium length (including anal fin ray 4 to 6 ratio), percentage of hooks found on the distal tip of the gonopodium and copulatory attempts with females in a dose-dependent manner (concentration used 20, 100 and 500 ng/L). Significant decreases in these endpoints suggest possible effects on the reproductive success for the species when exposed to high enough concentrations of estrogens.

1.6.3

Isolation and identification of endocrine-disrupting compounds in effluents There are a large number of chemical and organic compounds in

wastewater such as PME, and it is very difficult to identify and evaluate them all individually. PME contains a range of compounds including dissolved and

colloidal organics, lignin compounds, chlorinated compounds from bleaching processes and dissolved inorganics (i.e. NaOH) (Sreekrishnan, 2001). PME also contains phytosterols that come from wood and have been shown to induce androgenic responses in female mosquitofish when microbially degraded (Howell and Denton, 1989). STP has not been well characterized, but has been shown to contain estrogens and estrogenic compounds (Desbrow et al., 1998). Sterols and steroids are relatively low in molecular weight (200-400 g/mol) and hydrophobic (IPCS, 2002). They tend to stay adsorbed onto suspended organic material in wastewaters (IPCS, 2002). Isolating bioactive fractions of wastewaters is a major challenge. Many recent studies have taken a toxicity identification and evaluation (TIE) approach in trying to isolate a biologically active fraction or component of complex effluents (Hewitt et al., 2000; Parrot et al., 2000; Desbrow et al., 1998; Jenkins et al., 23

2001). In these studies, solid-phase extraction and reverse-phase HPLC methods were used to help isolate bioactive fractions from PME and STP. There are some problems inherent with these methods that may affect the potencies of the effluents and/or efficiency of isolation: i) sample handling, storage and preparation, ii) high molecular weight interferences with investigations of low molecular weight compounds, and iii) the complexities of low molecular weight compounds in wastewaters. Therefore, when trying to isolate bioactive

compounds in effluents, an extraction method should be designed to: i) allow for quick processing of the effluent sample so as to minimize or eliminate storage time, ii) target low-molecular weight extractives, particularly the moderately nonpolar fraction where potential steroidal compounds would reside, and iii) be lowcost and easy to use in field work. XAD resins have been used in the extraction of organics from water samples (Ohno, 2002; Malcom et al., 1992) and pulp mill effluent (Santos et al., 2000) quite effectively. In particular, XAD-7 resin is specific for steroids and steroid-like compounds. It has been used to extract testosterone from

fermentation batch reactors (Mahato and Garai, 1997). XAD resins are non-ionic exchange resins and are preferable over anionic resins for extraction of organics due to the former's better-reported recoveries (Malcom et al., 1992). Glass-fiber (GF) filters allow for entrapment of suspended organic matter in the effluent, with GF-C and GF-F filters having 1.5 and 0.45 µm pore sizes respectively. The use of XAD-7 resin in combination with GF-C and GF-F filters could theoretically trap a proportion of the sterols and steroids potentially present in an effluent sample. 24

1.7

Research objectives The purpose of this thesis is to examine the androgenic potential of

several effluents using specific, sensitive and quantitative methods. The effluents include: a New Zealand TMP/kraft pulp and paper mill, a New Zealand STP and a Canadian TMP/kraft pulp and paper mill. The methods include an in vivo assessment using a whole-organism bioassay (mosquitofish) with quantifiable analysis (anal fin ray 4 to 6 ratio), and a suite of in vitro analyses that include a fish androgen receptor assay, fish aromatase inhibition assay and gonadal tissue steroid analysis by radioimmunoassay. For the Canadian PME, only the in vitro fish androgen receptor assay and fish aromatase inhibition assay were done, as an in vivo analysis with mosquitofish has already been performed (Hardy, 2002). Currently, there is no accepted standard method or procedure for the detection of endocrine-modifying compounds. From the many different individual assays that exist for detecting and screening endocrine disruptors, there is no consensus on the interpretation of individual test results with respect to ecological health. There is also no legal provision at this time preventing the discharge of endocrine disrupting compounds into receiving environments. The approach taken in this thesis will provide a more comprehensive (in vivo and in vitro) assessment of the androgenic potential of the effluents. An analysis of the effluents' ability to bind to the fish androgen receptor, inhibit fish aromatase activity, decrease steroid production in gonadal tissue, and induce anal fin ray elongation in female mosquitofish compared to respective upstream samples as reference, will provide data to make this assessment.

25

Other experiments in this thesis will also look at the androgenic potential of ADD, a compound that could potentially be found in PME, using the fish androgen receptor assay and female mosquitofish bioassay. The potential in vivo anti-androgenic effect of the mammalian anti-androgen cyproterone acetate will be examined by studying its ability to inhibit anal fin elongation in the mosquitofish bioassay. Also, the potential anal fin elongation due to aromatase inhibition in female mosquitofish using HAD will be examined. The hypotheses tested in this study are: 1) There is no difference between the androgenic response potential of the effluent (NZ PME, Canadian PME, and NZ STP) samples and their respective upstream reference/blank samples. 2) There is no difference between the androgenic response potential of PME and STP. 3) Every fish-based in vitro assay indicates the same response for the same androgen. 4) There is no difference between the in vivo and in vitro androgenic response potential of the effluents.

26

2.0 2.1

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS Description of mills and collection sites The New Zealand pulp mill from which effluent was sourced for this

study was situated in Kawerau on the North Island. It is an integrated bleached kraft and thermomechanical (TMP) pulp and paper mill. It primarily used

softwood (Pinus radiata) furnish. The bleaching process used sodium hypochlorite and/or chlorine dioxide. A moving bed biofilm reactor pre-treated the TMP wastewater before it is combined with the bleached kraft mill effluent. Secondary treatment consisted of a three-pond aerated stabilization basin with effluent retention time of 5 to 6 days. The effluent was discharged from the secondary treatment system into the Tarawera River at a mean volume of 180,000 m3/day and an average temperature of 26 to 28oC. The effluent dilution in the Tarawera River ranged between 5 and 12%. Tarawera River samples used for upstream reference were collected well upstream of the Tasman outfall and at least 500 m upstream from other discharge points of effluent. The Canadian pulp mill from which effluent for this study was obtained was located in Thunder Bay, Ontario and also was a combined bleached kraft/TMP mill. Mill furnish consisted of jackpine (60-70%) and spruce (3040%). Chlorine dioxide was used in the bleaching process. Effluents from the TMP and kraft processes were settled in primary clarifiers before they were combined and sent to an activated-sludge stirred-tank reactor. Retention time in the activated sludge reactor was approximately 3 hours and typically had a mixedliquor suspended solids value of 4500 mg/L. The treated effluent was discharged into the Kaministiqua River. Effluent dilution in the Kaministiqua River ranged

27

between 6 and 13%. Kaministiqua River samples used for upstream reference were collected approximately 2 km upstream from the discharge point. The New Zealand STP was located in Rotorua on the North Island. It handled approximately 18,000 m3 of raw municipal sewage from a population of about 58,000. Pre-treatment of the sewage consisted of screening and grit

removal. Primary treatment consisted of sedimentation tanks. An activated sludge process for secondary treatment then treated the effluent before it moved on to the final clarifiers. The effluent was then pumped from the clarifiers to two holding ponds where eventually it was sprayed over the nearby Whakarewarewa forest. Therefore, no appropriate "upstream" reference was available.

2.2

Extraction apparatus and procedure In the experimental extraction procedures, XAD resins were used in a

low-pressure chromatography column. Please refer to Figure 2.1 for a flowchart representation of the following described procedure. In these experiments, 5 L effluent and upstream river samples were GF-C and GF-F filtered, treated with HCl to pH 4 (to ensure protonation of all hydroxylated compounds) and then pumped through a column (2.5 cm diameter, 40 cm in length) packed with 25 g of clean XAD-7 resin at a rate of 10 mL/min, such that the sample was processed within the same day of collection. A blank sample was also performed with 5 L of deionized water according to the procedure just described. The entire

apparatus was easily transportable and was amenable to on-site processing, as it required little space. The effluent sample volume (5 L) was chosen so as to avoid

28

5 L effluent

GFC filtered filters with residue dried and ground GFF filtered

filtrate

soxhlet extracted with ethanol

column packed with XAD-7 resin eluent (discarded) soxhlet extracted with ethanol

extracts combined and reduced to 2 mL by rotoevaporation

Figure 2.1: Schematic flowchart of extraction procedure

29

saturation of the XAD resin. The use of a larger column in order to increase resin capacity (and therefore increase effluent sample volume) was avoided due to the fact that larger columns promote band-broadening, which may cause loss of analyte (Skoog and Leary, 1992). Band-broadening may be reduced by decreasing the flowrate of the effluent being pumped through, but this would have increased the time required to process the sample considerably and introduce problems of effluent stability that were designed to be avoided. The XAD-7 was cleaned according to the methodology outlined in Ohno (2002): five batch extractions with 0.1 N NaOH stirred for 1 hour were followed by three repeated soxhlet extractions with methanol for 4 hours. Once packed into the column, the resin was eluted with 150 mL each of 0.1 N NaOH, 0.1 N HCl and deionized H2O. The UV-absorbance of the deionized H2O eluent between 200 nm and 800 nm was found to be zero, indicating effective purification of the resin. Once the sample was passed through the column, the resin was removed and allowed to dry in a desiccator. The dry sample resin and the GF-C/GF-F filters were then soxhlet extracted separately with 150 mL of ethanol overnight. The ethanol extracts were combined and reduced in volume by rotary evaporation to 2 mL and stored in a refrigerator until further use. GCMS analysis of all extracts was performed using a HP 5890 series II gas chromatograph with a HP 7673A auto sampler connected to a HP 5971A mass selective detector (MSD) via a 50 m HP Ultra-2 column with helium as a carrier gas. The MSD was operated in scan or selected ion-monitoring mode (SIM). All quantitations were undertaken using HP EnviroQuant software and a full suite of standard steroid compounds (testosterone, 17--estradiol, androstenedione, 1,430

androsta-diene-3,17-dione) for calibration. Samples were derivatised by silylation (BSTFA) prior to GC-MS analysis.

2.2.1

Validation of extraction method The ability of the resin to retain organics was determined by

measuring the colour and total carbon portion of the effluent after the passage of each one of the five litres of effluent sample. A 20 mL eluent sample from the resin column was taken and analyzed for colour following the NCASI method for measuring mill effluent and receiving water colour. Another 20 mL eluent sample was taken and analyzed for total organic carbon using a Shimadzu Total Organic Carbon Analyzer Model TOC-5000. Table 2.1 shows the percentage of retention as compared to an effluent sample that has not been passed through the resin column.

Table 2.1: Retention of colour and total carbon by XAD-7 resin from effluent sample Volume passed through column (L) 1 2 3 4 5 Percentage of total carbon retained (%) 58.3 53.6 54.0 55.3 52.2 Percentage of colour retained (%) 68.5 64.8 63.0 63.0 55.6

A 5-L treated effluent sample was also spiked with a 50 µg methyltestosterone surrogate and passed through a fresh XAD-7 resin column. The resin was then soxhlet extracted with ethanol. The ethanol extract was reduced in volume to 2 mL and analyzed for methyl-testosterone content by GC-MS. The 31

resin was found to retain 41.5% of the methyl-testosterone surrogate. This compares agreeably (39.5-41% recovery of 17--estradiol cypionate) with a recent method designed to remove steroids from PME using solid-phase extraction and HPLC (Jenkins et al., 2001).

2.3

Androgen receptor assay The androgen receptor assay used herein is a hybrid of those

presented in Wells and Van Der Kraak (2000) and Sperry and Thomas (1999). The androgen receptor protein was isolated from sexually mature rainbow trout brain tissue. Rainbow trout is commonly found in New Zealand and Canadian waters and its physiology is well studied compared to other species. Steroid hormone binding may be represented by the reversible reaction:

R + H

ÅÆ RH

(1)

where R is receptor and H is hormone. At equilibrium, it can be described as:

KD = [R][H] [RH]

(2)

where KD is the dissociation constant (Lodish et al., 1995). The KD value is equivalent to the concentration of hormone at which one-half of the receptors contain bound hormone (Lodish et al., 1995). The KD value can also be

interpreted as a measure of the affinity of the receptor for the hormone. The

32

lower the KD, the higher the affinity of a receptor for the steroid. KD values for steroid receptors are usually determined in order to show appropriate selectivity of the receptor protein preparation (i.e. how well and whether the protein binds its appropriate hormone). KD values were established by competitive radioligand binding studies (please see Figure 1.4 for a diagram on competitive radioligand displacement). The rainbow trout androgen receptor protein was then exposed to varying concentrations of radiolabelled testosterone (3H-testosterone) along with either an excess of unlabelled testosterone (to determine the non-specific binding to proteins other than receptors) or excess buffer with no testosterone (to determine the total binding). Subtraction of the non-specific binding values from the total binding values at their respective ligand concentrations provides specific binding values (Figure 2.2). The resulting specific binding saturation data of the androgen receptor was analyzed by non-linear regression using GraphPad Prism 3 software in order to determine the KD value. The KD value for the nuclear-fraction rainbow trout brain androgen receptor was found to be 2.27 nM which comparably agrees with those values found by Sperry and Thomas (1999) for nuclear-fraction atlantic croaker androgen receptor (1.1 nM) and Wells and Van Der Kraak (2000) for cytosolic fraction rainbow trout brain androgen receptor (1.43 nM). The specificity of the assay is validated by the fact that the nonspecific binding is below 50% of the total binding at all concentrations (Sperry and Thomas, 2000).

33

0.9 0.8

total binding

bound [ H]-testosterone (nM)

0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0

B m ax = 0.613 nM

specific binding

y = B max + x KD + x
K D = 2.27 nM non-specific binding

3

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

15.0

17.5

20.0

22.5

[ 3 H]-testosterone conc. (nM)

Figure 2.2: Saturation binding data of 3H-testosterone to rainbow trout brain androgen receptor

2.3.1

Tissue preparation Tissue preparation was performed according to Sperry and Thomas

(1999) with the exception of the addition of a commercial protease inhibitor (Pefabloc SC) in order to increase stability of the receptor protein during storage. Excised rainbow trout brains were preserved in buffer with 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM NaEDTA, 30% glycerol and 0.5 mM of commercial protease inhibitor (Pefabloc SC). The tissue samples were stored until use at ­80oC. When ready for the next stage, the tissue samples were thawed and homogenized with four passes of a tissue grinder. The samples were pooled and charcoal-stripped to remove endogenous steroids. Using the same buffer and including 1% activated charcoal and 0.1% dextran (by weight), the samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g

34

for 15 minutes. The supernatant was collected and immediately ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g for one hour. The resulting supernatant containing the cytosolic fraction of androgen receptor was collected and stored at ­80oC. The crude nuclear pellet was washed one time with the same homogenizing buffer (without charcoal and dextran) with the addition of 0.7 M KCl, re-suspended and then incubated in the buffer for 20 minutes. The re-suspended nuclear pellet was ultracentrifuged again at 100,000 g for one hour. The resulting supernatant was discarded, the nuclear pellet re-suspended in fresh buffer and stored at ­80oC until further use.

2.3.2

Assay procedure The assay procedure follows the methods outlined in Wells and Van Der

Kraak (2000).

The assay involved creating a reaction mixture of receptor,

radiolabelled hormone and endogenous steroid or steroid analog. Please refer to Figure 2.3 on the following page for a flowchart representation of the assay procedure. The reaction was carried out in 5 mL borosilicate glass tubes

containing 50 µL of 3H-testosterone, 50 µL of steroid and 150 µL of diluted (1:2 in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM NaEDTA, 10% glycerol (TEG) buffer) nuclear androgen receptor preparation. The final concentration of 3H-testosterone in the reaction mixture was 1.25 nM and the final concentration of steroid ranged from 0.01-1000 nM (logarithmic scale). Where effluent extracts were used, 50 µL of TEG buffer was added along with 5 µL of effluent extract (in ethanol). The final concentration of ethanol in the reaction tube was 2% by volume, which has not been found to interfere with ligand-receptor binding (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 35

2000).

Unless incubated at specific temperature or in centrifugation tubes,

samples were at all times kept on ice.

H-testosterone + test competitor (e.g. testosterone or effluent extract)

3

rainbow trout androgen receptor (AR)

buffer incubate @ 4oC overnight charcoal strip to remove unbound 3H-testosterone read percentage of 3H-testosterone still bound to AR by scintillation Figure 2.3: Flowchart representation of the rainbow trout androgen receptor binding assay

Steroids were added first to the tubes followed by nuclear androgen receptor. The tubes were vortexed and incubated overnight at 4oC. After

incubation, 500 µL of a 0.5% activated charcoal/0.05% dextran ­ TEG buffer solution was added to each tube. The tubes were allowed to incubate for 5 minutes and then centrifuged at 2000 g for 15 minutes to remove unbound 36

ligands.

The supernatant from each tube was collected into separate 5 mL

scintillation vials to which was added 5 mL of scintillation cocktail (2 L toluene, 1 L Triton X-100, 12 g 2,5-diphenyloxazole, 0.6 g 1,4-Bis[2-5-

Phenyloxazoly]Benzene) (McMaster et al., 1992). The vials were then measured with a scintillation counter and the counts for each vial were recorded. A blank tube set provided a blank value (no receptor or ligand) that was subtracted from all values. Another tube set containing only receptor and radiolabelled ligand (and 50 µL of TEG buffer) provided a count that represented 100% binding for the radiolabelled ligand. All counts were divided by this value in order to

normalize binding data in terms of percentage of bound radiolabelled ligand. Effluent extracts (2% by volume of reaction mixture) were analyzed in this manner, taking the place of the unlabelled ligand and replacing the volume difference with buffer. In addition to the effluent extracts (PME and STP), the androgens 4-androsten-3,17-dione (AD) and 1,4-androsta-diene-3,17-dione (ADD) were also analyzed for androgen receptor binding potential due to their suspected involvement of causing gonopodium development in female mosquitofish (Jenkins et al., 2001).

2.4

Aromatase activity assay Aromatase is the endocrine enzyme that converts testosterone to 17--

estradiol. Aromatase activity assays are involved with measuring the release of tritiated water from its reaction with [1-3H]androstenedione (Lephart and Simpson, 1991). Aromatase uses androstenedione as a substrate in its conversion to estrone (Figure 1.3). Aromatase inhibition would prevent the first step of this 37

reaction from occurring, thus stopping the formation of tritiated water when [13

H]androstenedione is used as the substrate. Therefore, aromatase inhibition

potential of test compounds can be determined by analyzing their ability to reduce the amount of tritiated water forming. Protein enzyme (aromatase) was incubated along with tritiated steroid ([1-3H]androstenedione) and the test compound. The reaction mixture was measured by scintillation to determine the amount of tritiated water present after an incubation period. Based on the methods of Shilling et al., (1999), an

aromatase activity assay using rainbow trout egg that can show inhibition in a dose-response manner was used here. Ovarian follicles are believed to be the location of high aromatase activity due to the requirement of 17--estradiol in ovulation (Séralini and Moslemi, 2001).

2.4.1

Tissue preparation Ovarian tissue from 3-year old sexually mature female rainbow trout were

excised and preserved at ­80oC. When ready for the next stage, the tissue was thawed, homogenized in 4:1 buffer-to-tissue ratio and pooled. The homogenate was then centrifuged at 11,000 g for 20 minutes. The resulting supernatant containing the microsomal fraction was collected and ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g for one hour. The microsomal pellet containing the aromatase enzyme from the ultracentrifugation was re-suspended in 0.5 mL of buffer and stored at ­80oC until further use.

38

2.4.2

Assay procedure The assay procedure was followed according to that described in Shilling

et al., (1999). Please refer to Figure 2.4 for a flowchart representation of this assay procedure. All reactions were carried out in triplicate in 5 mL borosilicate glass tubes.
3

The reaction mixture contained 1 mM NADPH, 10 nM [1-

H]androstenedione, 10 mM MgCl2 and 35 µL of the microsomal aromatase

protein solution to a total volume of 500 µL. NADPH is required in excess as it is a cofactor in the reaction (see Figure 2.4 above). The aromatase inhibitor standard used here was 4-hydroxyandrostenedione (HAD). A stock solution of 1 mg/mL of HAD was made in ethanol. Serial dilutions of the stock solution were made in ethanol and 5 µL additions were added to the reaction mixtures such that the inhibitor concentration range was 10-0.0001 µg/mL (logarithmic scale). Where effluent extracts were used, 5 µL additions of the extracts were added to the reaction mixtures. The reaction tubes were then incubated at 22oC for 90 minutes. After incubation, 1 mL of chloroform was added to each tube to stop the reaction and the aqueous phase was diluted to 1.5 mL with distilled H2O. The tubes were then centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes. Following centrifugation, 1 mL of the aqueous phase from each tube was taken and placed into a new empty tube to which was added 1 mL of dextran-activated charcoal buffer A (1% charcoal, 0.1% dextran by weight). The new tubes were centrifuged at 2000 g for 15 minutes after which the supernatant was collected into separate 5 mL scintillation vials. Upon addition of 5 mL of scintillation cocktail to each tube (as

39

[1-3H]androstenedione + test inhibitor (e.g. HAD)

rainbow trout aromatase protein

buffer + 10 mM MgCl2 + 1 mM NADPH incubate @ 22oC for 90 minutes

add chloroform to stop reaction

charcoal strip 1 mL of aqueous portion to remove unbound [1-3H]androstenedione determine percentage of [1-3H]androstenedione conversion by measuring tritiated water level via scintillation Figure 2.4: Flowchart diagram of rainbow trout aromatase activity assay

described in androgen receptor assay) the vials were measured by a scintillation counter. A blank set of tubes containing no inhibitor or effluent extract

represented 100% activity (i.e. no inhibition) and all other counts were normalized to this value. Figure 2.5 shows the aromatase activity profile of increasing

inhibitor standard (HAD) concentration.

40

100 % aromatase activity 80 60 40 20 0 0.00001 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 conc. (ug/mL)

Figure 2.5: Relative aromatase activity in presence of increasing inhibitor (HAD) concentration

The log EC50 value of Figure 2.5 above was determined to be ­2.511 by GraphPad Prism 3 software. This equates to a 7.18 nM EC50 concentration for HAD in the reaction mixture which contained 10 nM [1-3H]androstenedione. This agrees with other results of aromatase activity assays. HAD has been shown to be a strong inhibitor of aromatase in rainbow trout showing up to 80% inhibition at a concentration of 1.5 µM (Shilling et al., 1999). Also, an IC50 value for HAD with aromatase (human placental microsome) using androstenedione as a substrate was determined to be 15 nM (Bullion et al., 1990).

2.5

In vitro sex steroid analysis
The methods followed here were those found in McMaster et al., (1995).

Please refer to Figure 2.6 on the following page for a flowchart representation of

41

the in vitro steroid hormone assay. At the termination of exposure experiments, mosquitofish were sacrificed by an overdose of the fish anesthetic MS-222 and weighed to the nearest 0.001 g. Ovaries from each fish were then excised and placed in separate wells of a 24-well tissue culture plate. Each well contained 500 µL of Medium 199 (M199 containing Hank's salts without bicarbonate) adjusted to pH 7.2. Ovaries were carefully teased apart to release their eggs. The plates were then incubated for 18 hours at 20oC. Following incubation, testosterone and 17--estradiol levels in the media were measured directly by radioimmunoassay (RIA). Standard curves for

testosterone and 17--estradiol were made by creating a dilution series in 5 mL borosilicate glass tubes from 800 pg of respective steroid in 200 µL of Phosgel buffer (5.75 g Na2HPO4, 1.28 g NaH2PO4*H2O, 1 g gelatin, 0.1 g Thimersol in 1 L of distilled H2O adjusted to pH 7.6). The dilution range included 400, 200, 100, 50, 25, 12.5, 6.25, and 3.125 pg of steroid standard in 200 µL of Phosgel buffer. To these standards, 200 µL of radiolabelled steroid was added (3H-testosterone or
3

H-17--estradiol).

Then 200 µL of respective antibody solution was added

(rabbit anti-testosterone/anti-17--estradiol). The reaction mixture was vortexed and incubated overnight at 4oC. The following day, 200 µL of 1% activated charcoal-0.1% dextran Phosgel buffer was added to all tube and allowed to incubate for 10 minutes. When not in incubation or centrifugation, sample tubes were kept on ice at all times. The tubes were then centrifuged at 3000 g for 15 minutes and the supernatant collected in 5 mL scintillation vials. Scintillation cocktail (as described in section 2.3.2) was added to each vial and counts measured by a scintillation counter.

42

mosquitofish ovary tissue

M199 buffer incubate @ 20oC for 18 hours 200 µL sample of solution
3 3

H-testosterone or H-17--estradiol

anti-testosterone antibody or anti-estradiol antibody

incubate overnight @ 4oC charcoal strip to remove unbound H-testosterone/3H-17--estradiol

3

determine percentage of 3H-testosterone/3H-17--estradiol bound by scintillation interpolate testosterone/17--estradiol levels from standard curves Figure 2.6: Flowchart diagram of the in vitro steroid assay performed using exposed female mosquitofish ovarian tissue

43

Similarly for mosquitofish exposure samples, 200 µL of media from each well was placed in reaction with 200 µL of respective antibody and 200 µL radiolabelled steroid hormone (separately for testosterone and 17--estradiol). Tubes were prepared and measured by scintillation as described above.

2.5.1

Statistical analysis Steroid levels from mosquitofish ovary samples were interpolated from

testosterone and 17--estradiol standard curves with a logistic function using GraphPad Prism 3 software. Steroid levels were then standardized according to total weight of each respective fish. Means for testosterone and 17--estradiol levels for each treatment (PME, STP, Tarawera river water, HAD and ethanol) were calculated along with standard error. A non-parametric Mann-Whitney unpaired test was performed to determine significant differences in respective steroid hormone levels between the PME and Tarawera river water treatments, as normal distribution for the data cannot be assumed. A non-parametric KruskalWallis test was performed between the STP, HAD and ethanol treatments to determine statistical differences as three non-normally distributed means were compared in this case. The critical level of significance was assessed at p < 0.05 for all tests.

2.6

In vivo mosquitofish bioassay
Female mosquitofish were housed in 10 L aquaria under a 12:12 hour

photoperiod. Temperatures were maintained between 26-28oC and the aquaria were aerated with gentle air-streams. Treatments consisted of two replicates

44

(tanks A and B) of 10 fish each. Figure 2.7 shows a picture of the mosquitofish bioassay setup.

Figure 2.7: Mosquitofish bioassay setup

PME, STW and Tarawera river water treatments were at 50% dilution with dechlorinated tap water and all other treatments were with 100% dechlorinated tap water. A 50% dilution was chosen so as to facilitate the qualitative observations of the onset of potential anal fin ray fusion, which indicates the onset of anal fin ray elongation (Turner, 1941a). Having to pull fish out of their tanks to observe their anal fins would cause stress, which may alter sexual responses as seen with wild fish (McMaster et al., 1995), and therefore may influence the potential onset of anal fin ray fusion. A delay in the onset of anal fin ray fusion in female mosquitofish is a qualitative indication of effluent androgenic potency. Also, gonopodial development in female mosquitofish

exposed to this same New Zealand PME has been seen within 3 weeks at 15% 45

dilution (Ellis et al., 2003). Microbial degradation of plant sterols normally occurs within 15-20 days, and this is the mechanism believed to be responsible for the androgenic responses seen in female mosquitofish from PME exposures (Bortone and Davis, 1994). The test volume of 10 L for each treatment underwent 50% static renewal daily. The other treatments included methyl-testosterone (500 ng/L), AD (100 µg/L), ADD (100 µg/L, 10 µg/L, 1 µg/L), cyproterone acetate (250 µg/L, 25 µg/L, 2.5 µg/L) and HAD (100 µg/L). The methyl-testosterone concentration was chosen as it has been shown to be a minimal concentration required to produce anal fin ray elongation in female mosquitofish within 25 days (Turner, 1941b). AD has been shown to induce gonopodial development in female

mosquitofish at a concentration of 10 mg/L in a laboratory setting (Husinger and Howell, 1994), and has been suggested to cause female mosquitofish masculinization at 40 ng/L in a Florida river (Jenkins et al., 2001). So the

concentration used here (100 µg/L) is chosen to show whether female mosquitofish masculinization could potentially occur at more environmentally relevant concentrations. ADD has not been investigated, so 10-fold dilutions were also used to potentially show a dose-response effect. The HAD (100 µg/L) and maximum cyproterone acetate (250 µg/L) concentrations were chosen as these were the highest possible concentrations to achieve in ethanol stock solutions due to their respective solubilities. All these substrates were made up in a stock using ethanol as a solvent. The concentrations of the respective stocks were appropriately made to achieve the final concentrations in the tanks stated above with 50 µL additions. One treatment having only 50 µL additions of neat

46

ethanol was also conducted as a negative control. Figure 2.8 and Table 2.2 summarize the mosquitofish bioassay design on the following page. Methyl-testosterone is known as a potent androgen, which induces gonopodium development in female mosquitofish (Turner, 1941b) and was used as a positive control in these experiments. As mentioned previously, AD and ADD were investigated due to their implication in gonopodium development in female mosquitofish through microbial degradation of plant sterols found in PME (Jenkins et al., 2001). Cyproterone acetate is a known mammalian antiandrogen that has been shown to be non-binding in rainbow trout androgen receptor, while at the same time binding to goldfish testes androgen receptor (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000). Its in vivo effects on gonopodial development in female mosquitofish were studied here with exposures of cyproterone acetate combined with methyl-testosterone. Although gonopodium development in

female mosquitofish due to aromatase inhibition has been implied not to occur (Orlando et al., 2002), direct in vivo evidence was lacking. Here HAD was

investigated for its potential to induce gonopodium development in female mosquitofish. All treatments lasted 25 days with daily observational accounting of fin ray elongation and fusion. At the termination of the exposure the fish were sacrificed by overdose of the fish anesthetic MS-222, the ovaries of each fish excised and used for in vitro steroidogenesis analysis (described in section 2.4) and digital photos of their anal fins were taken using a confocal microscope with an attached digital camera. The anal fin ray 4:6 ratio was then determined for each fish in each treatment using Image Tool software.

47

test compound made up to appropriate concentration in ethanol

50 µL additions into 10 L aquaria

treatment tank A (10 female mosquitofish)

treatment tank B (10 female mosquitofish)

Figure 2.8: Mosquitofish bioassay design. All treatments were performed in duplicate (tank A and B) and under 50% daily static renewal.

treatment name AD ADD 100 ADD 10 ADD 1 CA 250 CA 25 CA 2.5 MT HAD

final concentration in tanks A and B (µg/L) 100 100 10 1 250 25 2.5 0.5 100

Table 2.2: Treatments used in mosquitofish bioassay and their respective concentrations. CA represents cyproterone acetate, MT represents methyl-testosterone. All CA treatments had 50 µL MT additions as well. Effluent (PME, STP) and upstream New Zealand reference concentrations were at 50% dilution.

48

2.6.1

Statistical analysis As reported in Angus et al., (2001), anal fin ray ratios for mosquitofish

follow a normal distribution when log-transformed. Thus, all fin ray ratios were log-transformed prior to ANOVA analysis using GraphPad Prism 3 software, as we were comparing more than two means in all cases. The critical level for significance was assessed at p < 0.05. A Dunnett's post-hoc test was performed for all graphs to elucidate specific significant differences where detected, as we were interested in comparing all fin ray ratios from the various treatments to the negative control mosquitofish exposure (EtOH). The only exception was for the cyproterone acetate treatment data (Figure 3.16), where we wanted to compare all the columns between themselves and thus used a Bonferroni's post-hoc test.

49

3.0 3.1

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Androgen receptor assay Competitive binding curves are useful tools in that they show the binding

of test compounds as a sigmoidal dose-response curve, which is amenable to the calculation of an EC50. An EC50 is a toxicological term used in this case to

describe the concentration of compound that elicits 50% binding to the receptor. The competitive binding curves in terms of 3H-testosterone (tritiated-T) displacement for testosterone, AD, ADD and 17--estradiol are shown in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2 respectively. Their respective EC50 values were determined by GraphPad Prism 3 software and are tabulated in Table 3.1, except for 17-estradiol, which did not bind to the androgen receptor (Figure 3.2). Relative binding affinities (RBAs) were another way to show the potency of compounds to bind to steroid receptors. They are defined as the ratio of the EC50 of androgen standard (testosterone in this case) to the EC50 of the test compounds, multiplied by 100. Thus, the RBA of testosterone was defined to be 100%. The RBAs of AD (241%) and ADD (164%) indicate that they were relatively potent binders to the rainbow trout brain androgen receptor. This means that a relatively smaller amount of AD and ADD can potentially elicit the same androgenic response as a relatively higher amount of testosterone. The AD result here (241%) agrees with another study where AD is shown to be more potent than testosterone (187.6%), also in rainbow trout brain androgen receptor (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000). However, AD was found to be non-binding in Atlantic croaker brain androgen receptor and showed only very weak binding (1.6%) to Atlantic croaker ovary androgen receptor (Sperry and Thomas, 1999). 50

AD 100 % tritiated-T bound 80 60 40 20 0 0.001 0.01 0.1

ADD

testosterone

1

10

100

1000

10000

conc. (nM)

Figure 3.1: Rainbow trout androgen receptor competitive binding curves for testosterone, AD, ADD

testosterone 100 % tritiated-T bound 80 60 40 20 0 0.001 0.01 0.1 1

17-B-estradiol

10

100

1000

10000

conc. (nM)

Figure 3.2: Rainbow trout androgen receptor competitive binding curves for testosterone and 17--estradiol

51

Steroid Testosterone AD ADD

EC50 (nM) 8.2 3.4 5.0

RBA (%) 100 241 164

Table 3.1: EC50 values and relative binding affinities (RBA) for testosterone, AD, ADD as determined from their competitive binding curves

AD binding in goldfish testes (52.6%), goldfish brain (57.1%) and goldfish ovaries (67.9%) have also been reported (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000). These results indicate that androgen receptors from different species have different affinities for the same androgen, which is an important consideration if an androgen receptor binding assay is being used to detect the presence of a potential androgenic xenobiotic. Moreover, appreciable binding of 17--estradiol to goldfish testes androgen receptor (16.3%) reported by Wells and Van Der Kraak (2000) show that the selection of species tissue for androgen receptor source may affect the selectivity of the assay to screen for androgens. Another important result here is the relatively strong potency of ADD to rainbow trout androgen receptor (164%). This is the first reported EC50 value for ADD using fish androgen receptor. ADD is reported to be of higher yield (30%) than AD (13%) from conversion of -sitosterol, a common plant sterol found in PME, with M. smegmatis (Mahato and Garai, 1997). While there have been

debates about the presence of AD in waters receiving PME discharges, due to the microbial conversion of plant sterols in the PME (Jenkins et al., 2001; Durhan et al., 2002), the potential prevalence of ADD has not been examined. Androgenic responses due to the presence of ADD in PME appear to be a possibility.

52

The rainbow trout androgen receptor assay was then used to determine the relative androgenic potencies of two PMEs and a STP. Fish androgen

receptor assays have been used to determine the relative potencies of PMEs in the past (Hewitt et al., 2000; Ellis et al., 2003) but these studies used androgen receptor isolated from goldfish testes which, as mentioned earlier, have been shown to have moderate affinity for 17--estradiol (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000). Rainbow trout brain AR, as seen from Figures 3.1 and 3.2, has a very specific affinity for androgens. Below are the competitive binding curves for the New Zealand PME and its upstream reference sample (Figure 3.3), Canadian PME and its upstream reference sample (Figure 3.4), and the New Zealand STP with a reference blank sample (Figure 3.5).

NZ PME 100 % tritiated-T bound 80 60 40 20 0 1E-06 0.00001 0.0001

NZ upstream reference

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

extract dilution ratio

Figure 3.3: Competitive binding curve of the New Zealand PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract

53

Canadian PME

Canadian upstream reference

100 % tritiated-T bound 80 60 40 20 0 1E-06 0.00001 0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

extract dilution ratio

Figure 3.4: Competitive binding curve of the Canadian PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract

STP

blank

100 % tritiated-T bound 80 60 40 20 0 1E-06 0.00001 0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

extract dilution ratio

Figure 3.5: Competitive binding curve of the New Zealand STP sample extract and its reference blank sample extract

54

Since the competitive binding studies with the effluent extracts dealt with an unknown starting concentration of potential androgenic xenobiotics, the binding to the androgen receptor is not measured relative to concentration, but rather to the dilution factor of the extract sample. This was done in order to potentially to produce the sigmoidal dose-response curve for the effluent extracts and establish an EC50 that could be related arbitrarily to testosterone EC50 and establish a "testosterone-equivalent" value. However, the curves are not

complete and determination of the EC50 is not possible. While the New Zealand PME extract appears to be relatively non-binding (Figure 3.3), the Canadian PME (Figure 3.4) and New Zealand STP (Figure 3.5) show a trend toward increasing androgen receptor binding. The Canadian PME was screened for the presence of testosterone, AD and ADD; and these were found to be non detectable (detection limit of 1 ng/mL). Also, the Canadian PME has failed to show significant gonopodial development in female mosquitofish (Hardy, 2002), which suggests that androgens are not present at high enough concentration to elicit this response. It may possibly be detecting the presence of androgens that are too low in concentration to cause this in vivo effect, or be detected by GC-MS. The androgen receptor binding seen from the STP extract may be due to testosterone excreted from humans. While it is known that humans excrete relatively large amounts (0.002-0.10 mg per day) of 17-estradiol (Huang and Sedlak, 2001), and the presence of other endogenous and synthetic estrogens have been detected in STP (Purdom et al., 1994), relatively little work has been done on the detection of androgens in STP. Figure 3.5 shows that androgenic compounds in STP may be approaching detectable levels. 55

3.2

Aromatase activity assay The aromatase activity curve for the aromatase inhibitor standard HAD

has already been shown in Figure 2.4 and its EC50 has been determined to be 7.18 nM. The aromatase activity curves for the New Zealand PME and its upstream reference sample (Figure 3.6), the Canadian PME and its upstream reference sample (Figure 3.7), and the New Zealand STP and a reference blank sample (Figure 3.8) are shown. While the curves are again incomplete, trends toward increasing aromatase inhibtion can be seen with in the Canadian PME (Figure 3.7) and the STP (Figure 3.8), with a slight trend noticed with the New Zealand PME (Figure 3.6). The effluent extracts were screened for the presence of HAD using GC-MS and none was found, nor was it expected to be found.

NZ PME

NZ upstream reference

100 % aromatase activity 80 60 40 20 0 1E-06 0.00001 0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

extract dilution ratio

Figure 3.6: Aromatase activity curve of the New Zealand PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract

56

Canadian PME

Canadian upstream reference

100 % aromatase activity 80 60 40 20 0 1E-06 0.00001 0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

extract dilution ratio

Figure 3.7: Aromatase activity curve of the Canadian PME sample extract and its upstream reference sample extract

STP

blank

100 % aromatase activity 80 60 40 20 0 1E-06

1E-05

0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

extract dilution ratio

Figure 3.8: Aromatase activity curve of the New Zealand STP sample extract and its blank reference sample extract

57

3.3

In vitro mosquitofish ovary sex steroid levels
The results from the in vitro testosterone analysis of the New Zealand

PME and upstream reference treated female mosquitofish are shown in Figure 3.9. The ovarian testosterone levels for the PME treated female mosquitofish are significantly lower than the upstream reference treated fish (Mann-Whitney U test, p < 0.05). While this may suggest the presence of androgenic compounds in the PME that are feeding back in the HPG axis (Figure 1.1) to stop the production of testosterone, our rainbow trout androgen receptor binding assay showed no difference in binding between the New Zealand PME extract and its upstream reference (Figure 3.3). The decreased production of testosterone in the PME exposed female mosquitofish may be due to non-steroidal compounds present in the effluent. Compounds causing reduced testosterone levels in

mummichog have been isolated from a Canadian PME, but their identities still remain unknown (Hewitt et al., 2002). Also, as already mentioned in section 3.1, androgen receptors from different fish species have different affinities for the same androgen. Thus, another possibility may be that the mosquitofish androgen receptors are more sensitive to the xenobiotic androgens that may potentially be present in the PME than rainbow trout brain androgen receptors. As seen in Figure 3.10, ovarian testosterone levels in STP treated female mosquitofish are lower than the ethanol-treated negative control (EtOH) mosquitofish, while the aromatase inhibitor HAD, as expected, was found not to alter testosterone levels. Statistical analysis of the testosterone levels shown in

58

pg testosterone/total weight of fish (mg)

0.12 0.1 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 0 PME upstream reference

*

Figure 3.9: Testosterone levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to New Zealand PME and upstream reference. Asterisk denotes a significant difference between the means (Mann-Whitney U test, p < 0.05).

pg testosterone/total weight of fish (mg)

0.35 0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 STP HAD EtOH

***

Figure 3.10: Testosterone levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to STP, HAD, and EtOH (negative control). Asterisks for the STP treatment denote a significant difference from the HAD treatment (Kruskal-Wallis test, p < 0.001).

59

Figure 3.10 only shows a significant difference between the STP and HAD treatments (Kruskal-Wallis test, p < 0.001. Nevertheless, STP showed some degree of binding to the rainbow trout androgen receptor (Figure 3.5) indicating the low presence of androgens in the effluent, which may also be causing the decreased testosterone production seen here through negative feedback in the HPG axis. While detection of androgenic compounds in STP are not widely reported, another study has found decreased circulating testosterone levels in female carp caught downstream from a STP discharge (Folmar et al., 1996). Ovarian 17--estradiol levels for PME and upstream reference treated female mosquitofish are shown in Figure 3.11. There is no significant difference in the 17--estradiol levels (Mann-Whitney U test, 95% confidence), which suggests that testosterone levels should also not be different. This is contradicted by our results shown in Figure 3.9, and may be due to the release of 17-estradiol that has been stored in the follicles. However, it may also be due to the presence of AD in order to maintain 17--estradiol levels (see Figure 1.3 for gonadal steroidogenesis pathway). AD can be formed by microbial conversion of -sitosterol, which is commonly found in PME (Denton et al., 1985), and has been detected in treated effluent (165.4 µg/L) and treated effluent extracts (147.8 µg/L) from this particular mill previously (van den Heuvel et al., 2003). GC-MS analysis of the New Zealand PME extract found no presence of AD. Therefore, if AD is present in the New Zealand PME sample, it is at a level undetectable by the rainbow trout androgen receptor assay.

60

pg estradiol/total weight of fish (mg)

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0 PME upstream reference

Figure 3.11: 17--estradiol levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to New Zealand PME and upstream reference. No significant difference between the means was detected (Mann-Whitney U test, 95% C.I.).

Figure 3.12 shows the ovarian 17--estradiol levels in the STP, HAD, and EtOH treated female mosquitofish. The large error associated with the EtOH treatment does not allow for any statistical difference to been seen between the treatments (Kruskal-Wallis test, 95% confidence), but noticeable trends can still be observed. 17--estradiol levels for the aromatase inhibitor HAD are lower than the negative control EtOH, as expected, due to its blockage of testosterone conversion to 17--estradiol. The STP treatment also showed lower 17--

estradiol levels compared to the negative EtOH control. This may be attributed to the aromatase inhibiting potential of the effluent from a combination of both steroidal androgenic compounds, as suggested in section 3.1 (Figure 3.5), and non-steroidal aromatase inhibiting compounds (section 3.2, Figure 3.8), which

61

may be present. Currently, there are no studies available that have thoroughly investigated the aromatase inhibiting potential of STP or PME.

pg estradiol/total weight of fish (mg)

0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0 STP HAD EtOH

Figure 3.12: 17--estradiol levels in female mosquitofish ovaries exposed to STP, HAD, and EtOH (negative control). No significant differences between the means were detected (Kruskal-Wallis test, 95% confidence).

3.4

Mosquitofish bioassay The 4:6 anal fin ray ratios for the MT, EtOH, STP, New Zealand PME

and the upstream reference treated female mosquitofish are charted in Figure 3.13. One-way ANOVA analysis (95% confidence interval) showed a significant difference in the variances (p < 0.0001). A Dunnet post-hoc test, having EtOH as the control, found no significant difference between the STP, PME or upstream reference treatments. The MT treatment, used a positive control, was significantly different (p < 0.01). Inter-tank differences (i.e. between tanks A and B for the same treatment) using Bonferroni's post-hoc test, which allows for 62

selection of any two treatments, were not found. The New Zealand PME and STP do not appear to induce gonopodial development in this bioassay. From the previous sections (3.1-3.3), we have seen evidence suggesting the presence of androgens at very low levels in the New Zealand PME and STP effluent samples. Therefore, if they are truly present, they must be at levels low enough not to cause anal fin ray elongation in female mosquitofish in this bioassay. Lower dilutions of effluent and/or longer bioassay duration might yield different results. Inter-species (mosquitofish vs rainbow trout) differences in sensitivity to androgens may also, in part, account for the lack of in vivo androgenic response in the mosquitofish seen in Figure 3.13. Interestingly, Ellis et al., (2003) found gonopodial development in female mosquitofish exposed to PME samples from the same mill used in this study. Ellis et al., (2003) also found appreciable binding in the goldfish testes androgen receptor assay with solid-phase extracts of the effluent. The PME samples were taken in 1999 and since then, there have been reported changes in the effluent quality (van den Heuvel et al., 2003). Between 1999 and 2003 there has been a gradual decrease in the total suspended solids of the effluent (van den Heuvel et al., 2003). This could potentially be reflected in the results shown in Figure 3.13 as low molecular weight compounds are highly adsorbed to suspended particulate matter. Also noted in van den Heuvel et al., (2003) is the change in specific resin acid ratios in the effluent between 1999 and 2003, which may indicate a change in the microbial ecology of the treatment system. For the Canadian PME, Hardy (2002) found no visible evidence of anal fin elongation in female mosquitofish exposed for 20 weeks using a flow-through setup. Total sterol concentrations for

63

1.5 1.4 fin ray 4:6 ratio 1.3 1.2 1.1 1

**

MT

EtOH

PME

STP

upstream reference

treatment

Figure 3.13: 4:6 anal fin ray ratios for female mosquitofish exposed to effluents (PME, STP) and upstream reference from New Zealand at 50% dilution, and controls (MT at 500 ng/L, EtOH). One-way ANOVA analysis with Dunnet's post-hoc test show MT significantly different from EtOH (p < 0.01).

the Canadian treated effluent ranged from 46 to 298 µg/L, which is comparable to the total sterol concentration of the New Zealand treated effluent (288 µg/L). This also suggests that there is a lack of microbial conversion of plant sterols to steroids, which may possibly be due to the structure of the microbial ecology of the effluent treatment system. Treatment of female mosquitofish with 100 µg/L of AD and 100 µg/L of ADD yielded significant induction of anal fin elongation (Dunnet's post hoc test, p < 0.01) in relation to the EtOH control treatment, whereas the 100 µg/L HAD treatment did not, as seen in Figure 3.14. This suggests, in agreement with Orlando et al., (2002), that aromatase inhibition does not induce gonopodial

64

development in female mosquitofish.

In Figure 3.14, we also see a higher

induction of anal fin ray elongation from ADD treatment than AD treatment. The dose-response assessment of ADD treatment can be seen in Figure 3.15. It is shown that possible masculinization effects of ADD in female mosquitofish can only be significant if concentrations are in the 100 µg/L range. Along with the fact that ADD appears to be a more potent inducer of anal fin ray elongation (Figure 3.14), suggestions that AD may be inducing masculine effects in the wild at concentrations of 40 ng/L (Jenkins et al., 2001) are not supported here. Furthermore, Durhan et al., (2002) have shown that androgenic extracts from the same sample site (Fenholloway River, Florida) do not contain AD. They do not suggest what compounds may possibly be exerting the androgenic response. Even considering that ADD is converted in higher yields than AD from sitosterol by M. smegmatis (Mahato and Garai, 1997), ADD is unlikely to be responsible for these effects. Although ADD was not detected by GC-MS in this New Zealand PME sample extract however, further investigation into this possibility for other samples may be warranted. Figure 3.16 shows the effect of the mammalian non-steroidal antiandrogen cyproterone acetate (CA) on gonopodial development in female mosquitofish. The CA treatments were in conjunction with the positive control (MT) additions. The results in Figure 3.16 show a significant reduction in

gonopodial development in female mosquitofish exposed to CA at a concentration of 250 µg/L (Bonferroni's post hoc test, p < 0.05). This suggests that while CA has reported to be non-binding in rainbow trout (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000) and Atlantic croaker (Sperry and Thomas, 1999), it apparently is 65

1.3

* *

fin ray 4:6 ratio

1.2

1.1

1 EtOH ADD 100 treatment AD HAD

Figure 3.14: 4:6 anal fin ray ratios for female mosquitofish exposed to ADD, AD, and HAD, all at 100 µg/L, along with negative control (EtOH). One-way ANOVA analysis with Dunnet's post-hoc test show ADD and AD to be significantly different from EtOH (p < 0.05).

1.3

*

fin ray 4:6 ratio

1.2

1.1

1 EtOH ADD 100 ADD 10 ADD 1 treatment

Figure 3.15: Dose-response of ADD to anal fin ray elongation in female mosquitofish. Treatment concentrations are 100, 10 and 1 µg/L for ADD 100, ADD 10 and ADD 1 respectively. One-way ANOVA analysis with Dunnet's post-hoc test show ADD treatment at 100 µg/L to be significantly different from EtOH (p < 0.05). 66

1.5

c
1.4 fin ray 4:6 ratio 1.3 1.2 1.1 1 EtOH CA 250 + 0.5 MT CA 25 + 0.5 MT

c

b

a

CA 2.5 + 0.5 MT

treatment

Figure 3.16: 4:6 anal fin ray ratios for female mosquitofish exposed to 50 µg/L MT and increasing concentrations of cyproterone acetate (CA). CA 250, CA 25 and CA 2.5 denote concentrations of 250, 25, and 2.5 µg/L respectively. One-way ANOVA analysis with Bonferroni's post-hoc test was performed. Treatments with same letter are not significantly different from each other.

binding to mosquitofish androgen receptors, causing a decrease in the androgenic effect of MT by competition. This again illustrates inter-species variability, and therefore must be a consideration in designing in vitro tests for detection of steroidal compounds. Also, the time required to first visible signs of anal fin elongation were observed to be delayed with increasing CA concentration. Normally, with the positive control anal fin elongation occurs with 5-7 days. In the 2.5 µg/L CA treatment, this was not delayed. For the 25 µg/L CA treatment, elongation was delayed by 7 days and for the 250 µg/L treatment it was delayed by 14 days. Once initiated, elongation of anal fin rays 4, 5 and 6 should occur rapidly (Turner, 1941b). This supports the theory that although anti-androgens may not decrease overall androgenic responses in organisms, they may affect the

67

timing of these responses, which would have a critical affect depending on the organisms' stage of development (IPCS, 2002). Effluents could be tested for their anti-androgenic potential by testing whether their extracts significantly reduce or delay the onset of gonopodial development in female mosquitofish treated with a known androgen, in a bioassay design as described in this study. To date, there are no studies on the anti-androgenic potential of effluents available.

68

4.0

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Addressing the hypotheses stated in the research objectives (section 1.7): 1) The results from this study show the potential of the Canadian PME

and New Zealand STP to elicit in vitro androgenic responses in the rainbow trout androgen receptor assay. The in vitro aromatase activity assay results suggest aromatase inhibition for all the effluent samples, with the gonadal sex steroid analysis results further supporting this for the New Zealand PME and STP. However, the in vivo mosquitofish bioassay results do not show any evidence of a whole organism androgenic response. In vivo responses may manifest if lower dilutions and longer durations were to be used for the mosquitofish bioassay. Also, a flow-through setup for the bioassay would be an improvement over the static-renewal procedure, as steroidal compounds tend to have limited availability to the mosquitofish due to the relatively low solubilities in water. 2) At the concentrations used in this study, STP appears to have a stronger in vitro response than the New Zealand PME and Canadian PME. The STP shows stronger binding in the rainbow trout androgen receptor assay and stronger inhibition in the aromatase activity assay than either PME. STP also showed stronger suppression of testosterone and 17--estradiol production in exposed mosquitofish than the New Zealand PME. PME has been reported to induce male responses in eelpout in the wild (Larsson et al., 2000) and in whole organism laboratory studies using mosquitofish (Ellis et al., 2003). STP has been studied for its ability to induce estrogenic effects due to the presence of estrogenic compounds (Sumpter, 1995), but its potential androgenic effects has not been examined. Very recent work on the New Zealand STP effluent extract

69

sample has detected the presence of AD and ADD in addition to estrogens (van den Heuvel, pers. comm.). Further work on the androgenic potential of STP is warranted. 3) The results from this study suggest that different fish species have different sensitivities to androgens and anti-androgens. Rainbow trout brain androgen receptor was found to have a very strong affinity for AD and ADD, whereas goldfish testes androgen receptor has a medium affinity for AD (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000) and Atlantic croaker has a very low affinity at all for AD (Sperry and Thomas, 1999). Furthermore, goldfish testes has shown to have appreciable affinity for 17--estradiol (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000). The results from this study also suggest that mosquitofish androgen receptors have an affinity for the mammalian anti-androgen cyproterone acetate, while rainbow trout androgen receptor has shown to have no affinity for it (Wells and Van Der Kraak, 2000). Thus, inter-species variability is a factor when considering in vitro tools to detect androgenic compounds in effluents. The rainbow trout brain androgen receptor assay has shown to be very sensitive and specific for androgens and should therefore be considered as a tool for trying to isolate and identify xenobiotic androgens in effluents. This study could also be repeated using mosquitofish gonadal tissue for the in vitro tests. 4) The in vitro tests suggest an androgenic response potential for the Canadian PME and New Zealand STP, but the in vivo results for the New Zealand STP here do not, while the Canadian PME has also failed to show an in vivo androgenic response using mosquitofish in another study (Hardy, 2002). Higher concentrations of effluent and longer exposure durations for the study may

70

produce different results in vivo. Also, as already mentioned, using tissue from the same fish species (mosquitofish) for the in vitro assays may reduce inter-species variability and provide more consistent results. Nevertheless, caution must be taken in extrapolating in vitro responses to in vivo responses and effects. This study also shows that AD is not likely to be the sole compound responsible for inducing masculinizing effects in wild fish as reported (Jenkins et al., 2001). AD and ADD are needed to be at concentrations of about 100 µg/L to elicit gonopodium development in female mosquitofish. Given that average effluent sterol concentrations range between 100-200 µg/L, the majority of which is bound to suspended solid material in the effluent, and that microbial conversion occurs at 13% for AD and 30% for ADD under optimum conditions, it is unlikely that either of these compounds is responsible for eliciting the androgenic effects downstream from a PME discharge. Furthermore, the

reported AD concentration in the river was 40 ng/L (Jenkins et al., 2001), which is 2500 times lower than the minimum needed to elicit an effect in female mosquitofish.

71

5.0

REFERENCES

Andersen,H.R., A.M.Vinggaard, T.H.Rasmussen, I.M.Gjermandsen, and E.C.Bonefeld-Jorgensen. 2002. Effects of currently used pesticides in assays for estrogenicity, androgenicity, and aromatase activity in vitro. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 179:1-12. Angus,R.A., H.B.McNatt, M.W.Howell, and S.D.Peoples. 2001. Gonopodium development in normal male and 11-ketotestosterone-treated female mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis): a quantitative study using computer image analysis. General and Comparative Endocrinology 123:222-234. Angus,R.A., S.A.Weaver, J.M.Grizzle and R.D.Watson. 2002. Reproductive characteristics of male mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis) inhabiting a small southeastern U.S. river receiving treated domestic sewage effluent. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 21(7):1404-1409. Antonopolou,E., P.Swanson, I.Mayer, and B.Borg. 1999. Feedback control of gonadotropins in Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar, male parr. General and Comparative Endocrinology 114:142-150. Batty,J. and R.Lim. 1999. Morphological and reproductive characteristics of male mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis holbrooki) inhabiting sewage-contaminated waters in New South Wales, Australia. Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 36:301-307. Bortone,S.A. and W.P.Davis. 1994. Fish intersexuality as indicator of environmental stress. Bioscience 44(3):165-172. Bortone,S.A. and R.P.Cody. 1999. Morphological masculinization in poeciliid females from a paper mill effluent receiving tributary of the St. Johns river, Florida, USA. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 63:150-156. Brantley,R.K., J.C.Wingfield, and A.H.Bass. 1993. Sex steroid levels in Porichthys notatus, a fish with alternative reproductive tactics, and a review of the hormonal bases for male dimorphism among teleost fishes. Hormones and Behaviour 27:332347. Breton,B., and E.Samroni. 1996. Steroid activation of the brain-pituitary complex gonadotropic function in the triploid rainbow trout Oncorynchus mykiss. General and Comparative Endocrinology 101:151-164. 72

Bullion,K.A., Y.Osawa and D.G.Braun. 1990. Reversible inhibition of human placental microsomal aromatase by CGS 18320B and other non-steroidal compounds. Endocrinlogy Research 16:255-267. Carson, R. 1962. Silent Spring. Boston University Press, Boston, Massachusetts. Caruso,J.H., R.D.Suttkus, and G.E.Gunning. 1988. Abnormal expression of secondary sexual characteristics in a population of Anguilla rostrata (Pisce:Anguilliadae) from a dark colored Florida stream. Copeia 1077-1079. Cody,R.P. and S.A.Bortone. 1997. Masculinization of mosquitofish as an indicator of exposure to kraft mill effluent. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 58:429-436. Denton,T.E., M.W.Howell, J.J.Allison, J.McCollum, and B.Marks. 1985. Masculinization of female mosquitofish by exposure to plant sterols and Mycobacterium smegmatis. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology627632. Desbrow,C., E.J.Routledge, G.C.Brighty, J.P.Sumpter, and M.Waldock. 1998. Identification of estrogenic chemicals in STW effluent. 1. Chemical fractionation and in vitro biological screening. Environmental Science & Technology 32:1549-1558. Doyle,C.J. and R.P.Lim. 2002. The effect of 17-estradiol on the gonopodial development and sexual activity of Gambusia holbrooki. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 21(12):2719-2724. Drysdale,D.T. and S.A.Bortone. 1989. Laboratory induction of intersexuality in the mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis, using paper mill effluent. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 13:611-617. Durhan,E.J., C.S.Lambright, V.Wilson, B.C.Butterworth, D.W.Kuehl, E.F.Orlando, L.J.Guillette, L.E.Gray, and G.T.Ankley. 2002. Evaluation of androstenedione as an androgenic component of river water downstream of a pulp and paper mill effluent. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 21:1973-1976. Ellis,R.J., M.R.van den Heuvel, E.Bandelj, M.A.Smith, L.H.McCarthy, T.R.Stuthridge, and D.R.Dietrich. 2003. In vivo and in vitro assessment of the androgenic potential of a pulp and paper mill effluent. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 22(7):1448-1456.

73

Flammarion,P., F.Brion, M.Babut, J.Garrie, B.Migeon, P.Noury, E.Thybaud, C.R.Tyler and X.Palazzi. 2000. Induction of fish vitellogenin and alterations in testicular structure: preliminary results of estrogenic effects in chub (Leuciscus cephalus). Ecotoxicology 9:127-135. Folmar,L.C., N.D.Denslow, V.Rao, M.Chow, D.A.Crain, J.Enblom, J.Marcino and L.J.Guillette. 1996. Vitellogenin induction and reduced serum testosterone concentrations in feral male carp (Cyprinus carpio) captured near a major metropolitan sewage treatment plant. Environmental Health Perspectives 104:10961101. Gagnon,M.M., J.J.Dodson, and P.V.Hodson. 1994a. Ability of BKME (bleached kraft mill effluent) exposed white suckers (Catostomus commersoni) to synthesize steroid hormones. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 107:265-273. Gerstenberger,S.L., I.Heimler, R.J.Hutz, A.K.Dasmahapatra, V.Tripoli, and J.A.Dellinger. 2000. Minimal endocrine alterations in rodents after consumption of lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush). Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 38:371-376. Gray,L.E. 1998. Xenoendocrine disrupters: laboratory studies on male reproductive effects. Toxicology Letters 102-103:331-335. Harada,N., S.I.Honda, and O.Hatano. 1999. Aromatase inhibitors and enzyme stability. Endocrine-Related Cancer 6:211-218. Hardy, K. 2002. Pulp and paper mill effluents: characterization and effects on mosquitofish using a continuous flow bioassay system. M.A.Sc. Thesis, Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto. Harries,J.E., D.A.Sheahan, S.Jobling, P.Matthiessen, P.Neall, E.Routeledge, R.Rycroft, J.P.Sumpter and T.Tylor. 1996. A survey of estrogenic activity in United Kingdom inland waters. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 15:19932002. Harries,J.E., D.A.Sheahan, S.Jobling, P.Matthiessen, P.Neall, J.P.Sumpter, T.Tylor and N.Zaman. 1997. Estrogenic activity in five United Kingdom rivers detected by measurement of vitellogenesis in caged male trout. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 16:534-542.

74

Hewitt,M.L., J.L.Parrot, K.Wells, K.M.Calp, S.Biddiscombe, M.E.McMaster, K.R.Munkittrick, and G.Van Der Kraak. 2000. Characteristics of ligands for the Ah receptor and sex steroid receptors in hepatic tissues of fish exposed to bleached kraft mill effluent. Environmental Science & Technology 34:4327-4334. Hewitt,M.L., S.A.M.Smyth, M.G.Dube, C.I.Gilman, and D.L.MacLatchy. 2002. Isolation of compounds from bleached kraft mill recovery condensates associated with reduced levels of testosterone in mummichog (fundulus heteroclitus). Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 21:1359-1367. Howell,M.W., D.A.Black, and S.A.Bortone. 1980. Abnormal expression of secondary sex characters in a population of mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis holbrooki: evidence for environmentally-induced masculinization. Copeia 4:676-681. Howell,M.W. and T.E.Denton. 1989. Gonopodial morphogenesis in female mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis affinis, masculinized by exposure to degradation products from plant sterols. Environmental Biology of Fishes 24:43-51. Huang,C.H. and D.L.Sedlak. 2001. Analysis of estrogenic hormones in municipal wastewater effluent and surface water using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and gas chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 20(1):133-139. Husinger,R.N. and M.W.Howell. 1991. Treatment of fish with hormones: solubilization and direct administerization of steroids into aquaria water using acetone as a carrier solvent. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 47:272-277. International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS). 2002. Global assessment of the state-of-the-science of endocrine disruptors. Edited by T.Damstra, S.Barlow, A.Bergman, R.Kavlock and G.Van Der Kraak. World Health Organization, pp 11-49. Jenkins,R., R.A.Angus, H.McNatt, M.W.Howell, J.A.Kemppainen, M.Kirk, and E.M.Wilson. 2001. Identification of androstenedione in a river containing paper mill effluent. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 20:1325-1331. Jobling,S., M.Nolan, C.R.Tyler, G.C.Brighty, and J.P.Sumpter. 1998. Widespread sexual disruption in wild fish. Environmental Science & Technology 32:2498-2506.

75

Katsiadaki,I., A.P.Scott, M.R.Hurst, P.Matthiessen, and I.Mayer. 2002. Detection of environmental androgens: a novel method based on enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay of spiggin, the stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) glue protein. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 21(9):1946-1954. Kelce,W.R., E.Monosson, M.P.Gamcsik, S.Laws, and L.E.Gray Jr. 1994. Environmental hormone disruptors: evidence that vinclozolin developmental toxicity is mediated by antiandrogenic metabolites. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 126-275-285. Kloepper-Sams,P.J., S.M.Swanson, T.Marchant, R.Schryer, and J.W.Owens. 1994a. Exposure of fish to biologically treated bleached-kraft effluent: 1. Biochemical, physiological and pathological assessment of rocky-mountain whitefish (Prosopium williamsoni) and longnose sucker (Catostomus catostomus). Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 13:1469-1482. Kloepper-Sams,P.J. and E.Benton. 1994b. Exposure of fish to biologically treated bleached-kraft effluent: 2. Induction of hepatic cytochrome P4501A in mountain whitefish (Prosopium williamsoni) and other species. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 13:1483-1496. Kovacs,T.G., R.H.Voss, S.R.Megraw, and P.H.Martel. 1997. Perspectives on Canadian field studies examining the potential of pulp and paper mill effluent to affect fish reproduction. Journal of Toxicological and Environmental Health 51:305-352. Krumholz,L.A. 1946. Reproduction in the western mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis affinis (Baird & Girard), and its use in mosquito control. Ecological Monographs 18(1):1-43. Kuntz,A. 1913. Notes on the habits, morphology of the reproductive organs, and embryology of the viviparous fish Gambusia affinis. Bulletin of the Bureau of Fisheries 37:181-194. Lamb,D.C., D.E.Kelly, N.J.Manning, and S.L.Kelly. 1998. A sterol biosynthetic pathway in Mycobacterium. FEBS Letters 437:142-144. Larsson,J.D.G., H.Hallman, and L.Forlin. 2000. More male fish embryos near a pulp mill. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 19:2911-2917. Lehninger,A.L., D.L.Nelson, and M.M.Cox. 1993. Principles of biochemistry. Worth Publishers Inc., U.S.A. pp 746-753. 76

Lephart,E.D. and E.R.Simpson. 1991. Assay of aromatase activity. In Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press, Inc., 477-83. Lephart,E.D., T.D.Lund, and T.L.Horvath. 2001. Brain androgen and progesterone metabolizing enzymes: biosynthesis, distribution and function. Brain Research Reviews 37:25-37. Lodish,H., D.Baltimore, A.Berk, S.L.Zipursky, P.Matsudaira, and J.Darnell. 1995. Molecular Cell Biology. Scientific American Books Inc., New York, pp 853-866. MacLatchy,D., L.Peters, J.Nickle, and G.J.Van Der Kraak. 1997. Exposure to sitosterol alters the endocrine status of goldfish differently than 17-estradiol. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 16:1895-1904. Mahato,S.B. and S.Garai. 1997. Advances in microbial steroid biotransformation. Steroids 62:332-345. Malcom,R.L. and P.MacCarthy. 1992. Quantitative evaluation of XAD-8 and XAD-4 resins used in tandem for removing organic solutes from water. Environment International 18:597-607. McCarthy,L.H., K.R.Munkittrick, B.R.Blunt, G.J.Van Der Kraak, C.S.Wood, and J.Parrott. 1997. Steroid levels in goldfish exposed to pulp mill effluent. In: Proceedings 3rd International Conference on Environmental Fate and Effects of Pulp and Paper Mill Effluents. Rotorua, New Zealand, p211. McMaster,M.E., K.R.Munkittrick and G.Van Der Kraak. 1992. Protocol for measuring circulating levels of gonadal sex steroids in fish. Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences ­ 1836. McMaster,M.E., K.R.Munkittrick, J.J.Jardine, R.D.Robinson and G.J. Van Der Kraak. 1995. Protocol for measuring in vitro steroid production by fish gonadal tissue. Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences ­ 1961. McMaster,M.E., G.Van Der Kraak, and K.R.Munkittrick. 1996. An epidemiological evaluation of the biochemical basis for steroid hormonal depressions in fish exposed to industrial wastes. Journal of Great Lakes Research 22:153-171.

77

McMaster,M.E., J.Jardine, G.T.Ankley, W.H.Benson, Jr.M.S.Greeley, T.S.Gross, L.J.Guillette, D.L.MacLatchy, E.F.Orlando, G.Van Der Kraak, and K.R.Munkittrick. 2001. An interlaboratory study on the use of steroid hormones in examining endocrine disruption. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 20:20812087. Mellanen,P., T.Petanen, J.Lehtimaki, S.Makela, G.Bylund, B.Holmbom, E.Mannila, A.Oikari, and R.Santti. 1996. Wood-derived estrogens: studies in vitro with breast cancer cell lines and in vivo in trout. Toxicological and Applied Pharmacology 136:381-388. Mellanen,P., M.Soimasuo, B.Holmbom, A.Oikari, and R.Santti. 1999. Expression of the vitellogenin gene in liver of juvenile whitefish (Coregonus lavaretus L. s.l.) exposed to effluents from pulp and paper mills. Ecotoxicological and Environmental Safety 43:133-137. Mulder,E. and A.O.Brinkmann. 1985. Characterization of different forms of the androgen receptor and their interaction with constituents of cell nuclei. In Molecular mechanism of steroid hormone action: recent advances. Edited by V.K.Moudgil. Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin, Germany. Munkittrick,K.R., M.E.McMaster, C.B.Portt, G.J.Van Der Kraak, I.R.Smith, and D.G.Dixon. 1992a. Changes in maturity, plasma sex steroid levels, hepatic mixed function oxygenase activity, and the presence of external lesions in lake whitefish (Coregonus clupaformis) exposed to bleached kraft mill effluent. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 49:1560-1569. Munkittrick,K.R., G.J.Van Der Kraak, M.E.McMaster, and C.B.Portt. 1992b. Reproductive dysfunction and MFO activity in three species of fish exposed to bleached kraft mill effluent at Jackfish Bay, Lake Superior. Journal of Canadian Water Pollution Research 27:439-446. Munkittrick,K.R., M.R.Servos, J.H.Carey, and G.J.Van Der Kraak. 1997. Environmental impacts of pulp and paper wastewater: evidence for reduction in environmental effects at North American pulp mills since 1992. Water Science and Technology 35:329-338. Munkittrick,K.R., G.Van Der Kraak, M.E.McMaster, C.B.Portt, M.R.van den Heuvel, and M.R.Servos. 1994. Study of receiving-water environmental impacts associated with discharges from pulp mills. 2. Gonad size, liver size, hepatic EROD activity and plasma sex steroid levels in white sucker. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 13:1089-1101. 78

Munkittrick,K.R., S.A.McGeachy, M.E.McMaster, and S.C.Courtenay. 2002. Overview of freshwater fish studies from the Pulp and Paper Environmental Effects Monitoring program. Water Quality Research Journal of Canada 37:49-77. Ohno,T. 2002. Fluorescence inner-filtering correction for determining the humification index of dissolved organic matter. Environmental Science & Technology 36:742-746. Orlando,E.F., W.P.Davis, and L.J.Guillette. 2002. Aromatase activity in the ovary and brain of the eastern mosquitofish (Gambusia holbrooki) exposed to paper mill effluent. Environmental Health Perspectives 110:429-433. Pasmanik,M., and G.V.Callard. 1988. High abundance androgen receptor in goldfish brain: characteristics and seasonal changes. Endocrinology 123:1162-1171. Parrot,J.L., M.R.van den Heuvel, M.L.Hewitt, M.A.Baker, and K.R.Munkittrick. 2000. Isolation of MFO inducers from tissues of white suckers caged in bleached kraft mill effluent. Chemosphere 41:1083-1089. Piferrer,F., I.J.Baker, and E.M.Donaldson. 1993. Effects of natural, synthetic, aromatizable, and nonaromatizable androgens in inducing male sex differentiation in genotypic female Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha). General and Comparative Endocrinology 91:59-65. Piferrer,F., S.Zanuy, M.Carrillo, I.I.Solar, R.H.Devlin and E.M.Donaldson. 1994. Brief treatment with an aromatase inhibitor during sex differentiation causes chromosomally female salmon to develop as normal, functional males. Journal of Experimental Zoology 270:255-262. Pottinger,T.G. 1987. Androgen binding in the skin of mature male brown trout, Salmo trutta L. General and Comparative Endocrinology 66:224-232. Purdom, C.E., P.A.Hardiman, V.J.Bye, N.C.Eno, C.R.Tyler and J.P.Sumpter. 1994. Estrogenic effects of effluents from sewage treatment works. Chemistry and Ecology 8:275-285. Rosen, D.E., A.Tucker. 1961. Evolution of secondary sexual characters and sexual behaviour patterns in a family of viviparous fishes (Cyprinodontiformes: Poeciliidae). Copeia 1961:201-212.

79

Santos,E.B.H., O.M.S.Filipe, R.M.B.O.Duarte, H.Pinto, and A.C.Duarte. 2000. Fluorescence as a tool for tracing the organic contamination from pulp mill effluents in surface waters. Acta hydrochimia et hydrobiologica 28:364-371. Séralini,G.E. and S.Moslemi. 2001. Aromatase inhibitors: past, present and future. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 178:117-131. Sheahan,D.A., G.C.Brighty, M.Daniel, S.J.Kirby, M.Hurst, J.Kennedy, S.Morris, E.J.Routledge, J.P.Sumpter, and M.J.Waldock. 2002. Estrogenic activity measured in a sewage treatment works treating industrial inputs containing high concentrations of alkylphenolic compounds ­ a case study. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 21(3):507-514. Shilling,A.D., D.B.Carlson and D.E.Williams. 1999. Rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss, as a model for aromatase inhibition. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 70:89-95. Skoog,D.A. and J.J.Leary. 1992. Principles of instrumental analysis. Saunders College Publishers, U.S.A., pp 579-598. Slater,C.H., M.S.Fitzpatrick, and C.B.Schreck. 1995. Characterization of an androgen receptor in salmonid lymphocytes: possible link to androgen-induced immunosuppression. General and Comparative Endocrinology 100:218-225. Sperry,T.S. and P.Thomas. 1999. Characterization of two nuclear androgen receptors in atlantic croaker: comparison of their biochemical properties and binding specifities. Endocrinology 140:1602-1611. Sperry,T.S. and P.Thomas. 2000. Androgen binding profiles of two distinct nuclear androgen receptors in atlantic croaker (Micropogonias undulatus). Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 73:93-103. Sreekrishnan,M.A.T.R. 2001. Aquatic toxicity from pulp and paper mill effluents: a review. Advances in Environmental Research 5:175-196. Starr,C. and R.Taggart. 1995. Biology: The unity and diversity of life. Wadsworth Publishing Company, U.S.A., pp 614-628. Sumpter, J.P. 1995. Feminized responses in fish to environmental estrogens. Toxicology Letters 82/83:737-742. 80

Sumpter, J.P. and S.Jobling. 1995. Vitellogenesis as a biomarker for estrogenic contamination of the aquatic environment. Environmental Health Perspectives 103(Suppl. 7):173-178. Swanson,S.M., R.Schryer, R.Shelast, P.J.Kloepper-Sams, and J.W.Owens. 1994. Exposure of fish to biologically treated bleached-kraft mill effluent 3. Fish habitat and population assessment. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 13:1497-1507. Takeo,J. and S.Yamashita. 2000. Rainbow trout androgen receptor-alpha fails to distinguish between any of the natural androgens tested in transactivation asay, not just 11-ketotestosterone and testosterone. General and Comparative Endocrinology 117:200-206. Thomas,P. and J.Smith. 1993. Binding of xenobiotics to the estrogen receptor of spotted seatrout: a screening assay for potential estrogenic effects. Marine Environmental Research 35:147-151. Tremblay,L. and G.J.Van Der Kraak. 1998. Use of a series of homologous in vitro and in vivo assays to evaluate the endocrine modulating actions of -sitosterol in rainbow trout. Aquatic Toxicology 43:149-162. Tremblay,L. and G.Van Der Kraak. 1999. Comparison between the effects of the phytosterol B-sitosterol and pulp and paper mill effluents on sexually immature rainbow trout. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 18:329-336. Turner, C.L. 1941a. Regeneration of the gonopodium in Gambusia during morphogenesis. Journal of Experimental Zoology 87:181-209. Turner, C.L. 1941b. Morphogenesis of the gonopodium in Gambusia affinis affinis. Journal of Morphology 69:161-185. Turner, C.L. 1941c. Gonopodial characteristics produced in the anal fins of females of Gambusia affinis affinis by treatment with ethinyl testosterone. Biological Bulletin 1941:371-383. Turner,K.J., M.Morley, N.Atanassova, I.D.Swanston, and R.M.Sharpe. 2000. Effect of chronic administration of an aromatase inhibitor to adult male rats on pituitary and testicular function and fertility. Journal of Endocrinology 164:225-238.

81

Tyler, C.R. and E.J.Routledge. 1998. Estrogenic effects in fish in English rivers with evidence of their causation. Pure and Applied Chemistry 70:1795-1804. van den Heuvel,M.R., R.J.Ellis, L.A.Tremblay, and T.R.Stuthridge. 2002. Exposure of reproductively maturing rainbow trout to a New Zealand pulp and paper mill effluent. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 51:65-75. van den Heuvel,M.R., E.Bandelj, R.Donald, R.J.Ellis, M.A.Smith, M.Finley, L.H.McCarthy, and T.R.Stuthridge. 2003. Review of reproductive-endocrine effects of a New Zealand pulp and paper mill effluent. In: Proceedings of The 5th International Conference on Fate and Effects of Pulp and Paper Mill Effluent. Seattle, WA, CRC Press. Submitted. Van Der Kraak,G.J., K.R.Munkittrick, M.E.McMaster, C.B.Portt, and J.P.Chang. 1992. Exposure to bleached kraft pulp mill effluent disrupts the pituitary-gonadal axis of white sucker at multiple sites. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 115:224233. Van Der Kraak,G.J., T.Zacharewski, and D.Janz. 1998b. Comparative endocrinology and mechanisms of endocrine modulation in fish and wildlife. In: Principles and processes for evaluating endocrine disruption in wildfish, R.Kendall, R.Dickerson, J.Giesy, and W.Suk Editors; SETAC Press: Pensacola FL, p97-119. Wells,K. and G.Van Der Kraak. 2000. Differential binding of endogenous steroids and chemicals to androgen receptors in rainbow trout and goldfish. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 19:2059-2065. Zacharewski, T.R., K.Berhane, and B.E.Gillesby. 1995. Detection of estrogenand dioxin-like activity in pulp and paper mill black liquor and effluent using in vitro recombinant receptor/reporter gene assays. Environmental Science and Technology 29:2140-2146.

82

Appendix A: Androgen receptor binding data sample Testosterone 0 nM 0.01 nM 0.1 nM 1 nM 10 nM 100 nM 1000 nM AD 0 nM 0.01 nM 0.1 nM 1 nM 10 nM 100 nM 1000 nM 0 nM 0.01 nM 0.1 nM 1 nM 10 nM 100 nM 1000 nM 0 nM 0.01 nM 0.1 nM 1 nM 10 nM 100 nM 1000 nM counts per minute 7898 8933.5 8125.5 7526 4308 1794 1333.1 7898 8254.1 8214 6821 3004 1514.5 1294 7898 8514 8513.7 7678.6 3613.5 1689.5 1181 8041.2 8207.1 7999.5 8136.5 7930.3 8225.8 8028.5 7898 8329.5 8561 7723.5 4553 1788 1298.5 7962.5 8061 8330.5 7621.1 4457.1 1829.5 1238 7962.5 8017.1 8317.1 6656.6 2977 1481.1 1275 7962.5 8273.6 8524.5 6644.5 3738.6 1549.5 1138.5 8447.4 8263.6 8054.5 8698.1 8357.4 8139.5 8265.2 7962.5 8563.5 8279.6 7472.5 4207 2006.5 1189.5 8095 8328 8131 7660.6 4608.6 1769 1365 8095 8273.5 8404.1 7102.5 2754.5 1569.5 1200.5 8095 8702 7873.5 7442.6 3481.5 1372.5 1189.5 7563.5 7868.7 8248.7 8151.4 8348.4 8059.0 8086.7 8095 8627.6 8413 7652.2 4696 1824.5 1257

ADD

estradiol

T in 2% EtOH 0 nM 0.01 nM 0.1 nM 1 nM 10 nM 100 nM 1000 nM

83

sample

counts per minute 5245.6 5613 5479 5563.5 4750.5 5246.5 5387 5237.7 5368.5 5513.5 4808.6 3474 5210 5405 5294 5366 5215.6 3845.7 5450.5 5387 5710.5 5032.5 4665.1 3171.5 5275.5 5454.5 5332.1 5226.5 5582 5187.6 4265.6 3539.7 3319.834 3398.37 2902.2 904.8

New Zealand PME Dilution factor: 0.00001 5554.5 0.0001 5416.7 0.001 5611 0.01 5502.5 0.1 5733.6 1 3977.5

New Zealand upstream reference Dilution factor: 0.00001 5434.5 6268 0.0001 5399 5169.6 0.001 5650.5 5872.5 0.01 5779.5 5774.6 0.1 5381 5521.6 1 4991 3741.1 Canadian PME Dilution factor: 0.00001 5237 0.0001 5554.5 0.001 5240.6 0.01 5852.6 0.1 4593 1 3166.6 Canadian upstream reference Dilution factor: 0.00001 5044.1 0.0001 5776.1 0.001 5265 0.01 6014 0.1 5363.7 1 5589.5 New Zealand STP Dilution factor: 0.00001 4512.1 0.0001 5257 0.001 4590 0.01 5128 0.1 5046.5 1 1231.5 4751 5482.5 5736 5468.1 5340.1 3099.5 4928 5330.5 5782 4765.2 5928.5 5124 4381.6 5362.1 5369.5 5067.1 3660.1 1482

84

sample Blank dilution factor: 0.00001 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1

counts per minute 5508 5222 5496.1 5467 5582.5 5466.5 6232.5 5596.3 5736.6 5916 5222.6 5060 5379.6 5316.5 5440.5 5472.5 5168.5 4954.6

85

Appendix B: Aromatase inhibition activity data sample HAD 0 ug/mL 0.0001 ug/mL 0.001 ug/mL 0.01 ug/mL 0.1 ug/mL 1 ug/mL 10 ug/mL New Zealand PME dilution factor: 0.00001 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 counts per minute 2741.5 2238 2100.6 817 334.6 193.1 379.1 875.6 852 963.1 927.1 888.5 633 2821.6 2633.7 2103 801 365.1 225.6 219.1 923 890.1 886.5 906.7 928.5 844.1 1225.6 1324.5 1379 1333 1266.5 1421.5 1157.5 1105.6 1126.5 1125.6 1063.5 958.1 1243 1285.5 1197.5 1332 1372.1 1228.1 2840 2865.1 2130 870.5 325.5 238.5 191.1 844.1 833 884.1 951.1 935.5 663 1269 1375.1 1352 1138.5 1389.5 1304.5 1164 1123.5 1091 1157.6 1033.5 628.7 1219.6 1293 1285.5 1355 1232.2 1295.2

New Zealand upstream reference dilution factor: 0.00001 1270.1 0.0001 1228.6 0.001 1318.6 0.01 1341.5 0.1 1170 1 1312.1 Canadian PME dilution factor: 0.00001 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 1127.5 1173 1083.1 1162.6 1061.5 619

Canadian upstream reference dilution factor: 0.00001 1226.1 0.0001 1298.5 0.001 1261.7 0.01 1319.1 0.1 1310 1 1329.5

86

sample New Zealand STP dilution factor: 0.00001 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1 Blank dilution factor: 0.00001 0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 1

counts per minute 1173.5 1151 1170.6 1279.1 1136 586 1940 1930 1956 1920 1890 1855.1 1165.6 1151.5 1247.6 1206.5 1062.7 548.7 2000 2010 1980 2040 1992 1970.2 1201.5 1172.5 1231.1 1282.5 1058.7 573.5 1920 1963 1941 1952 1922 2021.5

87

Appendix C: Mosquitofish anal fin ray data Methyltestosterone (500ng/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 ray 4 ray 6 2291.26 1806.29 2311.27 1490.54 2109.07 1648.80 2121.18 1472.50 1940.46 1562.19 2151.60 1542.19 2021.88 1588.05 ratio 4:6 1.2685 1.5506 1.2792 1.4405 1.2421 1.3952 1.2732

fish 8 dead fish 9 dead fish 10 dead avg. ratio 4:6 Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 1849.44 1080.22 1867.60 1368.72 1858.22 1123.53 1941.19 1524.90 1854.57 1439.78

1.3499 ratio 4:6 1.7121 1.3645 1.6539 1.2730 1.2881

dead dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.4583

88

Ethanol (negative control) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ratio 4:6 ray 4 1402.16 0.9735 ray 6 1440.34 1391.01 0.9372 1484.27 1785.33 1.0839 1647.10 1873.68 1.0930 1714.31 1633.07 1.1700 1395.78 1839.35 1.1499 1599.60 1789.42 1.1166 1602.56 1678.85 1.0515 1596.55 1823.95 1.0658 1711.36 dead avg. ratio 4:6 1.0713 ratio 4:6 ray 4 1676.29 1.0756 ray 6 1558.44 1714.65 1.0855 1579.63 1739.05 1.0888 1597.23 1867.32 1.0765 1734.64 dead dead dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6 1.0816

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10

89

AD (100 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 dead avg. ratio 4:6 ray 4 ray 6 1422.20 1163.09 1358.70 1136.07 1321.73 1184.21 1409.71 1274.79 1649.88 1567.37 1717.85 1394.21 1735.87 1482.09 1849.57 1464.42 1776.23 1504.21 1.1712 ratio 4:6 1719.51 1.0855 1584.10 1696.52 1.1377 1491.17 1749.19 1.0782 1622.28 1769.50 1.1257 1571.91 1792.77 1.2054 1487.31 1777.43 1.1424 1555.91 1648.68 1.1604 1420.74 ratio 4:6 1.2228 1.1960 1.1161 1.1058 1.0526 1.2321 1.1712 1.2630 1.1808

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6 ray 4 ray 6

1.1336

90

ADD (100 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 dead fish 9 dead fish 10 dead avg. ratio 4:6 Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1842.93 1.1674 1578.63 1512.27 1.1184 1352.12 1850.46 1.1849 1561.68 1697.03 1.2038 1409.73 1824.22 1.1871 1536.76 1822.58 1.1105 1641.18 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1785.31 1.2863 1387.93 1726.65 1.3809 1250.38 1873.04 1.2487 1499.97 1934.13 1.3008 1486.87 1834.21 1.3814 1327.81 1778.05 1.2327 1442.43 1885.52 1.3222 1426.01

1.3076

1.1620

91

ADD (10 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1390.45 1.1106 1251.99 1875.89 1.1505 1630.53 1790.51 1.1140 1607.33

dead dead dead dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.1250

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1393.32 0.9706 1435.57 1339.69 1.0012 1338.11 1759.17 1.1542 1524.16 1740.71 1.0713 1624.81 1918.69 1.1375 1686.74 1583.62 1.0594 1494.89

dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.0657

92

ADD (1 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 dead fish 10 dead avg. ratio 4:6 Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 dead fish 9 dead fish 10 dead avg. ratio 4:6 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1663.87 1.1251 1478.84 N/A 1426.38 1211.39 1579.25 1510.20 1790.18 1474.46 1778.40 1626.09 1804.24 1612.95 1.1775 1.0457 1.2141 1.0937 1.1186 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1195.84 0.9973 1199.08 1458.46 1.1109 1312.90 1256.97 0.9999 1257.05 1449.97 1.0897 1330.64 1708.42 1.2093 1412.75 N/A 1833.77 1.1460 1600.20 N/A

1.0922

1.1291 93

CA (250 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1833.02 1.3351 1372.90 1973.88 1.3972 1412.71 1901.39 1.2469 1524.85 1981.13 1.3981 1417.00 1844.66 1.1117 1659.34 2086.99 1.1743 1777.26

dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.2772 ratio 4:6 1.3756 1.2879 1.2172 1.4098 1.3604 1.2987 1.2589

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 1997.70 1452.29 1930.30 1498.84 1879.58 1544.15 1870.37 1326.70 1949.18 1432.75 2012.09 1549.29 1802.45 1431.76

dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.3155

94

CA (25 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 avg. ratio 4:6 Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6 95 ray 4 ray 6 1859.76 1328.12 1990.75 1014.21 1959.87 1316.82 1944.02 1456.83 1876.93 1343.06 1926.94 1316.23 1916.08 1396.18 ratio 4:6 1.4003 N/A 1.4883 1.3344 1.3975 1.4640 1.3724 ratio 4:6 1.3635 1.4570 1.5029 1.3162 1.2966 1.3913 1.4344 1.4129 1.2377 1.1933

ray 4 ray 6

1914.72 1404.25 1837.30 1260.98 1935.12 1287.61 1884.06 1431.40 1892.21 1459.34 1934.89 1390.66 1966.75 1371.10 1954.99 1383.72 1777.32 1436.00 1785.07 1495.88 1.3606

1.4095

CA (2.5 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 dead avg. ratio 4:6 Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6 ray 4 ray 6 1901.96 1328.69 2023.16 1423.03 2106.92 1430.64 1913.85 1457.08 1905.68 1369.50 1851.04 1368.84 ratio 4:6 1.4315 1.4217 1.4727 1.3135 1.3915 1.3523 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1841.14 1.3657 1348.14 1976.68 1.4104 1401.54 1984.98 1.2079 1643.28 1948.46 1.4691 1326.25 1927.26 1.4269 1350.67 1951.45 1.3549 1440.30 2033.51 1.4402 1412.01 2014.42 1.2227 1647.47 1858.36 1.4911 1246.29 1.3765

1.3972

96

HAD (100 ug/L) Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1739.17 1.1316 1536.96 1727.40 1.1623 1486.16 1584.11 1.1054 1433.09 1774.82 1.1282 1573.08 1625.21 1.1003 1477.01 1763.63 1.1889 1483.41

dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.1361 ratio 4:6 1.0660 1.0907 1.1140 1.0692 1.1146 1.1240

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 1688.36 1583.76 1812.08 1661.39 1777.41 1595.50 1742.78 1630.03 1748.27 1568.57 1728.42 1537.78

dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.0964

97

PME Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1849.37 1.1141 1659.96 1818.20 1.1472 1584.90 1889.88 1.1576 1632.52 1656.93 1.0975 1509.77 1776.90 1.1069 1605.30 1757.42 1.1040 1591.87

dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.1212 ratio 4:6 1.0968 1.0198 1.0984 1.1313 1.0014 1.1447 1.0983

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 1788.16 1630.39 1314.89 1289.33 1835.44 1671.03 1756.52 1552.65 1653.30 1651.03 1888.36 1649.62 1830.37 1666.58

dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.0844

98

STP Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1774.06 1.0910 1626.12 1593.73 1.0529 1513.68 1660.50 1.1367 1460.79 1695.01 1.0779 1572.46 1572.18 1.1429 1375.58 1666.40 1.0942 1522.90

dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.0993 ratio 4:6 1.1637 1.0307 1.0802 1.1275 1.1262 1.1416 1.1289

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 1780.28 1529.88 1549.37 1503.28 1785.83 1653.27 1684.54 1494.06 1695.60 1505.63 1684.54 1475.56 1752.15 1552.10

dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.1141

99

Upstream ref. Tank A fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1637.05 1.0368 1579.02 1747.22 1.1011 1586.76 1500.80 1.0589 1417.32 1777.25 1.0686 1663.08 1660.19 1.0557 1572.58 1805.35 1.1135 1621.35 1751.85 1.0787 1624.10

dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.0733

Tank B fish 1 fish 2 fish 3 fish 4 fish 5 fish 6 fish 7 fish 8 fish 9 fish 10 ray 4 ray 6 ratio 4:6 1634.39 1.0794 1514.17 1805.32 1.1150 1619.16 1721.08 1.1027 1560.81 1778.44 1.1001 1616.68 1767.41 1.1193 1579.03

dead dead dead dead dead avg. ratio 4:6

1.1033

100

Appendix D: In vitro testosterone levels RIA data Testosterone RIA standard curve data: conc. (pg/tube) 0 1.56 3.125 6.25 12.5 25 50 100 200 400 800 80000 counts per minute 1319.1 1321.5 1105.5 1056.2 1001.6 1038.0 1129.6 1053.1 838.5 934.0 856.0 565.5 398.5 411.1 243.0 264.0 184.5 181.5 151.1 139.2 129.5 133.5 78.6 64.1

1383.0 1102.5 1006.5 934.0 767.0 624.5 430.0 290.5 191.5 143.5 121.5 94.5 total weight of fish (mg) 348 532 636 589 731 990 348 603 660 731 600 434 243 548 679 829 899 523 696 551 1181

sample HAD1A HAD2A HAD3A HAD4A HAD5A HAD1B HAD2B HAD3B HAD4B HAD5B HAD6B upstream1A upstream2A upstream3A upstream4A upstream5A upstream6A upstream1B upstream2B upstream3B upstream4B

counts per minute 301.0 295.5 312.6 332.5 492.5 540.5 343.5 336.0 656.6 579.6 325.5 291.5 190.5 185.0 256.7 261.6 272.0 261.0 759.0 509.1 546.1 476.1 615.5 596.1 331.0 352.5 338.1 292.1 602.7 625.0 638.1 594.5 862.5 830.0 359.5 394.5 878.0 921.6 368.1 354.0 1194.5 1164.5

101

sample ETOH1 ETOH2 ETOH3 ETOH4 PME1A PME2A PME3A PME4A PME5A PME6A PME1B PME2B PME3B PME4B PME5B PME6B PME7B STP1A STP2A STP3A STP4A STP5A STP6A STP1B STP2B STP3B STP4B STP5B STP6B STP7B

counts per minute 284.1 303.0 371.5 358.5 875.5 786.6 1357.2 1294.0 864.5 863.6 790.0 776.0 566.0 551.0 1516.5 1535.0 579.0 608.1 1509.6 1547.5 1552.6 1455.0 665.0 702.5 967.0 923.7 1265.1 1304.5 598.0 577.6 1218.2 1297.6 918.5 892.5 1335.5 1306.6 1184.0 1173.5 1112.1 1113.5 1452.0 1166.0 1328.5 1362.5 1337.5 1384.0 1131.0 1056.7 1226.1 1142.5 826.1 913.6 1438.0 1425.0 1502.0 1396.5 1280.1 1320.0 1280.1 1320.0

total weight of fish (mg) 186 419 851 1263 1060 530 554 421 530 1075 383 376 440 542 670 822 1008 459 562 593 762 921 1153 450 462 606 608 702 815 1158

sample code: treatment/fish number/tank A or B

102

Appendix E: In vitro 17--estradiol levels RIA data Estradiol RIA standard curve data: Conc. (pg/tube) 0 1.56 3.125 6.25 12.5 25 50 100 200 400 800 80000 counts per minute 1653.0 1597.5 1709.0 1424.6 1541.5 1568.1 1424.0 1453.5 1494.0 1420.0 1444.6 1378.6 1157.6 1174.5 1064.1 664.5 810.5 857.0 611.6 597.5 470.5 425.5 405.0 419.7 290.5 305.6 306.0 242.5 234.0 231.1 223.1 243.5 215.6 223.5 248.0 224.0 total weight of fish (mg) 348 532 636 589 731 990 348 603 660 731 600 434 243 548 679 829 899 523 696 551 1181

sample HAD1A HAD2A HAD3A HAD4A HAD5A HAD1B HAD2B HAD3B HAD4B HAD5B HAD6B upstream1A upstream2A upstream3A upstream4A upstream5A upstream6A upstream1B upstream2B upstream3B upstream4B

counts per minute 643.5 665.6 708.6 742.0 1075.5 1147.0 1094.1 1004.5 1247.0 1162.6 808.1 823.6 558.0 588.0 598.1 602.0 711.0 720.1 1384.0 1408.1 1234.5 1230.1 1021.1 1356.0 497.0 476.5 686.5 661.0 1218.6 1422.6 1188.0 1283.6 1503.5 1266.7 1003.1 912.1 1417.6 1413.0 752.0 677.7 1663.0 1639.5

103

sample ETOH1 ETOH2 ETOH3 ETOH4 PME1A PME2A PME3A PME4A PME5A PME6A PME1B PME2B PME3B PME4B PME5B PME6B PME7B STP1A STP2A STP3A STP4A STP5A STP6A STP1B STP2B STP3B STP4B STP5B STP6B STP7B

counts per minute 465.5 470.5 611.0 551.0 1240.5 1385.1 1853.0 1871.6 1037.5 1004.0 611.5 596.5 701.0 674.5 1862.0 1757.0 705.0 705.5 1881.0 1849.6 1863.5 1847.0 662.0 770.6 768.0 806.0 1754.2 1685.5 753.5 749.7 1263.7 1314.5 1038.5 1054.0 1702.1 1672.0 1378.0 1283.5 768.2 747.6 1148.0 1214.5 1494.0 1472.5 1367.5 1294.6 904.8 903.5 652.1 713.5 825.6 846.5 1183.5 1122.0 1144.0 1138.5 1525.1 1516.0 1488.1 1581.0

total weight of fish (mg) 186 419 851 1263 1060 530 554 421 530 1075 383 376 440 542 670 822 1008 459 562 593 762 921 1153 450 462 606 608 702 815 1158

sample code: treatment/fish number/tank A or B

104

Appendix F: List of abbreviations AD ADD AR CA FSH GnRH GTH HAD HPG HRE IPCS LH MT PME RBA STP VTG androstenedione 1,4-androsta-diene-3,17-dione androgen receptor cyproterone acetate follicle-stimulating hormone gonadotropin-releasing hormone gonadotropin hormone 4-hydroxyandrostenedione hypothalamus-pituitary-gonads hormone response element International Programme on Chemical Safety luteinizing hormone methyl-testosterone pulp and paper mill effluent relative binding affinity sewage treatment-plant effluent vitellogenin

105


