aerospace
Article

Effect of the Backward-Facing Step Location on the Aerodynamics of a Morphing Wing
Fadi Mishriky *, and Paul Walsh 
Department of Aerospace Engineering, Ryerson University, Toronto, ON M5B 2K3, Canada; paul.walsh@ryerson.ca * Correspondence: fadi.mishriky@ryerson.ca; Tel.: +1-647-303-5854  These authors contributed equally to this work. Academic Editor: Rafic Ajaj Received: 13 June 2016; Accepted: 8 August 2016; Published: 11 August 2016

Abstract: Over the last decade, aircraft morphing technology has drawn a lot of attention in the aerospace community, because it is likely to improve the aerodynamic performance and the versatility of aircraft at different flight regimes. With the fast paced advancements in this field, a parallel stream of research is studying different materials and designs to develop reliable morphing skins. A promising candidate for a viable morphing skin is the sliding skin, where two or more rigid surfaces remain in contact and slide against each other during morphing. The overlapping between each two panels create a backward-facing step on the airfoil surface which has a critical effect on the aerodynamics of the wing. This paper presents a numerical study of the effect of employing a backward-facing step on the suction side of a National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) 2412 airfoil at a high Reynolds number of 5.9 × 106 . The effects of the step location on the lift coefficient, drag coefficient and critical angle of attack are studied to find a favorable location for the step along the chord-wise direction. Results showed that employing a step on the suction side of the NACA 2412 airfoil can adversely affect the aforementioned aerodynamic properties. A drop of 21.1% in value of the lift coefficient and an increase of 120.8% in the drag coefficient were observed in case of a step located at 25% of the chord length. However, these effects are mitigated by shifting the step location towards the trailing edge. Introducing a step on the airfoil caused the airfoil's thickness to change, which in turn has affected the transition point of the viscous boundary layer from laminar to turbulent. The location of the step, prior or post the transition point, has a noteworthy effect on the pressure and shear stress distribution, and consequently on the values of the lift and drag coefficients. Keywords: backward-facing step; aerodynamics; sliding morphing skin; step location; computational fluid dynamics

1. Introduction Nature has always been a source of inspiration for many engineering applications, and Aerospace engineering in particular is one the fields that holds a considerable share from these biomimetic inspired designs. Starting from the need of wings to fly, passing by the different airfoil designs and recently, the emerging need for morphing wings [1]. In the aeronautical field, morphing is a technology that increases the aircraft's performance by manipulating its geometrical characteristics [2­4]. Morphing technology of wings can be divided into the following three categories; in-plane (span, sweep and chord), out-of-plane (twist, dihedral and bending) and airfoil (camber and thickness) morphing [5]. With the fast evolution of aircraft morphing technology, versatile morphing skins should be realized. Kikuta et al. [6] listed a number of mechanical and chemical properties, but the most demanding requirements is the combination between flexibility and a significant out-of-plane stiffness to bear all the aerodynamic loads. Among different designs of morphing skins, two groups of designs
Aerospace 2016, 3, 25; doi:10.3390/aerospace3030025 www.mdpi.com/journal/aerospace

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

2 of 15

With the fast evolution of aircraft morphing technology, versatile morphing skins should be realized. Kikuta et al. [6] listed a number of mechanical and chemical properties, but the most Aerospace 2016, 3, 25 2 of 15 demanding requirements is the combination between flexibility and a significant out-of-plane stiffness to bear all the aerodynamic loads. Among different designs of morphing skins, two groups seemed toseemed be promising, namely, stretching skin andskin sliding [7].skin Stretchable or flexible skin is of designs to be promising, namely, stretching andskin sliding [7]. Stretchable or flexible skin is popular small-sized morphing as the Defense Advanced Research popular amongamong small-sized morphing aircraftaircraft as the Defense Advanced Research ProjectsProjects Agency Agency (DARPA) Smart [8], where a high strain-to-failure silicone skin was tested. for However, (DARPA) Smart Wing [8],Wing where a high strain-to-failure silicone skin was tested. However, the vast for the vast of airthe vehicles, the aerodynamic loads exceed the capabilities of stretchable skins, majority ofmajority air vehicles, aerodynamic loads exceed the capabilities of stretchable skins, and the and the rigid surfaces is emphasized. On the other hand, sliding andaprovide need of need rigid of surfaces is emphasized. On the other hand, sliding skins are skins rigid are andrigid provide suitable a suitable to withstand the aerodynamic forces, particularly the pressure distribution. these surface tosurface withstand the aerodynamic forces, particularly the pressure distribution. In these In designs, designs, rigid wing sections slide within an adjacent hollow As such, rigidremain surfaces rigid wing sections slide within an adjacent hollow wing. Aswing. such, two rigidtwo surfaces inremain contact in contact and slide against other during morphing. From the aerodynamics the and slide against each other each during morphing. From the aerodynamics perspective,perspective, the interface on interface onsliding wings skins with is sliding skins is treated as backward-facing integrated on the wings with treated as backward-facing steps integratedsteps on the wings' surface aswings' shown surface as 1. shown in Figure 1. in Figure

Figure Figure1. 1.Sliding Slidingskin skinwith withbackward-facing backward-facingsteps stepson onboth bothsides sidesof ofthe thewing. wing.

The telescopic design of the wing with steps along the chord-wise is imperative to allow the The telescopic design of the wing with steps along the chord-wise is imperative to allow the wing wing to morph in the required degrees of freedom. to morph in the required degrees of freedom. While most of the current studies in this field focused on the mechanical design [9­11], the While most of the current studies in this field focused on the mechanical design [9­11], aerodynamic analysis of these models plays a vital role. Infinitesimal discontinuities on the morphing the aerodynamic analysis of these models plays a vital role. Infinitesimal discontinuities on the skin can drastically affect the overall aerodynamic performance, leading to the loss of all potential morphing skin can drastically affect the overall aerodynamic performance, leading to the loss of all gains of the morphing wing. potential gains of the morphing wing. This study focuses on the aerodynamics perspective of the employed backward-facing step of This study focuses on the aerodynamics perspective of the employed backward-facing step sliding morphing skins. As a first step in analyzing the complete aerodynamic performance of of sliding morphing skins. As a first step in analyzing the complete aerodynamic performance backward-facing steps, this paper examines a NACA 2412 (National Advisory Committee for of backward-facing steps, this paper examines a NACA 2412 (National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics) airfoil with a single step on the suction side. The effect of backward-facing step on the Aeronautics) airfoil with a single step on the suction side. The effect of backward-facing step on the pressure side is currently being performed, and its implication is out of scope of the present paper. pressure side is currently being performed, and its implication is out of scope of the present paper. The first time a similar concept was documented was in the early 1960s, when Richarde Kline The first time a similar concept was documented was in the early 1960s, when Richarde Kline and and his colleague Floyd Fogleman designed a paper airplane that can fly longer distances despite his colleague Floyd Fogleman designed a paper airplane that can fly longer distances despite wind and wind and turbulence. The wings of their airplane were flat on top surface and partially hollowed at turbulence. The wings of their airplane were flat on top surface and partially hollowed at the bottom the bottom surface of the wing. In 1972, they filled a U.S. patent [12] for their wedged-like airfoil that surface of the wing. In 1972, they filled a U.S. patent [12] for their wedged-like airfoil that is hollowed is hollowed from below. Two years later, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration from below. Two years later, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) sponsored (NASA) sponsored an experimental study [13] to examine the Kline­Fogleman patented designs. The an experimental study [13] to examine the Kline­Fogleman patented designs. The wind tunnel results wind tunnel results showed that the lift-to-drag ratio of the new airfoil is lower than that of the flat showed that the lift-to-drag ratio of the new airfoil is lower than that of the flat plate and the pressure plate and the pressure data showed that the airfoil derives its lift the same way as the inclined flat data showed that the airfoil derives its lift the same way as the inclined flat plate. The airfoil offered no plate. The airfoil offered no advantages over the conventional airfoil. Despite these claims, the Kline­ advantages over the conventional airfoil. Despite these claims, the Kline­Fogleman airfoils inspired Fogleman airfoils inspired Fertis and Smith to design an airfoil with a backward facing step, this time Fertis and Smith to design an airfoil with a backward facing step, this time on the suction side. on the suction side. They filled a U.S. patent [14] for their design titled "Airfoil". They filled a U.S. patent [14] for their design titled "Airfoil". The experimental results of their designs were published six years later by Fertis [15]. Wind The experimental results of their designs were published six years later by Fertis [15]. Wind tunnel testing was performed on a NACA 23012 airfoil over a range of Reynolds numbers from5 tunnel testing was performed on a NACA 23012 airfoil over a range of Reynolds numbers from 1 × 10 1 × 105 to 5.5 × 105, and a wide range of angle of attacks. Results showed improved stall characteristics to 5.5 × 105 , and a wide range of angle of attacks. Results showed improved stall characteristics at all at all tested airspeeds, increased lift coefficients and increased lift-to-drag ratios over a wide range of tested airspeeds, increased lift coefficients and increased lift-to-drag ratios over a wide range of angles angles of attacks. This enhanced performance of airfoils with a backward facing step on the suction of attacks. This enhanced performance of airfoils with a backward facing step on the suction side was side was not in a perfect agreement with the results obtained by the numerical and experimental not in a perfect agreement with the results obtained by the numerical and experimental testing done by Finaish and Witherspoon [16]. In their study, they followed a more systematic way to examine

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

3 of 15

15 different configurations of a symmetric NACA 0012 airfoil. Backward-facing steps were located on either side of the airfoil, and the Reynolds number used in this study was 5 × 105 . Results showed that for most cases with the step installed on the upper surface, the lift-to-drag ratio decreased due to the increase in the drag, which was directly proportional to the step depth. With most of the studies were performed at low Reynolds number, the current study offers a comprehensive and in-depth numerical analysis on the aerodynamic performance of a stepped NACA 2412 airfoil at a high Reynolds number. First, the numerical methods and the boundary conditions will be stated, followed by an assessment of the spatial convergence of the mesh. The numerical investigations will focus on three main aerodynamic properties, namely, the lift coefficient cl , the drag coefficient cd and the critical angle of attack cr . The effect of varying the step location will be thoroughly studied on the three aforementioned aerodynamic properties. 2. Numerical Modeling and Accuracy Assessment 2.1. Numerical Modeling FLUENT is a general purpose commercial computational fluid dynamic (CFD) package that solves the Navier­Stokes equations using a finite volume method. In this study, the density-based solver implemented in FLUENT will be used to solve the governing continuity, momentum, energy and turbulence equations of the flow. The airfoil used is a NACA 2412 with a backward-facing step installed on the upper surface of the airfoil. The turbulence of the flow is modeled using the four equations Langtry­Menter transitional shear stress transport turbulence model (Transition-SST model) [17,18]. This turbulence model is based on coupling the SST k -  transport equations with two other transport equations, one for the intermittency and one for the transition onset criteria in terms of momentum-thickness Reynolds number. Previous studies [18,19] showed that results of the transition-SST model fit well with the experimental results when compared to fully turbulence models such as the k -  and the k -  models. For that reason, this model was chosen to numerically model the turbulence of the flow over the airfoil. 2.2. Boundary Conditions and Baseline Parameters The airfoil used in this study is a standard NACA 2412 (National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics) airfoil with a sharp trailing edge. This series of airfoils and its derivatives are commonly used for airplanes designed to operate at both subsonic and supersonic speeds, in addition to their applications in helicopter rotor blades and high performance propeller blades [20,21]. The chord length of the airfoil was set to unity, and its surface is treated as an adiabatic no-slip wall. The air around the airfoil is modeled as an ideal gas whose reference temperature is set to 300 K. A C-mesh topology was created around the airfoil with an extended far-field boundary that is 32 chords away from the airfoil. The far-field boundary conditions are set to pressure far-field with 0.16174 Mach number and a Reynolds number of 5.9 × 106 . The angle of attack of the flow was set to 2.5 , unless otherwise stated. Second order convergence schemes were used in calculating the convective and diffusive fluxes of the discretized transport equations, and a least squares cell based method was used to reconstruct the gradients of the scalar quantities. The baseline design is a NACA 2412 airfoil with a vertically oriented step installed on the upper surface. To choose the step depth, seven different step sizes have been tested ranging from 0.0075 of the chord length to 0.025 of the chord length. The seven configurations obtained similar correlation between the flow properties (lift coefficient, drag coefficient and the critical angle of attack) and the step location. For that reason, the step depth that is presented in this study is the mid value of 0.015 chords. After the step, the airfoil curvature follows original NACA 2412 profile, but scaled along the Y-direction to create the required descent that matches the step depth. Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram of a clean NACA 2412 overlaying an airfoil with a step located at a distance XU from the leading edge.

Aerospace 2016 25 Aerospace 2016 ,, 33 ,, 25

of 15 44 of 15

Figure 2. schematic diagram of clean NACA 2412 (National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics) Figure 2. AA schematic diagram of aa clean NACA 2412 (National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics) overlaying the stepped NACA 2412 airfoil. overlaying the stepped NACA 2412 airfoil.

2.3. the Spatial Convergence 2.3.Examining Examining the Spatial Convergence Choosing mesh to discretize the computational an essential Choosingthe theoptimal optimaldensity densityof ofthe the mesh to discretize the computationaldomain domainis is an essential and be fine enough to capture andchallenging challengingtask taskin incomputational computationalfluid fluiddynamics. dynamics.The Themesh meshhas hasto to be fine enough to capturethe the required of the theflow, flow, and computationally affordable in terms of the computational required details details of and toto bebe computationally affordable in terms of the computational power. power. Tothis reach this demanding balance, the Richardson's extrapolation method used on a of family To reach demanding balance, the Richardson's extrapolation method is used is on a family three of three consecutively refined meshes as proposed by John C. Vassberg and Antony Jameson [21]. consecutively refined meshes as proposed by John C. Vassberg and Antony Jameson [21]. This order of of convergence convergence pof of the numerical solution Thisapproach approachprovides provides an an estimation estimation of of the the order the numerical solution by by tracking aerodynamic property  a family of consecutively three consecutively The tracking an an aerodynamic property F on a on family of three refined refined meshes.meshes. The property property  is evaluated on the coarse, and medium and fine to  F , f  and  F is evaluated on the coarse, medium fine meshes to meshes obtain F Fm and respectively. c , obtain respectively. Thec, subscripts m and f stands for "coarse", "medium" andrespectively. "fine" respectively. The subscripts m and f c, stands for "coarse", "medium" and "fine" These These values values are extrapolated Richardson's extrapolation method to calculate the continuum value are extrapolated using using Richardson's extrapolation method to calculate the continuum value F h =0 .  value represents the expected value when spacing between the nodes the mesh tends This value represents the expected value when the the spacing between the nodes of of the mesh tends to =0 . This to zero. The continuum value  is calculated from the three values  ,  and  as follows: zero. The continuum value Fh is calculated from the three values F , F and F as follows: =0 c  m  = 0 f   -  - Fm (1) =0    + F f  Fh=0 = F f + p - 1 (1) r -1 where  is the refinement ratio, and in our case it is constant at 2. While is the refinement ratio, and our case itand is constant at 2. While p is the observed order of where is the r observed order of accuracy ofin the solution is calculated as: accuracy of the solution and is calculated as:  -       -   (2) F -F c m  = ln F -F m  () f (2) p= ln (r ) This order of accuracy could be also calculated from the logarithmic slope of the errors of the three meshes  , of  and  . could In thisbe case, the error of  in each mesh is calculated as: This order accuracy also calculated from the logarithmic slope of the errors of the
three meshes  c ,  m and  f| . In this case, the error of F in each mesh is calculated as:  = =0 -   |,  = |=0 -   | and  = |=0 -  |

(3)

This methodology the three consecutively  c is =used |Fh=on Fc | , m = |Fh=0 - Fm |refined and  f meshes = |Fh=0shown - F f | in Figure 3. 0-
This methodology is used on the three consecutively refined meshes shown in Figure 3.

(3)

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25
Aerospace 2016, 3, 25 Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

5 of 15
5 of 15 5 of 15

The number of quadrilateral cells in each mesh is approximately 12,000 for the coarse mesh, The number ofof quadrilateral cells each is approximately approximately 12,000 for the coarse mesh, 48,000 for the medium mesh and 192,000 elements for the fine mesh. The 12,000 aerodynamic property  is The number quadrilateral cells in in each mesh mesh is for the coarse mesh, 48,000 for the medium mesh and 192,000 elements for the fine mesh. The aerodynamic property F chosen to be the lift coefficient  . The convergence of the solution is judged by the complete stability 48,000 for the medium mesh and 192,000 elements for fine mesh. The aerodynamic property  is is chosen to be the lift coefficient c . The convergence of the solution isjudged judged by the complete stability l . coefficients. of the to lift, and moment Equations (1)­(3) were used to assess thestability spatial chosen be drag the lift coefficient The convergence of the solution is by the complete of the lift, drag and moment coefficients. Equations (1)­(3) were used to assess the spatial convergence convergence of the grids used. The order of Equations accuracy of the solution could calculated using of the lift, drag and moment coefficients. (1)­(3) were used tobe assess the spatial of the grids (2) used. order as of the accuracy ofthe the solution be calculated using (2) and is Equation and is shown slope of red line incould Figure 4a. convergence of The the grids used. The order of accuracy of the solution could be Equation calculated using shown as the slope ofshown the red line Figure 4a. Equation (2) and is as the in slope of the red line in Figure 4a.

Figure Three consecutivelyrefined refined meshes meshes used used to convergence. Figure 3. 3. Three consecutively to estimate estimatethe thespatial spatial convergence. Figure 3. Three consecutively refined meshes used to estimate the spatial convergence.

The computed order of accuracy  was found to be 2.03 which is in a very good agreement with the second order discretization schemes used. Figure 4a 2.03 shows thatis the line joining  ,  and  The computed order of accuracy  was found to be which in a very good agreement with The computed order of accuracy p was found to be 2.03 which is in a very good agreement with the second order discretization schemes used. Figure 4a 4b shows that the line joining  , coefficient is perfectly parallel to the second order slope line. Figure shows that the value of the lift  and  the order discretization schemes used. Figure shows that the line joining  c , coefficient  mthat andthe  f is obtained from the fine mesh is 0.244% away from the4a asymptotic value This means issecond perfectly parallel to the second order slope line. Figure 4b shows that the value of the lift =0 . perfectly parallel to the second order line. Figure 4b shows that the value of the lift coefficient results obtained from the fine mesh isslope very close to the asymptotic continuum value  , and further obtained from the fine mesh is 0.244% away from the asymptotic value . This means that the =0 =0 refinements be perceived as additional computational expenses with negligible improvement results obtained the fine mesh is very close to the asymptotic continuum value  , and further obtained fromwill thefrom fine mesh is 0.244% away from the asymptotic value Fh means thatin the =0 =0 . This the calculated numerical values. Thus, the fine mesh will be used in this study to examine the refinements will be perceived as additional computational expenses with negligible in results obtained from the fine mesh is very close to the asymptotic continuum value improvement Fh=0 , and further aerodynamic performance of the stepped NACA airfoil. the calculated numerical values. Thus, the fine 2412 mesh will expenses be used in thisnegligible study to examine the refinements will be perceived as additional computational with improvement performance the stepped 2412 airfoil. in aerodynamic the calculated numerical of values. Thus,NACA the fine mesh will be used in this study to examine the

Figure 4. Assessing the mesh spatial convergence using (a) the Richardson's extrapolation method; and (b) 4. the logarithmic the converged errors. Figure Assessing the slope meshof spatial convergence using (a) the Richardson's extrapolation method; Figure 4. Assessing the mesh spatial convergence using (a) the Richardson's extrapolation method; and (b) the logarithmic slope of the converged errors. and (b) the logarithmic slope of the converged errors.

(a) (a)

(b) (b)

aerodynamic performance of the stepped NACA 2412 airfoil.

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25
Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

6 of 15
6 of 15 6 of 15

3. Results and Discussion this section the effect of the step location on the aerodynamics of the stepped NACA 2412 airfoil 3. In Results and Discussion In this section the effect of the step location on the aerodynamics of the stepped NACA 2412 will be examined. The location of the step changed from 25% to 75% along the unity chord length airfoil examined. The of location of location the step on changed from 25% toof 75% the NACA unity chord Inwill this be section the effect the step the aerodynamics thealong stepped 2412 of the airfoil, with an increments of 5% from one configuration to the other. Figure 5 shows the two length will of the with The an increments 5% from one configuration to the along other. the Figure 5 shows airfoil beairfoil, examined. location of of the step changed from 25% to 75% unity chord extreme positions of the step at XU = 0.25 C= and 0.75 C, respectively. the two extreme positions of the step at  0.25  one and 0.75  , respectively. length of the airfoil, with an increments of 5% from configuration to the other. Figure 5 shows the two extreme positions of the step at  = 0.25  and 0.75  , respectively.
Range  Range 


3.

Aerospace 2016 , 3,Discussion 25 Results and

In each simulation, the lift, drag and moment coefficients were monitored until completely In In each simulation, the the lift, lift, drag and and moment coefficients werewere monitored until until completely steady steady values were reached. each simulation, drag moment coefficients monitored completely values were reached. steady values were reached. 3.1. Effect of the Step Location on the Lift Coefficient  3.1. Effect of the Step Location on the Lift Coefficient cl 3.1. Effect of the Step Location on the Lift Coefficient  The variation of the lift coefficient  with the step locations was calculated and plotted as The variation liftmain coefficient cl with the step locations was calculated and plotted as shown shown invariation Figureof 6.the Two properties observed in locations the trend of the curve shown. The first The of the lift coefficient are with the step was calculated and plotted as in Figure 6. Two main properties are observed in the trend of the curve shown. The first observation observation is the relationship between the step in location  of and its corresponding lifting shown in Figure 6.direct Two main properties are observed the trend the curve shown. The first is the direct relationship between step location XU and itsvalue corresponding lifting force. As the force. As the step shifted along the the chord-wise direction, the theits liftcorresponding coefficient increases. observation is theisdirect relationship between the step location  of and lifting step is shifted along the chord-wise direction, the value of the lift coefficient increases. The second / = 0.4 The second is the sudden change in direction, the slope the of the points located before  force. As theobservation step is shifted along the chord-wise value of the lift coefficient increases. observation is the sudden change in thejustification slope ofin the points before located XUcan /C only = 0.4 and the points and second the points after  /  the = 0.5 . The of these two observations be reached by The observation is sudden change the slopelocated of the points before   = 0.4  / after /C = analysis 0.5. The of these two observations can only be reached by an in-depth / an X in-depth of the flow properties around the stepped airfoil. and the points after justification  = 0.5 . The justification of these two observations can only be reached by U  an in-depth of the flow properties aroundairfoil. the stepped airfoil. analysis of the analysis flow properties around the stepped

Figure The two extreme locationsof ofthe the step step on on the the upper NACA 2412. Figure 5. 5. The two extreme locations upper surface surfaceof ofthe the NACA 2412. Figure 5. The two extreme locations of the step on the upper surface of the NACA 2412.

The fundamentals of airfoil aerodynamics indicate that the lifting force is mainly influenced by the pressure distribution the airfoil. Therefore, investigate the direct relation between the The fundamentals ofaround airfoil aerodynamics indicateto that the lifting force is mainly influenced by The fundamentals of coefficient airfoil aerodynamics indicate that the lifting force is relation mainly influenced step location and the lift  ,airfoil. the distribution of the pressure coefficient  overbetween the stepped the pressure distribution around the Therefore, to investigate the direct theby thestep pressure distribution the airfoil. Therefore, to investigate the direct relation between the location andin the liftaround coefficient  , the distribution of the pressure coefficient over the stepped airfoil is plotted Figure 7 for the different step locations, as well as the pressure distribution over a  step location and the lift coefficient of the coefficient stepped clean NACA 2412 airfoil is plotted in airfoil. Figure 7 for the c different step locations, aspressure well as the pressure C distribution a p over the over l , the distribution clean NACA 2412 airfoil.

Figure 6. The variation of the lift coefficient at different step locations ( = 5.9 × 106 and  = 2.5°). The dashed red lines emphasize changeat indifferent the slope of the obtained values. Figure 6. The variation of the lift the coefficient step locations ( = 5.9 × 106 and  = 2.5°). Figure 6. The variation of the lift coefficient at different step locations (Re = 5.9 × 106 and  = 2.5 ). The dashed red lines emphasize the change in the slope of the obtained values. The dashed red lines emphasize the change in the slope of the obtained values.

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

7 of 15

airfoil is plotted in Figure 7 for the different step locations, as well as the pressure distribution over a clean NACA 2412 Aerospace 2016 , 3, 25 airfoil. 7 of 15
Aerospace 2016, 3, 25 7 of 15

The pressure field experiences the normal drop at the leading edge due to the acceleration of the  = 2.5°) . fluid over the airfoil's curvature. When the flow travels pastleading the backward-facing it creates a of The pressure field experiences the normal drop at the edge due tostep, the acceleration The pressure field experiences normal drop at the leading edge due the acceleration of the low pressure recirculation zone thatthe increases the lifting force. However, the to sudden reduction in the fluid over the airfoil's curvature. When the flow travels past the backward-facing step, itthe creates fluid over the airfoil's curvature. When the flow travels past the backward-facing step, it creates a airfoil thickness after the step relatively decreases the flow velocity which results in a subsequent a low low pressure recirculation zone that increases the lifting force. However, the sudden reduction in the zone that the lifting However, the sudden reduction of in the the highpressure pressurerecirculation region stretched to theincreases trailing edge of the force. airfoil. Figure 8 shows the separation airfoil thickness afterafter the step relatively decreases thethe flow velocity which results inthe aa subsequent high airfoil thickness the step relatively decreases flow velocity which results subsequent flow and its subsequent reattachment at the end of the recirculation zone. Note alsoin presence of pressure region stretched to the trailing edge of the airfoil. Figure 8 shows the separation of the high pressure the trailing edge the airfoil. Figure 8 shows the separation of the flow three differentregion lengthstretched scales of to vortices trapped atof the corner of the step. Theoretically, an infinite and its subsequent reattachment at the end of the recirculation zone. Note also the presence of three flow and of itsclosed subsequent reattachment at the end of strength the recirculation zone. Note also the presence of sequence eddies with decreasing size and is expected. three different length scales oftrapped vortices at trapped at theof corner of the step. Theoretically, an infinite different length scales of vortices the corner the step. Theoretically, an infinite sequence sequence of with closed eddies withsize decreasing size and is expected. of closed eddies decreasing and strength isstrength expected.

Figure 7. The pressure distribution over the upper surface of stepped airfoils with different step locations as well as the pressure distribution over the clean NACA 2412 airfoil ( = 5.9 × 106 and 6 and locations as well as the pressure distribution over the clean NACA 2412 airfoil ( Re = 5.9 × 10 Figure 7.  = 2.5°) . The pressure distribution over the upper surface of stepped airfoils with different step  ).  = 2.5 locations as well as the pressure distribution over the clean NACA 2412 airfoil ( = 5.9 × 106 and

Figure 7. The pressure distribution over the upper surface of stepped airfoils with different step

suction side of a NACA 2412 (Re = 5.9 × 10 and  = 2.5 ). the lift coefficient and drops it below the value obtained from the clean NACA 2412 airfoil. At the increase of the pressure the2412 suction side a of the airfoil significantly affects the value of sameThe boundary conditions, a cleanover NACA obtains lift coefficient value of 0.5172 which exceeds The increase of the pressure over the suction side of the airfoil significantly affects the value of the the lift coefficient and drops it below the value obtained from the clean NACA 2412 airfoil. At the all the values observed in Figure 6. As the step location shifts towards the trailing edge, the region of same boundary conditions, a clean NACA 2412 obtains a lift coefficient value of 0.5172 which exceeds lift coefficient and drops it below the value obtained from the clean NACA 2412 airfoil. At the same high pressure diminishes, and the lift coefficient increases. This justifies the direct relationship all the values observed in Figure 6. As the step location shifts towards the trailing edge, the region of between the step location the value of lift coefficient  . boundary conditions, a clean and NACA 2412 obtains a lift coefficient value of 0.5172 which exceeds all the high pressure and the lift coefficient increases. This justifies direct relationship The second observation inthe Figure 6 is the change of the slope for the points the located before  /of = high values observed in diminishes, Figure 6. As step location shifts towards the trailing edge, the region between the step location and the value of lift coefficient  . 0.4 and the points after lift = 0.5. This increases. change in the slope is mainly by relative position of the   /coefficient pressure diminishes, and the This justifies the driven direct relationship between / = Thewith second observation in Figure 6 is the change of the slope for the points located before from the step to the point at which the step location and respect the value of lift coefficient cl . laminar boundary layer experiences a transition 0.4 and the points after  / = 0.5. This change in the slope is mainly driven by relative position of the step with respect to the point at which the laminar boundary layer experiences a transition from

Figure 8. Streamlines showing the separation of the flow at the step edge and the creation of low pressure recirculation zones over the step's vicinity. The step is located at the mid-chord length on 6 the flow at the step edge and the creation of low Figure 8. Streamlines showing the separation of the side of ashowing NACA 2412 ( = 5.9 × 10 and  = 2.5°) . step edge and the creation of low Figure 8.suction Streamlines the separation of the flow at the pressure recirculation zones over step's vicinity. The step locatedat atthe themid-chord mid-chord length pressure recirculation zones over the the step's vicinity. The step isis located lengthon on the 6 side of the airfoil significantly affects the value of The increase ofof the pressure over the suction the suction side a NACA 2412 ( = 5.9  6 × 10 and  = 2.5°).

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

8 of 15

The second observation in Figure 6 is the change of the slope for the points located before X / C = 0.4 and U Aerospace 2016 ,3 , 25 the points after XU /C = 0.5. This change in the slope is mainly driven by relative 8 of 15 position of the step with respect to the point at which the laminar boundary layer experiences a transition laminar to turbulent. With the boundary conditions stated 2.2, in Section 2.2, the transition laminar to from turbulent. With the boundary conditions stated in Section the transition point is / / point is approximately at X / C = 0.425 for cases of stepped airfoil and at X / C = 0.41 for the clean approximately at   = 0.425 for cases of stepped airfoil and at   = 0.41 for the clean airfoil at / = 0.425 airfoil at the same conditions. cases where the step isbefore located X /C, = 0.425, the presence of the same conditions. For casesFor where the step is located before the presence of the step the step triggers the transition before the point it where it naturally the airfoil. clean airfoil. For the triggers the transition before the point where naturally occurs occurs on the on clean For the other other where the step is after natural transition point, the step has aneffect effect on on the the transition cases cases where the step is after the the natural transition point, the step has an transition phenomena, phenomena, prolonging prolonging the the instability instability of of the the boundary boundary layer. layer. This This difference difference in in behavior behavior is is the the main main reason reason for for the the change change in in the the slope. slope. Notes Notes about about the the Viscous Viscous Boundary Boundary Layer Layer Transition Transitionand andthe theNumerical NumericalModeling Modeling The The viscous viscous boundary boundary layer layer transition transition is is observed observed in in Figure Figure 7 7 as as a a noticeable noticeable increase increase in in the the pressure approximately at X / C = 0.425. This change in the pressure distribution is not observed pressure approximately at / = 0.425. This change in the pressure distribution is not observed in in cases / C = 0.4, because in these cases the location of the step interrupt U / cases of of airfoils airfoils with with step step before before X   = 0.4 , because in these cases the location of the step interrupt  the the stability stability of of the the boundary boundary layer layer and and triggers triggers an an early early transition transition from fromlaminar laminarto toturbulent. turbulent. A A similar similar but but an an amplified amplified increase increase is is noticed noticed in in the the value value of of the the skin skin friction friction coefficient coefficient at at the the same location. These sudden changes in the values of the pressure distribution and the skin friction same location. These sudden changes in the values of the pressure distribution and the skin friction coefficient of aa clean NACA 2412 airfoil but slightly earlier at at X /C = as coefficient are arealso alsoobserved observedin incase case of clean NACA 2412 airfoil but slightly earlier /  0.41 = 0.41 shown in Figure 9a,b. as shown in Figure 9a,b.

(a)

(b)

These abrupt changes in the pressure and skin friction coefficient values were not observed These abrupt changes in the pressure and skin friction coefficient values were not observed when a fully turbulent model as the  -  or the  -  models were used. Langtry and Menter [18] when a fully turbulent model as the k -  or the k -  models were used. Langtry and Menter [18] observed the same sudden change in the value of the skin friction coefficient over Aerospatiale A and observed the same sudden change in the value of the skin friction coefficient over Aerospatiale A the McDonald Douglas 30P-30N airfoils when the flow was modeled using the transition-SST and the McDonald Douglas 30P-30N airfoils when the flow was modeled using the transition-SST turbulence model. This jump in the values of the skin friction coefficient fits well with the turbulence model. This jump in the values of the skin friction coefficient fits well with the experimental experimental results shown in their study, while the fully turbulent models showed discrepancies at results shown in their study, while the fully turbulent models showed discrepancies at these locations. these locations. Figure 10 shows a velocity contour plot with a close-up on the transition point. The Figure 10 shows a velocity contour plot with a close-up on the transition point. The numerical model numerical model clearly captured the transition of the laminar boundary layer to a turbulent clearly captured the transition of the laminar boundary layer to a turbulent boundary layer overlaying boundary layer overlaying a laminar sublayer at approximately / = 0.425. a laminar sublayer at approximately X /C = 0.425.

Figure 9. 9. Changes Changes in in ( (a a) ) the the pressure pressure coefficient coefficient value value and and ( (b b) ) the the skin skin friction friction coefficient coefficient values values at at Figure 6 and  = 2.5°). X/C = 0.41 for a clean NACA 2412 airfoil (  = 5.9 × 10 6  X/C = 0.41 for a clean NACA 2412 airfoil (Re = 5.9 × 10 and  = 2.5 ).

Aerospace 2016 2016,, 3 3,, 25 25 Aerospace
Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

9 9 of of 15 15
9 of 15

Figure 10. Velocity contour plot to showing a close-up on the ,location of transition of the viscous boundary boundary layer from laminar ( 5.9 × 106 = 2.5° and step at  /  the = 0.5 ). Figure 10. Velocity contour plotturbulent showing a= close-up on the location oflocated transition of viscous layer from laminar to turbulent (Re = 5.9 × 106 ,  = 2.5 and step located at X / C = 0.5). U boundary layer from laminar to turbulent ( = 5.9 × 106 ,  = 2.5° and step located at  / = 0.5). At the leading edge of airfoils (or any surface in general), the viscous boundary layer is laminar in nature, with aedge smooth gradual gradient in the of the layers adjacent to the airfoil. At the leading of and airfoils (or any any surface invelocity general), theflow viscous boundary layer is laminar laminar At the leading edge of airfoils (or surface in general), the viscous boundary layer is The velocity vectors will follow a monotonic curvature as shown in Figure 11a. Somewhere between in nature, nature, with with a a smooth smooth and and gradual gradual gradient gradient in in the the velocity velocity of of the the flow flow layers layers adjacent adjacent to to the the airfoil. airfoil. in 0.35 and 0.7 of the chord length, this laminar boundary layer starts a transition phase from laminar The vectors will follow a monotonic curvature as shown in Figure 11a. Somewhere between between The velocity velocity vectors will follow a monotonic curvature as shown in Figure 11a. Somewhere to turbulent. The exact location of this transition is controlled by a number of factors including 0.35 and 0.7 the chord length, this laminar boundary layer starts a transition phase from laminar to 0.35 and 0.7 of ofof the chord length, this laminar boundary layer starts a transition phase from curvature the airfoil, turbulent intensity of the flow, Mach number, Reynolds number, anglelaminar of turbulent. The exact location of this is controlled by a number factors including curvature to turbulent. The exact location oftransition this is controlled a of number of factors including attack, etc. At this transition region, thetransition viscous boundary layer is by transversely bifurcated into two of the airfoil, turbulent intensity of the flow, Mach number, Reynolds number, angle of exists. attack, curvature of the airfoil, turbulent intensity of the flow, Mach number, Reynolds number, angleetc. of branches; a thin laminar sublayer attached to the airfoil surface, above which, a turbulent layer At this transition region, the viscous boundary layer is transversely bifurcated into two branches; a thin Atetc. the transition region, the velocity vectors willboundary follow an S-shaped curve as shown in Figure 11a. attack, At this transition region, the viscous layer is transversely bifurcated into two After transition from laminar turbulent, the boundary layer a can be divided into four main regimes. laminar sublayer attached to theto airfoil surface, above which, turbulent layer exists. At the transition branches; a thin laminar sublayer attached to the airfoil surface, above which, a turbulent layer exists. The first regime is at the airfoil surface which has a zero velocity due to the no-slip condition of the region, the velocity vectors will follow an S-shaped curve as shown in Figure 11a. After transition At the transition region, the velocity vectors will follow an S-shaped curve as shown in Figure 11a. Justto above the surface, a thin laminar layer called the viscous sublayer orregimes. the laminar sublayer from flow. laminar turbulent, theto boundary layer can be divided into main The first regime After transition from laminar turbulent, the boundary layer canfour be divided into four main regimes. exists. At this layer, the flow velocity is linear with the off-wall distance. The viscous sublayer is at first the airfoil surface which has a zerowhich velocity due to the no-slip condition of the flow. Just is above The regime is at the airfoil surface has a zero velocity due to the no-slip condition of the followed by another thin region called the buffer layer, and that is where the flow begins the the surface, a thin laminar layer called the viscous sublayer or the laminar sublayer exists. At this flow.transition Just above the surface, a thin laminar layer called the viscous sublayer or the laminar sublayer from laminar to turbulent. The last layer is the turbulent layer, at which the flow velocity layer, the velocity is linear with the is off-wall distance. viscous sublayer is followed by another exists. Atflow thisto layer, the flow velocity linear with described the The off-wall distance. viscous sublayer is is related the log of the off-wall distance. The above transition fromThe laminar to turbulent thin region called the buffer layer, and that is where the flow begins the transition from laminar to followed by another thin region called the buffer layer, and that is where thea flow begins the was accurately captured in the numerical simulations of the flow. Figure 11 shows comparison turbulent. The last layer isturbulent. the turbulent atthe which flow velocity is related to the log of the transition from laminar to The layer, last layer is thethe turbulent layer, at which the flow velocity between schematic diagram of the transition of viscous boundary layer, and the intermittency off-wall distance. The above described transition from laminar to turbulent accurately captured in contour plotlog of a stepped airfoil at the transition region. is related to the of the off-wall distance. The above described transitionwas from laminar to turbulent

Figure 10. Velocity contour plot showing a close-up on the location of transition of the viscous

the numerical simulations ofthe thenumerical flow. Figure 11 shows a comparison between diagram of was accurately captured in simulations of the flow. Figure 11 schematic shows a comparison the transition of the diagram viscous boundary layer, and contour plotand of athe stepped airfoil at between schematic of the transition of the the intermittency viscous boundary layer, intermittency the transition region. contour plot of a stepped airfoil at the transition region.

(a)
Figure 11. Cont.

(a)
Figure 11. Cont. Figure 11. Cont.

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25 Aerospace 2016, 3, 25 Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

10 of 15 10 of 15 10 of 15

( (b b) )
Figure 11. Transition of the viscous boundary layer shown on ( a ) a schematic diagram that complies Figure 11. 11. Transition Transition of of the the viscous viscous boundary boundary layer layer shown shown on on ( (a a) )a a schematic schematic diagram diagram that that complies complies Figure well with ( b ) the intermittency contour obtained numerically at the transition region. well with with ( (b b) ) the the intermittency intermittency contour contour obtained obtained numerically numerically at at the the transition transitionregion. region. well

Intermittency is In the SST-Transitional Intermittency is is usually usually a a measure measure of of the the irregular irregular alternation alternation of of phases. phases. In the SST-Transitional Intermittency usually a measure of the irregular alternation of phases. In the SST-Transitional turbulence model, the value of intermittency can distinguish between laminar regimes and turbulence model, the value of intermittency can distinguish between laminar regimes and turbulent turbulent turbulence model, the value of intermittency can distinguish between laminar regimes and turbulent ones. When the intermittency value is 0, the SST turbulence model is suppressed and the flow is ones. When the intermittency value is 0, the SST turbulence model is suppressed and the flow is is ones. When the intermittency value is 0, the SST turbulence model is is suppressed andflow the flow treated as a laminar flow, while at a maximum value of 1 the SST model active and the is fully treated as a laminar flow, while at a maximum value of 1 the SST model is active and the flow is fully treated as a laminar flow, while at the a maximum value of 1 the SST model is active and the flow is turbulent. Thus, a contour plot of intermittency can numerically capture the transition of the turbulent. Thus, a contour plot of the intermittency can numerically capture the transition of the fully turbulent. Thus, a contour plot of the intermittency can numerically capture the transition of viscous boundary layer from laminar to turbulent. Figure 11b shows that the contour plot of the viscous boundary layer from laminar to to turbulent. Figure 11b shows that the contour plot of the the viscous boundary layer from laminar turbulent. Figure 11b shows that the contour plot of the intermittency successfully modeled the bifurcation of viscous boundary layer to sublayer intermittency successfully successfullymodeled modeled the bifurcation of viscous boundary layer to laminar laminar sublayer intermittency the bifurcation of viscous boundary layer to laminar sublayer and and turbulent layer as compared to the schematic diagram shown in Figure 11a. and turbulent layer as compared toschematic the schematic diagram shown in Figure turbulent layer as compared to the diagram shown in Figure 11a. 11a. 3.2. of on the Drag Coefficient  3.2. Effect Effect of the the Step Step Location Location on on the the Drag Drag Coefficient Coefficient c  3.2. Effect of the Step Location d The drag coefficient of each case was calculated as the location of the step slid from the leading The drag drag coefficient coefficient of of each each case case was was calculated calculated as as the the location location of of the the step step slid slid from from the the leading leading The edge towards the trailing edge. The relation between drag coefficient and the location of the step is edge towards the trailing edge. The relation between drag coefficient and the location of the step is is edge towards the trailing edge. The relation between drag coefficient and the location of the step shown in Figure 12. shown in in Figure Figure 12. 12. shown

Similar to the observations observations inFigure Figures 6 and 12, reflects two main characteristics of the relation Similar Similar to to the the observations in in Figure 6, 6, Figure Figure 12 12 reflects reflects two two main main characteristics characteristics of of the the relation relation between the drag drag coefficient c and the step location. The first observation is the inverse relation d between the coefficient  and the step location. The first observation is the inverse relation between the drag coefficient  and the step location. The first observation is the inverse relation  between the drag coefficient values and the step location. The drag coefficient decreases with the between between the the drag drag coefficient coefficient values values and and the the step step location. location. The The drag drag coefficient coefficient decreases decreases with with the the increase of the step distance from the leading edge, and continuously approaches the the value of the increase increase of of the the step step distance distance from from the the leading leading edge, edge, and and continuously continuously approaches approaches the value value of of the the clean airfoil. The second second observation observation is is again again related related to to the the sudden sudden change change in in the the slope slope of the lines clean airfoil. The of the lines clean airfoil. The second observation is again related to the sudden change in the slope of the lines before and after the location of transition of the viscous boundary layer, which is approximately at before before and and after after the the location location of of transition transition of of the the viscous viscous boundary boundary layer, layer, which which is is approximately approximately at at X/ /C = = 0.425.  /  = 0.425 0.425. .

6 Figure 12. The variation of the drag at step locations ( = × 10 6 6 and  ). Figure 12. 12.The The variation of drag the coefficient drag coefficient coefficient at different different step(Re locations (   = 5.9 5.9 10 Figure variation of the at different step locations = 5.9 × 10  =× 2.5 and  = 2.5°). and  = 2.5°).

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

11 of of 15 15 11

These two observations could be understood by decomposing the drag coefficient into its main These two observations could be understood decomposing the drag coefficient into its main components, namely, the pressure drag and the skinby friction drag coefficients as shown in Equation (4): components, namely, the pressure drag and the skin friction drag coefficients as shown in Equation (4):
 v2 A S  v2 A S where  is the pressure drag coefficient,  is the friction drag coefficient or viscous drag where c p is the pressure drag coefficient, the friction drag coefficient orreference viscous drag coefficient, coefficient,  is the fluid density,  is cthe velocity,  is the area,  is the f is reference  is the fluid density, v is the reference velocity, A is the reference area, p is the pressure at the surface pressure at the surface , 0 is the reference pressure,   is a unit vector normal to the surface , ^ the dA p0the is the reference pressure, n is a surface unit vector surface dA,tangent w is theto wall stresses  wall shear stresses at  normal and  to is the a unit vector theshear surface  .  ,is ^ is at the surface dA and t a unit vector tangent to angles the surface dA. Usually for streamlined bodies Usually for streamlined bodies (as airfoils at small of attack), the value of the pressure drag (as airfoils at small angles of attack), the value of the pressure drag coefficient is small compared to the coefficient is small compared to the viscous drag coefficient. This makes the graphs of wall shear viscous drag coefficient. This makes the graphs wall shear stresses skin friction coefficient stresses  or the skin friction coefficient goodof tools to compare the  drag forces on different airfoils w or the good tools to compare the drag forces on different designs. Equation (4) shows that as the area designs. Equation (4) shows that as the area under airfoils the curves of the skin friction coefficient increases, under the curves the skin friction coefficient increases, the viscous forces and consequently the drag the viscous forcesof and consequently the drag forces increase. Therefore, to justify the relation between forces increase. Therefore, justify the relation between the drag coefficient and the step location in the drag coefficient and theto step location in Figure 12, the skin friction coefficient values of the NACA Figure 12, the skin friction coefficient values of the NACA 2412 airfoil are plotted in Figure 13. 2412 airfoil are plotted in Figure 13.

 =  +  =

cd = c p + c f =

1 1  ( - 0 )(  ( .  )   .  )  + 2      2 1  1  ^ ^
^ . i dA + ( p - p0 ) n

^ . i dA w t

(4) (4)

(a)

(b)

Figure 13 is divided into two subplots because of the different nature of the skin friction Figure 13 is divided into two subplots because of the different nature of the skin friction coefficient coefficient values for cases with a step located before the transition point ( / = 0.425) and after values for cases with a step located the transition point /C = 0.425) and after this point. this point. In Figure 13a where thebefore step is located before the(X transition point, the skin friction In Figure 13a where the step is located before the transition point, the skin friction coefficient drops coefficient drops smoothly reflecting the laminar behavior of the viscous boundary layer, but the smoothly of reflecting the laminar behavior of the viscous boundary layer, but the presence of the step presence the step interrupts this laminar behavior and triggers the transition of the viscous interrupts this laminar behavior triggersThe the skin transition of the viscous value boundary layer from laminar boundary layer from laminar toand turbulent. friction coefficient drops to zero after the to turbulent. The skin friction coefficient value drops to zero after the step due to the presence of step due to the presence of a cascade of small sized and low energy eddies trapped at the corner of a cascade of small sized and low energy eddies trapped at the corner of the step. This is followed the step. This is followed by a concaved down curve confining the recirculation zone. After the by a concaved down curve confining the recirculation zone. After the reattachment of thecoefficient boundary reattachment of the boundary layer at the end of the recirculation zone, the skin friction layer at the end of the recirculation zone, the skin friction coefficient will follow the natural pattern for will follow the natural pattern for an airfoil but with a longer turbulent region than the clean airfoil an airfoil but withhand, a longer the clean has. On the other thenatural curves has. On the other the turbulent curves in region Figure than 13b show that airfoil the presence of the step hand, after the in Figure 13b show that the presence of the step after the natural transition point has an important transition point has an important influence on the behavior of the skin friction coefficient. It influence on behavior of the skin friction coefficient. It one prolonged the transition region and prolonged thethe transition region and minimized the turbulent before dropping towards zero at minimized the turbulent one before dropping towards zero at the tip of the airfoil. the tip of the airfoil. As the the step step is is shifted shifted towards towards the the trailing trailing edge, edge, the the area area under under the thecurves curvesin inFigure Figure13b 13bincreases, increases, As and the drag coefficient should have increased, but this contradicts the values shown in Figure 12, and the drag coefficient should have increased, but this contradicts the values shown in Figure 12, where the the drag drag coefficient coefficient values values followed followed a a negative negative slope slope when when plotted plotted versus versus the the step step location. location. where This means that the pressure drag may be the dominant component in the drag coefficient value in

Figure 13. Skin friction coefficient values for airfoils with a step (a) before the viscous boundary layer Figure 13. Skin friction coefficient values for airfoils with a step (a) before the viscous boundary layer 6 and  2.5 = 2.5°) transition =5.9 5.9× ×10 10 6 and  ). . transition point point and and ( (b b) ) after after the the transition transition point point ( ( Re = =

cases of airfoils with a backward facing step, and only a decomposition of the drag coefficient can resolve this contradiction. Equation (4) is used to decompose the value of the drag coefficient to its main components  and  . Figure 14 shows the decomposed values of the drag coefficient in case of a clean NACA 2412 airfoil and in cases when the step is employed at different locations on the upper surface of the airfoil. Aerospace 2016, 3, 25 12 of 15 In all cases, the value of the viscous drag coefficient is nearly constant, and the variation of the pressure drag coefficient controls the variation of the overall drag force. This domination of the pressure drag is due tomay the separation of the flow at the step edge, leading to the formation This means thatcoefficient the pressure drag be the dominant component in the drag coefficient value in of a of low pressure recirculation acting the vertical wall of the step. This creates an adverse cases airfoils with a backwardzone facing step, on and only a decomposition of the drag coefficient can force on the airfoil that significantly increases the pressure drag. For that reason, it is insufficient to resolve this contradiction. useEquation the skin friction coefficient valuesthe as a sole assessment of the variation the components drag coefficient. The (4) is used to decompose value of the drag coefficient to its of main c p and distribution over the airfoil willof provide a better assessment toacompare the values of the c fpressure . Figure 14 shows the decomposed values the drag coefficient in case of clean NACA 2412 airfoil drag coefficient different step locations. and in cases whenat the step is employed at different locations on the upper surface of the airfoil.

Figure 14. Decomposition ofof the drag coefficient toto pressure drag and viscous drag coefficients. Figure 14. Decomposition the drag coefficient pressure drag and viscous drag coefficients.

7 shows that a low pressure zone always exists after each constant, step due to the the vortex formation. InFigure all cases, the value of the viscous drag coefficient is nearly and variation of The value of this coefficient minimum pressure varies with the of the step location. As the step location the pressure drag controls the variation ofvariation the overall drag force. This domination of the increases (moves towards theto trailing edge), the pressure after the step relatively increases, so that pressure drag coefficient is due the separation of the flow at the step edge, leading to the formation the adverse force acting on the step wall gradually decreases. This justifies the inverse relation of a low pressure recirculation zone acting on the vertical wall of the step. This creates an adverse between the drag that coefficient valuesincreases and the step shown in Figure 12. Theit change in the slope force on the airfoil significantly the location pressure drag. For that reason, is insufficient to in Figure 12 is again attributed to the transition of the viscous boundary layer, where for the cases use the skin friction coefficient values as a sole assessment of the variation of the drag coefficient. with the step located before /airfoil  = 0.425 the presence of the step triggers the transition before the The pressure distribution over the will, provide a better assessment to compare the values of the point where it at naturally occurs. drag coefficient different step locations.
Figure 7 shows that a low pressure zone always exists after each step due to the vortex formation. 3.3. Effect ofthis the minimum Step Location on the Critical Angle ofvariation Attack  The value of pressure varies with the of the step location. As the step location increases (moves towards trailing edge), the pressure after the step relatively increases, soattack that the This subsection willthe test the relation between the step location and the critical angle of  , adverse force acting on the step wall gradually decreases. This justifies the inverse relation between the and whether the step has an effect on the onset of stall at a high Reynolds number. drag coefficient values and the step location shown in Figure 12. TheThe change the slope in is Figure 12 Four different configurations of the NACA 2412 were tested. first in configuration the clean is NACA again attributed to the transition of the viscous boundary layer, where for the cases with the step 2412, without any steps. The second, third and fourth cases incorporated a backward-facing located before X / C = 0.425, the presence of the step triggers the transition before the point where itof step on the upper surface of the airfoil at  / = 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75, respectively. A wide range naturally occurs. angle of attacks  was tested on each of the four configurations to find the critical angle of attack 

at which the separated flow on the airfoil hinders the airfoil's ability to create lift. 3.3. Effect of the Step Location on the Critical Angle of Attack cr Figures 15a,b show the values of the lift coefficient  and drag coefficient  at different angles This subsection will in test the relation between thelinear step location and the critical angle cr , of attack . The curves Figure 15a start with the relationship that extends up of to attack an angle of and whether the step has an effect on the onset of stall at a high Reynolds number. attack of 10° . As the separated flow starts to become dominant around the airfoils, the relation Four different configurations of the NACA 2412 were tested. The first configuration is the clean NACA 2412, without any steps. The second, third and fourth cases incorporated a backward-facing step on the upper surface of the airfoil at XU /C = 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75, respectively. A wide range of angle of attacks  was tested on each of the four configurations to find the critical angle of attack cr at which the separated flow on the airfoil hinders the airfoil's ability to create lift.

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

13 of 15

Figure 15a,b show the values of the lift coefficient cl and drag coefficient cd at different angles of attack .2016 The curves in Figure 15a start with the linear relationship that extends up to an angle of 13 attack Aerospace ,3 , 25 of 15  of 10 . As the separated flow starts to become dominant around the airfoils, the relation between the lift coefficient and angle of attack becomes non-linear andnon-linear quickly reaches the critical angle ofcritical attack between the lift coefficient and angle of attack becomes and quickly reaches the  . It is shown in Figure 15a that the three cases of the stepped airfoil experienced an early onset of angle of attack  . It is shown in Figure 15a that the three cases of the stepped airfoil experienced an cr  stall when compared to the case of the airfoil whose cr is approximately atapproximately 18 . While in cases of. early onset of stall when compared to clean the case of the clean airfoil whose  is at 18°  , 17 a backward-facing step at XU /C = 0.25, 0.5 and critical angle of attack was nearly atof 13attack / =the While in cases of a backward-facing step at 0.75, 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 , the critical angle  respectively. Thus, the three cases of the installed step speeded up the onset of stall. The drag and was 17 nearly at 13°, 17° and 17° respectively. Thus, the three cases of the installed step speeded up coefficient values in coefficient Figure 15b values show that the stepped airfoils willthat experience higher dragging the onset of stall. shown The drag shown in Figure 15b show the stepped airfoils will forces when compared to the clean airfoil. As the step location is shifted towards the leading edge of experience higher dragging forces when compared to the clean airfoil. As the step location is shifted the airfoil, higher values of coefficient are experienced, they grow faster at lower angles towards the leading edge ofthe thedrag airfoil, higher values of the drag and coefficient are experienced, and they of attack. These results show of that installing a backward-facing step on the upper surface of the step NACA grow faster at lower angles attack. These results show that installing a backward-facing on 2412 degrades the overall stall behavior of the airfoil. the upper surface of the NACA 2412 degrades the overall stall behavior of the airfoil.

(a)

(b)

4. Conclusions 4. Conclusions The study and analysis of the numerical results showed that a price has to be paid when using The study and analysis of the numerical results showed that a price has to be paid when using sliding morphing skin with a backward-facing step on the suction side of the airfoil. In comparison sliding morphing skin with a backward-facing step on the suction side of the airfoil. In comparison with the unchanged airfoil profile, employing a step on the suction side of the NACA 2412 airfoil had with the unchanged airfoil profile, employing a step on the suction side of the NACA 2412 airfoil an adverse effect on the lift coefficient  , the drag coefficient  and the critical angle of attack  . had an adverse effect on the lift coefficient c , the drag coefficient cd and the critical angle of attack The location of the step  / prominentlyl affected the aforementioned aerodynamic properties. cr . The location of the step XU /C prominently affected the aforementioned aerodynamic properties. The lift coefficient  showed a direct relationship with the location of the step  / , where the The lift coefficient cl showed a direct relationship with the location of the step XU /C, where the values values of the lift coefficient continuously increased while shifting the step location from the leading of the lift coefficient continuously increased while shifting the step location from the leading edge to edge to the trailing edge of the airfoil. On the other hand, the values of drag coefficient  followed the trailing edge of the airfoil. On the other hand, the values of drag coefficient cd followed an inverse an inverse relationship with the step location  / . Decomposition of the drag coefficient to its two relationship with the step location XU /C. Decomposition of the drag coefficient to its two main main components showed a domination of the pressure drag coefficient over the viscous drag components showed a domination of the pressure drag coefficient over the viscous drag coefficient. coefficient. This result shows that it is insufficient to use the skin friction coefficient as a sole tool of This result shows that it is insufficient to use the skin friction coefficient as a sole tool of assessment, assessment, and only the pressure distribution curves will explain the relationship between the drag and only the pressure distribution curves will explain the relationship between the drag coefficient coefficient and the step location. and the step location. The four equations Transition-SST turbulence model was used to numerically model the The four equations Transition-SST turbulence model was used to numerically model the transition transition of the viscous boundary layer from laminar to turbulent. The location of the step relative of the viscous boundary layer from laminar to turbulent. The location of the step relative to the to the transition point affected the distribution of the pressure and the wall shear stresses, and transition point affected the distribution of the pressure and the wall shear stresses, and consequently consequently the variation of the lift and drag coefficients from one step location to the other. the variation of the lift and drag coefficients from one step location to the other. By testing three configurations of the NACA 2412 with steps at different locations, and comparing the results to the unchanged airfoil, the backward-facing step speeded up the onset of stall and lowered the value of the critical angle of attack  . The case with a step at  / = 0.25 experienced an earlier stall condition when compared to cases with steps at  / = 0.5 and 0.75, which in turn have lower values of critical angle of attack  compared to the clean airfoil.

Figure 15. (a) Lift and (b) drag coefficients versus angle of attack . Figure 15. (a) Lift and (b) drag coefficients versus angle of attack .

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

14 of 15

By testing three configurations of the NACA 2412 with steps at different locations, and comparing the results to the unchanged airfoil, the backward-facing step speeded up the onset of stall and lowered the value of the critical angle of attack cr . The case with a step at XU /C = 0.25 experienced an earlier stall condition when compared to cases with steps at XU /C = 0.5 and 0.75, which in turn have lower values of critical angle of attack cr compared to the clean airfoil. As a conclusion, sliding skin with a backward-facing step on the suction side will degrade the aerodynamic performance of the airfoil, however, shifting the step from the leading edge towards the trailing edge relatively mitigate these adverse effects.
Acknowledgments: This work would not have been possible without the generous funding provided by the Aerospace Department at Ryerson University. Author Contributions: Fadi Mishriky performed the numerical testing, contributed to the data analysis and prepared the manuscript. Paul Walsh guided and supervised the numerical analysis and revised the manuscript. Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Nomenclature p Cp XU cd cf cl cp ^ n p0 ^ t cr w F A C k p r v    Observed Order of accuracy Pressure Coefficient Step location on the upper surface of the airfoil Drag coefficient Viscous (friction) drag coefficient Lift coefficient Pressure drag coefficient unit vector normal to the surface Reference pressure unit vector tangent to the surface Critical angle of attack Wall shear stresses Aerodynamic property used in the Richardson's Extrapolation method Reference Area Chord length of the airfoil Specific turbulent kinetic energy Pressure Mesh refinement factor Reference velocity of the flow Turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rate Density of the fluid Specific dissipation rate

References
1. Lentink, D.; Müller, U.K.; Stamhuis, E.J.; de Kat, R.; van Gestel, W.; Veldhuis, L.L.M.; van Leeuwen, J.L. How swifts control their glide performance with morphing wings. Nature 2007, 446, 1082­1085. [CrossRef] [PubMed] Barbarino, S.; Bilgen, O.; Ajaj, R.M.; Friswell, M.I.; Inman, D.J. A review of morphing aircraft. J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct. 2011, 22, 823­877. [CrossRef] Joshi, S.P.; Tidwell, Z.; Crossley, W.A.; Ramakrishnan, S. Comparison of morphing wing strategies based upon aircraft performance impacts. SEA 2004, 2, 32. Weisshaar, T.A. Morphing aircraft systems: Historical perspectives and future challenges. J. Aircr. 2013, 50, 337­353. [CrossRef]

2. 3. 4.

Aerospace 2016, 3, 25

15 of 15

5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21.

Rodriguez, A.R. Morphing aircraft technology survey. In Proceedings of the 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, USA, 8­11 January 2007. Kikuta, M.T. Mechanical Properties of Candidate Materials for Morphing Wings. Doctoral Dissertation, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA, 2003. Thill, C.; Etches, J.; Bond, I.; Potter, K.; Weaver, P. Morphing skins. Aeronaut. J. 2008, 112, 117­139. [CrossRef] Kudva, J.N. Overview of the DARPA smart wing project. J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct. 2004, 15, 261­267. [CrossRef] Bubert, E.A.; Woods, B.K.; Lee, K.; Kothera, C.S.; Wereley, N.M. Design and fabrication of a passive 1D morphing aircraft skin. J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct. 2010, 21, 1699­1717. [CrossRef] Thill, C.; Etches, J.A.; Bond, I.P.; Potter, K.D.; Weaver, P.M. Composite corrugated structures for morphing wing skin applications. Smart Mater. Struct. 2010, 19, 124009. [CrossRef] Chen, Y.; Yin, W.; Liu, Y.; Leng, J. Structural design and analysis of morphing skin embedded with pneumatic muscle fibers. Smart Mater. Struct. 2011, 20, 085033. [CrossRef] Fogleman, F.F.; Kline, R.L. Airfoil for Aircraft. U.S. Patent No. US 3706430 A, 19 December 1972. Lumsdaine, E.; Johnson, W.S.; Fletcher, L.M.; Peach, J.E. Investigation of the Kline-Fogleman Airfoil Section for Rotor Blade Applications; NASA: Hampton, VA, USA, 1974. Fertis, D.G. New airfoil-design concept with improved aerodynamic characteristics. J. Aerosp. Eng. 1994, 7, 328­339. [CrossRef] Finaish, F.; Witherspoon, S. Aerodynamic performance of an airfoil with step-induced vortex for lift augmentation. J. Aerosp. Eng. 1998, 11, 9­16. [CrossRef] Langtry, R.B.; Menter, F.R. Correlation-based transition modeling for unstructured parallelized computational fluid dynamics codes. AIAA J. 2009, 47, 2894­2906. [CrossRef] Menter, F.R.; Langtry, R.; Völker, S. Transition modelling for general purpose CFD codes. Flow Turbul. Combust. 2006, 77, 277­303. [CrossRef] Langtry, R.B.; Menter, F. Transition modeling for general CFD applications in aeronautics. AIAA Paper 2005, 522, 14. Abbott, I.H.; von Doenhoff, A.E. Theory of Wing Sections, Including a Summary of Airfoil Data; Courier Corporation: North Chelmsford, MA, USA, 1959. Asselin, M. An Introduction to Aircraft Performance; American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc.: Reston, VA, USA, 1997. Vassberg, J.C.; Jameson, A. In pursuit of grid convergence for two-dimensional Euler solutions. J. Aircr. 2010, 47, 1152­1166. [CrossRef] © 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

