  
UBER  VS.  PUBLIC  TRANSIT:  FRIEND  OR  FOE?   AN  EMPIRICAL  STUDY  OF  RIDERSHIP  TRENDS  ACROSS  UBER  CITIES  IN  THE   USA        
   by         Dominic  Tremblay   B.A.,  McGill  University,  2012      A  Major  Research  Paper   presented  to  Ryerson  University      in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of   Master  of  Planning     in     Urban  Development                  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2016                                       ©Dominic  Tremblay  2016  

  

  

  

Author's  Declaration  for  Electronic  Submission  of  a  MRP  
   I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  MRP.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  MRP,  including   any  required  final  revisions.        I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the   purpose  of  scholarly  research.        I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by  other   means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of   scholarly  research.        I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.        

ii  

UBER  VS.  PUBLIC  TRANSIT:  FRIEND  OR  FOE?   AN  EMPIRICAL  STUDY  OF  RIDERSHIP  TRENDS  ACROSS  UBER  CITIES  IN  THE  USA      ©Dominic  Tremblay,  2016      Master  of  Planning   in   Urban  Development   Ryerson  University         ABSTRACT      Uber  is  a  disruptive  transportation  network  company  (TNC)  that  is  affecting  the  way   people  move  in  cities.  While  its  effects  on  the  taxi  industry  are  increasingly  clear,  little   research  has  been  conducted  to  study  its  effects  on  public  transit  ridership.  This  study   uses  descriptive  statistics  to  establish  demographic  and  socio-economic  profiles  of  cities   that  Uber  has  targeted,  and  a  quasi  difference-in-difference  analysis  to  explore  Uber's   effect  on  transit  ridership  levels  in  order  to  determine  whether  the  service  is  acting  as  a   complement  or  substitute  to  public  transit.  The  results  from  this  high-level  study   suggest  that  Uber  may  be  more  of  a  complement  to  transit  over  time,  and  in  large,   dense  regions  with  highly-educated,  affluent,  productive  labour  markets  that  already   have  very  high  transit  ridership.  Finally,  recommendations  informed  by  these  findings   are  offered  for  transit  agencies,  policy  makers,  and  municipal  governments  as  they   continue  to  determine  how  to  regulate  Uber  and  similar  ridesourcing  services.      Key  Words:  Uber;  Public  Transit;  USA;  TNC;  Regulation  

        

  

iii  

Acknowledgments     
The  successful  completion  of  this  paper  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the   concerted  efforts  of  a  highly  generous,  intelligent,  and  thoughtful  supporting  cast.        My  thanks  first  go  out  to  my  supervisor  Dr.  Matthias  Sweet  for  sharpening  a  rough  initial   idea  for  this  paper  into  a  well-structured  and  meaningful  study,  and  for  being  so   generous  with  your  time,  dedication  and  intellectual  processing  power  from  start  to   finish.      Thank  you  to  Dr.  Murtaza  Haider  for  offering  your  time  and  providing  thorough  subject   matter  expertise  as  my  second  reader.      I  must  also  acknowledge  the  continued  support  of  the  SURP  faculty  and  administration   throughout  my  time  in  the  M.Pl  program,  and  in  particular  Julia  Macan  for  your  endless   positivity  and  energy.      Un  gros  merci  and  thank  you  to  my  loving  family  who  have  always  supported  and   encouraged  me  in  everything  that  I  do.        Gordana,  thank  you  for  your  love  of  me  and  of  data,  and  for  always  motivating  me  to   take  on  greater  challenges.          And  finally  to  my  friends  and  classmates  who  are  celebrating  their  degree  alongside  me:   thank  you  for  two  lightning-fast  years  of  intellectual  stimulation  and  friendship,  filled   with  memories  of  neighbourhood  explorations,  unexplainable  laughter,  trivia,  healthy   salad  lunches,  unhealthier  dinners,  contact,  dice,  and  endless  cheers-ing.  I  will  miss  our   uniquely  tight-knit  and  talented  graduate  student  community.                   

  

iv  

Table  of  Contents  
      List  of  Figures  .....................................................................................................  p.  vi      Chapter  1:  Introduction  ......................................................................................  p.  1   1.1 Purpose  of  this  paper  .....................................................................................  p.  1   1.2 Uber  ...............................................................................................................  p.  2   1.3 Literature  review  ............................................................................................  p.  7   1.4 Research  gap  ..................................................................................................  p.  11      Chapter  2:  Study  Design  .....................................................................................  p.  13   2.1  Research  Hypotheses  .....................................................................................  p.  13   2.2  Data  Collection  ...............................................................................................  p.  14   2.3  Methodology  ..................................................................................................  p.  15      Chapter  3:  Results  ..............................................................................................  p.  19   3.1  Uber  city  profiles  ............................................................................................  p.  19   3.2  Effects  on  transit  ridership  .............................................................................  p.  27      Chapter  4:  Conclusions  and  Recommendations  ..................................................  p.  31   4.1  Conclusions  ....................................................................................................  p.  31   4.2  Recommendations  .........................................................................................  p.  33   4.3  Study  limitations  and  direction  for  future  research  .......................................  p.  34      References  .........................................................................................................  p.  37     

  

  

v  

List  of  Figures  
   Figure  1:  Mode  preference  by  time  of  day  and  week  .............................................  p.  9   Figure  2:  Trip  purpose  for  recent  users  of  ridesourcing  ..........................................  p.  9   Figure  3:  All  Uber  UZAs  by  year  of  Uber  entry,  i.e.  Uber  city  groups  ......................  p.  19-20   Figure  4:  Uber  City  Groups  by  median  household  income    .....................................  p.  21 Figure  5:  Uber  City  Groups  by  population  density  ..................................................  p.  22   Figure  6:  Uber  City  Groups  by  percentage  of  bachelor  degree  or  higher  ...............  p.  23   Figure  7:  Uber  City  Groups  by  median  age  .............................................................  p.  24   Figure  8:  Uber  City  Groups  by  rates  of  car  ownership  ............................................  p.  25   Figure  9:  Uber  City  Groups  by  percentage  of  working  population  by  industry  .......  p.  26   Figure  10:  Current  day  transit  ridership  levels  across  Uber  and  non-Uber  cities  ....  p.  27 Figure  11:  Transit  ridership  of  Uber  City  Groups  over  a  10-year  period  .................  p.  28   Figure  12:  Ridership  growth  of  Uber  cities  compared  to  No  Uber  cities  .................  p.  29  

vi  

CHAPTER  1:  Introduction  
  

1.1  Purpose  of  this  paper  
Technologies  affect  mobility.  Throughout  history,  various  innovations  in  transportation   technology  have  had  a  significant  influence  on  how  people  travel,  where  they  choose  to   live,  and  the  lifestyle  they  can  afford  to  have.  However,  integrating  emerging  new   technologies  into  existing  transportation  systems  can  be  a  painful  process  for  users  and   operators.  Whenever  such  technological  changes  occur,  older  technologies  often  lose   out  to  the  new.  In  today's  increasingly  connected  world  in  which,  by  2020,  70  percent  of   the  world's  population  will  be  using  a  smartphone,  and  90%  of  it  will  be  covered  by   mobile  broadband  networks  (Ericsson,  2015),  technology  appears  to  be  on  the  verge  of   significantly  affecting  people's  mobility  once  more.      Uber  is  a  transportation  network  company  (TNC)  that  has  capitalized  on  increased  global   connectivity.  Since  its  debut  in  2010,  the  company's  political  tactics  and  smartphone- enabled  ridesourcing  technology  have  made  it  a  highly  disruptive  force  in  the  urban   transportation  landscape.  Most  indications  suggest  that  the  taxi  industry  is  being   strongly  impacted  by  TNCs,  as  reflected  by  the  industry's  vigorous  and  sometimes   violent  opposition  to  Uber's  entrance  into  new  markets.  As  governments  across  the   world  determine  how  to  integrate  this  disruptive  new  technology  into  their  existing   transportation  networks  alongside  taxis,  concerns  have  been  raised  about  how  this   technology  is  affecting  public  transit  systems  (Wadhwa,  2014).      How  will  Uber  impact  public  transit  use?    This  is  an  important  question  for  cities,   because  Uber  and  other  TNCs  have  the  potential  of  disrupting  public  transit  service   provision  by  eating  into  its  market  share,  and  therefore  negatively  affecting  the  mobility   of  residents  who  primarily  rely  on  transit.  Indeed,  Uber's  effect  could  be  significant   enough  to  force  a  transit  agency  to  reduce  its  service  due  to  a  loss  of  ridership  and   revenues.  As  a  consequence,  the  mobility  of  residents  once  ensured  by  a  public  service   would  be  left  in  the  hands  of  a  private  entity  only  guided  by  the  profit  motive.  The      1  

vulnerable  ridership  in  this  case  could  therefore  be  much  worse  off  over  time.  For  this   scenario  to  be  a  legitimate  concern,  however,  Uber  would  have  to  be  demonstrably   taking  ridership  away  from  public  transit.  Has  this  been  the  case?      This  research  paper  attempts  to  answer  this  question  by  examining  the  relationship   between  public  transit  ridership  and  the  emergence  of  Uber  in  cities  across  the  United   States.  By  looking  at  descriptive  statistics  of  ridership  trends,  the  primary  goal  of  this   research  is  to  determine  at  a  high  level  what  effect  Uber  is  having  on  transit  ridership,   and  to  determine  if  it  is  acting  as  a  complement  or  substitute.  Secondary  goals  of  the   research  are  to  establish  a  profile  of  cities  where  Uber  has  entered  the  market,  in  order   to  understand  why  the  arrival  of  the  company  in  a  given  city  may  have  had  a  more   significant  effect  in  transit  ridership,  and  attempt  to  determine  through  empirical   evidence  if  Uber  views  itself  as  a  complement  or  substitute  to  public  transit.  Finally,  this   paper  offers  recommendations  based  on  this  research  for  transit  planning  agencies,   municipal  governments,  and  policy  makers  across  North  America  as  they  continue  to   adapt  to  a  changing  transportation  landscape  as  a  result  of  new  technologies.    

   1.2  Uber  
What  is  Uber?   Uber  is  a  multinational  TNC  that  launched  in  2010.  It  operates  in  more  than  300  cities  in  over   60  countries  worldwide,  relies  on  a  network  of  over  one  million  private  drivers  globally  (Uber,   2016),  and  is  currently  valued  at  more  than  $50  billion  (USD)  according  to  Fortune  magazine   (Gandel,  2015).  This  so-called  "disruptive"  technology  company  is  currently  worth  more  than   other  notable  disruptive  firms  of  the  21st  century  such  as  Tesla  Motors  ($29  billion)  (Angelo,   2015),  SpaceX  ($12  billion)  (D'Onfro,  2015),  and  Airbnb  ($26  billion)  (Alba,  2015).  Uber's   success  is  largely  attributable  to  the  rapid  rise  in  popularity  of  its  smartphone  application  in   which  users  can  request  a  car  trip  from  an  Uber  driver  who  will,  through  a  similar  GPS- enabled  Uber  application  interface  on  their  smartphone,  be  given  pick-up  location  and   destination  information  prior  to  the  user's  entry  into  the  personally  owned  vehicle.  The  cost  

2  

of  a  trip  is  based  on  its  distance,  number  of  riders  in  the  car,  and  an  algorithm  that  calculates   area-wide  demand  for  the  service  called  "surge  pricing"  (Uber,  2016).  Payment  for  service  is   also  pre-arranged  through  the  application.      The  company  offers  several  variations  on  this  smartphone-based  service  model,  ranging  from   UberPool  in  which  users  with  similar  locations  and  destinations  are  grouped  in  the  same  Uber   vehicle,  UberHop  in  which  Uber  vehicles  drive  along  fixed  routes  during  commuting  times,  to   even  more  localized  Uber  services  such  as  UberSki  in  Salt  Lake  City  that  offers  direct  rides  to   ski  slopes  (Uber,  2016).  Various  new  Uber  concepts  are  routinely  developed  and  piloted  in   cities  across  the  world.      While  Uber  does  have  competitors  in  an  emerging  transportation  network  company  market   in  North  America­  Lyft,  Sidecar,  and  others  offer  similar  services­  Uber  is  currently  the  largest   player.  It  has  also  received  the  most  significant  media  coverage  and  governmental  attention.   Uber  was  therefore  chosen  as  the  TNC  of  study  in  this  paper  because  it  was  the  one  most   likely  to  have  had  an  effect  on  transit  ridership  to  date  given  its  scale  of  operations,  and   because  its  success  to  date  may  provide  insight  as  to  which  cities  are  best  suited  or  vulnerable   to  TNCs.          Possibilities  for  cities  and  planning  implications     Uber  purports  to  act  in  a  city's  best  interests  in  several  ways:  by  creating  jobs  and   additional  income  sources  for  its  drivers,  by  acting  as  a  complement  to  transit  by   bringing  people  to  and  from  transit  stations  and  hence  providing  a  solution  to  the   first/last  mile  problem,  by  reducing  drunk  driving,  and  by  reducing  the  total  number  of   cars  on  the  road  through  use  of  its  UberPool  service  in  particular  (Uber,  2016).  More   broadly,  Uber  and  similar  ridesourcing  TNCs  have  the  potential  to  positively  address   certain  environmental,  economic,  and  social  issues.        Environmentally,  TNCs  such  as  Uber  can  have  positive  effects  in  cities  by  potentially:  

3  

   · Providing  a  service  that  reduces  the  need  to  purchase  and  own  a  private   automobile  (Taylor  et  al.  2016,  30)   · Catalyzing  the  development  of  zero-emissions  and  autonomous  vehicles  through   increased  collaboration  between  technologically-inclined  companies   · Reducing  physical  cash  transactions  often  required  by  traditional  taxicab  services      According  to  Silverstein  (2014),  Uber  may  enable  more  alternate  choices  to  car   ownership,  as  Uber  is  generally  less  costly  than  taxis  but  offers  a  similar  service.     Environmental  benefits  from  Uber  may  or  may  not  materialize,  depending  on  regulatory   context,  as  Uber  may  incur  no  net  environmental  benefit  if  it  offsets  current  sustainable   options  or  increases  travel  demand  (Velickovic,  2015).    Nevertheless,  the  benefits  of   TNCs  are  potentially  significant,  and  through  collective  regulatory  action  could  be   harnessed  to  bring  about  positive  environmental  effects.  As  an  example  of  how   technologies  can  catalyze  environmental  gains,  with  the  rise  of  UberPool,  Uber  has   developed  a  system  to  get  two  or  more  potential  drivers  into  one  vehicle.  Moreover,   given  that  Uber  predicts  it  will  rely  on  driverless  cars  in  the  future  (Gilbert,  2015),  which   are  expected  to  be  electric  (Mui,  2016),  Uber  may  catalyze  environmentally  sensitive   mobility.      Uber  also  appears  to  leverage  environmental  sensibility  as  a  tool  for  growing  its   business.  On  Earth  Day  in  2015,  Uber  came  out  with  a  variety  of  city-specific  promotions   like  discounts  on  its  carpool  service  in  New  York,  and  the  ability  to  request  hybrid  or   electric  vehicles  in  Boston.  In  Seattle,  Uber  partnered  with  local  bus  and  bike  share   services  to  host  a  "Ditch  Your  Keys  Challenge"  (Cohen,  2015).        Economically,  TNCs  may  generate  positive  effects  at  governmental,  agency  and   individual  scales  by  potentially:     

4  

·

Providing  a  new  source  of  municipal  revenue  through  fees  or  taxes  (Taylor  et  al.   2016,  54)   Filling  gaps  in  transportation  network  coverage  (Donahue,  2015)  caused  by   limited  funding  of  public  transit  agencies   Coordinating  with  public  transit  agencies  to  deliver  private  sector-led   technologies  that  lead  to  more  efficient  service  delivery     Providing  more  affordable  and  a  wider  variety  of  choice  in  mobility  compared  to   individual  car  ownership  that  gives  access  to  greater  economic  opportunities   (Taylor  et  al.  2016,  67)  

·

·

·

   Examples  of  potential  cost  savings  on  the  transit  supply  side  can  come  in  the  form  of   measures  such  as  dynamic  pricing  and  seamless  smartphone  user  interface  across   different  modes.  Certain  transit  agencies  in  the  USA  have  already  experimented  with   this  type  of  collaboration.  In  Dallas,  a  pilot  program  was  set  up  for  St.  Patrick's  day  in   2015  where  DART  (Dallas  Area  Rapid  Transit)  customers  were  offered  free  Uber  rides   to/from  the  transit  station  to  their  starting  and  ending  destinations  (DART,  2015).   Following  the  success  of  this  program,  the  transit  agency  and  the  private  company  have   since  joined  forces  by  offering  the  Uber  app  as  part  of  the  transit  system's  suite  of   mobile  platform  services.  This  is  a  first  step  toward  integrating  Uber  as  part  of  the   transit  network's  standard  offerings  of  buses  and  light  rail,  though  Uber  still  operates  as   a  separate  financial  entity.  Similarly  in  Atlanta,  MARTA  (Metropolitan  Atlanta  Rapid   Transit  Authority)  customers  are  able  to  use  the  Uber  mobile  platform  to  pay  for  their   transit  fee,  and  cover  their  "first/last  mile"  trip  using  an  Uber  car.  This  is  part  of  the   transit  operator's  bid  to  modernize  its  mobile  platform,  while  providing  its  users  with  a   greater  amount  of  mobility  options  (Simmonds,  2015).        In  terms  of  social  issues,  TNCs  like  Uber  can  have  positive  effects  by  potentially   increasing  the  urban  mobility  of  residents  lacking  the  means  to  afford  private  car   ownership  (Taylor  et  al.  2016,  138).  By  providing  these  residents  with  an  affordable  

5  

option  to  make  non-routine  trips  that  require  a  car,  Uber  and  similar  TNCs  could   potentially  be  meeting  broader  social  needs  currently  unmet  by  public  transit  agencies.      Regulatory  battles   Despite  these  potential  positive  impacts  brought  on  by  TNCs,  the  legality  and  questions   surrounding  regulation  of  TNCs  like  Uber  have  sparked  fierce  debates  and  various   responses  around  the  world.  In  most  cases,  the  main  complainant  against  Uber  has   been  the  taxi  industry.  Generally,  taxi  agencies  argue  that  Uber  is  unfairly  taking  away   from  their  business  by  circumventing  the  municipal  regulations  by  which  they  are  forced   to  abide.  In  response  to  these  reactions  and  their  city's  transportation  needs,  municipal   governments  have  taken  varying  measures  to  curb  this  anger,  ranging  all  the  way  from   enforced  citywide  bans,  to  subsidizing  Uber  trips  to  and  from  transit  stops  for  residents   in  suburban  communities  (Liston,  2016).      Uber  and  public  transit   While  most  of  the  controversy  surrounding  Uber  has  been  centered  around  its  impact   on  the  taxi  industry,  its  possible  impact  on  public  transit  has  received  less  attention.   Uber  describes  itself  as  a  complement  to  transit­  in  San  Diego,  Uber  claims  that  its   platform  "allows  safe  and  reliable  rides  to  happen  at  all  hours  of  the  day,  supporting   and  extending  San  Diego's  public  transportation  system."  To  achieve  this,  Uber  admits   that  "gaps  in  public  transportation  become  hubs  for  Uber"  and  that  they  go  where  bus   and  rail  do  not,  while  also  "making  it  easy  for  people  to  take  advantage  of  the  existing   public  infrastructure"  (Donahue,  2015).      If  this  is  indeed  the  case,  are  there  specific  conditions  under  which  Uber  acts  as  a   complement  or  a  substitute?  Does  Uber  encourage  the  use  of  public  transit  by  way  of   promoting  a  car-free  lifestyle  in  which  trips  previously  made  by  a  personal  vehicle  are   now  replaced  by  transit,  and  non-routine  auto  trips  are  replaced  by  Uber?  Or  

6  

alternatively,  has  Uber  been  taking  away  from  transit  ridership  by  offering  a  faster,   more  reliable  service  for  commuting?      In  order  to  begin  answering  these  questions  and  effectively  understand  how  Uber   affects  public  transit  use,  a  broader  exploration  of  Uber's  recent  impact  on   transportation  is  required.     

1.3  Literature  Review  
Given  Uber's  relative  novelty,  its  ongoing  expansion,  and  its  rapidly  evolving  suite  of   services,  transportation  planning  literature  is  still  just  starting  to  understand  the   implications  of  Uber  and  TNCs  on  transportation  systems  and  how  to  plan  for  them.   Relatively  little  research  has  empirically  tested  the  links  between  Uber  services  and   public  transit  use.      Uber-specific  studies   Haider  et  al.  (2015)  examine  the  effects  of  possible  taxi  service  deregulation  as  a  result   of  the  emergence  of  TNCs,  by  documenting  existing  research  on  the  relationship   between  taxicab  deregulation,  fleet  sizes,  and  congestion  and  tailpipe  emission   increases  in  New  York  City.  The  authors  conclude  that  deregulation  of  the  taxicab   industry  would  lead  to  more  cars  on  the  road,  leading  to  higher  traffic  congestion  and   increased  tailpipe  emissions,  and  that  the  City  of  Toronto  should  consider  these  findings   in  their  recommendations  on  how  to  regulate  Uber.  Notably,  the  study  points  to  a  poll   conducted  in  Toronto  in  September  2015  that  suggests  that  ridesharing  services  such  as   Uber  are  taking  riders  away  from  transit  (CNW,  2015).  In  this  poll,  1  out  of  4   respondents  who  use  both  Uber  and  public  transit  expected  their  usage  of  transit  to   decrease  because  of  Uber.        Rayle  et  al.  (2014)  examine  the  question  of  how  ridesourcing  services  and  taxis  compare   according  to  trip  types,  customers,  and  locations  served.  They  also  examine  if  

7  

ridesourcing  complements  or  competes  with  public  transit,  and  they  look  at  its  potential   impacts  on  passenger  miles  traveled.  The  results  of  their  intercept  survey  in  San   Francisco  notably  revealed  that  ridesourcing  serves  a  "previously  unmet"  demand  for   convenient  "point-to-point"  travel  typically  shorter  than  the  average  taxi  ride;  that  users   of  ridesourcing  tend  to  be  younger  and  own  fewer  cars;  that  ridesourcing  appears  to   substitute  transit  on  longer  trips  but  otherwise  complements  transit;  and  that  there  is   an  unclear  relationship  between  private  automobile  use  and  ridesourcing.  But  whereas     the  poll  referenced  in  the  Haider  et  al.  (2015)  study  suggests  that  Uber  may  substitute   for  public  transit  trips,  Rayle  et  al.  (2014)  provide  evidence  that  Uber  may  be  inducing   demand  for  new  trip  types,  and  not  substituting  for  any  other  mode.          In  a  study  published  by  the  American  Public  Transit  Association  titled  "Shared  Mobility   and  the  Transformation  of  Public  Transit",  Murphy  et  al.  (2016)  use  a  mixed  method   approach  to  examine  the  relationship  between  public  transportation  and  shared   modes­  referring  in  this  study  to  bikesharing,  carsharing,  and  ridesourcing.  Through  in- depth  interviews  with  transportation  officials,  a  survey  of  4,500  shared  mobility  users,   and  an  analysis  of  transit  and  ridesourcing  capacity  and  demand,  the  authors  notably   determined  that  the  more  people  use  shared  modes,  the  more  likely  they  are  to  use   public  transit,  own  fewer  cars,  and  spend  less  on  transportation  overall,  and  that  shared   modes  complement  public  transit,  enhancing  urban  mobility  (Murphy  et  al.,  2016).     These  findings  are  broadly  consistent  with  those  of  Rayle  et  al.  (2014).      Moreover,  it  was  determined  that  ridesourcing  services  are  most  frequently  used  for   social  trips  between  10pm  and  4am,  at  times  when  public  transit  runs  infrequently  or  is   not  available,  that  shared  modes  substitute  more  for  automobile  trips  than  public   transit  trips,  and  that  people  don't  commonly  use  ridesourcing  for  commuting.  These   findings  suggest  that  users  of  ridesourcing  do  so  situationally,  and  not  regularly.  The  two   figures  below  illustrate  some  of  these  findings:     

8  

Figure  1:  Mode  preference  by  time  of  day  and  week*  

   *Taken  from  Murphy  et  al.  (2016),  p.12      Figure  2:  Trip  purpose  for  recent  users  of  ridesourcing*    

   *Taken  from  Murphy  et  al.  (2016),  p.11      These  two  graphs  suggest  that  users  of  ridesourcing  do  not  use  services  like  Uber  most   often  for  regular  commuting  purposes,  but  more  often  for  less  frequent,  late-night   social  trips.  The  study  ultimately  recommends  that  public  transit  agencies  can  improve   urban  mobility  of  all  its  users  by  integrating  new  technology  through  collaboration  with   the  private  sector,  in  order  to  improve  user  experience  and  even  paratransit  service.  It  

9  

also  points  to  the  benefits  of  ridesourcing  for  low  income  residents,  and  underscores   the  role  ridesharing  and  ridesourcing  can  play  in  helping  people  access  destinations   more  easily  reachable  by  car,  while  avoiding  the  costs  of  full-time  car  ownership.      While  this  extensive  study  that  employed  mixed  methods  presents  very  interesting   findings,  the  cities  in  which  the  survey  for  the  Murphy  et  al.  (2016)  study  was  put  out   were  limited  to  Austin,  Boston,  Chicago,  Los  Angeles,  San  Francisco,  Seattle,  and   Washington  D.C.­  cities  that  have  relatively  mature  public  transit  systems.  Chapter  3  will   attempt  to  corroborate  the  findings  of  the  Murphy  et  al.  (2016)  study  through  empirical   evidence  based  on  public  transit  ridership  across  a  broader  range  in  characteristics  of   urbanized  areas,  and  determine  if  there  are  differences  in  cities  where  the  transit   system  is  less  developed.        Ridesharing   As  research  on  Uber,  TNCs,  and  ridesourcing  is  nascent,  lessons  on  Uber's  potential   implications  can  be  gleaned  by  borrowing  from  related  research,  such  as  that  on   ridesharing.  Martin  &  Shaheen  (2011)  conducted  an  online  survey  of  North  American   carsharing  members  of  the  carsharing  industry's  leading  services  (such  as  ZipCar,  etc.).   Their  results  showed  that  carsharing  lowers  the  total  number  of  vehicles  owned  by   carsharing  service  members,  and  that  carsharing  also  deterred  carless  households  from   acquiring  a  new  vehicle.  Households  joining  carsharing  owned  an  average  of  0.47   vehicles  per  household  before  joining  a  carsharing  service,  but  that  average  was  shown   to  drop  to  0.24  after  membership.  Indeed,  carsharing  households  exhibited  a  dramatic   shift  towards  a  car-less  lifestyle.  While  the  Martin  &  Shaheen  (2011)  study  looks  at  a   service  that  is  not  the  same  as  a  ridesourcing  service  such  as  Uber,  it  does  demonstrate   that  providing  people  more  access  to  cars  that  are  not  their  own  reduces  rates  of   private  car  ownership  and  may  encourage  increased  transit  use.       

10  

The  literature  reviewed  in  this  section  helps  establish  a  theoretical  foundation  from   which  to  derive  hypotheses  regarding  the  effect  of  Uber  on  public  transit  ridership.  This   foundation  can  be  summed  by  the  following  statements:      · Uber  may  be  inducing  demand  for  new  trip  types,  i.e.  it  is  not  eating  into  the   market  share  of  other  transportation  services.   · · Use  of  ridesourcing  services  like  Uber  is  more  situational  than  regular.   If  people  are  given  a  reliable  option  to  use  a  car  that  is  not  their  own,  they  are   more  likely  to  forego  car  ownership.  

   1.4  Research  gap    
In  providing  this  foundation,  the  parts  of  the  literature  reviewed  also  present  interesting   research  gaps  in  terms  of  methodology  and  scope  when  it  comes  to  Uber.  It  is  far  from   clear  whether  Uber  is  likely  to  complement  public  transit  over  the  long-term  as  a   mobility-housing  bundle  (i.e.  the  combined  decision  of  where  to  live  and  how  to  travel)   or  whether  it  is  likely  to  substitute  for  public  transit  and  erode  its  market  share.     Different  studies  have  found  competing  evidence  ­  partly  as  a  consequence  of  research   design.    Aside  from  the  Murphy  et  al.  (2016)  study  that  approximated  Uber  demand   data  compared  to  transit,  the  other  Uber  studies  that  look  at  how  it  relates  with  public   transit  have  used  a  survey  approach,  with  varying  conclusions.  The  poll  mentioned  in   the  Haider  et  al.  (2015)  study  suggests  that  about  one  third  of  users  expect  their  transit   usage  to  decrease  as  a  result  of  Uber,  but  does  not  specify  which  type  of  transit  trips  are   expected  to  be  substituted.  The  survey  in  Rayle  et  al.  (2014)  suggests  that  Uber  perhaps   complements  transit  for  shorter  trips.  The  Murphy  et  al.  (2016)  study  shows  that  Uber   use  is  more  situational  rather  than  commonplace.        An  empirical  look  at  ridership  trends  is  warranted  to  further  explore  the  conclusions   drawn  from  these  studies  and  to  inform  future  research  on  the  topic.  Since  Uber  has   been  around  in  certain  cities  for  over  5  years  as  of  writing  of  this  paper,  it  may  be  

11  

possible  to  observe  some  short  and  medium  term  effects  of  Uber  on  overall  public   transit  ridership  levels  in  cities  where  it  has  entered  the  market.  Despite  regulatory   battles  over  Uber  and  other  TNCs  in  North  America  and  worldwide,  decisions  regarding   regulating  and  planning  for  Uber  will  also  benefit  from  baseline  data  to  understand  its   effects  on  transit.  In  what  types  of  cities  is  Uber  making  the  most  impact,  and  what  is   the  nature  of  that  impact?  What  if  Uber  could  encourage  the  use  of  a  government-run   transit  agency?  The  following  chapter  presents  hypotheses  informed  by  the  background   information  and  literature  reviewed  in  this  chapter,  and  describes  the  data  and  methods   used  to  set  up  a  study  designed  to  explore  these  questions.        

12  

Chapter  2:  Study  Design  
  

2.1  Research  Hypotheses  
Uber  city  profiles   In  order  to  contextualize  ridership  trends  in  cities  across  the  USA  in  which  Uber  has   entered  (`Uber  cities')  and  address  the  question  of  what  type  of  cities  Uber  has   prioritized  and  continues  to  target,  it  is  useful  to  develop  an  understanding  of  these   cities  based  on  factors  such  as  income  levels,  age,  population  density,  and  rates  of  car   ownership.  It  might  be  expected  that  Uber  prefers  cities  with  higher  population  and   population  density,  in  which  there  are  enough  destinations  to  induce  demand  for  new   trip  types  not  currently  served  by  transit  or  other  transportation  services.  Since  large,   dense  cities  typically  have  more  robust  transit  networks,  it  is  therefore  expected  that   the  cities  that  Uber  prefers  and  targets  initially  will  also  be  cities  with  greater  transit  use   overall.  However,  if  Uber's  goal  is  to  target  cities  that  have  insufficient  transit  to  supply   demand  for  regular  travel,  then  it  may  be  expected  to  target  these  types  of  cities  as   well.      Uber  effects  on  transit  ridership   Given  that  Uber  is  not  expected  to  substitute  transit  on  regular  trips  like  daily  work   commutes,  it  is  not  expected  to  have  a  significant  effect  on  transit  ridership  in  the  short   term.  In  the  medium  term,  Uber  may  provide  an  alternative  to  private  car  ownership   and  could  be  expected  to  encourage  lower  levels  of  car  ownership  as  people  adopt  and   "Uber  and  Transit"  lifestyle.  According  to  a  recent  market  report,  Americans  are  getting   a  new  car  every  6.5  years  on  average  (Henry,  2014).  Therefore,  any  evidence  of  a   medium  term  effect  on  transit  is  likely  to  emerge  roughly  in  this  amount  of  time  after   Uber's  entry.        Moreover,  if  Uber's  $50  billion  valuation  is  any  indication,  investors  likely  predict  that   Uber's  success  is  dependent  on  the  company  either:  

13  

1. Inducing  demand  for  a  significant  amount  of  new  trip  types,     2. Taking  a  significant  portion  of  market  share  away  from  existing  transportation   options  such  as  both  transit  and/or  taxis,  or   3. A  combination  of  both  of  these  hypotheses  (Damodaran,  2015).        Given  such  a  high  market  valuation,  it  is  most  likely  that  investors  are  buying  into  both   visions  (option  3).  Therefore,  if  the  results  of  this  study  show  that  Uber  is  not   demonstrably  taking  away  from  the  public  transit  market  share,  then  the  $50  billion   valuation  rests  on  the  expectation  that  Uber  is  creating  demand  for  additional  trips,  and   likely  taking  away  market  share  from  non-transit  transportation  services  such  as  taxis.   Such  a  result  would  also  reinforce  the  conclusions  of  the  Murphy  et  al.  (2016)  study.   Although  such  company  valuations  are  not  crystal  balls  that  always  accurately  predict   the  future  (e.g.  the  `Dot  Com'  bubble  of  the  2000s),  they  do  speak  to  a  trend  that  in  this   case  warrants  investigation  in  the  interest  of  adequate  transit  planning  and  municipal   governance.     

2.2  Data  Collection  
In  order  to  test  these  hypotheses,  it  was  necessary  to  gather  data  from  several  sources.   This  study  focuses  on  the  United  States  due  to  Uber's  early  and  sustained  market   presence  in  American  cities  and  due  to  the  availability  of  a  unified  set  of  data  to  track   transit  ridership  across  those  cities.        First,  data  was  collected  on  the  timing  of  Uber's  market  entry  into  major  US  urban   markets.  This  timeline  was  estimated  using  information  from  Uber's  website,  and  the   dates  of  entry  were  determined  through  online  research  of  local  media  coverage  of  the   service's  arrival.  In  cases  where  Uber  service  was  partially  interrupted  due  to   government  intervention  and  then  resumed,  Uber's  date  of  entry  (for  purposes  of   descriptive  statistics)  original  market  entry  date  was  retained.       

14  

Second,  data  from  2014  US  Census  Bureau  (5-year  averages)  on  various  demographic   metrics  in  US  Metropolitan  Statistical  Areas  (`MSA')  was  collected  from  the  U.S.  Census   Bureau.  Census  data  described  median  age,  sex,  income  levels,  rates  of  car  ownership   for  commuting  workers,  and  education  levels.  Although  MSA  boundaries  tend  to  be  very   large  and  go  beyond  urban  cores  where  Uber  trips  are  most  likely  generated,  MSAs   capture  the  wide  variety  of  travel  patterns  possibly  undertaken  in  a  region  by  people   not  necessarily  bound  to  the  downtown.  Indeed,  according  to  Taylor  et  al.  2016,  TNC   "drivers  are  not  restricted  to  picking  up  passengers  in  particular  municipalities"  (Taylor   et  al.  2016,  73).        Third,  data  from  the  2014  National  Transit  Database  (`NTD')  were  used  to  estimate   transit  ridership  changes  over  time.  The  Service  Data  and  Operating  Data  Time  Series   dataset  was  used  to  observe  trends  in  Passenger  Miles  Travelled  (`PMT')  as  a  way  to   estimate  transit  use  in  different  cities,  as  defined  by  Urbanized  Area  (`UZA').  The  urban   populations  and  areas  provided  by  the  NTD  data  were  used  to  calculate  population   densities  of  the  respective  UZAs  observed  in  the  study.    While  UZA  and  MSA  boundaries   are  not  identical,  almost  all  public  transit  trips  remain  within  UZA  boundaries  while   Uber's  coverage  is  more  variegated.  

   2.3  Methodology  
This  study  uses  descriptive  statistics  as  a  way  of  drawing  high-level  conclusions  about   Uber's  possible  effect  on  overall  ridership  trends,  limiting  transit  ridership  observations   to  a  10-year  period  from  2005  to  2014.  Although  the  NTD  database  does  provide   ridership  information  as  far  back  as  1991,  Uber  only  arrived  in  its  first  city  in  2010  and   therefore  a  5-year  pre-Uber  look  was  deemed  sufficient.  In  the  full  10-year  period,  it   was  possible  to  establish  the  following  baseline  ridership  trends:      · · Growth  rates  in  transit  ridership  across  Uber  and  non-Uber  cities;   Current  levels  (as  of  2014)  of  transit  ridership  across  Uber  and  non-Uber  cities.  

15  

   Cities  in  the  NTD  database  were  grouped  according  their  year  of  Uber  entry  (`Uber  City   Groups').  These  groups  were  first  compared  based  on  demographic  and  socio-economic   metrics  of  population,  population  density,  median  income,  vehicle  ownership,  education   level,  sex,  and  age.  Then,  these  groups  were  compared  according  to  their  ridership   levels  over  the  10-year  period  described.        Establishing  baseline  trends  and  Uber  city  groups   To  adequately  compare  demographic  and  ridership  information  across  the  areas  tracked   by  the  NTD  database,  the  first  step  was  to  aggregate  ridership  information  from  multiple   transit  service  providers  for  a  combined  UZA.  For  example,  the  "Chicago,  IL-IN"  UZA  had   17  total  transit  agencies  operating  within  it­  those  were  aggregated  into  one  "Chicago,   IL-IN"  UZA  for  which  total  ridership  trends  could  be  observed.  Agencies  that  did  not   have  full  10-year  data  starting  from  2005  (until  2014)  were  discounted  in  the  UZA   aggregate  to  mitigate  sudden  spikes  in  total  ridership  levels  caused  by  a  new  transit   system  appearing  or  disappearing.      Once  the  historic  ridership  levels  for  the  UZAs  were  estimated  using  the  NTD  data,  the   cities  where  Uber  is  currently  operating  needed  to  be  matched  by  name  according  to   those  UZAs.  Since  Uber  city  names  as  defined  by  Uber  did  not  always  match  up  with  UZA   names,  Uber  cities  in  those  cases  were  given  special  treatment.  For  example,  in   Maryland,  Uber  entered  the  city  of  Baltimore  in  2013,  but  Uber  entered  the  adjacent   city  of  Annapolis  in  2014  only.  They  both  fall  within  the  Baltimore  UZA,  so  for  the   purposes  of  this  study  it  was  determined  that  Uber  entered  the  "Baltimore,  MD"  UZA  in   2013,  even  though  Uber  entered  other  parts  of  that  UZA  like  Annapolis  only  a  year  later.   This  is  a  study  limitation,  along  with  the  underlying  assumption  in  this  method  that  trips   originating  from  an  Uber-defined  city  such  as  Annapolis  might  service  a  rider  who  lives   within  the  Baltimore  UZA  but  not  in  a  destination  area  that  is  not  officially  serviced  by   Uber  (i.e.  outside  of  "Baltimore"  and  "Annapolis"  according  to  Uber).    

16  

  Quasi  `Difference-in-difference'  calculation   Once  these  Uber  City  Groups  were  finalized,  and  the  demographic  comparison  of  these   groups  was  completed,  the  next  step  was  to  compare  ridership  levels  over  time  across   the  Uber  City  Groups.  To  determine  a  benchmark  by  which  to  compare  ridership  growth   of  these  groups,  the  `No  Uber'  group  was  used  analogously  to  a  control  group.    Thus,   those  regions  in  which  Uber  did  not  enter  serve  to  provide  a  benchmark  to  which   "normal  transit  ridership  growth"  can  be  compared  for  regions  entered  by  Uber.    This   was  done  for  two  reasons:        · To  account  for  the  compounding  effects  of  the  2008  economic  recession  on   transit  ridership  across  Uber  and  non-Uber  cities  alike.     ·    In  order  to  detect  these  differences,  an  imperfect  "difference  in  difference"  calculation   was  performed,  whereby  the  ratio  between  ridership  growth  in  an  Uber  City  Group  prior   and  after  Uber  entry  was  compared  to  the  ratio  between  ridership  growth  in  the  control   "No  Uber"  city  group  in  the  same  time  periods.  This  calculation  is  represented  by  the   following  equation:     
!!"#$   /  !! !!!!   /  !!""# !!"#$   /  !! !!!!   /  !!""#

To  detect  differences  in  ridership  growth  between  the  periods  before  and  after   Uber  entry  across  different  Uber  City  Groups.  

  
  

/

  

Whereby:     R  =  Transit  ridership  levels  of  given  Uber  City  Group     U  =  Year  of  Uber  entry  of  given  Uber  City  Group   N  =  Transit  ridership  levels  of  "No  Uber"  city  group     

17  

As  an  example,  for  the  2012  Uber  City  Group  (the  group  comprised  of  cities  where  Uber   entered  in  2012),  the  calculation  to  determine  the  ratio  looks  like  this  (2014  is  the  most   recent  year  of  transit  data,  and  2005  is  the  first  year  of  the  study  period):    

!"#$   /  !"#! !"#$   /  !"#! /    !"##   /  !""# !"##   /  !""#
As  will  be  shown  in  the  results  section  below,  the  No  Uber  city  group  is  characteristically   quite  different  from  the  group  where  Uber  entered  earlier.  Therefore,  there  are  certain   limitations  to  this  approach  given  that  the  No  Uber  group  is  not  an  ideal  control  group.     As  a  result,  this  approach  functions  as  a  "quasi"  difference-in-difference  analysis.  While   this  limitation  is  discussed  in  the  final  chapter,  the  No  Uber  group  still  provides  an   illustrative  benchmark  by  which  to  compare  Uber  City  Groups  to  each  other.    Based  on   this  relative  difference  measure,  values  above  one  indicate  that  transit  ridership  grew   faster  after  Uber's  entry  in  an  Uber  city  compared  to  the  relative  change  in  transit   ridership  growth  in  non-Uber  cities.    In  contrast,  values  less  than  one  indicate  that   transit  ridership  grew  relatively  slower  in  Uber  regions  after  its  market  entry.              

18  

Chapter  3:  Results  
  

3.1  Uber  city  profiles  
Market  entries   The  figure  below  presents  all  of  the  UZAs  in  the  USA  where  Uber  was  operating  at  the   time  of  this  study,  grouped  by  year  of  Uber  entry  into  those  cities  (Uber  City  Groups).   From  this  table,  it  is  possible  to  observe  that  Uber  started  off  in  a  limited  number  of   cities,  and  that  its  growth  has  been  significant  in  the  past  two  years.  Uber  targeted  high- profile  cities  in  its  first  years  before  moving  into  smaller-profile  markets.      Figure  3:  All  Uber  UZAs  by  year  of  Uber  entry,  i.e.  Uber  City  Groups     
UBER   CITY   GROUP   2010   San   Francisco- Oakland,  CA   Washington,   DC-VA-MD   Dallas-Fort   Worth- Arlington,   TX   Baltimore,   MD   Indianapolis,   IN   Akron,  OH   Bakersfield,   CA   Cleveland,   OH         New  York- Newark,   NY-NJ-CT   Boston,   MA-NH-RI   Columbus,   OH   Tucson,  AZ   Amarillo,   TX   Cincinnati,   OH-KY-IN   Burlington,   VT   Riverside- San   Bernardino,   CA   Miami,  FL                 

2011  

Chicago,  IL-IN  

  

  

  

  

   Minneapolis- St.  Paul,  MN- WI   Santa   Barbara,  CA      Austin,  TX   Sarasota- Bradenton,   FL   Greenville,   SC  

2012  

Atlanta,  GA  

San  Diego,   CA  

Denver- Aurora,  CO   Oklahoma   City,  OK   Trenton,  NJ   Asheville,   NC   Hartford,  CT  

Los  Angeles,   CA  

Phoenix- Mesa,  AZ   Nashville- Davidson,  TN      Wichita,  KS   Blacksburg,   VA   Chattanooga,   TN-GA   Fayetteville- Springdale- Rogers,  AR- MO   Grand   Rapids,  MI  

2013  

Charlotte,  NC- SC   Honolulu,  HI   Albuquerque,   NM   Bangor,  ME   College   Station-Bryan,   TX  

Detroit,  MI   Providence,   RI-MA   Ann  Arbor,   MI   New   Orleans,  LA  

Seattle,  WA  

   Athens- Clarke   County,  GA   Portland,   ME   Charleston- North   Charleston,   SC   El  Paso,  TX- NM   Gainesville,   FL  

2014  

Raleigh,  NC  

Durham,  NC  

Columbia,   MO  

Charleston,  SC  

Corpus   Christi,  TX   Cape  Coral,   FL  

Des  Moines,   IA  

Fayetteville,   NC   Green  Bay,   WI  

Flagstaff,  AZ  

Flint,  MI  

Fresno,  CA  

19  

Greensboro,   NC   Knoxville,   TN   Modesto,   CA   Pensacola,   FL-AL   San  Luis   Obispo,  CA   Wilmington,   NC  

Norfolk-- Virginia  Beach- -Newport   News,  VA   Lafayette,  LA   Bonita  Springs,   FL  

Houston,   TX   Lexington- Fayette,  KY   South   Bend,  IN- MI   Tampa-St.   Petersburg,   FL   Spokane,   WA     

Kansas  City,   MO-KS  

Jackson,  MS  

Jacksonville,   FL   Madison,   WI   Omaha,  NE- IA   Roanoke,   VA  

Jacksonville,   NC   Memphis,   TN-MS-AR   Orlando,  FL   Salt  Lake   City-West   Valley  City,   UT   Tuscaloosa,   AL     

Kalamazoo,   MI   Milwaukee,   WI   Oxnard,  CA  

Lincoln,  NE   Little  Rock,   AR   Portland,   OR-WA   Tallahassee,   FL      Los   Angeles- Long   Beach- Anaheim,   CA   Dayton,  OH   Scranton,   PA   Peoria,  IL     

Lubbock,  TX   Ocala,  FL  

Richmond,  VA  

Reno,  NV-CA  

San  Antonio,   TX  

Santa  Fe,  NM   Worcester,   MA-CT   Augusta- Richmond   County,  GA-SC   Charlottesville,   VA   Harrisonburg,   VA   Odessa,  TX   Topeka,  KS  

Toledo,  OH- MI      Philadelphia,   PA-NJ-DE- MD  

Tulsa,  OK  

Waco,  TX  

  

  

Abilene,  TX  

Ames,  IA  

Bellingham,   WA  

Rockford,  IL  

Birmingham,   AL  

2015  

Bowling   Green,  KY   Pittsburgh,   PA   Manhattan,   KS   State   College,  PA  

Coeur   d'Alene,  ID   Idaho  Falls,   ID   Mobile,  AL   Yuma,  AZ- CA  

Erie,  PA   Lancaster,   PA   Reading,  PA     

Fargo,  ND- MN   Las  Cruces,   NM   Savannah,   GA     

Fort  Wayne,   IN   Las  Vegas- Henderson,   NV   Springfield,   IL     

St.  Louis,   MO-IL   Lawrence,   KS   Springfield,   MA--CT     

   At  the  time  of  this  study,  Uber  was  operating  in  142  total  UZAs  that  had  full  10-year   data.  Uber  first  started  in  San  Francisco  in  2010,  before  entering  the  Chicago,  New  York   City,  and  Washington,  DC  markets  in  2011.  In  2012,  Uber  entered  8  more  cities,   followed  by  13,  82,  and  35  more  cities  from  2013  to  2015  respectively.  There  were  121   "No  Uber"  cities  that  were  analyzed  in  this  study  as  well.                           

20  

Median  incomes   The  graph  below  shows  the  average  of  all  median  household  incomes  in  Uber  City   Groups.  The  "No  Uber"  group  refers  to  the  remainder  of  UZAs  in  the  USA  that  did  not   have  Uber  at  the  time  of  this  study.      Figure  4:  Uber  City  Groups  by  median  household  income*  

Median  Annual  Household  Income  
  $90,000.00       $80,000.00       $70,000.00       $60,000.00       $50,000.00       $40,000.00     2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   No   Uber   Uber  City  Group  (by  year  of  Uber  entry)   Natonal  Average  

   *2010  only  represents  San  Francisco      Uber  first  entered  cities  where  median  household  income  is  highest,  while  progressing   into  markets  with  increasingly  lower  median  household  incomes.  The  remaining   markets  where  Uber  has  not  yet  entered  have  median  household  incomes  that  are   lower  than  the  national  average.                            

21  

Population  density   The  graph  below  shows  the  average  population  density  per  square  mile  for  Uber  City   Groups  sorted  by  year  of  Uber  entry.      Figure  5:  Uber  City  Groups  by  population  density*  

Popula_on  Density  (People/Sq.  Mile)  
  7,000       6,000       5,000       4,000       3,000       2,000       1,000       -         2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   No   Uber   Uber  City  Group  (by  year  of  Uber  entry)  

Natonal  (All  UZAs)  

   *2010  only  represents  San  Francisco      Uber  first  entered  denser  than  average  cities,  and  then  progressed  into  markets  where   population  density  was  increasingly  lower.  The  remainder  of  cities  where  Uber  has  not   yet  entered  has  a  lower,  albeit  slight,  average  population  density  than  Uber  cities.                                

22  

Educational  attainment   The  graph  below  shows  the  average  percentage  of  population  with  a  bachelor  degree  or   higher  in  Uber  City  Groups.      Figure  6:  Uber  City  Groups  by  percentage  of  bachelor  degree  or  higher*  

Bachelor  Degree  or  higher  (aged  25   years  or  older)  
50.0%   45.0%   40.0%   35.0%   30.0%   25.0%   20.0%   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   No   Uber   Uber  City  Group  (by  year  of  Uber  entry)  

Natonal  Average  

   *2010  only  represents  San  Francisco      Uber  first  entered  markets  where  there  were  higher  than  national  average  levels  of   education  as  measured  by  percentage  of  population  with  bachelor  degree  or  higher,   and  progressed  into  markets  where  educational  attainment  was  lower.                             

23  

Median  age   The  graph  below  shows  the  average  median  age  across  Uber  City  Groups.        Figure  7:  Uber  City  Groups  by  median  age*  

Median  Age  
39.0   38.5   38.0   37.5   37.0   36.5   36.0   35.5   35.0   34.5   34.0   38.6   37.9   37.3   36.8   35.8   36.2   35.8  

2010  

2011  

2012  

2013  

2014  

2015  

No  Uber  

Uber  City  Group  (by  year  of  Uber  entry)  

*2010  only  represents  San  Francisco   Median  ages  of  the  groups  are  varied  and  not  likely  to  be  a  significant  indicator  of  where   Uber  targets  the  market.                                   

24  

Vehicle  ownership   The  graph  below  shows  the  average  vehicle  ownership  rates  of  working  commuters  in   Uber  City  Groups.      Figure  8:  Uber  City  Groups  by  rates  of  car  ownership  among  working  commuters  

Average  vehicle  ownership  rates  of   working  commuters  
50.0%   40.0%   30.0%   20.0%   10.0%   0.0%   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   No  Uber   Uber  City  Group  (by  year  of  Uber  entry)   No  Vehicles   1  Vehicle   2  Vehicles   3  Vehicles  

      Uber  first  entered  markets  where  rates  of  low  vehicle  ownership  (0-1  cars)  were   highest,  and  where  rates  of  higher  vehicle  ownership  (2-3)  cars  were  lowest.                                   

25  

Principal  industries  of  employment   The  graph  below  shows  the  average  rates  of  employment  in  four  notable  industries   across  UZA  groups  sorted  by  year  of  Uber  entry.  The  color-coded  dotted  lines  represent   the  national  averages  of  employment  in  the  respective  industries.      Figure  9:  Uber  city  groups  by  percentage  of  working  population  by  industry  

Employment  by  Industry  
16%   14%   12%   10%   8%   6%   4%   2%   0%   2011   2012   2013   2014   No  Uber   Uber  City  Group  (by  year  of  Uber  entry)  
Professional,  scientfic,  and   management,  and  administratve  and   waste  management  services   Finance  and  insurance,  and  real   estate  and  rental  and  leasing   Informaton   Manufacturing  

      Uber  first  targeted  cities  with  higher  than  average  percentages  of  workers  in  the   Information,  Finance,  and  Professional  services.  It  has  only  recently  been  entering   markets  with  higher  levels  of  workers  in  the  manufacturing  industry.      While  initially  targeting  markets  where  there  was  higher  than  average  levels  of  median   income,  population  density,  educational  attainment,  low  vehicle  ownership  rates,  and   white  collar  jobs,  Uber  has  since  ventured  into  markets  that  are  closer  or  lower  than   national  average  in  all  of  those  categories.  

26  

3.2  Effects  on  transit  ridership  
Current-day  ridership  snapshot   The  chart  below  presents  a  current  day  look  at  ridership  levels  across  Uber  and  non- Uber  cities,  as  measured  by  average  passenger  miles  travelled  per  capita.        Figure  10:  Current  day  transit  ridership  levels  across  Uber  and  non-Uber  cities    

Average  PMT/Capita  in  2014   Across  Uber  and  non-Uber   Ci_es  
  1,000       900       800     PMT  per  capita     700       600       500       400       300       200       100       -    

    
   Uber  first  targeted  cities  with  higher  ridership  levels  than  the  ones  Uber  entered  starting   in  2012  and  later.  Cities  still  without  Uber  have  the  lowest  levels  of  per  capita  PMT   compared  to  the  other  Uber  city  groups.  This  suggests  that  Uber's  preference  for  large,   dense  cities  was  not  outweighed  by  the  presence  in  those  cities  of  robust  transit   networks.        

27  

Actual  ridership  vs.  benchmark   The  graph  below  shows  the  comparison  of  ridership  levels  across  different  Uber  City   Groups  over  a  10-year  period.        Figure  11:  Transit  ridership  measured  by  PMT  per  capita  over  a  10-year  period  for  Uber   City  Groups  (by  year  of  Uber  entry)  

Transit  ridership  over  _me  of  Uber   City  Groups  
1000   900   800   700   PMT  per  capita   600   500   400   300   200   100   0   2010  (San  Francisco)   2011   2012   2013   2014   No  Uber  

      From  this  graph,  it  can  be  observed  that  the  cities  that  Uber  first  targeted  (the  2010  and   2011  Uber  City  Groups)  all  have  higher  rates  of  ridership  growth,  both  before  and  after   the  recession.  The  other  groups  have  less  dramatic  levels  of  ridership  growth,  but  can  all   be  observed  to  have  been  somewhat  increasing  before  the  recession,  and  either  mildly   increasing  or  remained  stable  after  the  recession.  All  groups,  including  cities  without   Uber,  shared  a  similar  fate  in  transit  ridership  levels  after  the  2008  the  recession.  In   order  to  compare  differences  in  ridership  growth  between  different  Uber  city  groups,  it  

28  

is  therefore  possible  to  use  the  No  Uber  group  as  the  benchmark  group  that  was  not   "treated"  with  Uber.  The  results  of  this  analysis  are  shown  in  the  following  graph.        Figure  12:  Ridership  growth  of  Uber  cities  compared  to  No  Uber  cities*  

Transit  ridership  growth  of  Uber  Ci_es   by  year  of  Uber  entry  compared  to  ci_es   without  Uber  
1.5   1.25   Rela_ve  change   in  growth  aber/ before  Uber     1   0.75   0.5   2010   2011   2012   2013   Year  of  Uber  Entry  

Uber  Cites   No  Uber  benchmark  

   *Equation  used  to  calculate  values:  
!!"#$   /  !! !!!!   /  !!""#

/

!!"#$   /  !! !!!!   /  !!""#

  

     R  =  Transit  ridership  levels  of  given  Uber  City  Group     U  =  Year  of  Uber  entry  of  given  Uber  City  Group   N  =  Transit  ridership  levels  of  "No  Uber"  city  group      The  different  relative  ridership  growth  rates  shown  in  this  graph  have  two  potential   explanations.  The  first  is  that  Uber's  entry  in  a  regional  transportation  market  appears   to  be  associated  with  a  reduction  in  transit  ridership  growth  that  attenuates  over  time.   In  fact,  insofar  that  the  attenuating  effect  and  experiences  of  the  earliest  adopting  cities   are  representative  (there  is  only  one  city  in  the  2010  group,  and  three  in  the  2011   group),  Uber's  apparent  link  with  short-term  reductions  in  transit  ridership  may  even   lead  to  medium-term  ridership  gains  (over  approximately  five  years)  as  a  region's  fuller   transportation  market  and  users  adapt.  Such  a  finding  would  be  consistent  with  Uber  

29  

directly  substituting  for  other  modes  in  a  short-term  period  and  medium-term  user   adaptations  (car  ownership  or  housing  choice  decisions)  leading  Uber  to  be  a   complement  to  transit  ridership­  or  at  least  a  less  perfect  substitute.          The  second  potential  explanation  of  these  results  is  that  Uber  impacts  city  groups   differently  based  on  other  regional  characteristics.  Based  on  the  results  shown  in  Figure   12,  Uber's  entry  into  a  regional  transportation  market  with  cities  that  are  less  dense,   affluent,  and  educated  appears  to  be  associated  with  a  reduction  in  transit  ridership   growth.  The  Uber  city  group  profiles  established  in  section  3.1  show  that  the  cities   where  Uber  entered  first  are  structurally  different  than  the  ones  where  Uber  entered   more  recently.  This  suggests  that  the  cities  where  Uber  entered  earlier  have   characteristics  that  make  Uber  less  of  a  substitute  to  transit  than  cities  that  Uber  has   entered  more  recently.  Given  that  transit  in  the  latter  group  of  cities  is  likely  less   competitive  in  terms  of  service  quality  than  the  former  group,  transit  ridership  in  the   latter  group  may  be  more  vulnerable  to  Uber.        These  results  and  their  two  potential  explanations  must  be  nuanced  by  the  limitations   of  the  data  and  methods  used  in  this  study.  The following  chapter  discusses  the   implications  of  these  findings  and  their  limitations.        

30  

Chapter  4:  Conclusions  and  Recommendations  
  

4.1  Conclusions  
Uber  city  profiles  ­  Uber  prefers  dense,  affluent  cities,  but  is  now  entering  other  types   of  markets   Uber  was  expected  to  initially  prefer  larger  cities  with  denser  populations  where  there  is   a  greater  market  for  unique  destination  trips  before  moving  to  smaller  markets.  Findings   are  consistent  with  these  expectations,  as  Uber  is  increasingly  moving  to  smaller  and   less  dense  urban  markets.      While  the  results  showed  no  visible  pattern  regarding  median  age  of  Uber  cities  (Figure   7),  urban  density  and  car  ownership  are  strongly  linked  with  Uber's  market  entry.  Uber   first  entered  cities  with  the  highest  population  densities  of  all  Uber  City  Groups  (Figure   5),  and  cities  with  the  lowest  levels  of  car  ownership  (Figure  8).  Once  Uber  entered   those  initial  cities,  the  company  then  entered  cities  with  lower  densities  and  higher   levels  of  car  ownership.  Uber  first  targeted  cities  with  highest  levels  of  median  income   (Figure  4),  highest  educational  attainment  levels  (Figure  6),  and  highest  share  of  white- collar  jobs  (Figure  9),  and  has  slowly  transitioned  to  other  urban  markets.  Uber  initially   targeted  cities  that  have  high  levels  of  transit  ridership  overall  (Figure  10)  where  transit   ridership  growth  has  historically  also  been  strongest.  Although  this  might  suggest  that   Uber  preferred  cities  with  established  transit  systems,  these  transit  systems  might  be  a   by-product  of  other  city  properties  that  Uber  finds  attractive,  such  as  city  size,  urban   density,  affluence,  and  industrial  base.    Uber  shows  a  clear  preference  for  dense  affluent   cities,  but  given  that  it  has  entered  117  less  dense,  less  affluent  cities  in  2014  and  2015,   it  appears  that  it  is  finding  a  market  potential  in  most  cities,  regardless  of  their  spatial,   demographic,  or  socio-economic  characteristics.          

31  

Ridership  trends  ­  Uber's  links  with  transit  ridership  vary  either  by  regional  context  or   by  time  period   The  results  of  the  illustrative  difference-in-difference  analysis  suggest  that  Uber  appears   to:   · · Be  more  of  a  complement  (or  less  of  a  substitute)  over  time,   Be  more  of  a  complement  (or  less  of  a  substitute)  in  large,  dense  regions  with   highly  educated,  affluent,  productive  labour  markets  that  already  have  very  high   transit  ridership,  or   ·    If  the  data  from  the  relatively  small  sample  size  of  2010  and  2011  Uber  city  groups  is   representative,  transit  ridership  in  these  groups  where  Uber  entered  first  increases  after   a  period  of  roughly  5  years,  approximately  correlating  with  the  average  turnover  of   vehicle  ownership.  This  suggests  that  Uber  may  have  an  effect  on  medium  term   mobility-housing  bundle  decision-making­  in  other  words,  residents  in  cities  with  Uber   may  be  influenced  by  the  arrival  of  the  service  in  determining  where  to  live  within  a  city   and  how  to  get  around.  However,  a  more  robust  statistical  model  would  be  needed  to   substantiate  this  claim.      The  conclusion  that  Uber's  recent  entry  into  cities  that  are  less  dense,  affluent,  and   educated  appears  to  be  associated  with  a  reduction  in  transit  ridership  means  that  Uber   is  likely  substituting  transit  for  more  than  just  occasional  trips  in  these  types  of  cities.   This  conclusion  somewhat  contrasts  with  those  proposed  by  the  Murphy  et  al.  (2016)   study  discussed  in  Chapter  2,  that  concluded  that  Uber  serves  trip  types  different  from   the  ones  served  by  transit.  This  study  has  shown  that  Uber  likely  serves  some  trip  types   similar  to  transit  in  those  less  dense  cities.  However  in  more  dense  cities  that  have  had   Uber  longer,  transit  trips  do  not  appear  to  be  substituted  by  Uber.      Be  a  combination  of  the  two.  

32  

Despite  certain  limitations  in  terms  of  the  data  used  and  methodology,  the  conclusions   derived  from  this  study  can  inform  discussion  on  the  role  of  public  transit  agencies,   municipal  governments,  and  policy  makers  in  dealing  with  Uber.       

4.2  Recommendations  
The  results  of  this  study  highlight  the  need  for  transport  planning  agencies,  municipal   governments,  and  policy  makers  to  understand  how  Uber  is  affecting  their  transit   ridership  and  plan,  debate,  and  regulate  accordingly,  particularly  since  the  emergence  of   Uber  may  be  a  symptom  of  a  city's  larger  mobility  problems.      Wait  time  needed   Given  that  Uber  may  be  a  complement  to  transit  over  time  in  certain  types  of  cities,  it   should  be  given  the  time  to  mature.  Thwarting  its  development  by  over-regulating  it   may  prevent  cities  from  enjoying  the  benefits  of  the  added  mobility  and  transit-centred   lifestyles  enabled  by  Uber.  This  is  not  to  suggest  that  Uber  deserves  no  regulation   relating  to  the  safety  of  Uber  users  and  drivers.      Regulation  in  different  spatial  contexts   The  results  of  this  study  have  shown  that  Uber  may  be  more  of  a  complement  to  public   transit  over  time  (or  less  of  a  substitute)  in  large,  dense  regions  with  highly  educated,   affluent,  productive  labour  markets  that  already  have  very  high  transit  ridership.  But  in   other  cities,  Uber  may  be  having  more  of  a  substitute  effect.  If  the  correct  and  unique   explanation  of  these  results  is  that  Uber's  effect  on  ridership  attenuates  over  time   regardless  of  spatial  characteristics,  then  cities  that  are  less  highly  educated,  dense,  and   affluent  may  also  need  to  wait  for  Uber's  negative  short-term  effect  to  wear  out.   However,  if  the  correct  and  unique  explanation  is  that  spatial  characteristics  are  the   significant  predictor  in  Uber's  effect  on  transit,  then  less  dense,  less  educated,  and  less   affluent  cities  need  to  pay  more  attention  to  Uber  than  their  denser  city  counterparts.   Both  of  these  explanations  merit  further  investigation  using  more  empirical  data  over  

33  

time.  However,  since  the  pressure  to  act  on  Uber  is  immediate,  cities  to  not  have  the   luxury  of  waiting  for  five  more  years  of  data.        Uber  should  not  become  "too  big  to  fail"   This  leads  to  additional  concerns,  mainly  having  to  do  with  the  fact  that  Uber  is  a  private   company  offering  a  service  that  potentially  initially  takes  demand  away  from  a  publicly   run  and  ensured  service.  In  the  event  that  Uber  went  out  of  business  after  having  been   in  a  city  for  more  than  a  medium-term  period,  and  large  portions  of  that  city's   population  have  adopted  a  transit-centred  lifestyle  that  now  relies  on  Uber  for  certain   trip  types,  then  those  residents  may  suddenly  find  themselves  lacking  a  core  element  of   their  overall  mobility.        Barriers  of  entry  into  the  ridesourcing  market  are  relatively  low  (Sullivan,  2015).     Competitors  such  as  Lyft  or  others  may  overtake  Uber  and  continue  to  populate  the   market,  but  cities  embracing  the  arrival  of  TNCs  like  Uber  should  be  aware  of  risks   inherent  in  the  profit  motive  driving  the  provision  of  basic  mobility  needs.  Solutions  may   lie  in  encouraging  fair  competition  and  ensuring  operational  compatibility  with  public   transit.    

   4.3  Study  limitations  and  directions  for  future  research
This  study  has  limitations  in  terms  of  the  methods  employed  and  the  nature  of  data  on  a   very  recent  phenomenon,  but  a  better  understanding  of  the  links  between  transit   ridership  and  TNCs  is  important  for  transportation  planning,  making  more  in-depth   future  studies  critical  for  shaping  better  public  policy.    This  study  used  descriptive   statistics  as  a  method  for  drawing  conclusions.  While  certain  tactics  were  employed  to   account  for  the  likely  effect  of  spatial,  demographic,  and  socio-economic  factors  on   transit  ridership  trends­  such  as  the  use  of  spatially  dissimilar  Non-Uber  cities  as  a   comparative  benchmark­  future  studies  with  greater  resources  may  benefit  from  a   regression  analysis  to  specifically  account  for  these  factors,  and  other  non-Uber  factors  

34  

that  may  be  having  an  effect  on  transit  ridership  in  an  attempt  to  approach  a  causal   relationship  between  Uber  and  travel  behaviour.  Discounting  ridership  data  from   agencies  that  were  not  in  operation  from  the  full  2005-2014  study  period  is  also  a   limitation  that  could  be  accounted  for  in  a  future  regression-based  analysis.      The  data  used  in  this  study  should  also  nuance  some  of  the  conclusions  drawn  from  it.     The  demographic  data  used  to  contextualize  the  different  Uber  City  Groups  was  derived   from  MSA  demographic  data,  and  applied  to  smaller  UZAs.  Given  that  UZAs  within  an   MSA  may  vary  demographically,  this  is  an  imperfect  representation  of  the  true   demographics  of  the  UZAs  examined.  Using  ridership  data  at  the  UZA  level  is  perhaps   not  ideal  either.  Given  that  Uber-defined  boundaries  and  UZAs  do  not  line  up  exactly,  it   is  possible  that  Uber's  true  effect  on  ridership  is  diluted  in  a  larger  UZA  area,  affecting   the  results  of  this  study.          Given  that  Uber  only  entered  into  one  city  in  2010,  into  three  cities  in  2011,  and  into   eight  in  2012,  the  results  of  this  study  are  likely  not  statistically  significant.  Since  the   average  car  exchange  rate  is  about  6.5  years,  medium  term  effects  may  barely  be  visible   today.  It  would  be  very  insightful  to  repeat  this  study  in  5  years  to  better  understand   how  larger  Uber  City  Groups  like  the  2014  or  2015  groups  have  evolved  as  a  result  of   Uber­  assuming  that  Uber  is  still  operating,  or  that  a  similar  company  has  replaced  it.  At   that  point  in  the  future,  looking  at  levels  of  car  ownership  would  also  be  helpful  to   confirm  or  rebuke  the  claim  that  Uber  leads  to  lower  levels  of  car  ownership  in  the   medium  term.            The  greatest  asset  to  any  future  research  on  Uber  would  be  Uber  ridership  data,  which   would   directly   describe   average   trip   lengths,   types,   time   of   day,   and   how   frequently   users  are  using  the  service.  Although  Uber  claims  that  releasing  such  data  would  be  in   violation   of   user   privacy,   finding   some   mechanism   to   make   this   information   available  

35  

would  go  a  long  way  in  enriching  the  discussion  around  Uber's  true  effects  on  all  other   modes  of  transit,  and  perhaps  engender  a  more  favorable  regulatory  climate.    

36  

References  
   Aber  (2016).  "Find  a  City".  Retrieved  from:  https://www.uber.com/cities/      Alba,  Davey  (2015).  "Airbnb  Confirms  $1.5  Billion  Funding  Round,  Now  Valued  At  $25.5   Billion".  Wired.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.wired.com/2015/12/airbnb-confirms-1- 5-billion-funding-round-now-valued-at-25-5-billion/        CNW  (2015).  "Poll  suggests  UberX  is  decreasing  TTC  and  GO  transit  ridership".  Retrieved   from:  http://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/poll-suggests-uberx-is-decreasing- ttc-and-go-transit-ridership-529475091.html      Cohen,  Josh  (2015).  "Is  Uber  Really  Alt  Transportation?"  Next  City.  Retrieved  from:   https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/uber-alt-transportation-taxi-public-transit      D'Onfro,  Jillian  (2015).  "SpaceX  Is  Now  Worth  More  Than  Dropbox,  Snapchat,  Or   Airbnb".  Business  Insider.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.businessinsider.com/spacex-valuation-12-billion-2015-1      Damodaran,  Aswath  (2015).  "How  Do  You  Value  A  Company  Like  Uber?"  Tech  Crunch.   Retrieved  from:  http://techcrunch.com/2015/10/10/valuing-uber/      DART  (2015).  "Uber  stepping  up  "complete  trip"  efforts"  Retrieved  from:   http://www.dart.org/news/news.asp?ID=1179      Donahue,  Kate  (2015).  "Uber  and  Public  Transit  Working  Hand  in  Hand  in  San  Diego".   Uber  Newsroom.  Retrieved  from:  https://newsroom.uber.com/us-california/uber- and-public-transit-working-hand-in-hand-in-san-diego/        

37  

Ericsson  (2015).  "Ericsson  Mobility  Report:  70  percent  of  world's  population  using   smartphones  by  2020"  Retrieved  from:  http://www.ericsson.com/news/1925907      Gandel,  Stephen  (2015).  "Uber  just  beat  Facebook's  $50  Billion  record".  Fortune   Magazine.  Retrieved  from:  http://fortune.com/2015/07/31/uber-valuation- funding-round/      Gilbert,  Ben  (2015).  "Uber's  CEO  gave  us  a  lot  of  clues  about  what  the  future  looks  like".   Tech  Insider.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.techinsider.io/ubers-future-is-driverless- cars-2015-9      Grief,  Amy  (2016).  "Uber  draws  Ire  for  surge  pricing  during  TTC  mess".  BlogTO.   Retrieved  from:   http://www.blogto.com/city/2016/03/uber_draws_ire_for_surge_pricing_during_ ttc_mess/      Haider  et  al.  (2015).  "To  Uber  or  Not  to  Uber:  That  is  the  Question".  Retrieved  from:   http://stream1.newswire.ca/media/2015/09/29/20150929_C6395_PDF_EN_5089 57.pdf      Henry,  Jim  (2014).  "The  Average  Trade-In  Has  Stopped  Aging  So  Fast,  Great  News  For   The  Auto  Industry".  Forbes.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.forbes.com/sites/jimhenry/2014/05/31/the-average-trade-in-has- stopped-aging-so-fast-great-news-for-the-auto-industry/#561e0421152d      Liston,  Barbara  (2016).  "Uber  teams  with  Florida  city  on  public  transit  test".  Reuters.   Retrieved  from:  http://www.reuters.com/article/us-uber-tech-subsidies- idUSKCN0W52LQ     

38  

Martin,  E.  and  Shaheen,  S.  (2011).  The  Impact  of  Carsharing  on  Household  Vehicle   Ownership.  Access,  Number  38,  Spring  2011.        Mui,  Chunka  (2016).  "The  Virtuous  Cycle  Between  Driverless  Cars,  Electric  Vehicles  And   Car-Sharing  Services".  Forbes.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.forbes.com/sites/chunkamui/2016/02/08/the-virtuous-cycle- between-driverless-cars-electric-vehicles-and-car-sharing-services/#699486e31c6c      Murphy  et  al.  (2016).  Shared-Use  Mobility  and  the  Transformation  of  Public  Transit.   American  Public  Transportation  Association.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.apta.com/resources/hottopics/Pages/Shared-Use-Mobility.aspx      National  Transit  Database  (2016).  Service  Data  and  Operating  Data  Time  Series,  2014   data.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.ntdprogram.gov/ntdprogram/data.htm      Normandin,  P.A.  and  Croteau,  M.  (2016).  "Denis  Coderre  fustige  le  refus  d'Uber  de   suspendre  son  service".  La  Presse.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.lapresse.ca/actualites/montreal/201602/10/01-4949125-denis- coderre-fustige-le-refus-duber-de-suspendre-son-service.php      Rayle,  L.  et  al  (2014).  App-Based,  On  Demand  Ride  Services:  Comparing  Taxi  and   Ridesourcing  Trips  and  User  Characteristics  in  San  Francisco.  University  of   California,  Berkeley,  University  of  California  Transportation  Center.      Silvertein,  Sara  (2014).  " These  Animated  Charts  Tell  You  Everything  About  Uber  Prices  in   21  Cities".  Business  Insider.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.businessinsider.com/uber- vs-taxi-pricing-by-city-2014-10        

39  

Simmons,  Andria  (2015).  "MARTA  pilots  free  Wi-Fi  on  buses  and  Uber  partnership".  AJC.   Retrieved  from:  http://commuting.blog.ajc.com/2015/07/23/marta-pilots-free-wi- fi-on-buses-and-uber-partnership/      Sullivan,  Bob  (2015).  "6  reasons  Ubernomic  could  be  fatal  to  itself,  its  customers,  and   mass  transit".  GeekWire.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.geekwire.com/2015/6- reasons-ubernomics-fatal-customers-mass-transit/      Taylor,  Brian  et  al.  (2016).  "Between  Public  and  Private  Mobility:  Examining  the  Rise  of   Technology-Enabled  Transportation  Services".  Transportation  Research  Board;   Special  Report  319.  Retrieved  from:   http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/sr/sr319.pdf      Uber  (2016).  "Shifting  expectations  ­  Finding  better  ways  for  cities  to  move,  work,  and   thrive".  Uber.  Retrieved  from:  https://www.uber.com/helping-cities/      Uber  (2016).  "UberSki:  From  the  City  to  the  Slopes!"  Uber  Newsroom.  Retrieved  from:   https://newsroom.uber.com/us-utah/uberski-from-the-city-to-the-slopes/      Uber  (2016).  "Understanding  Surge".  Uber  website.  Retrieved  from:   https://help.uber.com/h/19572af0-d494-4885-a1ef-1a0d54d0e68f      United  States  Census  Bureau  (2016).  American  Fact  Finder,  demographic  information  by   MSA,  5-year  average.  Retrieved  from:   http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/searchresults.xhtml?refresh=t              

40  

Velickovic,  Ivana  (2015).  "The  Rise  of  Uber:  Blurring  the  Lines  of  the  Sharing  Economy".   WSP  Canada.  Retrieved  from:  http://www.wsp-pb.com/en/WSP-Canada/Who-we- are/In-the-media/Blog/In-Transit/The-Rise-of-Uber-Blurring-the-lines-of-the- sharing-economy/      Wadhwa,  Tarun  (2014).  "Could  Lyft  and  Uber  Put  Public  Transit  Out  Of  Business?".   Forbes  Tech.  retrieved  from:   http://www.forbes.com/sites/tarunwadhwa/2014/11/13/will-lyft-and-ubers- shared-ride-service-put-public-transit-out-of-business/#76af2eff1f58      Young,  Angelo  (2015).  "Tesla  Motors  Inc.  (TSLA)  Has  Lost  $3.5B  In  Value  Since  The  Model   X  Debut".  International  Business  Times.  Retrieved  from:   http://www.ibtimes.com/tesla-motors-inc-tsla-has-lost-35b-value-model-x-debut- 2135349  

  

41  

