Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

The effect of a "real-world" media intervention on body image
Stephanie L. Quigg
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Psychology Commons Recommended Citation
Quigg, Stephanie L., "The effect of a "real-world" media intervention on body image" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 495.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

THE EFFECT OF A "REAL-WORLD" MEDIA INTERVENTION ON BODY IMAGE

by

Stephanie L. Quigg,

Bachelors of Arts (Honours), Saint Mary's University, 2007

A Thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the

requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts in the program of
Psychology

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 © (Stephanie L. Quigg) 2009

PROPERTY OF

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.
I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis or dissertation to other institutions or

individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other

means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research.

111

The Effect of a "Real World" Media Intervention on Body Image Stephanie L. Quigg Master of Arts in Psychology, 2010, Ryerson University

The present research investigates whether a brief "real world" media intervention - a
short television advertisement - can be an effective mitigator of the adverse effects of media

portrayals of women on viewers' body satisfaction. Two hundred female university students (age 17 to 29, M = 19.54) were randomly assigned to one of two television conditions (music video or control), one of two commercial conditions ("intervention" or control), and completed self-report
measures of television behavior, media influence, body satisfaction and mood. Participants who

viewed music videos did not report significantly different levels of body dissatisfaction than participants who viewed control television, although results trended in the hypothesized
direction. A significant interaction between program and commercial emerged assessing mood as the outcome variable. Participants who viewed the music videos and were not exposed to the intervention commercial reported significantly lower mood than participants in the other three
conditions.

DEDICATION

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

To my supportive and loving parents, and everyone who has made this a reality.

There have been many people who through their encouragement, support and guidance have shaped my graduate career. The most influential person during this research is Dr. Stephen

Si-

flu

Want, my advisor. I would like to express my gratitude to him for all the invaluable knowledge,
experiences and guidance. I would like to thank Dr. Michelle Dionne for her valuable insight and suggestions throughout the reviewing process. As well I would like to express my appreciation to Dr. Tara Burke for all her comments and support as a member of my examination committee. I

would like to acknowledge the Social Science and Humanities Council of Canada for financial
support. Thank you to all my fellow students who have supported and encouraged me throughout the Master's and the many long nights. Finally, I would also like to thank my friends and family,
throughout this process their love, support and patience have motivated me to stay focused.

VI

vn

TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Tables

DECLARATION
ABSTRACT

·
·

m
v

Table 1. ANOVA results, means and standard deviations for personality, BMI and Age
across condition 33

DEDICATION
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ·

vi
vii

Table 2. Correlations between variables
Table 3. Correlations between VAS measures of mood
Table 4. Descriptive statistics for measures by condition

35
47
48

TABLE OF CONTENTS LIST OF TABLES
LIST OF FIGURES

viii ix
x

LIST OF APPENDICES
CHAPTERS

·

·

xi

1.
2.

INTRODUCTION
LITERATURE REVIEW

·

·

l
5

Body Image
Effects of Media on Body Image
Enhancing Benefits of Media Exposure

*
· ···· 7
11

How Do Media Images Affect Body Image? Social Comparison Theory....

12

Interventions for the Effects of Media Images on Body Image.
The Extension of Existing Media Interventions...

14
17

3.
4.
5.

STUDY
METHOD ·
......

···

I9
23
33

RESULTS - APPEARANCE SATISFACTION

6.

RESULTS - AWARENESS OF EXPERIMENTAL HYPOTHESES

45

7.

RESULTS - MOOD

47

8.

DISCUSSION

··

51

9.

CONCLUSION

.,

65

APPENDICES
REFERENCES

67
1°3

vm

ix

List of Figures

List of Appendices

Figure 1. The interaction between Commercial, Trait Body Satisfaction (BES subscale

Appendix A. Study Recruitment Information
Appendix B. Consent Form .

67
68 70

weight concern) and Intemalization (SATAQ-3 subscale pressure) for state weight and
shape satisfaction (VAS Weight and Shape satisfaction) Figure 2: The interaction between Commercial and Television Program regarding the 39

Appendix C. Debriefing Form

Appendix D. Pre-rating Music Videos and Commercials Questionnaire

73

combined VAS Mood variable

49

Appendix E. Descriptive Statistics for Attractiveness and Thinness of Stimuli
(Pre-ratings) 75

Appendix F. Descriptive Statistics for Enjoyment of Stimuli (Pre-ratings)
Appendix G. Study Questionnaire Appendix H. STATQ-3
Appendix I. BES

76
77 85
88

Appendix J. Inter-rater Reliability for VAS Variables Appendix K. Skewness and Kurtosis for the Independent Variables Appendix L. Histogram with Normal Curve for the Independent Variables
Appendix M. Multiple Regression Analysis

90 91 92
95

Appendix N. Descriptive Statistics for Measures

1

96

Appendix O. Means and Standard Deviations of the VAS items and Moderator
Variables, across the four Conditions 99

Appendix P. Additional Analyses Influence of Awareness

100

XI

1. INTRODUCTION

Notions of ideal standards of physical appearance for women are common to many

cultures (Etcoff, 1999). However, the particulars of those standards may vary between cultures, and the "perfect" female body promoted by the Western mass media has become problematic.
Within the past 40 years the body weight of women appearing in such media has decreased

(Seifert, 2005; Sypeck, Gray, Etu, Ahrens, Mosimann & Wiseman, 2006; Wiseman, Gray,
Mosimann, & Ahrens, 1992) and the prevailing body shape has changed from a curvy hourglass
figure to a thin skeletal figure (Lin & Kulik, 2002). Given that the average Western adult female
has actually become heavier over the same period of time (Garner, Garfinkel, Schwartz &

Thompson, 1980; Spitzer, Henderson & Zivian, 1999), there is a large discrepancy between ideal
media images of women and the average woman (Groesz, Murnen, & Levine, 2002). The mediapromoted ideal of female beauty has become unattainable for most women. Media promotion of

the "perfect" female suggests that there is a single ideal that women should strive to obtain. This

iiil

ideal woman portrayed in the media is tall, thin, young, and weighs 15% below the average for
women (Johnson, Tobin, & Steinberg, 1989). Genetically the majority of women cannot achieve

this unrealistic ideal (Posavac, Posavac, & Weigel, 2001), yet the media promote the idea that these standards are obtainable.
Research has shown that exposure to idealized media images is positively correlated with

a desire to be thin (Tiggemann & Pickering, 1996), body dissatisfaction, and disturbed eating
among women (Levine, Smolak & Hayden, 1994; Stice, Schupak-Neuberg, Shaw, & Stein,

1994). A causal effect of the media on body dissatisfaction has also been demonstrated in metaanalyses of laboratory studies, in which exposure to media images results in an immediate

decrease in body satisfaction (Grabe, Ward & Hyde, 2008; Groesz et al., 2002; Want, 2009).

1

Recently, researchers have focused on investigating and administering brief, lab-based

credible university "experts", or whether a "real world" intervention can counteract adverse
media effects on women's body image.

interventions to counteract the negative effects of idealized media portrayals of women. Such

interventions are designed to lead women to question media images as appropriate points of
comparison, and have been effective in mitigating adverse media effects (Posavac et al., 2001;

Yamamiya, Cash, Melnyk, Posavac & Posavac, 2005; Want, Vickers & Amos, 2009). One
currently under-explored area of research regarding work on media interventions, however, concerns the manner in which such interventions are presented. In particular, previous

interventions have been constructed and administered to participants by university researchers from psychology departments (Posavac et al., 2001; Yamamiya et al., 2005; Want et al., 2009)

who are likely seen as credible sources of information (i.e. as "experts"). Information provided
by university researchers in these interventions may have been processed more thoroughly by
participants and thus have been more effective than such information would be if delivered via

II

other, perhaps more naturalistic, means. This may be especially true given that participants in existing intervention studies have been asked to pay special attention to the intervention material
in order to evaluate or to answer questions later about the stimuli (Posavac et al., 2001;
Yamamiya et al., 2005).

At present, the effects of intervention material that is encountered more incidentally, in a

format that lends itself to more widespread distribution, have not been investigated. To address
the effectiveness of such interventions, this thesis details an investigation into the mitigating potential of material that highlights the unrealistic nature of media images via one of the same mediums through which people are normally exposed to such unrealistic images (i.e. through a

television commercial). In doing so, the present study attempted to uncover useful information
about whether the effectiveness of media interventions depends crucially on their presentation by

2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Body Image

Research in the area of body image is extensive and multifaceted. The concept of body

image has been defined as a multi-dimensional construct referring to how an individual perceives
his/her own body (Cash, Melnyk, & Hrabosky, 2004; Farrell, Shafran & Lee, 2006) and is complex, including thoughts, feelings and behaviors related to an individuals' body (Thompson
& van den Berg, 2002). The measurement of body image encompasses at least two distinct

components; (1) body image evaluations, or the thoughts and feelings an individual has about
his/her own physical appearance including self-ideal discrepancies and body satisfactiondissatisfaction, and body size estimation (Cash et al., 2004; Cash & Szymnanski, 1995), and (2) body image investments including the behaviours engaged in to augment physical features (Cash
et al., 2004; Cash & Szymnanski, 1995). One of the most studied aspects of body image evaluations in research on media effects, and the aspect under investigation in the present study,

11

is body dissatisfaction. Body dissatisfaction is defined as the negative evaluation of one's physical features (Posavac et al., 2001), and can be either specific to particular body parts (e.g.

the hips, buttocks, thighs) or an overall negative evaluation of one's body as a whole (Bessenoff,
2006).

Body dissatisfaction is prevalent among women in Western society, with approximately

half indicating some degree of dissatisfaction (Etcoff, Orbach, Scott, & D'Agostino, 2004). Some authors have argued that body image dissatisfaction among women in Western societies is
so widespread as to be a form of "normative discontent," (Rodin, Silberstein, Striegel-Moore,

1985). This term "normative discontent" indicates that this dissatisfaction that women are
contending with is so prevalent in society that it is now considered normal; women may not be

r
completely dissatisfied with their bodies however it is now regarded as standard for women to
Ontario and revealed that 29.3% of the girls stated that they were currently trying to lose weight

hold a certain amount of dissatisfaction with their body (Farrell, Shafan, & Lee, 2006). A study
which surveyed 3200 women about their views of beauty across ten countries (U.S., Canada,

and 10.5% of the girls reported disordered eating behaviors (such as vomiting and binge eating).
However, severe dieting is not the only consequence of body dissatisfaction, other risks include lower self-esteem, and decreased psychological well being including depressed mood and
depression (Dittmar, 2005; Dohnt & Tiggemann, 2006; Polivy & Herman, 2002; Thompson,

Great Britain, Italy, France, Portugal, Netherlands, Brazil, Argentina, and Japan) illustrates the
extent of women's body dissatisfaction (Etcoff et al., 2004). Etcoff et al. (2004) found thft

almost half of the women they surveyed rated their body weight as "too high" and around 25%
of these women reported that they were contemplating cosmetic surgery. Similarly, Champion

Heinberg, Altabe & Tantleff-Dunn, 1999). These are major problems which are associated with body dissatisfaction, and therefore the reasons behind women's body dissatisfaction need to be
assessed. Research has indicated that one contributing factor to women's body dissatisfaction may be the media's portrayal of idealized yet unrealistic images of women.
Effects ofMedia on Body Image

and Furnham (1999) reported that 76% of adolescent girls between the ages of 12 and 16
described themselves as slightly overweight or obese, whereas in reality (according to health

statistics) only 32% of participants actually fell into that category. The body shape preferences of
these adolescent girls were such that over half indicated a preference for a thinner body shape

It has been claimed that the mass media are the most powerful conveyors of thin ideals of women's body shape and size (Tiggemann & Slater, 2004) and that television, magazines and
movies help create and reinforce ideal standards of beauty and provide increased pressure to conform to these standards (Martin & Gentry, 1997). Many studies have supported the
connection between the media and body dissatisfaction in women. Irving (1990) indicates that women perceive the media as the main source promoting the

than the average body shape for females their age (Champion & Furnham, 1999). A Canadian

11

survey of 19,841 men and women aged 18 to 74 years indicated that women were more likely
than men to be attempting to lose weight (Green, Cameron, Polivy, Cooper, Liu, Leiter, &

Heatherton, 1997). Of the women whose weight was in the "normal range" (according to official
Canadian health guidelines) 37% indicated that they were attempting to lose weight.
Additionally, 8% of women categorized as underweight indicated that they were attempting to

"thin-ideal" for women. The media relay the message that women who are beautiful, successful, and healthy are tall and thin, whereas being fat is associated with many negative attributes, such
as lethargy, self-indulgence, and lack of control (Robinson, Bacon, & O'Reilly, 1993:

lose weight (Green et al., 1997). Therefore, the problems that women face with regard to body
image are not solely with thoughts and feelings, but also with the behaviours they engage in to
mitigate that dissatisfaction.

Tiggemann & Rothblum, 1988). People who are overweight are also viewed as being less

One of the most detrimental behaviours engaged in by individuals who experience body

intelligent, less successful and less popular than people of average weight (Harris, Harris, & Bochner, 1982). Furthermore, women hold these negative attitudes to a greater degree than men (Crandall & Biernat, 1990).

dissatisfaction is severe dieting (Strauman, Vookles, Berenstein, Chaiken, & Higgins, 1991). McVey, Tweed, and Blackmore (2004) surveyed 2279 young girls aged 10-14 years old in

Content analyses investigating preoccupation with thinness and representations of body
shapes and sizes have demonstrated that the media promotes standards of body attractiveness

media image. Studies in this meta-analysis presented media stimuli which ranged from slides to
videos and television commercials. All studies included a control comparison (average models, attractive non-models, overweight models, or objects, cars, or houses), and assessed body
dissatisfaction or self-perceived physical attractiveness as the dependent variable. The results
indicated that exposure to media images of thin female models generally had small, but

that are unrealistic for most women (Fouts & Burggraf, 1999; Silverstein, Perdue, Peterson, &

Kelly, 1986). The reality is that many women can not obtain a figure conforming to the media
ideal because of genetic predispositions to be a certain size and height (Posavac et al., 2001); less
than 5 percent of women can achieve the thin form of a model (Grogan, 2008).

significant detrimental effects on women's satisfaction with their bodies. In addition, presentation of such images had a significantly greater impact on women with pre-existing body

Myers and Biocca (1992) indicate that women with even minimal exposure to television

(30 minutes a day) depicting idealized images of female beauty report detrimental effects. Correlational research reports that the amount of time spent watching television soap operas and
movies is associated with greater body dissatisfaction (Tiggemann & Pickering, 1996), that the
amount of time spent watching music videos is associated positively with desires for thinness (Tiggemann & Slater, 2004), and that exposure to thin ideal media within magazines is associated with distorted eating among women (Harrison & Cantor, 1997). Research also

dissatisfaction issues than on women without pre-existing body dissatisfaction issues. There was
also a significant effect regarding the age of the women in the studies, with women under 19
being more adversely affected by exposure to thin media stimuli than women 19 and over.

A recent meta-analysis by Grabe et al. (2008) further supports the notion that exposure to
thin-ideal images displayed in the media is associated with body dissatisfaction in women. This
meta-analysis included a large sample of 77 experimental and correlational studies, including

indicates that female adolescents who report that fashion magazines are an important source of
information on beauty and fitness have a higher likelihood of engaging in weight management

unpublished studies, and grouped outcome measures into four categories (body dissatisfaction, body self-consciousness/objectification, internalization of the thin-ideal/drive for thinness, and

behaviors, both positive, such as exercise, and negative, such as skipping meals, as compared to
adolescents who do not consider magazines to contain useful information (Levine et al., 1994).
(

eating behaviours/beliefs). The analysis revealed effect sizes representing small to moderate effects using Cohen's (1988) criteria, d = -0.28 to -0.39, for the four outcome categories. This
meta-analysis provides increased support for the claim that viewing media images of thin models can detrimentally affect women's body satisfaction, and the inclusion of correlational studies in

Perhaps as a long-term result, women exposed to media containing a high proportion of idealized
body images, and engage in negative weight-management behaviors are at greater risk of
developing anorexic and bulimic behaviors (Stice et al., 1994).

the analysis suggests that the findings apply not just in experimental settings, but outside the laboratory as well.
Several moderator variables have been found to affect the strength of the relationship

A meta-analysis conducted by Groesz et al. (2002) of 25 experimental studies including
results from 2292 female participants revealed that the influence of the mass media is most

detrimental when women are exposed to thin female models as compared to any other type of

between exposure to thin ideal media images and detrimental effects on women's body

8

satisfaction. Groesz et al. (2002) suggests that of the many moderators that have been examined,
the two most prominent are pre-existing body dissatisfaction and thin ideal internalization. Prior

therefore have different appearance standards and engage in different compensatory behaviours to obtain the idealized standards of appearance displayed in the media, such as steroid use for
men and vomiting and the use of diet pills or laxatives for women (Morrison, Kalin & Morrison, 2004). Women compared to men also have a higher incidence of body dissatisfaction and detrimental eating behaviors (van Hoeken, Lucas, Hoek, 1998). Considering the different impact of the media on men and women, that women are more likely to engage in dieting behaviors, and that the majority of women report at least some degree of body dissatisfaction, the focus of the
literature review and investigation will be limited exclusively to women. How Do Media Images Affect Body Dissatisfaction? Social Comparison Theory The theory most commonly used by researchers to explain why women are susceptible to these media effects is Festinger's (1954) Social Comparison theory. According to this theory, in domains which we cannot easily identify objective criteria for success or ability by ourselves, we
seek to compare ourselves with others to determine our own levels of achievement. "Attractiveness" is thought to be one domain in which independent assessment of the self is not

research has demonstrated that pre-existing or trait appearance dissatisfaction moderates the influence of media images on women, such that women who display initial body dissatisfaction

are more vulnerable to the influence of such images than women who are initially relatively more satisfied with their appearance (Bessenoff, 2006; Groesz et al., 2002; Heinberg & Thompson, 1995; Posavac et al., 1998). With regards to thin ideal internalization, women who

internalize the thin ideal standards presented in the media view such images as personal appearance standards (Cusumano & Thompson; Heinberg & Thompson, 1995; Stice, SchupakNeuberg, Shaw, & Stein, 1994; Stice & Shaw, 1994; Thompson, Heiberg, Altobe, & TantleffDunn, 1999; Yamamiya et al., 2005). Halliwell and Dittmar (2005) report that exposure to ideal
media images results in body dissatisfaction only among women who internalize the thin ideal to
a high degree.

j

ft: I

Therefore, research investigating body image suggests that when thin media ideals are viewed, negative outcomes result, ranging from body dissatisfaction to the potential for

available; that is, "attractiveness" is inherently relative to other people. In this theory, "upward" social comparison involves comparing oneself to others who are perceived as socially better or
more desirable than oneself, and often results in negative affect. On the other hand, "downward"

disordered eating behaviors (Farrell, et al., 2006; Hawkins, Richards, Granley, & Stein, 2004).
Furthermore, these media representations of ideal beauty may be particularly harmful to younger
women, those with existing body image concerns and individuals who internalize the appearance
ideals projected by the media.

social comparison involves perceiving oneself as socially better or more desirable than the
comparison person, often resulting in positive affect. Given that the dominant media image of
women in Western culture is exceptionally thin and attractive, the average woman is likely to engage in upward social comparison when viewing these images (Engeln-Maddox, 2005;

The idealized images represented in the media vary for men and women. Men in the

media are athletic and muscular (Cash & Brown, 1987; Murray, Touyz, & Beumont, 1996) whereas women in the media are depicted as having "flawless skin, a thin waist, long legs, and
well-developed breasts", essentially a thin ideal (Groesz et al., 2002, p.2). Men and women

Tiggemann & McGill, 2004).

10

11

r
This theory is supported by research which indicates that girls do use media images of
women as targets for social comparison (Irving, 1990; Morrison et al., 2004). When women are
Wheeler and Miyake (1992) report that some women may achieve positive benefits when
engaging in upward social comparison acts as a motivating agent to achieve the social standards

encouraged to engage in social comparison with models during media exposure, increased weight concerns and body image dissatisfaction can result (Tiggemann & McGill, 2004).

of appearance. These positive benefits depend on the perception of weight control held by the individual; individuals with no perceived control have resulting negative affect, whereas perceptions of control result in self-improvement (Major, Testa, Bylsma, 1991). Furthermore,
these positive benefits are reported for only certain individuals, specifically restrained eaters. Mills et al. (2002) report that restrained eaters gain positive benefits, such as viewing their body size as smaller and having higher appearance self-esteem, after viewing thin media images than after viewing plus-size images. However, negative effects for restrained eaters also resulted from viewing thin ideal images, with restrained eaters engaging in disinhibited eating, where they
consume more food after viewing thin ideal images than plus-size images (Mills et al., 2002). Joshi et al. (2004) further reports benefits of thin images for restrained eaters. Restrained eaters exposed to thin media images reported greater social state self esteem and higher positive self

Additionally, research investigating the social comparison of girls aged 9 through 14 with media
ideals indicates that, when explicitly instructed to compare their own physical attractiveness to that of models in media ads, the girls immediately felt less attractive than girls who did not compare themselves to the models in the advertisements (Martin & Gentry, 1997). Further, indepth interviews conducted by Milkie (1999) with girls ages 14-16 reveal that even when young girls are aware and critically evaluate the notions of idealistic beauty set forth by the media they
are not deterred from reading magazines that promote these standards of beauty and their resulting enjoyment does not decrease. Instead they indicated the main reason for engaging in

i!
1 ; 

this medium was for social comparison (Milkie, 1999). Therefore, these idealistic images
produced by the media are regarded by adolescents as appropriate representations for
comparison.

image than restrained eaters exposed to control images. However, non-restrained eaters were not
significantly influenced by exposure to either thin media images or control images.
This positive effect has been explained as the result of a "thin fantasy", with women

Enhancing benefits of media exposure

Although the majority of literature supports the idea that thin media images have a

having short term elevations in mood, and gaining thinner perceptions in body size estimation by
engaging in fantasies of obtaining their ideal figure (Joshi et al., 2004; Mills et al., 2002; Myers

detrimental influence on women's body satisfaction, some research suggests that there may be
self-enhancing benefits of exposure to thin media images for some individuals (Henderson-King
& Henderson-King, 1997; Joshi et al., 2004; Mills et al., 2002; Wheeler & Miyake, 1992;

& Biocca, 1992). Dieters may be more likely to engage in this "thin fantasy" with weight and shape being personally relevant and perceptions of their ideal image seen as obtainable by
restricting their food intake (Mills et al., 2002). Restrained eaters are reported to have overall

Wilcox & Laird, 2000). Furthermore, research reports that when some methodological aspects of studies investigating the influence of thin ideal images on women are controlled for, obtaining
positive benefits from exposure to ideal images is more likely (Mills et al., 2002).

lower state social and appearance self esteem, view themselves more negatively and report a
worse self image than unrestrained eaters (Joshi et al., 2004). Therefore, it is not surprising that

12

13

thin ideal images may act as a motivating agent to achieve the social standards of appearance for certain individuals whose appearance is more closely associated to their self image. Furthermore,

Posavac and colleagues (2001) assessed female undergraduate students aged 18-25 who

were pre-screened on the body dissatisfaction subscale of The Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI-2;
Garner, 1991) to demonstrate that they experienced pre-existing body image dissatisfaction. The

images that produce positive benefits started to be perceived as slightly better physically and
women comment that they are able to obtain that size, whereas a large discrepancy between

final sample of 125 participants with moderate to high levels of body dissatisfaction were randomly assigned to one of three experimental interventions, each consisting of a seven-minute

individual's physical appearance and media images do not result in positive benefits (Collins,

1996; Myers & Biocca, 1992). Mills et al. (2002) contend that detrimental effects of media images on women's body

video tape about the nature of media images of women, or to a control condition in which a "parenting skills" message was presented. The three experimental interventions were "Artificial Beauty" (which discussed the fact that media images are inappropriate targets for comparisons because models' beauty is artificially constructed by professional makeup, lighting, hair stylists,
airbrushing etc); "Genetic Realities" (which pointed out that the majority of women are

satisfaction may typically be found because there is a general consensus that thin media images
are detrimental to self esteem and appearance satisfaction, and so studies investigating body satisfaction in response to media images may encounter "demand" effects, whereby participants
report what the researchers expect to find. Mills et al. (2002) further contend that research can counteract this negative response tendency by employing less obvious self report questions when

predisposed genetically to be heavier than most models), and a combination (3.5 min of each previous intervention). Participants then viewed either 20 idealized media images (thin and beautiful models) or neutral images (automobiles) and were assessed on three measures: the Weight Concern subscale of the Body Esteem Scale (Franzoi & Shields, 1984), Negative-Self
statements and Drive for Thinness statements derived from free response listings by participants. Results indicated that participants who received the control intervention and viewed the media images were significantly more likely to report Weight Concerns, and more likely to make Negative-Self and Drive for Thinness statements than control participants who viewed the

presenting thin images, which then results in a greater likelihood of finding self-enhancing and
beneficial responses.
Interventions for the Effects ofMedia Images on Body Image

Research has indicated that interventions that discourage women from engaging in social comparison with media images by leading women to question the appropriateness of media

representations of women as beauty comparators are effective in mitigating adverse media effects on women's body image (Posavac et al., 2001). Three interventions which exclusively focused on reducing body dissatisfaction in reaction to media images by reducing social
comparisons to such images are those of Posavac et al. (2001), Yamamiya et al. (2005) and Want
etal.(2009).

neutral images. However, of the participants who viewed the media images, those assigned to intervention conditions reported significantly less Weight Concern and were less likely to make

Negative-Self and Drive for Thinness statements than participants in the control intervention. These interventions may be successful because they lead women to question the artificial
nature of the media's representation of women and beauty, and suggest that fashion models are

14

15

dissimilar others and therefore inappropriate for social comparison. Yamamiya and colleagues

women assigned to a control group who are not exposed to the program and that intervention
material presented prior to exposure helps to mitigate this detrimental effect.

(2005) replicated these findings in a sample of women who were not pre-selected for existing body image concerns and instead were evaluated on internalization of idealized media. The

The Extension of Existing Media Interventions

results indicate that women who see media images as representing the ideal for women (high-

Although existing interventions provide a means of decreasing the influence of the media on women's body image, they may be usefully extended in two related aspects: their distribution
and presentation. Given that it has been proposed that body dissatisfaction is widespread among women in Western societies - indeed, that it may even be a form of normative discontent - one

internalization women) expressed significantly more negative evaluations of their own physical appearance and worse mood after viewing media ideal images than women exposed to control
images. Importantly however, these adverse effects on body image and mood states were

effectively prevented by the interventions, when presented prior to media exposure. This
literature on body image provides support for the notion that women with high internalization
levels are influenced by media images and that media intervention may reduce these adverse
effects.

goal of body image interventions ought to be to reach as wide an audience as possible. Existing
experimental media interventions, in their current form [7-minute videotapes in Posavac et al., (2001) and 7-minute audiotapes in Yamamiya et al., (2005)], have somewhat limited potential for mass distribution. Although 7-minutes is not a long time in the context of a psychology study,

Additionally, Want et al. (2009) recently reported success in mitigating the detrimental effects of viewing a television program that contained thin and attractive female characters, by
using a similar short intervention that persuaded viewers not to compare themselves to women

or a clinical intervention for eating disorders, given the widespread nature of body dissatisfaction among women, it would be beneficial to have a shorter intervention that is as effective as these 7-minute-long interventions and that might be delivered to large audiences outside the
psychology laboratory or clinic.

appearing on television. This intervention study expanded the literature by exploring whether or

not two intervention scripts, one focused on the ways in which the general appearance of people
appearing in the media is manipulated and one focused on similar concerns specific to weight,
could effectively reduce the detrimental influence of television programs (specifically a television situation comedy) rather than magazine images (as used in both previous

On a related note, existing interventions have been administered to participants by

university researchers from psychology departments (Posavac et al., 2001; Yamamiya et al.,

2005; Want et al., 2009) who are likely to be seen as experts in their area of research. Therefore

the information provided in these interventions may have been processed in a deeper and more

interventions). Participants were exposed to 10 minutes of the experimental stimulus after reading the intervention material and then completed the main dependent measures assessing

thorough way by the participants in the studies, and thus may have been more effective, than
such information would be if conveyed by more everyday "naturalistic" means.
It has been further suggested that previous experimental research is limited by the means

appearance satisfaction. The results indicated that women exposed to a television program that
depicts women adhering to thin ideal standards are less satisfied with their appearance than

in which the experimental stimuli are presented (Hargreaves & Tiggemann, 2003). Experimental

16

17

presentation of media stimuli, such as thin media images in music videos, are provided to

3. STUDY

participants in short clips and this varies greatly from everyday television viewing which occurs

The "Dove Campaign for Real Beauty", presented by Unilever Inc. provides an

with programs and commercials interspersed. Previous research further promotes an artificial

opportunity to investigate the effectiveness of a real world media intervention. A television
commercial (called "Evolution") created by the company presents seventy-five seconds of timelapsed footage of the transformation that a model undergoes before being photographed, and of

television viewing atmosphere by provide participants with instructions as to how to process the
stimuli. Research has instructed participants to assess media images in manners ranging from
comparing themselves to the stimuli (Tiggemann & Slater, 2004) to focusing on the products

the digital modifications the pictures undergo before being presented to society (Postrel, 2007).
The aim and objective of these commercials is similar to that of the interventions used in
psychological studies. The commercial aims to expose the unreal nature of most media images of
women and to discourage viewers from engaging in social comparison with idealized media images. Therefore, the commercial presents a good opportunity for investigators to explore the effectiveness of a widely-distributed (and brief) form of media intervention to act as a mitigator of the adverse effects of thin ideal and artificially-manufactured media presentations of women.
This research will provide valuable information as to the effectiveness of "real world" media interventions as an adjunct to the presentation of such interventions by credible university
experts. Furthermore, if these real world interventions provide a means of decreasing media

presented in the stimuli (Cattarin et al., 2000). Cattarin et al. (2000) and Tiggemann and Slater (2004) both report that instructions provided to participants influence the level of comparison
between oneself and viewed models. Therefore, research is not assessing the real world influence

of these media images; instead it is investigating the media's impact through artificial viewing
behavior.

Research studies may further prompt unrealistic television viewing behavior by assessing

individual body satisfaction prior to the experimental exposure to thin media images (Mills et al.,
2002). Hamilton, Mintz and Kashubeck-West (2007) suggest that asking participants questions

about body image prior to exposure to media images may sensitize them to the purpose of the
study. This poses a problem when attempting to determine the influence of media images on

influence on women's body image, dissemination to a great number of women who might
otherwise be detrimentally affected by media images will be possible. Research Design
The present study consists of a between-subjects, 2 (commercial: intervention vs. control)

body image satisfaction. If participants are aware of the area of investigation then demand or
expectancy effects can influence the results:

Whether or not the effectiveness of existing intervention material can be replicated when

it is provided in different contexts remains an open question. In particular, if reaching as wide an audience as possible is the goal, then it would be useful to investigate whether these media
interventions that convey the highly unrealistic nature of media images retain their effectiveness
when presented though a widespread, everyday medium, such as television.

x 2 (type of media image: music video vs. control documentary) factorial design. The dependent variables consist of satisfaction with overall appearance, weight and body shape, and facial
appearance.

18

19

In short, participants were exposed to one of two different television programs. One of

socio-cultural attitudes to appearance) will have significantly higher levels of state body dissatisfaction in response to the music videos than those who score below the mid-point of the
SATAQ-3.

n!::

the television programs (a series of music videos) contained thin and attractive media images,

while the other (a documentary - Planet Earth) acted as a control condition and did not contain
any images of people. Participants also viewed either the "intervention" commercial

The third hypothesis is that the detrimental effect of media images will also be moderated
by participants' levels of pre-existing body dissatisfaction, such that;

("Evolution") or control commercials featuring no people within the television sequence. Levels
of current state body satisfaction among the participants were then assessed using Visual
Analogue Scale (VAS) measures. Two standardized measures, the Sociocultural Attitudes to

H3: Among participants who do not see the intervention commercial, those who score
below the mid-point on the BES (i.e. those who have relatively lower long-term, trait body

Appearance Questionnaire (SATAQ-3; Thompson, van den Burg, Roehrig, Guardia & Heinberg, 2004) and the Body Esteem Scale (BES; Franzoi & Shields, 1984) were used as potential
moderators. The SATAQ-3 was administered as a means of evaluating the extent to which

satisfaction) will have significantly higher levels of state body dissatisfaction in response to the
music videos than those who score above the mid-point of the BES.

Finally, it is hypothesized that the intervention commercial will successfully mitigate at
least some of the detrimental effect of the thin-ideal programs, such that;
H4: Among participants who view the music videos, those who do not view the

women have internalized the thin-ideal presented in the media. The second measure, the Body
Esteem Scale (BES; Franzoi & Shields, 1984), assessed participants' long-term, trait (not state),
r.ill'iii" i

evaluation of their own appearance. Hypotheses

intervention commercial will have significantly higher levels of state body dissatisfaction than
those who do view the intervention commercial.

The first hypothesis is that the "thin-ideal" television programs (the music videos) will be
detrimental to participants satisfaction with their appearance, such that;

HI: Among participants who do not see the "intervention" commercial, those who view

the "thin-ideal" television programs (music videos) will demonstrate significantly higher levels
of state body dissatisfaction than those who view the control (documentary) program.

The second hypothesis is that this detrimental effect will be moderated by participants'
level of internalization of the thin-ideal, such that;

H2: Among participants who do not see the intervention commercial, those who score

above the mid-point on the SATAQ-3 (i.e. those who are relatively more committed to prevailing

20

21

fir
4. METHOD
II!
;!:': !

Participants

For the present study, a total of 229 female undergraduate students between the ages of 17 and 29 years attending Ryerson University were recruited from introductory psychology courses and received partial course credit for participating. Participants were provided with
information about the study and were recruited through the psychology research participation system, Sona Systems Ltd. (See Appendix A). Ryerson Ethics Board granted approval for all

ijjl

procedures conducted as well all participants provided written consent (See Appendix B) and
were fully debriefed (See Appendix C). Data screening procedures were conducted with the initial raw data of 229 participants. Data from respondents who were 30 years of age or older (n=l 1), who did not self-report weight (n=10), or who were otherwise missing data (n=8) were
excluded from main analyses. A total of 29 participants were thus excluded based on the

jhjjji, ,HI,

screening criteria, resulting in a final data set consisting of 200 participants with 50 in each

condition. The average age of the participants was 19.54 years (SD= 2.33), the mean weight was

129.46 lbs. (SD= 24.74), mean height was 64.58 in. (SD= 2.97), and the mean body mass index
(BMI) was 21.76 (SD= 3.50).

Participants self-reported ethnicity was evaluated using the Canadian census categories:

White/Caucasian, Chinese, South Asian (e.g., East Indian, Pakistani, Sri Lankan, etc), Black/

African American, Filipino, Latin American, Southeast Asian (e.g., Vietnamese, Cambodian,

Malaysian, Laotian, etc), Arab, West Asian (Iranian, Afghan, etc), Korean, Japanese, Aboriginal
(e.g., North American Indian, Metis, Inuit, etc), and Other. Of the 200 participants, 80 identified

their ethnic origin as White/Caucasian (40%), 23 identified themselves as Chinese (11.5%), 30 as

South Asian (15%), 15 as Black/African American (7.5%), 11 as Filipino (5.5%), 3 as Latin

23

American (1.5%), 2 as Arab (1%), 1 West Asian (0.5%), 5 as Korean (2.5%), 1 as Japanese (0.5%) and 3 as other (1.5%) (Russian, East African, Italian).

scale for attractiveness and thinness (ranging from "Not at all" to "extremely") (See Appendix p). The mean attractiveness for the images ranged from 4.50 to 6.30 and the thinness of the

Another 24 participants identified themselves as multiracial (12.5%). Of these 24
!,'! !

images ranged from 5.50 to 6.30 (See Appendix E). To reduce the probability of participants
guessing the hypotheses of the study, the focus on the women in the videos was reduced by

participants, 16 identified themselves as White/Caucasian and another ethnicity: Chinese (1),

South Asian (1), Black/African American (3), Filipino (2), Latin American (1), Arab (1),

having 3 music videos with female lead singers and 2 with male lead singers containing either female backup singers or dancers/actors appearing in over half of the viewing time. Additionally,
the music videos did not consist solely of media images of White musicians, with 2 music videos containing African American female singers. The 5 music videos with a total running time of
17:08 min included: Keri Hilson- Energy (3:23 min), Lady Gaga- Just Dance (4:04 min), Timberland-Scream (3:49 min), Kate Perry-1 Kissed A Girl (3:04 min), and New Kids On The Block- Summertime (3:28 min). The overall enjoyment of the music videos was assessed on a seven-point scale (ranging from "Not at all" to "extremely"), revealing scores ranging from 1 to
6 (M=4.5, SD=U2) (See Appendix F).

m

Aboriginal (1), and Other (6) (Halian, Polish, Ukrainian, Romanian, Italian); 6 identified
themselves as Chinese and another ethnicity: South Asian (2), Filipino (1), Southeast Asian (2),

A

and Aboriginal (1); and 2 identified themselves as Arab and another ethnicity: Black/African
American (1) and Latin American (1).
Materials

Videos, Four DVDs with a running time of approximately 20 min were produced for this study, each of which included 17 min of a television show (Music Videos, or Documentary) and about 3.5 min of commercials (intervention or control) embedded in the viewing time. The videos were displayed to participants using a projector, DVD player and speaker. Participants
were seated 6 ft from the screen which was 4.5 ft by 3.5ft.
The music videos were chosen according to three criteria; popularity, presence of women

The control television program was a segment of a wildlife documentary ("Planet Earth") that featured no images of people and had a total running time of 16.79 min. This control
program featuring no people was used because previous research has sometimes found that the

fitting the thin ideal, and recency. First, popularity indicated a ranking in the top 20 music videos

use of control images of overweight or average-weight women causes viewers to feel more

on the popular Canadian show Much Music Countdown. Second, the music video contained one
woman or more than one woman fitting the thin ideal for a minimum of half the viewing time. Third, recency indicated that the music video was released in 2007 or 2008. The music videos were pre-rated by a sample of 10 graduate students, (M= 23.10 years, SD = .88), to ensure that the chosen music videos contained images of women that were considered to fit the thin and attractive media ideal. In particular, the women in the programs were rated on a seven-point

satisfied with their appearance, compared to viewing nothing (Irving, 1990). Thus, using
overweight or average-weight women as control images confounds the potentially negative

effect of viewing images of thin women with the potentially positive effect of viewing images of
average or over-weight women.

Four commercials were embedded in the 20 min viewing sequence for both the control

and intervention conditions. The control commercial condition involved four commercials which

24

25

: it
ll-iili:

do not feature any people, and included: K9-Advantix ad (30 sec), 2008 Honda Accord Sedan ad
(30 sec), Telus 2006 Fish Talk To You ad (30 sec), and the Sony Bravia Paint Remastered ad (130 sec). Total running time for the control commercial condition was 220 sec. These
commercials were obtained from a video sharing website located at http://www.youtube.com.

research (van den Berg & Thompson, 2007). In the present study, participants indicated their
mood with answers to "right now I feel", ranging from "worried" to "relaxed". They also rated

"right now" how they feel about their "facial appearance", "weight and shape" and "overall appearance" (ranging from extremely dissatisfied/unhappy to extremely satisfied/happy) with
higher ratings indicating better satisfaction and mood (Heinburg & Thompson, 1995). These three questions formed the key dependent measures in the present study and relate to participants' feelings of satisfaction with their appearance. The convergent validity of this measure has been examined through comparison with longer measures of appearance

The intervention commercial condition involved 3 of the commercials from the control condition (K9-Advantix ad, 2008 Honda Accord Sedan ad, and Telus 2006 Fish Talk To You ad), with the addition of the intervention Dove "Evolution" commercial (116 sec) in place of the Sony Bravia
ad. The total running time for the intervention commercial condition was 206 sec. The enjoyment of each of the commercials was also pre-rated on a seven-point scale (ranging
i'H

satisfaction/dissatisfaction such as the Eating Disorders Inventory-Body Dissatisfaction subscale
(EDI-BD; Garner, 1991) and results indicate these two measures (VAS appearance satisfaction
and the EDI-BD) are significantly correlated (Garner, Olmstead & Polivy, 1983; Heinberg &
Thompson, 1995).

from "Not at all" to "extremely"). The mean enjoyment of the commercials ranged from 3.6 to
! I: i

6.7 (See Appendix F). Comparing the intervention commercial (Dove Evolution Ad) to the
control commercial (Sony Bravia Ad) indicated that the intervention commercial (M=6.8, SD =

.63) received a higher mean enjoyment rating than the control commercial (Af=4.9, SD=l.2O). Considering the variation between the enjoyment of the intervention and control commercial the participants in the study were also assessed on their enjoyment of the program they viewed
(Music Videos or Planet Earth) and their overall enjoyment of the commercials.
Measures

Other VAS items included rating participants' perceptions of the reality of the program, with questions such as, "I thought the people in the music videos were", with answers ranging

from "not at all true-to-life" to "very true-to-life", and describing their personality with
questions such as "generally, I come across as", ranging in their answers from "someone who is

sensitive and excitable and can be tense" to "someone who is relaxed, unemotional, rarely gets

Visual Analogue Scales. Participants completed a self-report questionnaire containing a

irritated and seldom feels blue" from the Single-Item Measure of Personality (SIMP; Woods &
Hampson, 2005).
The implementation of a short measure of body satisfaction (just three VAS questions)
among the other VAS items helped to facilitate the cover story for this study (see below) and

number of Visual Analog Scales (VAS) to measure state body satisfaction and mood. VAS are comprised of 100mm horizontal lines with anchored endpoints which participants mark with a vertical line to indicate their response (Heinburg & Thompson, 1995). Scoring of participants

responses is done to the nearest millimeter and range from 0 to 100. VAS measures allow for a greater range of responses than 1-7 Likert scales and have been frequently used in this type of

reduce the likelihood of participants discovering its true purpose. Participants becoming aware of

the true purpose of the study may result in expectancy effects.

26

27

11::,:1,.

1 :

Television Viewing Behaviors. Participant's television exposure was assessed with three

The VAS scales, television viewing behavior questions, demographics and awareness of
hypotheses measures were all compiled into one Study Questionnaire when administering to
participants (See Appendix G).

free response questions, "Which are your top 3 favorite TV shows?", "Which television shows
do you watch faithfully every week" and "Number of episodes of this show you watch every
:!1 .1

week". Viewing behavior of specific shows and genres was assessed with self report items

Sociocultural Attitudes Towards Appearance Questionnaire-3 (SATAQ-3). Participants
were assessed with Thompson et al.'s (2004) measure of the degree of internalization and awareness of the thin ideal typically seen in mainstream media, the SATAQ-3 (See Appendix H)
an updated verson of the Heinberg, Thompson, & Stromer (1995) SATAQ scale. Thin-ideal internalization is defined as the level at which an individual endorses, both cognitively and behaviorally, the ideals of attractiveness set out by society (Heinberg & Thompson, 1995; Heinberg et al, 1995; Thompson & Heinberg, 1999). Research suggests that internalization of societal ideals is likely multidimensional, consisting of a multitude of constructs such as media
pressure and information from the media (Thompson et al., 2004).Responses on this measure range from "definitely disagree" to "definitely agree") and higher scores represent greater

':!!: i

assessing the amount and frequency of viewing of 32 Nelson top-rated programs. These viewing
behavior questions appeared after the VAS items on the questionnaire.

Demographic variables. Participant's age, gender, height, weight, and ethnicity were also
iii

assessed with five free response questions appearing after the television viewing behavior

#

questions. Information obtained for self-reported height and weight was used to calculate BMI
(kg/m2).
Awareness ofHypotheses. Further actions were taken to assess the extent to which

participants were aware of the hypothesis of the study. Before administration of the Sociocultural Attitudes Towards Appearance Questionnaire-3 (SATAQ-3) and the Body Esteem Scale (BES)
participants were asked to provide a description of what they believed the study was
..":"!.  "

internalization of the thin ideal. The SATAQ-3 is composed of four subscales of media influence
(General, Information, Pressure, and Athlete) with a total of 30 items. The General subscale is an

ilii''!,'

investigating (i.e. the hypotheses). These descriptions were scored by an independent rater, who
indicated if the participant was aware of the study's true hypothesis. Participant's responses were

overall measure of the internalization of socio-cultural standards of attractiveness. The Pressure

coded into one of two categories, (1) mentioned media influence but did not mention body image
or appearance satisfaction, or (2) mentioned media influence and mentioned body image or
appearance.

subscale is a measure of the amount of pressure a person feels from the media to adhere to those
standards of attractiveness. The Information subscale is a measure of the importance a person attaches to the media as a source of information about standards of attractiveness. Finally, the

Examples of participants' responses falling into categories (1) and (2):
(1) How your personality dictates what you watch on TV.

Athlete subscale assesses one's focus on athleticism and sports as important to standards of
attractiveness. The scale is comprised of statements such as "I wish I looked like the models in

(2) The effects of physical appearance portrayed in the media on selfperception/feelings of physical appearance of viewers.

music videos" (General subscale),"IVe felt pressure from TV and magazines to be thin"(Pressure

subscale), "TV programs are an important source of information about fashion and being

28

29

J ::!;

attractive" (Information subscale) and "I try to look like sports athletes" (Athlete subscale). The
participants respond using a 5-point Likert scale with 1 indicating that they completely disagree

the BES includes three subscales: Sexual Attractiveness (feelings about body areas such as the eyes, cheekbones, and breasts), Weight Concern (feelings about body areas such as the waist, thighs, and hips), and Physical Condition (feelings about the body's capabilities, such as its strength, stamina, and reflexes). Because the focus of the present study is on evaluation and
satisfaction with appearance, only the Sexual Attractiveness and Weight Concern subscales were

to 5 indicating that they completely agree. Thompson and colleagues (2004) evaluated the

psychometric status of the SATAQ-3, reporting high internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha) of
the subscales over two studies (General- 0.96 and 0.92, Information- 0.96 and 0.94, Pressure-

0.92 and 0.94 and Athlete- 0.95 and 0.89) and excellent convergent validity demonstrated by

administered. The BES was calculated into two subscales; the 'Sexual Attractiveness' subscale
has scores ranging from 13 to 65 (13 Items: body scent, nose, lips, ears, chin, chest or breast,

correlations with body image and eating disturbance measures. The SATAQ-3 was calculated
into 4 subscales: The 'General' subscale has scores ranging from 9 to 45 (9 Items: 3, 4, 7, 8, 11,

eyes, cheeks, sex drive, sex organs, sex activities, body hair and face), and the 'Weight Concern'
subscale has scores ranging from 10 to 50 (10 Items: appetite, waist, thighs, body build, buttocks,
hips, legs, figure, stomach and weight) in accordance with Franzoi and Shields (1984). Cronbach's alphas have been reported as ranging from .78 to .87 which provides evidence for adequate internal consistency (Franzoi & Shields, 1984) In addition, evidence for convergent
validity has been provided by studies showing significant correlations between the BES and the
Rosenberg Self Esteem Scale (Franzoi & Herzog, 1986).
Research Design

12, 15, 16, 27), the 'Athlete' subscale has scores ranging from 5 to 25 (5 Items: 19, 20, 23, 24,

30), the 'Pressure' subscale has scores ranging from 7 to 35 (7 Items: 2, 6, 10, 14, 18, 22, 26) and
the 'Information' subscale has scores ranging from 9 to 45 (9 Items: 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, 21, 25, 28, 29). This measure included 8 reverse items (3, 6, 9, 12, 13, 19, 27, and 28) and was scored in
accordance with Thompson et al. (2004).

:l.l!.!"

Thompson et al. (2004) reports that the Pressure subscale of the SATAQ-3 has greater

predictive ability for body disturbance than any of the other three subscales. Yamamiya et al
(2005) used the General subscale in their investigation of interventions for reducing the impact

The present study was a post-test only design in which all measures were administered

of media on women's body image. Therefore, considering the greater predictive ability of the
Pressure subscale and the use of General subscale in previous intervention research, the Pressure and General subscales will be used as moderator variables in the present study.

after the presentation of the experimental stimuli. A pre and post test design was not used so that
participant's responses to the experimental stimuli were not influenced by measures presented

i;:!!:-

prior to experimental exposure of media images that specifically assessed body satisfaction of
regions of the body, weight and shape, and the awareness and internalization of the thin ideal
standard displayed in the media. Research suggests that the use of such pre-test measures may

Body Esteem Scale (BES) (Franzoi & Shields, 1984). Participant's trait body satisfaction

was measured with the BES is a 35-item scale which assesses an individual's feelings about

various aspects of their appearance (ranging from "strong negative feelings" to "strong positive
feelings") (See Appendix I). Higher scores represent more trait body satisfaction. For women,

reveal the true purpose of the study or increase participants' attention towards appearance issues

which may result in expectancy effects (Hamilton, Mintz & Kashubeck-West, 2007).

30

31

Procedure

5. RESULTS - APPEARANCE SATISFACTION Results are presented for the final data set of 200 participants. Firstly, inter-rater
reliability measures of the VAS data were calculated in the current study to assess the accuracy

Upon arrival at the laboratory for the experimental session, participants were provided

with an informed consent form for the study. To distract participants from the true purpose of the

study, they were told that the goal was to determine how mood and personality affect the
enjoyment of television. After thoroughly reading and signing the informed consent form, participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions, (Music video/Control

of the measured VAS items by the first rater using a comparison subsample of 15% of the scores (n=30) with a second independent rater. Comparison of the cases revealed and average overall
agreement of 97.5% for all the VAS variables (See Appendix J).

Commercial, Music Video/Dove Commercial, Control Program/Dove Commercial, Control

Secondly, to ensure that the data adheres to the standards of statistical analyses, the data was screened and assumptions of independence and normality. The assumption of normality was
assessed using histograms with a normal curve, as well z-score calculations of skewness and kurtosis (p < .05). For the four appearance satisfaction outcome variables (Facial, Weight and
Shape, Overall Appearance and Averaged Appearance Satisfaction) the histograms appears to approximate a normal (symmetrical) distribution. The calculations of skewness and kurtosis reveal that all the appearance satisfaction factors, except the Weight and Shape Satisfaction distribution which appears platykurtic, approximate a normal distribution (See Appendix K). The calculations further indicate that the SATAQ-3 subscales approximate a normal distribution with

Program/Control Commercial), with the caveat that all four conditions ended up with an equal
number of participants. This was achieved through the use of a web-based random number generator located at http://www.randomizer.org/. In each condition, participants watched one of
the 4 DVDs containing approximately 20 min of television programming and commercials. To
remove the possibility of experimenter bias, the person administering the testing session was

I;1 1 i,

unaware of which DVD each participant watched; the DVDs were compiled and labelled with a code by an independent assistant. All participants then filled out the questionnaire containing the
dependent measures, demographic information, a question asking them what they believed was the true nature of the study, the SATAQ-3 and the BES. After completing the questionnaires participants were provided a debriefing form and thanked for their participation. All aspects of
this study were completed by the participants individually.

the exception of the Pressure subscale which appears platykurtic (See Appendix K). The

distributions of the BES subscales Weight Concern and Sexual Attractiveness are both slightly
positively skewed and BES Weight Concern is leptokurtic. Furthermore, both distributions of
age and BMI are positively skewed and leptokurtic. However, considering ANOVA's are robust

to violations of normality and skewness and kurtosis pose less of a concern with large sample

!' \

sizes (200 or more) the Weight and Shape Satisfaction, Pressure subscale of the SATAQ-3, BES
subscales Weight Concern and Sexual Attractiveness, age and BMI variables were not
considered problematic (Field, 2005). Therefore the shape of the distribution should be the

U:

i

32

33

,P
CD

CD
o

2
ON
CD
oo

o o
I--k«

1 3
CD

S.
E^
O

o

?
3

CD

OO

C/5

p

8.
o

I
3
bo

CO

CD

p CTQ

O

o

CD

3

o p
p

S

8

I.
O
o

i
13
P

I
1=1

o
CD

5
ON
CD
oo

EL
o
o

8
g I
a
o

|
o
CD

?
ciT
oo

tn

!
P

CD

I
00
oo
i--'·

I
cd

P
OO

$
o

p
O

8
o
O5

CD

I
B5 o
O
CD

p

EL
oo

P

I
CD

o

CD
oo g.

|
ICD

t*
o

o

5
O
O

CD*
bO

I
o
CD

O
o

OQ

!
§
to

1
EL
o o

I

8
P P

C/)

&.
oo

f I
el

I
§
EL

& oo'

,P
o

CD

o

I
o

g-

I.
o
oo
CD
oo

5

CD

I
to
CD

oo

P

4

P
o o

3

^
o

3

§
to

I I I
CD

& OO

§

t
s
O
CD
O

1
o

I
o

g
oo oo

is I
p

ON

& r-h*

I
f I l
o

O
p

CD
t--i

Bi o

I
CD

o'

p

I I"
3

I: cd"
O

I
o

s

p*

OO

OO

I

P

CD CD

0

3

3

s
o
oo

S

8
II

I
.8

1

£

O

O CD

2.
CD

&
OO

f
O
OO

BL

§
CD

CD

o CD

I
I
X
to

CD

8 3.
CZ

n
CD

oo

I
3

o

d
P
CD

8 CD
O

c5
o CD
I--'·

I
CD

P
CD

©
CD CD
o

P
OO

o
00

OO 00

1
P
CfQ
P

1
ON

o
O

H

2
CD

CD

n
o

P

EL
OO

P
CD

era

>
CD

P00
oo

3 8
CD*
CD

I
E
0Q

p
O

t
oo

I
I

^

P-

CD

2
p
oo

3

td
CD
oo

I
I
oo

CD

§
CD

CD

O

|

oo

P

s

I

i

Table 1

ANOVA results, means and standard deviations for personality, BMI and Age across condition.
Mean(SD) Program

Commercial

Music video conditions
Control Dove

Control program conditions
Control Dove

Variable
Personality

F value

F value

1 value

commercial

commercial

commercial

commercial

Extraversion

F(3,196)=3.037

.083

F(3,196)=222

.638

57.60(28.34)

53.30(27.13)

49.37(27.13)

49.13(25.86)

Agreeable

F(3,196)=.944

.332

F(3,196)=.O29

.865

68.98(21.16)

69.07(23.70)

73.61(23.91)

72.77(19.38)

Emotional
Stability

F(3,19.6)=1.480
Conscientious F(3,196)=.205

.225
.651

F(3,196)=.150
F(3,196)=.755

.699
.386

32.14(20.80)
38.56(26.02)

31.55(21.65)
41.66(26.37)

35.90(25.63)
39.85(31.05)

34.91(23.81)
43.30(25.34)

Openness
Age
BMI

F(3,196)=1.267
F(3,196)=1.108

.262
.294

F(3,196)=.036
F(3,196)=1.998

.849
.159

59.63 (22.70)
20.28 (2.85)

59.36 (27.22)
19.20 (1.84)

55.88 (23.35)
19.16 (1.92)

55.24 (23.28)
19.50 (2.44)

F(3,196)=7.016

.598

F(3,196)=3.355

.096

21.29 (2.93)

21.76 (3.48)

21.21 (2.96)

22.80 (4.30)

Note. Personality, Extraversion, Agreeableness, Emotional Stability, Conscientiousness, and Openness, were assessed using bipolar
responses on a Visual Analog Scale. Levene's test of homogeneity of variances all non significant.

33

1

:-!. 

Correlations between state VAS measures of appearance satisfaction and trait measures

presented in Table 5 indicates the correlations between the dependent measures, the moderating
'!":

J» "I.. .-"

variables and the demographic information taken in the study for the sample of 200 participants.
T-H

T-H

q

"ON
cn

X-

00
T-H

XX-

in
cn

T-H

q

cn
T-H

XX-

i

I1)-

i1 i. 

As can be seen in Table 5, the VAS scores of state appearance satisfaction were significantly
correlated with several of the moderating variables. All three individual VAS items were

T-H

1*

i"

1*

T-H

T-H

d
T-H

q

q

q

XX-

T-H

q

q i*

in

q

q
I

significantly correlated with both subscales of the BES, and with the Pressure and General
'
ON

XX-

X-

XX-

X-

X-

X-

X-

in
cn
I

ON
<N
i

o
i

cn

cn

CN
·

i

1
X-

r

*
00
X-

it
1.11 

subscales of the SATAQ-3. The VAS measure of satisfaction with facial appearance was

cn
T-H

X-

00

correlated most strongly with the BES Sexual Attractiveness subscale, r = .42, p < .01, and the
SATAQ-3 General subscale, r = -.24, p < .01 and therefore these subscales were used as

CN
i

T-H

cn

cn

00
XX-

1
*
X-

CN
i

o

cn

1
x-

CN CN

T-H

cn cn

ON
i

00

XX-

CN
i

1
T-H r-H
1

1

1
00

CN

,

moderators in the subsequent analysis of this dependent measure. In contrast, the other two VAS
items (weight and shape and overall appearance satisfaction) were relatively more strongly

00
i

O

o
1

o

00

o
i

cn
i

1

correlated with the BES Weight Concern subscale (weight and shape, r = .71, p < .01, and
overall appearance, r = .53, p < .01) and the SATAQ-3 Pressure subscale (weight and shape, r =

*CN
.

i
cn

"cn

i

in

m

m cn

*m
cn

T-H

*cn
in

-.41,p.< -01, and overall appearance, r = -33,p < .01) and therefore these subscales were used
as moderators in the subsequent analyses of these dependent measures. The weight and shape
cn

*CN

T-H

satisfaction and overall appearance satisfaction VAS items were also significantly correlated
with BMI, r = -.39, p < .01 and r = -.18, p < .05, respectively. Therefore, in the subsequent

CN

analyses of weight and shape satisfaction and overall appearance satisfaction BMI was included
va

T-H

<Z)
c^

as a covariate.

(D
D

i

a

o

a
O

'ons between

a
cn
cn

V
ft
in

o

13

l
34

J3
u

·a
0)

3
O
cn

in

<
W PQ
in

<
in

O
(D

d
V
M
pq

ft
..

>

c3

Ph
CN

W PQ

00

<

<

00
00

on

The evaluation of the study's moderators (the subscales of the BES and SATAQ-3) as

Main Hypotheses

continuous variables was conducted by multiple regression analysis to gain an understanding of
the influence of the full range of the individual differences in these variables. However, this

Facial Appearance Satisfaction. An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was conducted
assessing VAS facial appearance satisfaction using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2

analysis resulted in non-significant effects for television program and commercial (See Appendix
M). To allow comparison between the current study and previous studies, the moderators were

(Commercial: Dove vs. control) x 2 (BES Sexual Attractiveness: median and below vs. above
median) x 2 (SATAQ-3 General: median and below vs. above median) model. Analysis revealed

evaluated in the subsequent analyses as dichotomous variables by median split which is a
common procedure used within this area of research, allowing for assessment of participants as

no significant main effects for Program, F(l, 184) = .451, p = .50, T|p2 = .002, or Commercial,

F(l, 184) = .135, p = .71, T|p2 = .001. Analysis indicated a significant main effect for BES Sexual
Attractiveness, F(l, 184) = 9.479,p = .002, r|p2 = .049, and SATAQ-3 General, F(l, 184) =
4.408, p =.037, T|p = .023. Participants at or below the median on the Sexual Attractiveness

low or high internalizers as well as having low or high body dissatisfaction. Therefore, low trait

body satisfaction as indicated by the Sexual Attractiveness and Weight Concern subscales of the
BES, was considered as being at or below the sample median (44.00 and 28.50, respectively)

subscale of the BES reported significantly lower levels of state facial appearance satisfaction (M= 54.02) than those who scored above the median (M= 64.16). Participants who scored at or
below the median on the S ATAQ- 3 General subscale reported significantly higher levels of state facial appearance satisfaction (M= 62.55) than those who scored above the median (M= 55.63).
No significant interactions resulted from this analysis. Weight and Shape Satisfaction. An Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) was conducted
assessing VAS weight and shape satisfaction using 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2

whereas high trait body satisfaction was considered as above the sample median. Additionally,
low internalization, as indicated by the Pressure and General subscales of the SATAQ-3, was

considered as being at or below the sample median (22.00 and 27.00, respectively) whereas high trait body satisfaction was considered as above the sample median. The middle of the range of
possible scores for each subscale (27 for General, 21 for Pressure, 39 for Sexual Attractiveness,

and 30 for Weight Concern) approximates the median scores of the sample. Therefore, the
median split for each scale coincides closely with a theoretically meaningful cutoff point, a score

(Commercial: Dove vs. control) x 2 (BES Weight Concern: median and below vs. above median)

of 3 ("Have no feelings on way or another" for the BES and "Neither agree nor disagree" for the
SATAQ-3) which is the middle of the 5 point scale used for each measure (See Appendix

by 2 (SATAQ-3 Pressure: median and below vs. above median) model with BMI as a covariate.

Analysis revealed no significant main effects for Program F(l, 183) = .238, p = .626, r|p2 = .001,

N).Thus, the choice of median split is theoretically valid, and provides a means of comparison
with previous research. Means and standard deviations of the VAS items and moderator
variables, across the four conditions are presented in Table 6 (See Appendix O).

or Commercial F(l, 183) = .009, p = .924, r|p2 = .000. However, analysis did reveal the
covariate, BMI, was significantly related to weight and shape satisfaction, F(l, 183) = 9.464,/? =

.002, T|p2 = .049. This significant negative relationship indicates that as BMI increases weight
and shape satisfaction decreases. Analysis further indicated a significant main effect for BES

36

37

Weight Concern, F(l, 183) = 61.652, p = .000, tip2 = .252 and SATAQ-3 Pressure, F(l, 183) =

100.0-

Internalization

5.234, p = .023, TiP2 = .028, when controlling for BML Participants at or below the median on the
Weight Concern subscale of the BES reported significantly lower levels of state weight and
shape satisfaction (M= 37.87) than those who scored above the median (M= 64.90). Participants
O
o

 High

 Low

id

who scored above the median on SATAQ-3 Pressure subscale reported significantly lower levels

$·

O
o

of state weight and shape satisfaction (M= 47.66) than participants who scored at or below the
median (M= 55.11).

m

a
o

Q.

The interaction between Program, BES Weight Concern and SATAQ-3 Pressure

E
o

approached, but did not achieve, significance, F(l, 183) = 3.836, p = .052, Tfc2 = .021. Finally, a
significant interaction between Commercial, BES Weight Concern and SATAQ-3 Pressure F(l,
183) = 5.878, p = .016, r\v2 = .031, resulted from this analysis. In order to illustrate this

a
o

w.

significant interaction, Figure 1 shows participants' mean state weight and shape satisfaction, by
Commercial, BES Weight Concern and SATAQ-3 Pressure.

Low

High

Trait Body Satisfaction

i
,.,
<

Figure 1: The interaction between Commercial, Trait Body Satisfaction (BES subscale weight concern) and Internalization (SATAQ-3 subscale pressure) for state weight and shape
satisfaction (VAS Weight and Shape satisfaction). SE +/-

ll''

ll

 -.. 

A post-hoc Tukey's HSD test (with correction for unequal sample sizes) indicated that at each of the four combinations of BES Weight Concern level (median and below, above median) and SATAQ-3 Pressure level (median and below, above median) there was no significant effect

,.'

of Commercial (Dove vs. control). The effect of S ATAQ- 3 Pressure (median and below vs.

above median) was non-significant at each of the four combinations of BES Weight Concern

level (median and below, above median) and Commercial condition (Dove, control). Regarding
39

38

BES Weight Concern, for participants who scored at or below the median on the SATAQ-3
Pressure subscale, the effect of BES Weight Concern was significant for both the Dove

Overall Appearance Satisfaction. An Analysis of Covariance (ANCOVA) was conducted
assessing overall appearance satisfaction using 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2

commercial condition, p < .001, and the control commercial condition, p < .05. This indicates

(Commercial: Dove vs. control) x 2 (BES Weight Concern: median and below vs. above median) x 2 (SATAQ-3 Pressure: median and below vs. above median) model with BMI as a covariate.

that, for participants who feel relatively less pressure from the media, those who report low

levels of trait satisfaction with their weight (i.e. those who score at the median or below on the
BES Weight Concern subscale) also demonstrate lower levels of state weight and shape

Analysis revealed a non-significant main effect for Commercial F(l, 183) = .984, p = .322, r|p2 =

.005, and the covariate, BMI, was not significant F(l, 183) = .072, p = .789, r|p2 = .000. The

satisfaction than those who report high levels of trait satisfaction with their weight (i.e. those

main effects for Program F(l, 183) = 3.246, p. = .073, tip2 = .017, and SATAQ-3 Pressure, F(l,

who score above the median on the BES Weight Concern subscale), when they are exposed to
the Dove commercial and when they are exposed to the control commercials. However, for

183) = 3.167,/? = .077, r|p2 = .017 approached, but did not achieve, significance. Furthermore, a
significant main effect for the BES Weight Concern, F(l, 183) = 22.714,/? = .000, r|p2 = .110
was revealed. Participants at or below the median on the Weight Concern subscale of the BES reported significantly lower levels of state overall appearance satisfaction (M= 49.31) than those
who scored above the median (M= 65.88). Interactions approaching significance between

participants who scored above the median on the SATAQ-3 Pressure subscale, the effect of BES
Weight Concern was significant in the control commercial condition, p < .001, but not in the
Dove commercial condition. This indicates that, for the participants who perceive relatively more

pressure from the media, those who report low levels of trait satisfaction with their weight only

Commercial, BES Weight Concern and SATAQ-3 Pressure F(l, 183) = 3.609, p = .059, r|p2 =
.019 and Program, Commercial, BES Weight Concern and SATAQ-3 Pressure F(l, 183) =

demonstrate lower state weight and shape satisfaction than those who report higher levels of trait
satisfaction with their weight after exposure to the control commercials videos and not after
exposure to the Dove commercial. In other words, among those participants who were relatively
more sensitive to media influence, the difference in state weight and shape satisfaction between

2.838,/? = .094, r|p2 = .015 also resulted from this analysis.
Evaluation of Hypotheses First Hypothesis. The first hypothesis asked whether "thin-ideal" television programs in

participants who report low levels of trait weight satisfaction and those who report high levels of
trait weight satisfaction was significant after exposure to the control commercials, but not after
exposure to the Dove commercial. This indicates that the Dove Commercial was able to

the form of music videos would be detrimental to participant's appearance satisfaction;
replicating previous experimental investigations of the impact of music videos (Tiggemann &

Slater, 2004). Specifically, the prediction, HI, was that for participants who do not see the Dove
commercial, those who view the "thin-ideal" television programs (music videos) would

influence participant's current weight and shape satisfaction for individuals with low levels of
trait weight satisfaction who internalize media ideals.

demonstrate significantly lower levels of appearance satisfaction than those who view the control (documentary) program. Although the means of all three dependent variables were in the

40

41

predicted direction (with the means of the music video/control commercial group below the

Third Hypothesis. The third hypothesis investigated was that pre-existing trait body
dissatisfaction, BES, would moderate the detrimental effects of media images. Specifically, in

means of the control program/control commercial group) none of these differences achieved
statistical significance (none of the main effects of Program, nor the interaction terms, Program x
Commercial, were significant for any of the three outcome variables). Thus, there was no support
offered to HI in the present study.

H3 it was predicted that for participants who do not see the intervention commercial, those who
score below the median on the BES will have significantly higher levels of body dissatisfaction in response to the music videos than those who score above the median of the BES. As with the prediction regarding the moderating influence of the SATAQ-3 scale, a main
effect of one of the subscales of BES was significant for all three dependent variables (BES Sexual Attractiveness for facial satisfaction, and BES Weight Concern for weight and shape satisfaction and overall appearance satisfaction), meaning that participants who reported lower trait appearance satisfaction on the BES also reported lower state appearance satisfaction than
participants who reported higher trait appearance satisfaction on the BES. However, for state weight and shape satisfaction, the main effect of BES Weight Concern was qualified by a significant interaction, between BES Weight Concern, Commercial and SATAQ-3 Pressure. This interaction revealed that, whereas the difference in state weight and shape satisfaction between those high and low in trait weight concern was generally significant, it was not significant for participants who scored above the median on perceived pressure from the media (as measured by
the SATAQ-3) and who were exposed either to the Dove commercial.

Second Hypothesis. The second hypothesis proposed that the detrimental effect of music

videos on appearance satisfaction hypothesed in HI would be moderated by participants' level of
internalization of the thin-ideal. Specifically, in H2 it was predicted that among participants who do not see the Dove commercial, those who score above the median on the SATAQ-3 would
have significantly higher levels of appearance dissatisfaction in response to the music videos

than those who score below the median of the SATAQ-3. In the present study, participants who
scored above the median on the SATAQ-3 General subscale reported lower satisfaction with

their facial appearance than participants who scored at or below the median on that subscale.
Participants who scored above the median on the SATAQ-3 Pressure subscale reported lower
satisfaction with their weight and shape and lower overall appearance satisfaction than

participants who scored at or below the median on that subscale. Thus, perceived pressure from
the media regarding appearance did significantly affect participants' appearance satisfaction.
However, contrary to H2, these were main effects, not interactions with commercial type or

Fourth Hypothesis. The fourth and final hypothesis proposed in the present study was that the Dove (intervention) commercial, would successfully mitigate at least some of the

program type. That is, all participants, irrespective of the type of program or commercial they
watched, demonstrated lower state appearance satisfaction if they reported feeling more pressure

detrimental effect of the thin-ideal programs. Specifically, it was predicted in H4 that for
participants exposed to the music videos, those who viewed the Dove commercial would report

from the media. Thus, although H2 was not specifically supported, a general effect of perceived
pressure from the media was found on participants' state appearance satisfaction.

higher levels of appearance satisfaction than those who viewed the control commercials.
Although the pattern of means was in the predicted direction for all three dependent variables

42

43

(with the means of the participants in the music video/Dove commercial condition higher than the means of participants in the music video/control commercial condition), this hypothesis was
not supported by statistically significant differences between those means.

6. RESULTS - AWARENESS OF EXPERIMENTAL HYPOTHESES Evaluation of participant's awareness of experimental hypothesis was also done to determine if demand characteristics may have influenced the results. A Chi- Square analysis was
conducted using a 2 (Aware: Television effects vs. Television effects on body image or appearance) x 4 (Condition: Music video/Dove vs. Music video/control commercial vs. Control Program/Dove vs. Control Program/ control commercial) model. There was a significant

relationship between condition and participant's awareness of the experimental hypothesis, /2(3)
= 18.525, p = . 000, the effect size was .304. Odds ratio indicates that participants that viewed
the music videos and the control commercial were 5.7 times more likely to indicate awareness of
the true hypothesis of the study than participants that viewed the control television and the control commercial. Furthermore, odds ratio indicates that participants that viewed the music videos and the Dove commercial were 14.7 times more likely to indicate awareness of the true
hypothesis of the study than participants that viewed the control television and the control
commercial.

U

Follow up Chi- Square analyses were conducted for Program, 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Aware: Television effects vs. Television effects on body image or appearance), and Commercial, 2 (Commercial: Dove vs. control) x 2 (Aware: Television effects vs. Television

effects on body image or appearance) separately. The follow-up test for Program revealed that
participants who viewed the music videos were significantly more likely to be aware of the

experimental hypothesis than participants who were exposed to the control program, /2(1) =
10.821, p = . 001, the effect size was -.233. Odds ratio indicates that participants who viewed the music videos were 2.9 times more likely to indicate awareness of the true hypothesis of the study than participants who viewed the control television. Evaluation of the relationship between the

44

45

commercial conditions (Dove vs. Control) and Aware (Aware: Television effects vs. Television
effects on body image or appearance) revealed that participants who viewed the Dove

7. RESULTS-MOOD

Although the mood and personality VAS variables were originally intended just to serve
as distracter items, adding credibility to the cover story, some interesting results emerged when mood was considered as a dependent measure, in analyses similar to those conducted on the
VAS measures of state appearance satisfaction.
Table 3.

commercial were significantly more likely to indicate awareness of the true nature of the study

than participants who viewed the control commercials, /2(1) = 7.091, p = . 008, the effect size
was -.188. Odds ratio indicated that participants who viewed the Dove commercial were 2.4 times more likely to indicate awareness of the true hypothesis of the study compared to participants who viewed the control commercial. Analyses evaluating the influence of
participants' awareness of the studies true hypothesis on the main dependent measures were

Correlations between VAS measures of mood
Variable
1.

2.

3.

4.

conducted; however participants who were aware of the study hypothesis did not show a different pattern of results from participants who were unaware of the study hypothesis (See
Appendix P).

1. Worried
2. Angry

-

.59"
-

.43"

.56"

.42**
-

.44"
.50"

3. Confident (Reverse scored)
4. Happy (Reverse scored) Note: **/?<.01

As can be seen in Table 7, the VAS scores of mood were significantly correlated. Table 8 displays the means (and standard deviations) of the four mood VAS items by condition. All
mood items were scored so that lower values indicated poorer mood (i.e. lower scores indicated
greater worry, greater anger, lower confidence and lower happiness). Because the VAS mood

items were all significantly correlated, and because all four demonstrated the same pattern across
conditions, a combined VAS mood variable was created from the average of the four original
variables.

46

47

Table 4.

Commercial condition

Descriptive statistics for measures by condition
Mean (SD)

(d Control Commercial Conditions

H Dove Commercial Conditions

Music video conditions

Control program conditions

Control

Dove

Control

Dove

commercials

commercial

commercials

commercial

Variable
VAS items Worried
Angry

(n = 50)

(n = 50)

(n = 50)

(n = 50)

64.09 (21.92) 72.97 (24.42)

70.76(26.10)
82.04 (20.33)

70.58(26.81)

70.16(22.13)

82.85 (22.00) 66.86 (20.95)
70.22 (18.29)

80.81 (18.67)
67.08 (21.17)
70.48(20.71)

Confident
Happy

57.17(25.69)

70.91 (24.69)
71.74(21.66)
73.86 (18.62)

62.20 (19.56)
64.11(17.16)

Mood

72.63 (16.80)

72.13(16.80)

Music Video Condition

Control Condition

Televison Program Conditions

Note. VAS = Visual Analog Scale, scored on 0-100 scale.
Figure 2: The interaction between Commercial and Television Program regarding the combined

VAS Mood variable. SE +/-

An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was conducted assessing the combined VAS Mood
using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs. control) model.
A post-hoc Ryan REGWQ Procedure (as recommended by Howell, 2007) was conducted

Analysis revealed no significant main effects for Program, F(l, 196) = 1.912, p = .168, r|p =

on this interaction. This analysis revealed that the mean mood rating of participants in the Music
Video/Control Commercial condition was significantly below the mean mood rating of

.010. However, the main effect for Commercial approached significance, F(l, 196) = 3.557, p =

.061, r|p2 = .018. Furthermore, the interaction between Commercial and Program was significant,

participants in all three other conditions, at the p < .05 level. The mean mood ratings of
participants in the three other conditions did not differ significantly from one another.

, 196) = 4.358, p = .038, r|p2 = .024. Figure 2 illustrates this significant interaction.

48

49

PROPERTY OF

Evaluation of Hypotheses

8. DISCUSSION

In this section, the first and fourth hypotheses that were proposed for state appearance

Interventions have been formulated to decrease the negative effect of thin media on

satisfaction are evaluated with mood in place of the appearance satisfaction outcome variables. In accordance with the first hypothesis, among participants who were not exposed to the Dove commercial, those who viewed the "thin-ideal" television programs (music videos)

women's body satisfaction. These interventions have been found to be effective by promoting critical evaluation of media images which decreased participant's engagement in social comparison with media images. Although some are effective, current interventions are limited by their length and the artificial nature of their presentation. These factors prevent widespread distribution of the information necessary to mitigate the adverse effects of thin ideal media
experienced by the majority of women. Considering the media is the most pervasive and powerful social influence projecting the thin ideal, the wide prevalence of body dissatisfaction
(Tiggeman & Slater, 2004), and that television programs are probably the most widely-viewed form of the mass media, interventions that can reach an extended audience, and which are presented in a naturalistic manner are necessary. This research has taken the first step towards

demonstrated significantly lower mood levels than participants who were exposed to the control
(documentary) program. In accordance with the fourth hypothesis, among participants who viewed the music videos, those who were exposed to the Dove commercial reported significantly
higher mood levels than those who did not view the Dove commercial. Thus, support was

offered to both the first and fourth hypotheses, when mood was used as the dependent variable.

investigating the effectiveness of real world media interventions that present information similar
to previous intervention studies. Considering the present study was conducted in an ethnically
diverse Canadian university and that the content of the television and commercial material used

here is displayed in many countries, the present findings may be relevant to women around the
world.

The current study assessed whether the information presented in the Dove Commercial

"Evolution" by Unilever could mitigate the negative effects of thin ideal images. This study was
designed to simulate regular television, presenting the Dove commercial with other
"i \

advertisements during a commercial break. Therefore, this research takes into account the

limitation of presenting media in an unrealistic manner, which has been attributed to the
experimental manipulations of many prior media and body image studies (Hargreaves &

50

51

Tiggemann, 2003). Taking this into account, the results of this study should provide a more

relationship between thin media images and decreased body satisfaction for women employ

accurate assessment of the effect of thin media images during realistic television viewing than
previous studies.

images from fashion magazines as the experimental stimuli. The meta-analysis by Groesz et al.

(2002) shows that of the 25 experimental studies only 4 used stimuli from television, all of which
were TV commercials (not programs). Additionally, in the Grabe et al. (2008) meta-analysis, of
the 34 experimental studies reviewed, only 10 assessed the influence of thin ideal television, of
which only one assessed a television program and one assessed music videos (Grabe et al., 2008). Therefore, research in the area of television programs' influence on women's appearance satisfaction is still in its infancy and we cannot assume that televised programs will have the same detrimental effect as thin ideal images from magazines or television ads. Regarding the relationship between media exposure and body satisfaction Tiggemann (2003) states that "television and magazines are not the same!" (p.418). Tiggemann suggests that images from magazines and television can not be assumed to affect people in the same way and
proposes the theoretical argument that social comparison may not arise from exposure to

Using a social comparison perspective to interpret the results, the current study examined

the effects of exposure to thin media images in Music Videos on women's body dissatisfaction and mood, and investigated the mitigating power of a "real world" media intervention.
Music Video Manipulation

The results of the first line of present inquiry, regarding the influence of thin ideal music
videos on women's body dissatisfaction, were inconsistent with previous literature. Hypothesis one postulated that exposure to thin ideal music videos would significantly decrease women's
body dissatisfaction. In the current study, participants who viewed Music Videos did not report

significantly different levels of body dissatisfaction than participants who viewed control television, although the results revealed some trends in the hypothesized direction. Although
unexpected, the resulting non-significant difference in body dissatisfaction may be partly
explained by the fact that the effect sizes for women's body dissatisfaction in research with
significant effects has been consistently small to moderate, d = -0.28 (Grabe et al., 2008).

television images (Tiggemann 2003, 2005; see also Posavac et al., 1998 and Want et al., 2009).
Tiggemann (2005) indicated that one primary objective for engaging in viewing television

programs is for entertainment value, and therefore this medium is less likely to invoke social
comparison, whereas a primary objective for reading magazines is that women seek information on "beauty (Tiggemann, 2003), weight loss (Thomsen et al., 2002) and for the purpose of self

Consequently, it is difficult for research to uncover the influence of thin ideal media without
using very large sample sizes. In addition, experimental variation in the many variables that

influence the presentation of such stimuli, such as image type, type of presentation method, and
degree of thinness and attractiveness of the stimuli, may affect the size and direction of the
results.
at

evaluation (Martin and Gentry, 1997)" (Want et al., 2009, p. 3). Although research suggests that
magazine ads and television commercials may prompt more social comparison than television

programs, little research had theorized about the motivation to watch music videos. Music videos The majority of previous research supports the notion that thin media images are
are viewed for entertainment, however they also employ a focus on women's bodies, present

detrimental to women's body satisfaction. However, many studies that support the causal

women as sexualized objects and lack the story line of many television shows. Therefore, music

52

53

videos can not be grouped in with regular television shows, watched solely for entertainment,

measures of facial appearance, weight and shape and overall appearance. In the Tiggemann and Slater (2004) study demand characteristics resulting from the pre and post measure design and from the rating instructions could have heightened the degree of comparison to the appearance
music videos.

and research is necessary to investigate the level to which they encourage social comparison.
Tiggemann and Slater (2004) was the first experimental study to show that music videos featuring thin women were detrimental to the body satisfaction of women between 18-30,

compared to control music videos (that featured ordinary people and scenic clips). Beyond considering variations in the specific music videos that were used, there are many additional factors that could have invoked more appearance comparison to the music videos in the Tiggemann and Slater (2004) study. First of all Tiggemann and Slater (2004) manipulated the instructions provided to participants when viewing the media, asking participants to engage in comparison (comparing their attractiveness to the women in the videos) or distracter (rating the
creativity of the videos) tasks, whereas participants in the current study were instructed to engage

!;-

Many previous experimental designs have employed pre and post test measures to assess
mood and body dissatisfaction. However, research reports that the likelihood of finding adverse

effects is increased when participants are aware of the true purpose of the study (Mills et al.,
2002). Considering the widely publicized knowledge that thin media images are detrimental to appearance satisfaction, an experimental study that did not assess pre test satisfaction and employed a naturalistic viewing design was necessary to evaluate thin media effects without the influence of demand characteristics. To combat the issues of demand characteristics the current
study employed three methods, firstly measuring appearance satisfaction only once, after
exposure, to lessen the chance of alerting participants to the true nature of the study, second by providing a cover story with outcome questions embedded between decoy measures that relate to the cover story and finally by assessing the naivety of the participants to the actual purpose.

in normal viewing behavior and no tasks were given during viewing. The instructions provided
to participants by Tiggemann and Slater (2004) were given in a subtle manner using five rating
questions for each music video. Therefore, participants may have attended to the music videos to
a higher degree during this rating task than during normal television viewing behavior.
A second possible influential factor employed by Tiggemann and Slater (2004) was a pre

Evaluation of participant's awareness of experimental hypothesis indicated that 57 participants had some knowledge of the true nature of the study with more participants in the experimental Dove condition compared to the other three conditions. Additionally, there are many differences in the stimuli used that might contribute to the

and post test design, in which participants completed identical VAS measures of mood and body
satisfaction directly before and immediately after viewing the video sequence. In the current

study no pre-test was used and the implementation of the key dependent measures was done
among other VAS items that were intending to facilitate the cover story. Furthermore, the three key dependent measures of appearance also varied between the studies, Tiggemann and Slater (2004) employed VAS measures concerning feelings of fatness, physically attractiveness, and

varying results between the current study and the study by Tiggemann and Slater (2004). Different music videos were used in each of the studies and were pre-rated slightly differently for attractiveness and thinness. In current study the mean attractiveness scores for the images ranged from 4.50 to 6.30 and the thinness of the images ranged from 5.50 to 6.30 (See Table 1),

satisfaction with body size and shape (body satisfaction), while the current study utilized VAS

54

55

compared to the ratings of 6.4 for mean attractiveness focus and 6.3 for presence of thin women

higher levels of state appearance dissatisfaction following exposure to thin ideal music videos.
The present study does show that both trait body dissatisfaction and internalization of media

in Tiggemann and Slater (2004). Moreover, the control video sequences of the two studies varied in type. Tiggemann and Slater (2004) used music videos that still featured people stated as

ideals significantly influence participants' appearance satisfaction, although irrespective of
media condition. Internalization ofMedia Ideals

"ordinary" with a mean of 2.9 for attractiveness focus and 1.6 for thin women being featured.
However the control program in the current study was a segment of a wildlife documentary

("Planet Earth") that featured no images of people. Considering that previous research has found
that viewing normal or plus size models can produce positive appearance satisfaction compared
to viewing of thin models and no models, Tiggemann and Slater (2004) may have evaluated two

Internalization of media ideals regarding appearance as personal standards has been

shown in previous research as a reliable moderator in the relationship between thin media
exposure and women's appearance satisfaction (Dittmar et al., 2009). Although the current
research did not reveal a significant influence of internalization in the relationship between thin media and appearance satisfaction, a general effect of perceived pressure from the media resulted. This indicated that when women personally endorse the ideals of attractiveness presented in the media, their satisfaction with their own appearance was generally lower. This coincides with Cafri, Yamamiya, Brannick and Thompson's (2005) meta-analysis, which
identified internalization, the merging of the thin ideal into one's own personal goal, as being
highly associated with negative body satisfaction.

appearance effects, upward social comparison to thin models and downward social comparison
to "ordinary" people.

Therefore, the possibility of Tiggemann and Slater (2004) tapping into more than one effect may also partly account for difference between the results of their study and the current
study.
Moderators

Individual differences in vulnerability to media that leads to negative evaluations of

appearance mean that not all women are influenced in the same way. Therefore, the second and
third area of inquiry of the current study investigated two of the most prominent moderating
influences in the relationship between thin ideal media and women's appearance dissatisfaction,
namely internalization and trait body satisfaction. Hypothesis two postulated that the degree to

Considering that the ideal female in the media has been getting progressively thinner over the last 40 years, then the image of one's ideal self for women who internalize these media ideals

is also getting thinner, resulting in a greater discrepancy between one's actual and ideal self
image. Dittmar and colleagues (2009) report that internalization of thin media ideals is a
moderating factor and weight-related self discrepancies (the differences between one's actual

which women internalize as a personal goal the thin ideal image set forth by the media would
moderate the relationship between exposure to thin ideal music videos and women's body

and ideal self image)are a mediating factor in the relationship between exposure to thin ideal

dissatisfaction. Hypothesis three investigated trait body dissatisfaction as a moderator,
postulating that women with higher levels of trait body dissatisfaction would correspond to

^

images of women and negative affect. Dittmar et al. (2009) showed that negative effects on
women's appearance satisfaction after exposure to thin ideal media can be accounted for by the

56

57

activation of this body image discrepancy, with greater intemalization relating to a greater

Prior research indicates that women with pre-existing appearance dissatisfaction are more

discrepancy and more detrimental effects. This may provide some an explanation as to the

vulnerable to the influence of the thin ideal standards (Heinberg and Thompson, 1995). The current study assessed trait body dissatisfaction and did not reveal a significant influence in this link between thin media and state appearance satisfaction. However, a general effect emerged;

variation between the current research and previous research. If intemalization of media ideals acts as a moderator in the relationship between thin ideal media images and women's body
dissatisfaction under certain circumstances, specifically when there is activation of weight-

not surprisingly, trait body satisfaction was significantly associated with state body satisfaction. Considering that measures of trait body satisfaction are stable and enduring and the fact
that demand characteristic can skew results of state body satisfaction, the current research chose not to assess pre-existing dissatisfaction directly prior to media exposure. Although many claim that women who have presented previous trait dissatisfaction with their bodies are more sensitive
to adverse effects of thin media exposure, more research is necessary to parcel out the potential demand effects and create measures that do not reveal the true purpose of the study if presented
before stimulus exposure.
Dove Intervention

related self discrepancies, then investigations must look into what triggers this activation to gain
a better understanding of intemalization. One explanation may lie in the instructions provided to

participants. The current research only asked participants to engage in normal viewing behavior while viewing the media images and did not provide instructions to participants to engage in
contemplation of the media images, either verbally or through tasks such as rating enjoyment,

attractiveness or creativity during exposure (participants in the current study rated their enjoyment of the television material only after exposure). If instructions or tasks help to activate
participant's contemplation of the differences between themselves and ideal media images, participants who internalize the attractiveness of those media images as personal standards will experience greater discrepancies resulting in decreased body satisfaction. Therefore, "the type of
thoughts aroused in women when they are exposed to thin models is crucial" (Dittmar et al.,
2009, p. 48). However, there is a trade-off here; studies in which participants are asked to engage

For the final and main line of inquiry, the investigation into the intervention potential of a
brief "real world" intervention in the relationship between body dissatisfaction and exposure to

idealized media images, the current study cannot provide conclusive results regarding
appearance satisfaction because of the non-significant results of the thin media exposure. Hypothesis four postulated that a brief "real world" intervention, the Dove commercial, may

in specific rating tasks, such as rating their enjoyment of the program or in whicK they are asked
to make direct comparisons to the images may not provide an accurate assessment of the
thoughts experienced by participants during normal viewing behavior.
Trait Body Dissatisfaction

decrease the body dissatisfaction experienced by women exposed to thin ideal images in music
videos. It was theorized that the Dove commercial may provide information to interrupt the

comparisons that women make with idealized images, essentially providing information that may
help to critically evaluate the images and showcase these images as inappropriate for comparison, preventing detrimental body image disturbance. This information was thought to

Trait body dissatisfaction has been proposed as a moderator in the relationship between

media influences and one's current state body satisfaction (Posavac, Posavac & Posavac, 1998).

58

59

have the potential to change women's perceptions of idealized images by showing the behind the scenes techniques, change the behavior of engaging in upward comparisons with the ideal
images, change cognitions concerning evaluations of their own bodies and how women are

feel strong pressure to conform to media ideals, the current state weight and shape satisfaction of

the participants who had low trait body satisfaction was lower than the state weight and shape
satisfaction of those who had high trait body satisfaction only when participants were exposed to

viewed in the media, and even change women's affect by reducing the negative impact of thin
media images.

the control commercial, not when they were exposed to the Dove commercial. This suggests that
the Dove commercial was influential to participants who strongly internalize media ideals, making the difference in state weight and shape satisfaction reduced between individuals with high and low trait weight satisfaction. This may be interpreted as the Dove Commercial raising the state weight and shape satisfaction for individuals with low trait weight satisfaction to a level similar to individuals with high levels of trait weight satisfaction, among those who strongly
internalize media ideals. Mood

In the current study, participants who viewed music videos did not report significantly

different levels of body dissatisfaction than participants who viewed control television and therefore the potential of this intervention to mitigate the social comparison of women to thin media images could not fully be evaluated. One theoretical reason that the Dove commercial
may not have an effect on music videos is the fact that the techniques illustrated in the Dove

commercial to alter the model were directed towards a photo. Therefore, the Dove commercial
may have more influence on magazine images which can be altered using the same techniques,
not all of which can be used in music videos. Computer techniques are one of the most

To determine if this "real world" intervention has broader effects than on just appearance satisfaction, mood was evaluated as a dependent variable. Prior research has not investigated
mood to the same level as appearance satisfaction, however it does indicate that thin media images can reduce participant's mood. Bessenoff (2006) states that exposure to thin ideal advertising (pictures) increased negative mood, specifically dejection-related and agitation-

astonishing aspects to the Dove commercial; altering the size of the mouth, ears and eyes,

elongating the neck and smoothing the face. However, these computer techniques are not used with Music Videos. The techniques which may impact how participants process the music videos
are the make-up, hair and camera techniques, which are only part of the Dove commercial.

related moods, and increased levels of depression. Heinberg and Thompson (1995) demonstrated
greater negative mood resulting from viewing commercials of thin media images compared to non-appearance control commercials. Additionally, changes in mood assessed with pre-to-post

Although it is unfortunate that more information could not be drawn froni the current
research about the potential for the Dove Commercial as an intervention in the relationship

between thin media and women's appearance satisfaction, the results reveal the potential of the
Dove commercial to influence women's body dissatisfaction, irrespective of television exposure

experimental designs indicate that decreases in mood result from thin ideal magazine (Pinhas,
Toner, Ali, Garfinkel, & Stuckless, 1999) and television exposure (Cattarin et al., 2000).

cqndition. In the present study there was a significant interaction of weight and shape with commercial, trait body satisfaction and pressure from the media. Among those participants that

Mills aiid colleagues (2002) suggest that exploration of thin ideal media images on mood
may reveal significant detrimental effects more often than looking exclusively at appearance

60

61

satisfaction. They propose that since it is now a widely-held belief that media images are

detrimental to appearance satisfaction, investigating mood as a dependent variable may reveal

Limitations and Directions for Future Research

the actual influence thin media without the problem of demand characteristics. With the
increasing promotion of the idea that thin media are detrimental to women's appearance
satisfaction and the knowledge many women hold that "you should not compare your appearance

The major limitation in the current research is the strength of the media manipulation, specifically the non-significant effect of idealized media on women's body satisfaction (no significant difference between the music video condition and control condition). Considering that
HI was not supported, the hypothesis that the Dove commercial could effectively mitigate detrimental effects of thin media images on appearance satisfaction could not be fully evaluated.
Therefore, developing a follow up study with stronger exposure to thin media images may
provide more conclusive results.

with thin media models", participants may be less inclined to indicate their decreased appearance

satisfaction after media exposure. Even music is incorporating the message that media image are harmful with lyrics in songs suggesting "Don't read beauty magazines. They'll only make you
feel ugly" (Mills et aL, 2002, p. 1694).

Consistent with previous research and the theoretical notion proposed by Mills and

Furthermore, the choice to use music videos for the experimental stimuli showcasing thin
ideal images in the current research may not have been ideal considering that relatively limited

colleagues (2002) an interaction between program and commercial emerged in the present study
when mood was considered as the outcome variable. Participants who viewed the thin media
images and did not view the Dove commercial reported significantly lower mood than participants in all the other three conditions (music video/Dove commercial, control program/control commercial and control program/Dove commercial). However, these mood results are contrary to previous research by Tiggemann and Slater (2004) which found that thin
ideal videos had no significant influence on mood. In the present study, the Dove commercial
was able to decrease the detrimental influence of thin ideal images on mood. This interaction may provide evidence that the Dove commercial effectively mitigated some detrimental

work has been done in this area. In retrospect employing the use of television advertisements as
the thin ideal media would have presented a greater likelihood of finding a significant effect of
thin ideal images on women's body satisfaction. This would also have had the added benefit of
comparing the same type of media in the experimental stimuli and intervention (since the intervention itself was a commercial). Follow up research that would allow pre-screening (mass testing session prior to the experimental session) would provide change scores between baseline and post-test, and a means

to compare this potential intervention to previous successful interventions, such as Posavac and colleagues (2001) who only used participants with moderate to high levels of body dissatisfaction. Follow up research would also be beneficial to examine the broader effects of the Dove commercial, including effects on dieting behaviours, self esteem, media skepticism, and to

influence of music videos. Considering that mood may evaluate components of body image that are less prone to demand then the current research may be the first intervention to lessen body
iniage disturbance in this construct.

62

63

investigate long term influences of commercials that promote positive body image for women,
such as the Dove commercial.

9. CONCLUSION

It has been said that beauty is "more than skin deep" and that "beauty is in the eye of the

beholder". However, western society is changing those views; magazines, television and commercials project a different view that beauty is all about one's physical form and that only a

thin-ideal is beautiful. A Cover Girl commercial with Ellen DeGeneres, blandly states that "Inner
beauty is important, but outer beauty is more important!" (2009). These mediums promote views
that self worth is judged by how closely a person resembles the thin ideal.

Although the majority of mass media communicates this message, there are those that
encourage the view that beauty comes in all shapes and sizes. Dove's campaign of "real beauty" promotes the idea that women's beauty within the media is simulated, that models are made to look flawless with make-up, hair, and computer techniques that change the structure of models faces, and airbrushes out any remaining imperfections. With the media influencing millions of
women's body image, interventions that mitigate the harmful effects of these societal projections
are essential. This current study indicated that a "real-world" intervention, consisting of a commercial, has the potential to mitigate the detrimental effects that ideal media images have on
women's mood, and can influence the appearance satisfaction of participants who internalize
media ideals. Essentially, this study points out that illustrating the techniques used to create

media representations of women, may contribute to decreasing the damaged body image of
women.

64

65

Appendix A Study Recruitment Information

Personality and the Enjoyment of Television
Abstract This social psychology study investigates psychological factors that influence people's opinions and enjoyment of television. The 60 min visit involves a segment of television and questions relating to enjoyment, mood and personality. In this study I am investigating the effect of psychological factors, such as personality and mood, on opinions and enjoyment of television and commercials. Around 200 individuals will participate in this study. Participants will be students enrolled in either PSY102 or PSY202 at Ryerson University. Participants will make one 60-minute visit to the "Media and Social Development" lab (South Bond Building, 2nd floor, room 244). During the individual lab session, participants will view a segment of television and will then complete a questionnaire about how much they enjoyed that segment of television, and about their mood and personality. When the participants have finished taking part, they will have an opportunity to ask questions and to learn more about the study. As a result of participating in this research, you may learn more about your opinions of television, commercials and about yourself. Potential benefits to science and society that may result from this research include useful information about the interaction between psychological factors such as personality, and the genre of television programme that is viewed, in determining people's opinions about, and enjoyment of, television and commercials. Being involved in a study may be a new experience for you, and you may feel uncomfortable answering some of the questions or viewing the images. Remember that you do not have to answer all questions and that you may
discontinue participation at any time.

Description

i

Duration Credits
Researcher

60 minutes 1 Credits
Stephanie Quigg

Email: Stephanie.Quigg@psych.ryerson.ca

Principal
Investigator

Stephanie Quigg

67

Appendix B

Ryerson University: Consent Agreement

Personality and the Enjoyment of Television

television and commercials. If at any point you feel uncomfortable during the study, you may stop participating either temporarily or permanently. Likewise, you are welcome to skip any item on the questionnaire that you do not wish to answer. In the unlikely event that you feel uncomfortable after the study, the Ryerson Centre for Student Development and Counselling offers free and confidential services to Ryerson students. The Ryerson Counselling Centre may be reached at: 416-979-5195 Monday through Friday during the summer from 9am to 5pm. More information about the Centre is available at: http://www.ryerson.ca/counselling/
Benefits of the Study: As a result of participating in this research, you may learn more about your opinions of television, commercials and about yourself. Potential benefits to science and society that may result from this research include useful information about the interaction between psychological factors such as personality, and the genre of television programme that is viewed, in determining people's opinions about, and enjoyment of, television and commercials.

You are being asked to participate in a research study. Before you give your consent to be a volunteer, it is important that you read the following information and ask as many questions as
necessary to be sure you understand what you will be asked to do. Investigators: Ms. Stephanie Quigg, MA Student, Department of Psychology, Ryerson
University.

Dr. Stephen Want, Assistant Professor, Department of Psychology, Ryerson University.

Confidentiality: The confidentiality of records identifying you will be maintained at all times. Specifically, access to collected data will be limited to Ms. Quigg and Dr. Want. Data will be
stored in a computer (accessible only via password) and the questionnaires will be secured in a filing cabinet. In addition, your name will not appear anywhere except on the consent form -- all questionnaires will be marked with an ID-number only. After completion of this study, your data will be confidentially stored for a period of at least 5 years and then destroyed. Walk Through Option: If you do not want your data to be included in the study, but you still
want to participate, you may perform the tasks without having your data collected. You will still

Purpose of the Study: The purpose of this study is to determine the psychological factors (such as mood and personality) that influence people's opinions about, and enjoyment of, television and commercials. About two hundred people (all at least 18 years old) will take part in this
study.

Description of the Study: This research will take place in this lab room, at 105 Bond Street,
f

which is a research building for psychology studies at Ryerson University. During this study, you
will be asked to do the following:

receive your bonus mark (described below), even if you do not want to have your data used in
the study.

(1) Read and sign this consent form (10 minutes).

(2) Watch approximately 25 minutes of a television segment. The television programming that you will watch will be a documentary with a commercial break, or some music
videos with a commercial break.

Incentives to Participate: As an incentive to participate, you will receive one percent added to
your final grade in your Introductory Psychology course for participating in this study. You may
stop your participation at any time during this study and you will still receive this additional one

(3) Complete a questionnaire in which you answer questions about how much you enjoyed the segment of television you watched, and about your mood and personality. You will be presented with statements such as "I enjoyed the program that I viewed" and "Right now I feel happy." For these and other questions, you will be asked to rate how well each
statement describes you. You will also be asked for some simple demographic

percent added to your final grade in Introductory Psychology. It is important for you to note that
you will still obtain this additional one percent if you stop your participation, or if you want to
participate without having your data collected.

information (e.g. age). This questionnaire takes approximately 10 minutes to complete. It is expected that your participation in this study will take about 45 minutes in total. Each person will take part in the study individually. When you have finished taking part, you will have
another opportunity to ask questions and to learn more about the study. What is Experimental in this Study: None of the procedures or questionnaires used in this study are experimental in nature. The only experimental aspect of this study is the gathering of
information for the purpose of analysis.

Costs and/or Compensation for Participation: There are no costs associated with your
participation.

Voluntary Nature of Participation: Participation in this study is voluntary. Your choice of
whether or not to participate will not influence your future relations with Ryerson University. If
you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw your consent and to stop your participation at any time without penalty or loss of incentives. At any particular point in the study, you may refuse to answer any particular question or stop participating altogether.

Risks or Discomforts: The risks of participation in this study are minimal and similar to the
risks that you might experience in your everyday life. You will be asked to watch television, and reflect on your mood and personality. As a result of your participation, you might find yourself

Questions about the Study: If you have any questions about the research now, please ask. If
you have questions later about the research, you may contact.
Ms. Stephanie Quigg
or

thinking more about your satisfaction with your life, your personality, or your enjoyment of

Dr. Stephen Want

68

69

Phone: 416-979-5000 ext. 4986
7156

Phone: 416-979-5000 ext.
Appendix C

If you have questions regarding your rights as a human subject and participant in this study, you may contact the Ryerson University Research Ethics Board for information.
Research Ethics Board

Debriefing Form

c/o Office of the Associate Vice President, Academic
Ryerson University
350 Victoria Street

At the beginning of this study, we told you that we were interested in finding out if people's

personalities and mood influence how much they enjoy television. In fact, the real purpose of this study was to determine if TV and a commercial, specifically the Dove commercial "Evolution", can influence people's mood and opinions about themselves. More specifically, the aim of the study that you just participated in was actually to find out if the depictions of women shown on television might influence viewer's feelings about themselves and their body image. Furthermore, we investigated whether the Dove commercial "Evolution" could counteract any
influence that these depictions of women on television have on women's body image. We did not tell you the real purpose of the study at the beginning because knowledge of our real hypothesis
(that watching certain types of television and commercials may affect your feelings of

Toronto, ON M5B 2K3
416-979-5042 Agreement:

Your signature below indicates that you have read the information in this agreement and have had a chance to ask any questions you have about the study. Your signature also indicates that you agree to be in the study and have been told that you can change your mind and withdraw
your consent to participate at any time. You have been given a copy of this agreement.

satisfaction with your appearance) may have influenced the results you generated. Previous researchers have investigated the body image question, and it has sometimes been
found that women feel less satisfied with their appearance when they watch the thin and attractive women depicted in the media. We wanted to add to the research investigating the impact of television on women's feelings of satisfaction with their appearance and explore the affects of television commercials as potential mitigators of this relationship.

I

You have been told that by signing this consent agreement you are not giving up any of your
legal rights.

Name of Participant (please print)

With that in mind, we have four groups of people participating in this study. People in the first
group, the "Baseline group", watched part of a documentary about wildlife and commercials that

did not feature any people. This group will provide us with data on how people generally feel
about themselves and their bodies in their everyday life, when they are not exposed to images of
Signature of Participant
Date

thin and attractive women on television. People in our second group watched part of a

documentary about wildlife and were exposed to the Dove commercial "Evolution" which featured the transformation that a model undergoes before being photographed, and of the digital modifications the pictures undergo before being presented to society. The two other groups

Signature of Investigator

Date

watched some television, specifically music videos, that contained depictions of thin and

attractive women. However one watched the Dove commercial "Evolution" whereas the other was presented with commercials that did not feature any people. The data from these four groups of participants when compared will tell us if watching television that contains depictions of thin and attractive women actually makes people feel worse about themselves and if the Dove
commercial "Evolution" was able to counteract any negative affects experienced as a result of

images of thin and attractive women. We chose to investigate music videos, because they
typically focus quite explicitly on women's bodies and may be more likely to cause viewers to think about their own bodies and appearance than other types of television. Researchers have previously suggested that we may be more likely to compare ourselves to real people than to actors, and so watching thin and attractive real people (compared to thin and attractive actors) may be more damaging to our feelings of satisfaction with our appearance. We chose the Dove commercial "Evolution", because the aim and objective of this commercials is similar to that of the interventions used in psychological studies; that is, to expose the unreal nature of most media

70

71

images of women and to discourage viewers from engaging in social comparison with idealistic
media images. Appendix D

Thank you again for participating in this study. Please remember that your participation in this study is confidential and that we will not discuss your participation or results with anyone, nor identify you by name in any written report from this study! As noted in the informed consent form, you may withdraw your participation and/or data at any point in the study, including upon completion. Declaring that you would like to withdraw your participation and/or data at any time
will not result in any penalties or loss of incentives.

Pre-rating Music Videos and Commercials Please indicate the extent that you agree with the following statements:

1) I thought the women in the first music video that I viewed were attractive
1

6

7
Extremely

If you know other people who are going to participate in this research (perhaps other people from your intro psych class), please don't talk to them about the study until after they have participated. It is important for our study that people participate in it without knowing what the real purpose of the study is. Please feel free to ask us any questions about the study and thanks
again!

Not at all

2) I thought the women in the first music video that I viewed were thin
1

6

7
Extremely

Not at all

3) I thought the women in the second music video that I viewed were attractive
1

6

7
Extremely

Not at all

4) I thought the women in the second music video that I viewed were thin
1 Not at all

6

7
Extremely

I

p

5) I thought the women in the third music video that I viewed were attractive
1

6

7
Extremely

Not at all

6) I thought the women in the third music video that I viewed were thin
1

6

7
Extremely

Not at all

7) I thought the women in the fourth music video that I viewed were attractive
1

6

7
Extremely

Not at all

8) I thought the women in the fourth music video that I viewed were thin
1

6

7
Extremely

Not at all

72

73

9) I thought the women in the fifth music video that I viewed were attractive
1

Appendix E

4

6

7
Extremely

Not at all

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Attractiveness and Thinness of Stimuli (Pre-ratings)

10) I thought the women in the fifth music video that I viewed were thin
1
Not at all

2

3

4

5

6

7

Variable

Mean

St. Deviation

Minimum

Maximum

Extremely

Attractiveness

11) Overall I enjoyed the Music Videos that I viewed 1
Not at all

1
6 7
Extremely

Kate Perry Lady Gaga

2

3

4

5

iff'

5.40
4.50 6.30 6.00 5.10

.70 .71 .48
.94

4.00

6.00

4.00 6.00
4.00 3.00

6.00
7.00
7.00

w

12) I enjoyed the particular "K9-Advantix ad" that I viewed
1

New Kids

6

7

Timberland
Keri Hilson

Not at all

Extremely

1.1

6.00

13) I enjoyed the particular "2008 Honda Accord Sedan ad" that I viewed
1 6 7 Extremely

Thinness
Kate Perry Lady Gaga

Not at all

5.50 5.70 6.30
5.70 5.80

.53
.82
.82

5.00 4.00 5.00 3.00

6.00
7.00 7.00
7.00

14) I enjoyed the particular "Telus 2006 Fish Talk To You ad" that I viewed
1

6

7

New Kids
Timberland Keri Hilson

Not at all

Extremely

1.2

15) I enjoyed the particular "Sony Bravia Paint Remastered ad"that I viewed
1 Not at all 6 7 Extremely

.63.

5.00

7.00

16) I enjoyed the particular "Dove Evolution ad" that I viewed
1

6

7 Extremely

Not at all

74

75

Appendix F

Appendix G

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Enjoyment of Stimuli (Pre-ratings)

THANK YOU FOR AGREEING TO PARTICIPATE. PLEASE READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY
Maximum
6.00
7.00

Variable

Mean
4.5

St. Deviation
1.72

Minimum
1.00
4.00 2.00 3.00 3.00

On the following pages are pairs of descriptions. Please indicate with a straight,
vertical line how much you think each description sounds like you. For example: · If a pair of descriptions describe you equally well, mark the centre of the scale

Music Videos
K-9 Advantix Ad Honda Accord Ad Telus Ad Sony Bravia Ad

5.5
3.2

.85
1.14 1.23 1.20 .63

5.00
7.00 7.00 7.00

Description 1

i

I

Description 2

_i

5.8
4.9

If you are slightly more like description 1 than description 2, then mark the scale
slightly closer to description 1.

I
Description 1 Description 2

Dove Evolution Ad

6.8

5.00

·

If description 2 is exactly right and description 1 is not like you at all, then
mark the scale right next to description 2.

Description 1

Description 2

Please note that questions 11-17 ask you to rate how you feel right now. Questions 18-22 ask
you to rate your personality in general.

76

77

HOW MUCH DOES EACH DESCRIPTION SOUND LIKE YOU?
1)1 am

11) Right now I feel

I
Happy Unhappy

The biggest fan
of MuchMusic

Not at all a fan
of MuchMusic

12) Right now I feel

2) I enjoyed the particular music videos that I viewed

I
Worried

Relaxed

Very much

not at all

13) Right now I feel

3) I thought the people in the music videos were
Confident
Insecure

Not at all true-to-life

Very true-to-life

14) Right now I feel

(nothing like people in real life)

(a lot like people in real life)

I
Angry

4) I thought the events that took place in the music videos were

Calm

15) Right now I feel
Very realistic

Very unrealistic

{a lot like events that happen
in real life)

{nothing like events that happen
in real life)
times.

I
Extremely dissatisfied with my facial appearance

I
Extremely satisfied with
my facial appearance

5) I have seen the particular music videos (on average) that I viewed
6) I enjoyed the commercials that I viewed

16) Right now I feel

1
Very much
not at all ___ times. Extremely dissatisfied with my weight and shape

I
Extremely satisfied with
my weight and shape

7) I have seen the particular "K9-Advantix ad" I viewed

Right now I feel

8) I have seen the particular "2008 Honda Accord Sedan ad" I viewed
9) I have seen the particular "Telus 2006 Fish Talk To You ad" I viewed

times.
times.

Extremely dissatisfied with my overall appearance

Extremely satisfied with
my overall appearance

10) I have seen the particular "Dove "Evolution ad" I viewed

times.

78

79

18) Generally, I come across as

In this next section, we'd like to know about the TV shows you like to watch.
Someone who is talkative,
outgoing, is comfortable around people, but could

Someone who is a reserved,
private person, doesn't like to draw attention to themselves
and can be shy around strangers

23) Using the space below, please tell us which television shows you watch regularly and the number of episodes you watch of that show (per week). Sometimes people watch only part of
an episode. If this applies to you, please estimate this number by using proportions (for example, someone might have watched 3 Vi episodes of a show last week).
Which television shows do you watch
faithfully every week?

be noisy and attention seeking. 19) Generally, I come across as

Number of episodes of this show do vou
watch per week

Someone who is forthright, tends to be

Someone who is generally

trusting and forgiving, is
interested in people, but can

critical and find fault with others and doesn't suffer
fools gladly. 20)Generally, I come across as

be taken for granted and
finds it difficult to say no

Someone who is sensitive and excitable, and can be
tense.

Someone who is relaxed,
unemotional, rarely gets

irritated and seldom feels blue.

21) Generally, I come across as

Someone who likes to plan
things, likes to tidy up, pays attention to details,
but can be rigid or
inflexible. 22) Generally, I come across as

Someone who doesn't
necessarily work to a

schedule, tends to be

flexible, but disorganized
and often forgets to put

24) Which are your top 3 favorite TV shows?
1. 2.

things in their proper place.

Why? Why? Why?

3.

Someone who is a

Someone who spends time reflecting on things, has an

practical person who is not interested in abstract ideas,

active imagination and likes

prefers work that is routine
and has few artistic interests.

to think up new ways of doing things, but may lack pragmatism.
81

80

25) Consider these popular television shows. On average, how many episodes of this show do
you watch per week? Demographic information
Network

TV show

Number of full or partial
episodes viewed

When was the
last time you

How many

episodes did you see during the
past 2 weeks?

Age:

watched an episode?

per week
Sex and the City American Idol Medium The Hills
Survivor The Bachelorette TBS FOX NBC CTV CBS

Gender: (please tick)

Female
Male

ABC TBS
TBS NBC

Height:

Seinfeld
Friends

Law and Order America's Top Model Criminal Minds Family Guy
Desperate Housewives

Weight:

CW
CBS FOX ABC

Ethnicity:
(please tick all that apply)

White/Caucasian
Chinese

CSI

CBS
MUCH
FOX

Much On Demand
Simpsons

South Asian (e.g., East Indian, Pakistani, Sri Lankan, etc)
Black/ African American

The Office
Grey's Anatomy

TBS ABC MUCH CW CW CTV CBS FOX MUCH
NBC ABC

The OC
Gossip Girl
One Tree Hill
Laguna Beach

Filipino
Latin American

NUMB3ERS
House

Southeast Asian (e.g., Vietnamese, Cambodian, Malaysian,
Laotian, etc) Arab West Asian (Iranian, Afghan, etc)
Korean

Much Music Countdown
Heroes Extreme Makeover Two and a Half Men

CBS ABC NBC CW
FOX

Ugly Betty
Biggest Loser

Pussycat Dolls
Bones

Japanese

Aboriginal (e.g., North American Indian, Metis, Inuit, etc)
Other (please specify)

82

83

Please write a short description below of what you think this study was about (i.e. what
hypothesis it was designed to investigate).

Appendix H

Sociocultural Attitudes Towards Appearance Questionnaire-3 (SATAQ-3)

Please read each of the following items carefully and indicate the number that best reflects your
agreement with the statement.

Definitely Disagree = 1
Mostly Disagree = 2 Neither Agree Nor Disagree= 3 Mostly Agree =4 Definitely Agree = 5

1.

TV programs are an important source of information about fashion and "being attractive."

2.

I've felt pressure from TV or magazines to lose weight.

3.

I do not care if my body looks like the body of people who are on TV.

Thank you!
4. I compare my body to the bodies of people who are on TV.

5.

TV commercials are an important source of information about fashion and "being
attractive."

6.

I do not feel pressure from TV or magazines to look pretty.

7.

I would like my body to look like the models who appear in magazines.

8.

I compare my appearance to the appearance of TV and movie stars.

84

85

9. Music videos on TV are not an important source of information about fashion and "being
attractive."

20.1 compare my body to that of people in "good shape."

10. I've felt pressure from TV and magazines to be thin.

21. Pictures in magazines are an important source of information about fashion and "being
attractive."

11.1 would like my body to look like the people who are in movies.

22. I've felt pressure from TV or magazines to exercise.

12.1 do not compare my body to the bodies of people who appear in magazines.

23.1 wish I looked as athletic as sports stars.

13. Magazine articles are not an important source of information about fashion and "being
attractive."

24.1 compare my body to that of people who are athletic.

14. I've felt pressure from TV or magazines to have a perfect body.

25. Movies are an important source of information about fashion and "being attractive."

15.1 wish I looked like the models in music videos.

26. I've felt pressure from TV or magazines to change my appearance.

16.1 compare my appearance to the appearance of people in magazines.

27.1 do not try to look like the people on TV.

17. Magazine advertisements are an important source of information about fashion and
"being attractive."

28. Movie starts are not an important source of information about fashion and "being
attractive."

18. I've felt pressure from TV or magazines to diet.

29. Famous people are an important source of information about fashion and "being
attractive."

19.1 do not wish to look as athletic as the people in magazines.

30.1 try to look like sports athletes.

86

87

Appendix I

21. 22.

sex organs

Body Esteem Scale (BES)

appearance of stomach

23.

sex activities

Instructions: On this page are listed a number of body parts and functions. Please read each item and indicate how you feel about this part or function of your own body using the following scale:
1 = Have strong negative feelings

24.

body hair
face weight height
hair mouth teeth complexion/skin

25. 26.
27. 28.

2 = Have moderate negative feelings

3 = Have no feeling one way or the other
4 = Have moderate positive feelings 5 = Have strong positive feelings

29.
30. 31.

1. 2.

body scent

appetite
nose

3.
4.

lips

5. 6.
7. 8.

waist
thighs
ears

chin

9.
10.

body build
buttocks

11.
12.
13. 14.

width of shoulders
arms

chest or breasts

appearance of eyes
cheeks/cheekbones

15. 16.
17.

hips
legs

18.*
19. 20.

figure or physique
sex drive
feet

88

89

Appendix J Table 8

Appendix K

Skewness and Kurtosis for the Independent Variables
Variable Skewness -1.610
-0.035

Inter-rater reliability for VAS variables

Kurtosis -0.819 -2.640**

Facial Satisfaction
Variable
Percentage of Agreement
.994

Weight and Shape Satisfaction Overall Appearance Satisfaction Averaged Appearance Satisfaction

Facial appearance

Weight and shape
Overall appearance
Happy

.965
.997

-1.267 -0.506 -1.215 -1.326
-0.872

-1.520
-0.980

.955
.987 1.00

Internalization -General
Internalization -Athlete

-1.599
-1.319
-2.716**

Worried
Confident Angry

Internalization -Pressure
Internalization -Information

.957 .958 .965
.967 .977
.973

-1.139
1.994*

-0.561 -0.155
2.392*
9 494***

BES -Sexual Attractiveness
BES -Weight Concern
Age BMI

Agreeable
Extraversion

2.529* 10.570***
7.041***

Emotional Stability
Conscientiousness Openness

5 781***

*Significant at/? < .05. **Significant at/? < .01. ***Significant at/? < .001

90

91

Appendix L
Intemalization Information

Intemalization Athlete

Figure 6.

Mean =26.93 Std. Dev. =7.971 N=200

Mean =13.77 Std. Dev. =4.265 N=200

Histogram with normal curve for the independent variables: Facial Appearance, Weight

and Shape, Overall Appearance, Averaged Appearance Satisfaction, SATAQ- 3 subscales

(General, Athlete, Pressure and Information), BES subscales (Sexual Attractiveness and Weight
Concern), Age and BMI.
10 15 20

Intemalization Athlete

Facial appearance

Weight and Shape

Mean =58.96 Std. Dev. =23.174 N=200

Mean =51.47 Std. Dev. =27.566 N=200

Intemalization General

BES Weight concern

30-

0.0

20.0

40.0

60.0

80.0

100.0

120.0

0.0

20.0

40.0

60.0

80.0

100.0

120.0

Overall appearance

Averaged Facial appearence, weight and shape, and overall appearence

Mean =57.57 Std. Dev. =23.62 N=200

Mean =56.00 Std. Dev. =21.489 N=200

0.00 0.0 20.0 40.0 60.0 80.0 100.0 120.0

20.00

40.00

60.00

80.00

100.00

120.00

Averaged Facial appearence, weight and shape, and
overall appearence

Overall appearance

92

-requncy

requancy

20-

10-

I
JU
10

\ I
/
-A
30

Std. Dev. =7.005 N=200

Mean =26.54

Vi
40 50 20 40

20

Intemalization General

BES Weight concern

Intemalization Pressure

BES sexual attractiveness

12.5-

n

Std. Dev. =7.891
N=200

Mean =45.33

10.0"

1 r
5.0-

/

V
\

2.5-

10

20

30

40

Intemalization Pressure

93

"Real-World" Media Intervention 95

Appendix M
BMI = 703*(weight/(height*height))

Demographics: Age

Multiple Regression Analysis
Mean =21.76 Mean =19.54 Std. Dev. =2.327 N=200

Three hierarchical multiple regression involving four steps were conducted on the dependent variables, facial appearance satisfaction, weight and shape satisfaction and overall
appearance satisfaction to examine the influence of music videos and the intervention
commercial.

35

40

17.5

20

22.5

25

27.5

BMI = 703*(weight/(height*height))

Demographics: Age

A hierarchical multiple regression involving four steps was conducted to examine the
risk factor of exposure to thin media images in music videos, and the protective factor of exposure to intervention commercial, with facial appearance satisfaction as the criterion. In step
one, BMI and age were entered into the regression model. These two covariates were not

significant (F=.O59, /?=.943) accounted for 0.1% of the variance in facial appearance satisfaction.
In step two the mediators were entered into the regression model, including: trait body satisfaction (both subscales of the BES Weight Concern and Sexual Attractiveness) and internalization (both General and Pressure subscales if the SATAQ-3). These factors were

significant CF=12.945,/?=.OOO) in accounted for an additional 21.1% of the variance in facial
appearance satisfaction. For third step the risk factor exposure to television programs was

entered into the regression model and was not significant (F=1.214, /?=.272) accounting for 0.5% of the variance in facial appearance satisfaction. The fourth step the potential protective factor exposure to the intervention commercial was entered into the regression model and was also not

significant (F= 12.945,/?=.000) accounting for none of the variance in the regression model.
Hierarchical multiple regression involving four steps was conducted to examine the risk factor of exposure to thin media images in music videos, and the protective factor of exposure to
intervention commercial, with weight and shape satisfaction as the criterion. In step one BMI and

94

95

"Real-World" Media Intervention 96

"Real-World" Media Intervention 97

age were entered into the regression model. These two covariates were significant (F=17.342,
p=.000) predictors accounting for 15% of the variance in overall appearance satisfaction. In step

regression model and was also not significant (F=.223, p=.637) accounting for only 0.1% of the
variance in the model.

two the mediators were entered into the regression model, including: trait body satisfaction (both
subscales of the BES Weight Concern and Sexual Attractiveness) and internalization (both

General and Pressure subscales if the SATAQ-3). These factors were significant (F= 41.309,
p=.000) and accounted for an additional 39.2% of the variance in overall appearance satisfaction.
For third step the risk factor exposure to television programs was entered into the regression

model and was not significant (F=.881, p=.349) accounting for only 0.2% of the variance in the
model. For fourth step the potential protective factor, intervention commercial, was entered into

the regression model and was also not significant (F=976, p=342) accounting for only 0.2% of
the variation in the model.

Hierarchical multiple regression involving four steps was conducted to examine the risk
factor of exposure to thin media images in music videos, and the protective factor of exposure to

intervention commercial, with overall appearance satisfaction as the criterion. In step one, BMI and age were entered into the regression model. These two covariates were significant (F=3.406,
p=.O35) and accounted for 3.3% of the variance in overall appearance satisfaction. In step two

the mediators were entered into the regression model, including: trait body satisfaction (both
subscales of the BES Weight Concern and Sexual Attractiveness) and internalization "(both

General and Pressure subscales if the SATAQ-3). These factors were significant (F=21.476,
p=.0O0) and accounted for an additional 29.8% of the variance in overall appearance satisfaction.

For the third step the risk factor television programs was entered into the regression model and was not significant (F=4.333,jp=.059) accounting for 1.5% of the variance in the model. The
fourth step the hypothesized protective factor, intervention commercial, was entered into the

96

97

"Real-World" Media Intervention 98

'Real-World" Media Intervention 99

Appendix N Table 7

Appendix O Table 6

Descriptive statistics for measures

Means and standard deviations of the VAS items and moderator variables, across the four
conditions.

Variable VAS items
Facial appearance Weight and shape Overall appearance
Mood SATAQ-3 General
Pressure

Mean

SD

Median

Mean (SD)

Music video conditions
58.96
51.47 23.17 60.00 50.00

Control program conditions
Control Dove

0-100 0-100 0-100
0-100

Control commercials
Variable

Dove commercial

27.57 23.62 17.66

commercials (n = 50)

commercial (n = 50)

(n = 50)

(n = 50)

57.57
70.68

54.50
71.88

VAS items

Facial appearance
Weight and shape Overall appearance

55.54 (22.36)
47.58(29.26) 53.83 (26.54)

59.85 (25.05)
53.92(28.18) 56.80 (24.75)

62.64 (21.68) 56.74 (25.80) 63.97 (18.41)

57.81 (23.55)
47.64 (26.55)
55.67 (23.44)

26.54
21.39 26.92 13.77

7.01

27.00 22.00 28.00 13.00

9-45 7-35 9-45 5-25

SATAQ-3 General
Pressure

7.51
7.97 4.27

27.58 (7.43)
22.34 (7.32) 28.36 (7.30)

25.70 (6.99)
20.36 (6.88)

25.58 (7.52)
21.00(7.96)

27.28 (5.95) 21.86 (7.88)
27.18(8.21) 14.24 (3.94)

Information Athlete BES

Information Athlete
BES

25.26(8.16)
13.48 (4.76)

26.90(8.12)
13.50 (3.88)

13.86(4.51)

Sexual attractiveness
Weight concern

45.34 29.42

7.89

44.00

13-65 10-50

Sexual attractiveness
Weight concern

45.72 (8.00)

46.08(9.12) 29.60(9.71)

44.74 (7.32)

44.80(7.14)

29.72(11.35)

30.88 (7.40)

27.46(7.79)

9.21

28.50

Note. VAS = Visual Analog Scale, scored on 0-100 scale. SATAQ-3 = Sociocultural

Attitudes Towards Appearance Questionnaire-3, subscale General scores ranged from 9-45,
Athelete score ranged from 5-25, Pressure ranged from 7-35 and Information ranged from 9-

45. BES = Body Esteem Scale, Sexual Attractive subscale scores ranged from 13-65 and
Weight Concern subscale scores ranged from 10-50. BES subscale.

98

99

"Real-World" Media Intervention 100

"Real-World" Media Intervention 101

Appendix P

139) = .598,/? = .441, t\v2 = .004, Commercial, F(3, 139) = .045,/? = .832, r|p2 = .000. No
significant interactions resulted from this analysis. For the participants that reported media

Influence ofAwareness. To test whether participant's awareness of the hypotheses of the

study influenced the relationship between thin media images and appearance satisfaction 4
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) were conducted assessing VAS facial appearance satisfaction,

influence and mentioned body image or appearance when asked about the study hypothesis an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS facial appearance satisfaction
using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs. control) model was

VAS weight and shape satisfaction, VAS overall appearance satisfaction, and mood at each level
of the Aware variable (Television effects vs. Television effects on body image or appearance).
Table 7

conducted. Results reveal no significant main effects for Program, F(3, 53) = .168, /? = .683, r|p2

= .003, Commercial, F(3, 53) = .015,/? = .903, r\p2 = .000 and no significant interactions.
Weight and Shape Satisfaction. Among the participants that indicated that the study
Mean (SD)

Awareness of Experimental Hypotheses

hypothesis focused on media influence but did not mention body image or appearance

Music video conditions
Control Dove

Control program conditions
Control Dove

satisfaction an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS weight and

Variable

commercial
(n = 50)

commercial
(n = 50)

commercial
(n = 50)

commercial
(n = 50)

Total
(n = 50)

shape satisfaction using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs.
control) model was performed. Analysis revealed no significant main effects for Program, F(3,

Aware

Television effects but

n = 36

n = 25

n = 38

n = 34

n=143

139) = .224, p = .637, r|p2 = .002, Commercial, F(3, 139) = .792, p = .375, tip2 = .006. No
significant interactions resulted from this analysis. For the participants that reported media influence and mentioned body image or appearance when asked about the study hypothesis an

not in relation to body
image or appearance

Television effects on
body image or
appearance

n=14

n = 25

n=12

n = 6

n = 57

Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS weight and shape satisfaction
using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs. control) model revealed

no significant main effects for Program, F(3, 53) = .224, p = .683, r\p2 = .004, Commercial, F(3,
Facial Appearance Satisfaction. Among the participants that reported media influence
when asked about the hypothesis of the study but did not mention body image or appearance

53) = .038, /? = .846, r|p2 = .001 and no significant interactions.
Overall Appearance Satisfaction. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS overall appearance satisfaction using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs. control) model was performed on participants that reported the focus of

satisfaction an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS facial
appearance satisfaction using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs.

control) model was conducted. Analysis revealed no significant main effects for Program, F(3,

the study as media influence but did not mention body image or appearance satisfaction.

100

101

"Real-World" Media Intervention 102

"Real-World" Media Intervention 103

Analysis revealed no significant main effects for Program, F(3, 139) = .997, p = .320, r|p2 = .007,
Commercial, F(3, 139) = 2.323, p = .130, r|p2 = .016. No significant interactions resulted from
this analysis.

REFERENCES

Bessenoff, G.R. (2006). Can the media affect us? Social comparison, self-discrepancy and the
thin ideal. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 30, 239-251.

Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS overall appearance

Cafri, G., Yamamiya, Y., Brannick M., & Thompson, J.K. (2005). The influence of sociocultural
factors on body image: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology, Science and Practice, 12,
421-433.

satisfaction using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs. control) model was conducted with participants that reported media influence and mentioned body image
or appearance when asked about the study hypothesis. Results indicated no significant main

Cash, T.F., & Brown, T.A. (1987) Body image in anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa: a
review of the literature. Behaviour Modification, 11, 487- 521.

effects for Program, F(3, 53) = 2.351, p = .131, r|p2 = .042, Commercial, F(3, 53) = .091, p =
.765, r|p2 = .002 and no significant interactions emerged.
Mood

Cash, F.T., Melnyk, S.E., & Hrabosky, J.I. (2004). The assessment of body image investment:
An extensive revision of the appearance schemas inventory, International Journal of

Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS mood was conducted

Eating Disorders 35,305-316.

for participants that reported the focus of the study as media influence but did not mention body
image or appearance satisfaction using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial:
Dove vs. control) model. Analysis revealed no significant main effects for Program, F(3, 139) =

Cash, T.F., & Szymanski, M.L. (1995). The development and validation of the body-image
ideals questionnaire. Journal of Personality Assessment, 64, 466-477. Cattarin, J.A., Thompson, J.K., Thomas, C. & Williams, R. (2000). Body image, mood, and
televised images of attractiveness: The role of social comparison. Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology, 19, 220-239.

.340, p = .561, r|p2 = .002, Commercial, F(3, 139) = .319,/? = .573, r|p2 = .002. No significant
interactions resulted from this analysis.

Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with the dependent variable VAS mood was conducted using a 2 (Program: music video vs. control) x 2 (Commercial: Dove vs. control) model focusing on participants that reported media influence and mentioned body image or appearance when
asked about the study hypothesis. Results indicated a significant main effect for Program, F(3,

Champion, H. & Furnham, A. (1999). The effects of media on body satisfaction in adolescent
girls. European Eating Disorders Review, 7, 213-228.

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale,
NJ:Erlbaum.

53) = 6.165,/? = .016, r|p2 = .104, and Commercial, F(3, 53) = 4.003,/?= .051, r|p2 = .070. No
significant interactions for this analysis emerged.

Collins, R.L. (1996). For better or worse: The impact of social comparison on self-evaluations.
Psychological Bulletin, 119, 51-69.

Crandall, C, & Biernat, M. (1990). The ideology of anti-fat attitudes. Journal ofApplied Social

102

103

"Real-World" Media Intervention 104

"Real-World" Media Intervention 105

Psychology, 20, 227-243.

verbal reinforcements. Sex Roles, 40, 473, -481.

Dittmar, H. (2005). Vulnerability factors and processes linking sociocultural pressures and body
dissatisfaction. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 24, 1081-1087.

Franzoi, S.L. & Shields, S.A. (1984). The body esteem scale: Multidimensional structure and sex

differences in a college population. Journal of Personality Assessment, 48, 173-178.
Franzoi, S. L., & Herzog, M.E. (1986). The body esteem scale: A convergent and discriminant
validity study. Journal of Personality Assessment, 48, 173-179. Garner, D.M. (1991). Eating Disorder Inventory-2. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment
Resources, Inc.

Dittmar, H. (2009). How do "body perfect" ideals in the media have a negative impact on body image and behaviors? Factors and Processes related to self and identity. Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology, 28, 1-8.

Dittmar, H., Halliwell, E., & Stirling, E. (2009). Understanding the impact of thin media models
on women's body-focused affect: The roles of thin-ideal internalization and weight

Garner, D.M., Garfinkel, P.E., Schwartz, D. & Thompson, M. (1980). Cultural expectations of
thinness in women. Psychological Reports, 47, 483-491.
Garner, D.M., Olmstead, P. & Polivy, J. (1983). Development and validation of a

related self discrepancy activation in experimental exposure effects. Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology, 28, 43-72.

Dohnt, H.K., & Tiggemann, M. (2006). Body image concerns in young girls: The role of peers
and media prior to adolescence. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 35, 141-151.

multidimensional eating disorder inventory for anorexia nervosa and bulimia.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 2, 15-34.

Engeln-Maddox, R. (2005). Cognitive responses to idealized media images of women: The
relationship of social comparison and critical processing to body image disturbance in
college women. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 24, 1114-1138.

Grabe, S., Ward, L.M. & Hyde J.S. (2008). The role of the media in body image concerns among
women: A meta-analysis of experimental and correlational studies. Psychological
Bulletin, 134,460-476.

Etcoff, N. (1999). Survival of the prettiest: The science of beauty. New York: Doubleday.

Green, K.L., Cameron, R., Polivy, J., Cooper, K., Liu, L., Leiter, L. & Heatherton, T. (1997).

Etcoff, N., Orbach, S., Scott, J. & D'Agostino, H. (2004) "The real truth about beauty: A global report". Retrieved October 2007, from http://www.campaignforrealbeauty.com7.
Farrell, C, Shafan, R. & Lee, M. (2006). Empirically evaluated treatments of body image
disturbance: A review. European Eating Disorders Review, 14, 289-300. Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7,
^117-140.

Weight dissatisfaction and weight loss attempts among Canadian adults. Canadian
Medical Association Journal, 157, S17-S25.

Groesz, L.M., Levine, M.P. & Murnen, S.K. (2002). The effect of experimental presentation of thin media images on body satisfaction: A meta-analytic review. International Journal of
Eating Disorders, 31, 1-16.

Grogan, S. (2008). Body image: Understanding body dissatisfaction in men, women and

Fouts, G., & Burggraf, K. (1999). Television situation comedies: Female body images and

children (2nd ed.) London: Routledge.

104

105

"Real-World" Media Intervention 106

"Real-World" Media Intervention 107

Hargreaves, D., & Tiggemann, M. (2003). The effect of "Thin-Ideal" television commercials on body dissatisfaction and schema activation during early adolescence. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 32, 367-373.

Johnson, C. L., Tobin, D. L., & Steinberg, S. L. (1989). Etiological, developmental and
treatment considerations for bulimia. Special issue: The bulimic college student:

Evaluation, treatment and prevention. Journal of College Student Psychotherapy, 3, 5773.

Harrison, K. & Cantor, J. (1997). The relationship between media consumption and eating
disorders. Journal of Communication, 47, 40-67.

Joshi, R., Herman, C.P., & Polivy, J. (2004). Self-enhancing effects of exposure to thin-body
images. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 35, 333-341.

Harris, M.B., Harris, R.J., & Bochner, S. (1982) Fat, four-eyed, and female: Stereotypes of
obesity, glasses, and gender, Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 12 503-516.
Hawkins, N., Richards, P.S., Granley, H.M., & Stein, D.M. (2004). The impact of exposure to the thin-ideal media image on women. Eating Disorders, 12, 35-50.

Levine, M., Smolak, L., & Hayden, H. (1994). The relation of sociocultural factors to eating attitudes and behaviors among middle school girls. Journal of Early Adolescence,
74,471-490.

Heinburg, L.J. & Thompson, J.K. (1995). Body Image and televised images of thinness and
attractiveness: A controlled laboratory investigation. Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology, 14, 325-338.

Lin, L.F. & Kulik, J.A. (2002) Social comparison and women's body satisfaction. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 24, 115-123.

Major, B., Tessta, M., & Bylsma, W.H. (1991). Responses to upward and downward social comparisons: The impact of esteem-relevance and perceived control. In J. Suls & T.A.
Wills (Eds.), Social Comparison: Contemporary theory and research (pp.237-257).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Heinberg, L. J., Thompson, J. K., & Stormer, S. (1995). Development and validation of the
Sociocultural Attitude Towards Appearance Questionnaire (SATAQ). International
Journal of Eating Disorders, 17, 81-89

Henderson-King, E., & Henderson-King, D. (1997). Media Effects on women's Body Esteem:

Martin, M.C. & Gentry, J.W. (1997). Stuck in the model trap: The effects of beautiful models in ads on female pre-adolescents and adolescents. Journal ofAdvertising, 26, 19-33.
McVey, G., Tweed, S. & Blackmore, E. (2004). Dieting among preadolescent and young

Social and Individual Difference Factors. Journal ofApplied Social Psychology, 27, 399417.

Howell, D.C. (2007). Statistical Methods for Psychology. 6th Edition. Belmont, CA: Thomson
Wadsworth.

adolescent females. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 170, 1559-1561.
Morrison, T.G., Kalin, R. & Morrison, M.A. (2004). Body-image evaluation and body-image investment among adolescents: A test of sociocultural and social comparison theories.
Adolescence, 39, 571-592.

Irving, L.M. (1990). Mirror images: Effects of the standard of beauty on the self- and body-esteem of women exhibiting varying levels of bulimic symptoms. Journal of Social
and Clinical Psychology, 9, 230-242.

Milkie, M. (1999). Social comparisons, reflected appraisals, and mass media: The impact of

106

107

"Real-World" Media Intervention 108

"Real-World" Media Intervention 109

pervasive beauty images on black and white girls' self concepts. Social Psychology
Quarterly, 62, 190-210.

Robinson, B.E., Bacon, J.G., & O'Reilly, J. (1993) Fat phobia: Measuring, understanding, and
changing anti-fat attitudes. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 14, 467-480. Rodin J, Silberstein LR, Striegel-Moore RH. (1985). Women and weight: a normative
discontent. In: Sonderegger TB; ed. Psychology and Gender: Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation (pp. 267-305). Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press.

Mills, J., Polivy, J., Herman, C.P., & Tiggemann, M. (2002). Effects of media-portrayed
idealized body images on restrained and unrestrained eaters. Personality & Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1687-1699.

Murray, S. H., Touyz, S. W., & Beumont, P. J. V. (1996). Awareness and perceived influence of body ideals in media: A comparison of eating disorder patients and the general
community. Eating Disorders, 4, 33-46.

Silverstein, B., Perdue, L., Peterson, B., & Kelly, I. (1986). The role of mass media in promoting
a thin standard of bodily attractiveness for women. Sex Roles, 14, 519-532.

Seifert, T. (2005). Anthropomorphic characteristics of centerfold models: Trend towards
slender figures over Time. International Journal ofEating Disorders. 37,111-21'4.

Myers, P.N. & Biocca, F.A. (1992). The elastic body image: The effect of television advertising
and programming on body image distortions in young women. Journal of
Communication, 42, 108-133.

Spitzer, B.L., Henderson, K.A. & Zivian, M.T. (1999). Gender differences in population versus
media body size: A comparison over four decades. Sex Roles, 40, 545-565.

Pinhas, L., Toner, B.B., Ali, A., Garfinkel, p.E., & Stuckless, N. (1999). The Effects of the
ideal of female beauty on mood and body satisfaction. International Journal of Eating
Disorders, 25, 223-226.

Stice, E., Schupak-Neuberg, E., Shaw, H.E., & Stein, R.I. (1994). Relation of media exposure to
eating disorder symptomatology: An examination of mediating mechanisms. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 103, 836-840.

Polivy, J., & Herman, C.P. (2004). Causes of eating disorders. Annual Review ofPsychology,
53, 187-213.

Strauman, T.J., Vookles, J., Berenstein, V., Chaiken, S. & Higgins, E.T. (1991). Self-

discrepancies and vulnerability to body dissatisfaction and disordered eating. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 946-956.

Posavac, H.D., Posavac, S.S., & Posavac, E.J. (1998) Exposure to media images of female
attractiveness and concern with body weight among young women. Sex Roles, 38, 187201.

Sypeck, M.F., Gray, J.J., Etu, S.F., Ahrens, A.H., Mosimann, J.E. & Wiseman, C.V. (2006).

Cultural representations of thinness in women, redux: Playboy magazine's depiction of
beauty from 1979 to 1999. Body Image, 3, 229-235.

Posavac, H.D., Posavac, S.S. & Weigel, R.G. (2001). Reducing the impact of media images on
women at risk for body image disturbance: Three targeted interventions. Journal of
< Social and Clinical Psychology, 20, 324-340.

Thomsen, S. R., McCoy, J. K., Gustafson, R. L., &Williams, M. (2002). Motivations for reading

beauty and fashion magazines and anorexic risk in college-age women. Media
Psychology, 4, 113-135.

Postrel, V. (2007, March). The truth about beauty. The Atlantic, [299(2)], [125-127].

108

109

"Real-World" Media Intervention 110

"Real-World" Media Intervention 111

Thompson, J. K., & Heinberg, L. J. (1999). The media's influence on body image disturbance

perceived overweight in the United States and Australia. Sex Roles, 18, 75-86.

and eating disorders: We've reviled them, now can we rehabilitate them? Journal of
Social Issues, 55, 339-353.

Tiggemann, M., & Slater, A. (2004). Thin ideals in music television: A source of social
comparison and body dissatisfaction. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 35, 4858.

Thompson, J.K., Heinberg, L.J., Altabe, M., & Tantleff-Dunn, S. (1999). Exacting beauty: Theory, assessment, and treatment ofbody image disturbance, Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.

van den Berg, P., & Thompson, J.K. (2007) Self-schema and social comparison explanations of
body dissatisfaction: A laboratory investigation. Body image, 4, 29-38.

Thompson, J. K., & van den Berg, P. (2002). Measuring body image attitudes among adolescents
and adults. In T. F. Cash & T. Pruzinsky (Eds.), Body images: A handbook of theory,
research and clinical practice (pp. 142-153). New York: Guilford.

van Hoeken, D., Lucas, A.R., & Hoek, H.W. (1998). Epidemiology. In H.W. Hoek, J.L.

Treasure, & M. A. Katzman (Eds.), Neurobiology in the treatment of eating disorders (pp. 97-126). New York: Wiley. Want, S.C. (2009). Meta-analytic moderators of experimental exposure to media portrayals of women on female appearance satisfaction: Social comparisons as automatic processes.
Body Image, (5,257-269. Want, S.C, Vickers, K., & Amos, J. (2009). The Influence of Television Programs on
appearance satisfaction: Making and Mitigating Social Comparison to "Friends". Sex Roles, 60, 642-655.

Thompson, J.K., van den Burg, P., Roehrig, M., Guardia, A.S. & Heinberg, L.S. (2004). The
sociocultural attitudes to appearance scale-3 (SATAQ-3): Development and validation.
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 35, 293-304.

Tiggemann, M. (2003). Media exposure, body dissatisfaction and disordered eating: Television
and magazines are not the Same! European Eating Disorders Review, 11, 418-430. Tiggemann, M. (2005). The state of body image research in clinical and sqcial psychology.
Journal of Social and clinical Psychology, 24, 1202-1210.

Wilcox, K., & Laird, J.D. (2000). The Impact of Media Images of Super-Slender Women on
Women's Self-Esteem: Identification, Social Comparison, and Self-Perception. Journal

Tiggemann, M. & McGill, B. (2004). The role of social comparison in the effect of magazine
advertisements on women's mood and body dissatisfaction. Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology, 23, 23-44.

of Research in Personality, 34, 278-286. Wheeler, L., & Miyake, K. (1992). Social Comparison in Everyday Life. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 62, 760-773.

Tiggemann, M. & Pickering, A. S. (1996). Role of television in adolescent women's body dissatisfaction and drive for thinness. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 20, 199,203.

Wiseman, C.V., Gray, J.J., Mosimarm, J.E. & Ahrens, A.H. (1992). Cultural expectations of thinness in women: An Update. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 11, 85-89.

Tiggemann, M., & Rothblum, E. D. (1988). Gender differences in social consequences of

Woods, S.A., & Hampson, S.E. (2005). Measuring the big five with single items using a

110

111

"Real-World" Media Intervention 112

bipolar response scale. European Journal of Personality, 19, 373-390.

Yamamiya, Y., Cash, T.F., Melnyk, S.E., Posavac H.D. & Posavac, S.S. (2005). Women's
exposure to thin-and-beautiful media images: body image effects of media-ideal
intemalization and impact-reduction interventions. Body Image, 2, 74-80.

112

*^^

