Seediscussions,stats,andauthorprofilesforthispublicationat:https://www.researchgate.net/publication/265994039

SettingtheStage:WirelessBroadbandNetworkinginNorth America.(InvitedTalk)
Presentation·January2007 2authors,including: CatherineMiddleton RyersonUniversity
259PUBLICATIONS489CITATIONS
SEEPROFILE

Availablefrom:CatherineMiddleton Retrievedon:23August2016

Setting the Stage: Wireless Broadband Networking in North America
Dr. Catherine Middleton
Faculty of Business Ryerson University

Dr. Andrew Clement
Faculty of Information Studies University of Toronto Community Wireless Infrastructure Research Project
Presented at Wireless Cities Summit, Toronto, January 23, 2007

Objectives
· Provide an overview of wireless networking initiatives · Highlight issues to consider as you listen to the case studies presented at the Wireless Cities Summit · Identify desiderata for wireless initiatives

Municipal WiFi Deployments
Municipal WiFi Systems in the United States Type of Jul Feb Apr Jun Sep network 2005 2006 2006 2006 2006 Region/citywide 38 56 58 59 68 City hotzones 22 29 32 32 43 Muni or public 28 32 35 35 35 safety use only Planned 34 59 69 121 135 deployments Total 122 176 194 247 281
Source:

Dec 2006 79 49 36 149 312

muniwireless.com, summarized at http://www.dailywireless.org/2007/01/05/time-magazine-munifi-article/

Going Wireless: The Building Blocks
· Organization (community group, municipality, school, university etc.) with a perceived need for networked connectivity Purpose · Organizational champion(s), vision for network People · Broadband service to the organization, technical deployment of network Backbone

Types of Broadband Networks
· For-profit, commercial hotspots · Community wireless networks · Municipal broadband networks · Public municipal wireless broadband networks

For-Profit Wireless Hotspots
· Access on a fee-forservice basis · Located in coffee shops, airports, train stations · Operated by telecommunications companies (e.g. Bell, Telus, T-Mobile)

Community Wireless Networks

· Local organizations, typically run by volunteers · Connect local citizens to local resources · May or may not focus on the digital divide · Offer free alternative to commercial internet service providers, where service exists

Municipal Broadband Networks
· Municipality provides fibre and/or wireless network
­ Various models for provision, municipality may or may not own network

· Network is used for and by municipal government

Municipal Wireless Network Uses
· Public safety,
e.g. police communication

· Support for mobile workers · Service provision, sensors, remote monitoring · Benefits: improved service at decreased cost for municipalities

Public Municipal Wireless Networks
· Using wireless technologies, a municipality makes its existing network infrastructure available for public use, or develops infrastructure specifically for public use · The municipality becomes an internet service provider · This is where things get complicated...

Pre-Existing Service Level?
· If the public municipal wireless network offers the only source of broadband connectivity to citizens:
­ No competition, public infrastructure is the only option

· If there are other providers already serving the community:
­ Public-private sector competition, public infrastructure overlays existing services ­ Look to case studies, consider policy context

Drivers for Public Wireless Networks

Public Municipal Wireless Offerings
· What is your objective in providing a wireless network? · · · · Who are the primary users for the service? Where should the service be available? What devices should the service support? Pricing? Free, at-cost, commercial rates?

Why Offer Public Wireless?
· Affordability for citizens · Serve un- or underserved areas and offer alternative to private sector service · Community-wide coverage offers citizens and visitors convenience, flexibility, improved access for internet and telephony services

Why Offer Public Wireless?
· Citizen input into network development · Open networks with no restrictions on legal usage
­ Tiered pricing schemes based on bandwidth consumption

· Economic development, tourism, reputation

What to Offer?
· Who are your primary users?
­ government employees? ­ local citizens?
· is this primary or secondary access? · where will they use it? (at home? public place?)

· What type of coverage do you want?
­ Hotspots ­ Wide area "cloud" ­ Portable service
· moves with user but does not support mobility

­ visitors/tourists

­ Mobile service
· can be used in vehicles

­ Outdoor and Indoor?

What type of technology?
· How to provision network "backhaul"? · Should the network be based on WiFi/WiMax standards or cellular telephony standards? · What device(s) will be used to access the network and services?
­ laptop? PDA/portable PC? mobile phone?

· Choice of vendor, ownership of network, partnerships?

Recap: Key Questions for Muni WiFi
· Why do you want to develop a wireless network for your organization? · What is the purpose of the network? · Who will the network serve? · Where is network coverage needed? · How will you provision the network? · What is the business model?

Local case: Toronto Hydro Telecom
· City-owned utility · Largest WiFi zone in Canada · Built on existing extensive fibre back-bone · Ubiquitous service, up to 7Mbps

What is the best approach?

Commercial competitor
Capital investment:

(current model)

­ $2M for first phase, ~$56M full coverage

Pricing (after 6 month free period):
­ $29/mo

$348/yr+taxes

Competitors:
­ Rogers (cable)/Bell Sympatico (DSL): $520/yr - $560/yr

Main benefits:
­ Attracts businesses, tourists and investment to city ­ No cost to taxpayers, profits shared with City (~1 year pay-back, with 1% share) ­ 30% savings to subscribers Sources: onezone.ca,rogers.com, sympatico.ca, THT presentations, Apr 27 & Sep 6, 06

Public Utility
Operating costs:

(alternative model) ~$40-50M per year ~$50-60 per year

Average annual household cost: Funding options:
­ property taxes ­ utility bill

Main benefits:
­ Cost savings ($300-400/yr) for 60% of households now with broadband ­ Eased access for 25% of households now without internet access

How to choose between such models?
Note: These rough calculations are our own based on publicly available information. Sources: Technical details - onezone.ca, THT presentations, April 27,06 & Sept 6, 06.

Desiderata
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Ubiquitous Affordable Reliable Healthy Secure

-

for public wireless Internet

Widely Useful Cost Effective Convenient and Ready-to-Hand

Desiderata (2)
9. Open 10. Neutral and Non-Discriminatory 11. High Quality 12. Privacy Enabling 13. Accessible and Usable 14. Communicative Commons Enabling 15. Civically oriented 16. Accountable and Responsive

1. Ubiquitous



Service coverage should include every household, business, organization, public space, tourist destination, and public transit corridor in the network's coverage area, within the limits of what is technically feasible. Wireless contributes to enlarging service coverage to areas that are not easily reachable by wireline, and enabling the development of new services.

9. Open
INEC Declaration on Open Networks:

?

"3. Infrastructures should be `open', meaning they are wholly

open for any market entity to provide its services on a totally equal basis, free to compete with any other market entity. ... The open nature of such infrastructures extends to:
Technology: the infrastructure must be compatible with other networks, whereas the technical protocols have been made available or known to all; Functionality: there should be no barriers or limitations in the connectivity between one end-user and another Finance: the costs of infrastructure usage should be non-discriminatory and stimulate fair competition Organization: all providers shall have equal opportunities to offer their services to their clients or prospective clients"

a.

b. c. d.

http://www.smartcommunity.nl/the_declaration

16. Accountable & Responsive



Transparency in policy development and operations. Mechanisms of governance and citizen oversight to ensure that the service and its operator are responsive to citizen input and needs.

Espoused Benefits of Public Wireless

Espoused Benefits Essential service

Desiderata 1. Ubiquitous 2. Affordable 3. Reliable 4. Healthy 5. Secure 6. Widely useful 9. Open 10. Neutral and non-discriminatory 7. Cost effective 8. Convenient and ready-to-hand 9. Open 10. Neutral and non-discriminatory

Economic development

Improves efficiency

Espoused Benefits Improves service

Desiderata 9. Open 10. Neutral and non-discriminatory 1. Ubiquitous 13. Accessible 14. Communicative commons enabling 15. Civicly oriented 16. Accountable and responsive 1. Ubiquitous 6. Widely useful 9. Open 10. Neutral and non-discriminatory

Improves access

Community engagement

Fosters innovation

'Enabling' Conditions
· Access to high bandwidth backhaul · Open spectrum policies · Business models to suit local context (geography, existing infrastructure, political environment, support of local community)

Conclusions
· Desiderata as a preliminary effort to define what public wireless infrastructures should/could look like · Need to consider best means for achieving the desired outcomes · Shift debate from ideological grounds to serving intended beneficiaries - the public

Thank you!

CWIRP.ca
These slides are available at: www.cwirp.ca/files/wireless_summit.pdf

This research has been supported by a grant from Infrastructure Canada. The views expressed are our own.


