Running  Head:  Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding       

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation   Branding        Larissa Fitzsimons

This Major Research Paper is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Professional Communication Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada
August 26, 2016

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

ii  

Author's Declaration
I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper and the accompanying Research Poster. This is a true copy of the MRP and the research poster, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper and/or poster to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP and/or poster by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP and/or my MRP research poster may be made electronically available to the public.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

iii  

Abstract
This Major Research Paper (MRP) investigates how nation branding is accomplished through political brand ambassadors, particularly Canada's Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. Within this research, I also examine the intersection of political speech genres and branding speech genres, and how they have created the emergence of the nation branding speech genre. My research questions are as follows: 1. Does the intersection between the political and branding speech genres lead to the emergence of an independent nation branding speech genre? 2. Using the nation branding speech genre, do personal brands translate onto country brands? More specifically, is Trudeau's personal brand influencing Canada's brand?

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

iv  

Table of Contents
Author's Declaration Abstract Table of Contents List of Tables & Appendices Introduction Literature Review Research Questions Methodology Findings Limitations and Future Studies Conclusion Reference List Appendix List of Figures Figure 1 Figure 2 List of Tables Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 18 24 26 33 23 27 ii iii iv iv 1 5 20 20 25 34 37 40 47

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Branding Canada: Trudeau's Contribution to Nation Branding   Introduction: `Justin Trudeau is the New Young Face of Canadian Politics' - this was the

1  

opening headline in the December 2015 edition of Vogue Magazine (Powers, 2015). As a Canadian Prime Minister (PM), Trudeau is not a typical choice for the celebrity gossip and entertainment magazine. However, his popularity has continued to grow since he entered office in October 2015. In the article, Vogue paints the picture of a young man following in his father's footsteps, as Justin's father Pierre Trudeau was the predecessor of this fame, being named the most glamorous Canadian Prime Minister while in power from 1968 to1984 (Powers, 2015). This fame continues with Justin, who is seemingly better known for his youthful appearance, persona, and personal brand, than his political views. This is seen in the Vogue article, when Powers focused on Justin's appearance more than his political decisions. "Strikingly young and wavy-haired," Powers writes, "the new Prime Minister is dashing in his blue suit and jaunty brown shoes ­ a stylistic riposte to the old world of boring black-shoed politicians" (Powers, 2015, para. 5). This type of commentary is unusual for politicians, demonstrating a fascinating crossover between personal branding and politics. What does Trudeau's star power mean for Canada, the country that he proudly represents? In this paper, I discuss this question by addressing the triangulation of branding and political speech genres, and how they contribute to the formation of a nation branding speech genre, which is exemplified by Trudeau. While I argue that Trudeau brings forth this genre, he is not the first to do so. In fact, there are instances where other charismatic non-Trudeau family politicians have had

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     the same effect, such as American President John F Kennedy. These politicians have a unique charm and mass appeal that contributes to their image, and it is reflected on the

2  

country that they represent. They play a key role in branding their country while using the nation branding speech genre. Nation branding is defined as, "The unique, multi-dimensional blend of elements that provide the nation with culturally grounded differentiation and relevance for all of its target audiences" (Dinnie, 2008, p. 15). Effective nation branding finds a unique selling proposition that distinguishes a country from others that are similar to them (Anholt, 2009). As demonstrated by Trudeau, one way nation branding is achieved is through celebrities that act as brand ambassadors (Hakala, Lemmetyinen, & Kantola, 2013). A celebrity is defined as, "a famous or well known person," which Trudeau clearly personifies (Dictionary.com, n.d). Ambassadors use strategic communication strategies to present their own brands, which translate onto the perception of the country they represent. To communicate branding techniques, ambassadors like Trudeau use language that belongs to the branding speech genre. Speech genre theory argues that there are two levels of analysis in linguistic study: primary analysis and secondary analysis (Baktin, 1953). The primary level analyzes the direct meanings of words used, while the secondary level analyzes the context that language is used in (Baktin, 1953). The context determines more information about the true meaning of a word than studying the linguistic meaning alone. As with all messages, the context in which it is received has an effect on how it is understood. For example, while nation branding is associated most with the branding speech genre, an intersection occurs with the political speech genre when Canadian Prime Minister

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Trudeau acts as a brand ambassador for the country. This intersection impacts the

3  

political and branding speech genre, allowing for an independent nation branding speech genre to emerge. When examining the nation branding speech genre, it is important to understand the multi-faceted language used in marketing and branding efforts. This leads to the recognition of brand language and identifies the impact it has on the image of a nation. The branding speech genre is defined as, "A programmatic approach to the selling of a product, service, organization, cause or person that is fashioned as a proactive response to the merging desires of a target audience or market" (Lair et al., 2005, p. 311). Trudeau's personal brand demonstrates this, as it includes progressive language in response to desires of a forward thinking Canadian population. Progressive language is defined as, "Making progress toward better conditions; employing or advocating more enlightened or liberal ideas, new or experimental methods, etc." (Dictionary.com, n.d). This type of thinking promotes climate stability, openness to change, and equality. The political speech genre is known for using linguistic, discursive, and communication elements to persuade and bargain with listeners (Chilton, 2002). As Prime Minister, discussions about Trudeau belong in the political speech genre; however his personal brand has combined both the political and branding speech genres, as a means to influence and change Canada's brand. While both political and branding genres have an element of persuasiveness and require a high degree of communication, the context in which they are typically used differs. An intersection between two speech genres is possible, and it contributes to the reconstruction of a genre when overlapping occurs (Baktin, 1953). This is worth mentioning, as the intersection between the political and branding speech genres

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     contributes to the emergence of an independent nation branding genre. This intersection is examined more thoroughly throughout this paper. For my research, I analyze three American newspapers with the highest distribution (New York Times, Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune), as a means to answer the following questions: R1: Does the intersection between the political and branding speech genres lead to the emergence of an independent nation branding speech genre? R2: Using the nation branding speech genre, do personal brands translate onto country brands? More specifically, is Trudeau's personal brand influencing Canada's brand? The first question uses Baktin's speech genre theory to determine if the intersection between political and branding speech genres leads to the emergence of a

4  

nation branding speech genre. The overlap between branding and political speech genres can be used to determine if politicians are in fact strong brand ambassadors for a nation, and if the nation branding speech genre arises. My second research question aims to determine whether or not Trudeau's personal brand is translating onto and influencing Canada's brand positively. If so, this means Trudeau is an effective brand ambassador for Canada. Brand ambassadors are consistently influencing opinions and impressions about their country of origin making this an important area of research. The remainder of this MRP will begin with a literature review aimed at introducing the nation branding objectives, outcomes, and communication. It also defines in greater detail the characteristics of political speech genres and branding speech genres. This is followed by a content analysis, and a discussion regarding the research conducted. Finally, the findings are revealed, and the limitations and future studies are presented.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Literature Review: Examples of nation branding include the reliability of German cars, the affordability of `Made in China' products, and the appeal of locally made items sold abroad. These are some ways that nation branding is achieved. Hakala et al. (2013) state

5  

that one of the strongest nation branding platforms is celebrity, as they are representatives for an entire country. Based on Trudeau's Vogue magazine cover, and the numerous articles written about him, it is easy to see that he has achieved star power. Trudeau indirectly brands Canada through numerous instances of branding language within political articles and contexts. This literature review defines in detail nation branding and speech genres, using Trudeau as the example of how they work together to create a unique nation branding speech genre.

Defining Nation Branding Dinnie (2008) defines nation branding as, "The unique, multi-dimensional blend of elements that provide the nation with culturally grounded differentiation and relevance for all of its target audiences" (p. 15). Nation branding is not about the superficial interpretation of a country, similar to how individuals view other commodities such as a running shoe. Instead, nation branding focuses on showcasing countries that develop laws, policies, products, and services to enhance the lives of their citizens (Dinnie, 2008). Nation branding is responsible for creating and managing an entire country's reputation, and thus requires far more depth than what is used in commercial brand management techniques (Anholt, 2008). While commercial branding can be quite complex, nation branding requires strategic management of all economic and political decisions. Nation

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     branding also encompasses all commercial brands from their country, which can have a

6  

positive or negative impact (Anholt, 2008). Nike for example, is an established American brand, and all commercial branding decisions made by the million-dollar company impact how individuals view the United States. While marketers develop the vision and scope of a brand, consumers create their own perceptions about it. Often the consumer perception differs from the original marketing intentions (Dinnie, 2008). Dinne (2008) suggests that nation branding has three major goals: these include increasing exports, tourism, and internal and foreign investments. Anholt (2007) insists that nation branding is more of a `competitive identity' as opposed to branding, as it has more to do with the development of a country's global identity, politics, and economics. Nation branding also promotes talent attraction, where by countries compete to acquire skilled workers and higher education students (Dinnie, 2008). In addition, nation branding can create currency stability, boost investor confidence, reestablish international credibility and ratings, and stimulate strong global partnerships (Dinnie, 2008). A nation's image is formed in many ways, and is shaped by people's experiences, previous knowledge and beliefs, prevailing social, political and economic conditions, companies and products, people and culture, cultural stereotypes, national characteristics, history and tradition, and intangibles (Hakala et al., 2013). While some scholars believe that a country's image is static and cannot change, many scholars show this is incorrect (Sun & Paswan, 2011). In fact, there are multiple ways a country's image can be shaped and transformed. While nation branding is a highly researched area, there is no one tactic used to enhance a nation's brand. This paper argues that while there are multiple ways to brand a nation, the most strategic way is through brand ambassadors. Below is a

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

7  

summary of factors that shape and impact how nations are branded, and how their image develops and transforms.

Ambassadors and Managers Hakala et al. (2013) see celebrities as the strongest nation branding platform because they act as ambassadors (or brand managers) for the whole country. It is easy to argue that Trudeau has achieved this celebrity status by appearing on magazine covers and creating a public frenzy over his handsome appearance and charming personality. Sun and Paswan (2011) agree with Hakala et al. (2013) on the effectiveness of brand ambassadors, and state that ambassadors should focus on promoting the people dimension of their country as opposed to the product dimension. This includes highlighting education, standard of living, technical skill, friendliness and creativity of a nation to a global audience (Sun & Paswan, 2011). Canadian PM Trudeau demonstrated this at the World Economic Forum in Davos by mentioning Canadians and their "resourcefulness" as opposed to the products that Canada is so well known for (Wherry, 2016).

Product Quality Product quality is another way that nation branding can be achieved. Hakala et al. (2013) state that there is a direct correlation between strong consumer brands and strong countries. For example, countries that produce desirable consumer brands are often more highly regarded by an international audience than those that do not. For example, Germany is well known for creating highly reliable vehicles. Sun and Paswan (2011)

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     believe that product quality is a key factor in creating a country brand image. They state that an image can be upgraded if a product from the country of origin is highly desired

8  

(Sun & Paswan, 2011). Gupta (2010) also states that even if a product is not great by any standards, as long as people believe that it is, the brand is equally as powerful. Thus, companies should spend time developing positive perceived product quality, through advertising and consumer insight research (Sun & Paswan, 2011). Anholt (2005) says that the best brands are not always the best products; the best products are those that people believe to be the best. A strong example of Anholt's theory is Canada's number one export, oil (Workman, 2016). While oil has always been a controversial topic, the Conservative party and previous Prime Minister Stephen Harper tried desperately to depict it in a positive light (Pedwell, 2013). In 2008, TransCanada Pipelines proposed a Keystone XL pipeline, a cross-boarder 1179-mile pipeline connecting Canada and Nebraska (Yardley & Parsons, 2015). Highlighting the economic benefits of the plan, which include new employment opportunities, as well as the elimination of US importation of oil from over seas, Harper refused to take no for an answer when it came to the approval of the pipeline (Pedwell, 2013). However, among these benefits are drawbacks including interference with multiple homes to build the line, and negative environmental factors. For seven years the Conservative party pushed for pipeline approval and invested their time into developing positive perceived product quality that Sun and Paswan (2011) refer to. However, according to Anholt's (2005) theory, the conservative party failed to recognize that the best products are those that individuals believe to be the best. By ignoring public protest, and inaccurately representing both the negative and positive aspects of the plan,

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     the Keystone proposal may have contributed to the 2015 election loss for the Conservative government. This example of product quality also relates to Trudeau as a strong Canadian brand ambassador. As a leader of the Liberal Party, Trudeau is a firm believer in environmental sustainability and reducing climate change (Yardley & Parsons, 2015). Therefore, since the Keystone proposal was in conflict with Trudeau's personal brand, the rejection by the Obama government reflected poorly on the previous Conservative government, even though it occurred while Trudeau was Prime Minister (Yardley & Parsons, 2015). Trudeau responded to the rejection with grace and poise, stating that,

9  

"The Canada-U.S relationship is much bigger than any one project, and I look forward to a fresh start with president Obama to strengthen our remarkable ties in a spirit of friendship and cooperation" (Yardley & Parsons, 2015, para. 23). This demonstrates Trudeau's recognition of the importance of perceived product quality, as he was quick to disassociate himself and Canada with its most popular import as soon as a negative association occurred. This is important, as individuals often view a nation in the same way that they view products that come from that country (Van Ham, 2001). Product perception translates into how a nation is perceived. By recognizing that most Canadians value environmental sustainability, Trudeau has worked to reverse the environmental impacts of Canada's oil sands and position Canada as progressive and environmentally conscious.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Policies, Economics, and Cultural Environment A nation's political, economic, legal, and cultural environment plays a fundamental role in national identity (Gupta, 2010). Countries that are in political or

10  

economic turmoil are not highly regarded by other nations and are unlikely to be accepted by them (Gupta, 2010). An example of this is the limited amount of interaction between North Korea and other countries. One way nation branding is developed is through major events like the Olympic games (Sun & Paswan, 2011). These types of events have the ability to shape a country's perception, by both a local and global audience. Nation branding is most effective when there is a change in political, economic or social systems, as opposed to the result of a wishful campaign (Fan, 2005). Specific policy changes must be combined with strategic actions to improve reputations (Anholt, 2008). Trudeau has implemented a series of changes since becoming Prime Minister that have made international headlines. Some of these changes include: a gender-balanced cabinet, acceptance of 25,000 refugees, and the `un-muzzling'1 of Canadian scientists (Abedi, 2015). In doing this, Trudeau has highlighted an equal standard of living for both men and women, which was deemed important by Hakala et al. (2013). He has also demonstrated the friendliness Canada has towards immigrants and new citizens. Both positively contribute to Canada's brand, as they demonstrate Trudeau's progressive cultural vision, and willingness to enforce political change (Sun & Paswan, 2011). A progressive cultural environment makes                                                                                                                  1  The term "un-muzzling" refers to previous Prime Minister Stephen Harper, and the Conservative government's decision to forbid scientists from speaking freely about their work to the media and public (Abedi, 2015). Despite backlash with petitions and protests, the ban was held until the Liberal government won the election in October 2015. The liberals promised to eliminate all regulations that censored government scientists once they took office, and began to deliver that promise in November 2015 (Abedi, 2015).   

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Canada more appealing to outside countries, and highlights one of its most unique features.

11  

Finding a Niche The final way that nation branding is achieved is through the identification of country uniqueness and using it to appeal to the global masses (Gupta, 2010). This is done through proper branding, with the end result being a distinctly unique edge that is far removed from other countries in a similar league (Gupta, 2010). An example of this is Trudeau's frequent reference to Canada's multicultural and dynamic population (Wherry, 2016). The cohabitation of so many nationalities in one country is unique to Canada, and provides it with a competitive advantage when seeking skilled workers and higher education students (Dinne, 2008). While niche offerings are aimed at creating a unique advantage on an international scale, they must continuously be updated using strategic communication methods and messaging as international trends change. Nation branding ambassadors should focus on recruiting a small, tight knit team to control all branding responsibilities as a way to ensure that national messaging is in sync (Dinnie, 2007). This limits the control of branding communication from the foreign affairs ministry, cultural organizations, companies, and investment and export establishments (Dinnie, 2007). Having consistent messaging is beneficial in the perception of a nation by outside countries. The most effective branding makes a country relevant to many, instead of famous to some (Anholt, 2009). Most importantly, brand managers must maintain integrity and clarity, whereby they only promote the nation in ways that are true and clear to a global audience. Trudeau exemplifies this by embodying

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     and depicting Canadian values in an accurate light. It is clear that Trudeau's branding strategy is consistent and controlled, and encompasses many of the nation branding techniques mentioned in this section (Anholt, 2009). Nation branding can also be

12  

achieved through product quality, policies, economics, the cultural environment, and with niche offerings. Brand ambassadors play a role in each of these strategies. Trudeau combines branding and politics to persuade and communicate with his audience.

Speech Genre Theory: In my research, there is an emphasis on two speech genres: the political speech genre and branding speech genre. When examining nation branding, brand language is always already present. However, since I am examining Trudeau's role as a nation branding ambassador, I must also look at the political speech genre to determine what language typically belongs in that context. By examining both genres separately, I can identify where the overlap occurs, and how both genres intersect and work together to create an independent nation branding speech genre. This section provides an in-depth analysis of all three genres, using Baktin's speech genre theory as the theoretical framework. Speech genres began with Wittgenstein, a German philosopher who determined that a lot of confusion about the meaning of language has to do with the examination of language outside of its original context, otherwise known as "forms of life" (Blair, 2006). He realized the truth behind a word or phrase is not determined by logic, but how the statement is used in a specific context (Blair, 2006). This research continued with Whorf (1997), who examined linguistic patterns cross-culturally as opposed to within the same

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

13  

culture. Whorf noticed vast differences among languages and cultures. Whorf's research on the structure of language identifies significant differences in the way that cultures speak and communicate. This is important for nation branding, as different nationalities can easily misunderstand messaging from countries outside of theirs. While both Whorf and Wittgenstein provide insight into linguistics and contextual meaning, Baktin's (1953) speech genre theory is the most relevant when examining nation branding communication. Bakhtin (1953), a Russian researcher who studied language, literary theory and the early development of linguistics, coined the term `Speech Genres,' which are categories of speech determined by primary and secondary information, otherwise known as the context in which they are used (Bakhtin, 1953). Bakhtin identified an issue with how linguistic research is conducted. He noticed that speech is being observed on a primary level, which is essentially breaking down sentences and examining only their words. Bakhtin argues that researchers must also examine a secondary level, which is the context or category that language is used in, as this drastically changes the meaning of a sentence. For example, he notes that language varies in a political speech, brand guide, sales presentation and official declaration. Understanding the context allows researchers to find the data that they need within the genre. Therefore, speech genres are the written or oral communication that belong to a certain situation or context (Bakhtin, 1953). Bakhtin also examined the use of style within speech genres. Each person has his or her own written and oral speaking style. While individuals try to incorporate their style into daily communications, some speech genres are more conducive of individuality than others. For example, official declarations and media

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

14  

statements are structured and do not allow for stylistic input (Bakhtin, 1953). This differs from a candid response given in a magazine interview or social media post. Individual styles are a by-product or addition to a speech genre, but never the main focus (Bakhtin, 1953). Transferring individual style into a genre that it does not belong to warps and changes that speech genre (Bakhtin, 1953). For example, when Trudeau uses branding or marketing language in a political context, he is changing the political speech genre entirely. Bakhtin's (1953) speech genre theory is important for my research, as it demonstrates how branding language intersects with the political speech genre, which contributes to the emergence of an independent speech genre that combines both political and branding speech genres.

Branding and Political Speech Genres: To recognize the independent nation branding genre, I examine what branding language and political language look like separately, followed by how they work together to create another speech genre category. Using Bakhtin's speech genre theory, I outline the parameters of branding language and political language in this section, tying it together with examples of Trudeau's contribution to the nation branding speech genre.

Branding Language Historically, branding was the word used to describe the ownership of farmer's livestock (Lair, Sullivan, & Cheney, 2005). Over the years, branding has evolved to include marketing, communications, personal branding and other relatable areas (Lair et al, 2005). Branding has four purposes: to differentiate from competitors, to guarantee

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

15  

consistency, a means of projective self-image, and to aid in decision-making (McWilliam & Chernatony, 1989). Branding is used to differentiate a product, service or individual from its competitors. A brand is also used to guarantee consistent quality and messaging, creating trust in a particular product or service (McWilliam & Chernatony, 1989). A brand may also be viewed as a `personality' using extrinsic values that stand for a variety of ideas and attitudes that may register with consumers. Brand personalities can impact a brand's public image, character and reputation. As demonstrated by my results, an example of this is Trudeau, and the way his values and attitudes influence Canada's brand. Finally, branding acts as an aid in decision making, as it allows consumers to make rapid choices based on familiarity alone (McWilliam & Chernatony, 1989). Studies show that humans are highly capable of recognizing familiar items and symbols, and therefore a brand name allows us to associate a company's values and differentiation with their name or image (McWilliam & Chernatony, 1989). An example of this is the symbolism of the Canadian flag. To most global audiences, the Canadian flag triggers key attributes of the country, such as cold weather, hockey, multiculturalism, friendly and apologetic citizens, universal healthcare, and perhaps even Trudeau himself. Keeping the four brand purposes in mind, branding language tends focus on differentiation, consistency and categorization. Branding is most frequently associated with products, but can also be used to market individuals, nations, and all other monetary items (Lair et al, 2005). Branding forces a seller or marketer to ask: what is unique and distinguishable? What is remarkable, authentic, and genuinely real? These questions help to position an item as a brand (Lair et al, 2005). Nation branding also asks these questions, as its aim is to

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     differentiate a country from the rest of the global world. This requires marketing a country's real and authentic unique appeal. Branding has grown and evolved, and countries are increasingly promoting themselves in complex ways, particularly through personal branding.

16  

Personal branding encourages and supports the process of self-commodification (Lair et al, 2005). This form of branding, similar to others, places an emphasis on values and mission statements, and what an individual promises to do. This is framed as a unique value proposition, which aims to set people apart from their competitors. An example of this is Trudeau and the campaign promises he made while running in the 2015 election. Communication is key to branding, as it allows a product, service or individual to explain their purpose. In this MRP I explore the use of personal branding, specifically Trudeau's physical appearance and age. I also examine if Trudeau's personal brand is influencing Canada's brand through the nation branding speech genre. While political articles tend to focus on policy regulations and changes, I predict that personal branding and nation branding will play a pivotal role in my data set. It is fundamental to understand what political language looks like to detect changes within the speech genre, and to identify the emergence of a separate nation branding speech genre.

Political Language Political language uses communication elements to persuade and bargain with listeners (Chilton, 2002). According to Edelman (1974), the function of political language is to recruit public support or opposition for any given factor. Some people do this overtly, by simply asking, or covertly, by demonstrating mutual benefit for both speaker

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     and listener (Edelman, 1974). An example of this is Trudeau's use of the term `sunny

17  

ways'2 (CBC, 2015). With this phrase, Trudeau creates a positive association to persuade his listeners that his policies will lead to positive changes in parliament. Politics varies according to individual situation and purpose (Chilton, 2002). It can be used in a governmental capacity or professional capacity, and can be viewed as a struggle for power between individuals who aim to assert their power, and those who try to resist it (Chilton, 2002). Political language structures perceptions of status, authority, merit and hierarchy (Edelman, 1974). However, political language is also a dialogue that aims to enhance cooperation and resolve conflicts over money, influence and liberty (Chilton, 2002). Political language involves addressing and resolving differences using persuasive discussion tactics, and therefore incorporates communication as a central theme (Chilton, 2002). Trudeau exemplifies this in his passionate speeches about what it means to be a Canadian, and the values that most Canadians share. Almost all political contexts involve facilitated discussions regarding shared values (Chilton, 2002). To dismiss criticism and avoid making politically insensitive comments, politicians must closely monitor their use of language, ensuring that they remain politically correct. The use of the phrase `politically correct' further emphasizes the need for correctness, as it is a common phrase used to dismiss an offensive or insensitive remark in everyday language. An example of this is the sensitivity that Canadian's share                                                                                                                  2  The  term  "sunny  ways"  was  a  term  used  by  Trudeau  in  his  2015  victory  speech,   and  is  a  reference  to  Sir  Wilfrid  Laurier.  Laurier  used  the  term  to  help  eliminate   hostility  during  a  dispute  in  1896  over  minority  language  rights  and  education  (CBC,   2015).  Trudeau's  use  of  the  term  was  in  response  to  previous  Prime  Minister  Harper   and  his  failed  attempt  to  ban  the  niqab.  Trudeau's  use  of  the  term  reminds   Canadians  that  we  can  find  a  way  to  respect  all  religious  identities  and  come   together  as  one.         

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     for all cultural groups, as Canada is a multicultural country that values the diversity of their geographical region. The use of communication in political speech is highly regarded, as it allows a message to be conveyed accurately and persuasively.

18  

Characteristics of Political Speech Genres and Branding Speech Genres Political Language · · Persuasiveness Emphasis on mutually beneficial policies · Political correctness (sensitivity to offensive language) · Changing regulations · · · · · · ·
Table 1

Branding Language Unique, genuine and authentic Point of differentiation Commodification Personable branding Consistent quality and messaging Guarantees Familiarity

While Trudeau combines the political speech genre and branding speech genre in his effort to brand Canada, I aim to identify if an entirely separate speech genre emerges, which is the nation branding speech genre. To determine this, I examine how the characteristics of both the political and branding speech genres are combined in the political articles written about Trudeau. Based on their characteristics I am able to identify intersections between the two genres prior to conducting any research. Using this information, I can show what the nation branding speech genre looks like. One commonality between the two genres is persuasiveness. To achieve acceptance and likeability in personal branding, individuals must persuade others that they are likeable

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

19  

and worthy of acceptance. This can be achieved through consistent messaging, desirable physical features, and authenticity. Trudeau encompasses all of these things, as his personal brand includes his good looks and genuine personality (Friedman, 2015). Persuasiveness also plays an important role in a political context, as politicians use personal branding techniques to win a seat in parliament and continue being reelected. The nation branding speech genre aims to combine the characteristics of both the political and branding speech genres, in an effort to influence a country's brand in a positive way through brand ambassadors such as Trudeau. As this literature review has outlined, nation branding can be conducted in a number of ways, and is fundamental to the development of a country's competitive advantage in an international setting. As stated by Hakala et al. (2013), celebrities act as brand ambassadors, and are one way through which nation branding can be achieved. It is fair to say Trudeau is a celebrity, as he has appeared in Vogue magazine and received celebrity attention worldwide. As such, this Major Research Paper examines Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau and his influence in branding Canada. His impact is determined by examining the language used to describe his personal brand, in comparison to Canada's brand. While ambassadors are critical to nation branding, their messaging and communication strategy is fundamental to their success. Thus, using Baktin's (1953) speech genre theory as my theoretical framework I examine the intersection of the political speech genre and the branding speech genre, to determine where the independent nation branding speech genre emerges within my dataset. This finding would reveal new information in the study of speech genres, and the impact it has on branding a nation.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Research Questions: The scholarship agrees that nation branding is an effective way to create a competitive advantage when competing in a global arena. By examining the American news media, I determine how Trudeau is being portrayed, and whether his brand is influencing Canada's brand. Using Bakhtin's (1953) speech genre theory, I predict that

20  

branding language will be used in a political context, breaking speech genre barriers that will positively affect Canada's image and reveal a nation branding speech genre. This has led to the following research questions: 1. Does the intersection between the political and branding speech genres lead to the emergence of an independent nation branding speech genre? 2. Using the nation branding speech genre, do personal brands translate onto country brands? More specifically, is Trudeau's personal brand influencing Canada's brand?

Methodology: Data Collection For my data collection, I examined three of the most highly circulated American newspapers, including the New York Times, Los Angeles Times, and Chicago Tribune. These were selected based on having a high circulation rate, as well as geographical distribution (East, West and Central States). While the paper USA Today has a higher circulation rate, it is an international paper and therefore does not fit within my research. Similarly, the Wall Street Journal was not selected as its primary function is to deliver finance-based news, and my focus is on politics and branding.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

21  

To complete my analysis, I used 132 articles from the New York Times, 16 from the Los Angeles Times, and 18 from the Chicago Tribune. These are the amount of stories that come up when searching "Justin Trudeau" in my chosen date range in the ProQuest database. The publication date range is from October 19th 2015 (election date) to February 19th 2016. This range was selected as it provides a large enough scope to be representative of my research questions. I examined news stories, excluding videos and images, in my analyses. Articles that discussed Trudeau and not Canada were kept in my sample, because while they do not provide a comparison to Canada in that specific article, future articles may use similar language. Though this is not a historical set of all news media ever written about Trudeau, it is a sufficient sample size to answer my research questions.

Methods of Analysis My methodology consists of grounded theory for my codebook development, and two qualitative content analyses of the newspaper articles. I discuss my methodology in depth within this section.

Codebook Development The first method used to develop my codebook was grounded theory. Using 18 articles from the Chicago Tribune, I was able to create categories for my codebook. I created a t-table with Canada on one side, and Trudeau on the other. A sample of my grounded theory analysis can be seen in Appendix D. During my examination I first determined whether or not the Chicago Tribune articles were relevant to my study by

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     reading their content. Articles that were repeat stories or did not discuss Trudeau in enough depth were deemed outliers, and eliminated. More will be said about this in the

22  

Outlier Content Analysis section below. Following the outlier stage, I was left with four articles to examine in greater depth, and I scanned these articles for possible themes. I identified the reoccurrence of youthful language, progressive language, and many comparisons between Trudeau and American President Barak Obama. While the comparisons between Trudeau and Obama were an interesting finding, it does not directly relate to my research questions. Once I completed this portion of research, I moved onto the development of my codebook. Using the results from my grounded theory research, I created a codebook with two categories. The categories include Youthful Adjectives and Progressive Vocabulary. Youthful adjectives were prevalent among most articles in the grounded theory analysis, and are commonly used to describe Trudeau in international news media. This section has been broken into two subcategories, the first being Youthful Mindset. This subcategory is defined as, "having the freshness, energy and outlook of someone who is young." This is important because it represents Trudeau's hopeful attitude and personal brand. An example of this is the description of Trudeau as youthful and hip. The second subcategory is Physical Appearance. This subcategory is defined as, "comments or phrases regarding traits and features of Trudeau's body." An example of this is the reference to his hair, and stating that he is tall and athletic. Since a political figure's appearance is not typically addressed in artciles, it is an important component to examine. This relates back to my first research question, as it uses personal branding language in political speech genres that together reveal an independent nation branding genre.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Codebook

23  

Figure 1

The second category examined is Progressive Vocabulary. This category is also broken into two subsections. The first is Change Language, and the second is Equality Language. Change language is an important area of study, as changes implemented by Trudeau can cause a change in the perception of Canada. This category refers to my second research question that asks if Trudeau's brand is translating onto Canada's brand. The second subsection of this category relates to equality language. Trudeau has often been known to value an equal playing field for all members of society (Susman, 2015). This is revealed through his plans to raise taxes for the rich, and offer help to the less fortunate, most notably Syrian refugees. In answering my second research question, this category determines if Trudeau's emphasis on equality is translating onto the Canadian brand, by being viewed as a country with equal opportunities.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Outlier Analysis Following the development of my codebook, I performed my first content

24  

analysis on the remaining 148 articles from the New York Times and Los Angeles Times. This analysis was conducted to determine their relevance to my study, and to eliminate outliers. Since outliers were already eliminated from the Chicago Tribune in my codebook development analysis, they were left out from this step in my research. The main factor that resulted in article elimination was repeat stories. For example, when the New York Times publishes an original story, they can then republish it for their International paper, Style Desk, or Foreign Desk. Each newspaper article was only examined once in my study. Exclusion also occurred when there was an insufficient amount of information within an article. An example of this is a paper that references Trudeau but does not provide any insightful information about him. I began with 16 articles form the Los Angeles Times, and 132 from the New York Times. After this content analysis I was left with 8 articles from the Los Angeles Times, and 40 articles from the New York Times. From 166 articles, only 52 were left following my outlier analyses.

Outlier Analysis Article Results

Table 2

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Content Analysis Following my outlier analysis, I was able to perform a second content analysis

25  

using my codebook. I analyzed each article for all categories and subcategories defined in my codebook. When a category was present, I used numbers to represent the frequency of its occurrence. For example, if four youthful adjectives were used to describe Trudeau, that column would display the number four. The results of this analysis are discussed in the next section, and my frequency table can be found in appendix B.

Findings: During my analysis, many patterns emerged and are discussed in relation to each research question below. Theme one and two refer to my first research question, which is whether or not the intersection between the political and branding speech genre reveal an independent nation branding speech genre. Theme three and four revolve around my second research question, which determines if Trudeau's brand is influencing Canada's brand. All themes address and answer the research questions posed throughout this paper, and provide critical insights into nation branding.

Theme 1: Youthfulness as a form of branding The first category of my codebook relates to Theme 1: Youthfulness as a form of branding. Within the 52 articles analyzed, the youthful mindset subcategory occurred 54 times, and the physical appearance subcategory occurred 31 times (see table 3). Based on these results it is evident that youthful adjectives are significant within the articles

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     examined. This is a form of personal branding, as it focuses on aspects of Trudeau's personality, and encourages the process of self-commodification (Lair et al., 2005).

26  

Youthful Adjectives Results

Table 3

Using Bakhtin's theory that there is a primary and secondary meaning to language, I analyzed my findings on both levels. First, the primary level of analysis involves looking only at the meaning of specific words being used, while the secondary level examines the meaning of words based on the context they are used in. My second theme explores the secondary level, while theme one relates only to the primary context of the words being used. On a primary level, the first notable finding is that references to Trudeau's age were more frequent than references to his physical appearance. The words youthful and young were extremely prevalent in my dataset, indicating that his age is of considerable importance to all three publications. An example of the language in this subcategory is, "the 43-year old Mr. Trudeau has exuded youthful exuberance" (`An Antidote to Cynicism in Canada,' 2015). This example indicates the positive association attached to youthfulness. This is further demonstrated in a New York Times article that says, "[Trudeau] has been bringing a message of optimism" (Stevenson, 2016). While the

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Conservative Party emphasized Trudeau's young age in attack ads, it seems as though Trudeau's youthfulness is actually a point of differentiation for the current Prime Minister (Ling, 2015). Differentiation is a common aspect of branding, as it aids in

27  

decision-making, and allows competitors to separate themselves from one another (Lair et al., 2005).

Example of the Conservatives Attack Ad based on Trudeau's Age

Figure 2

The association between youthfulness and optimism is a clear advantage for Trudeau, especially since the 2015 election had a surge in young voters, and a large amount of social media coverage (King, 2015). In fact, on the day of the election, there were more than 150,000 tweets sent to @justintrudeau, with only 68,385 tweets directed

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     towards the Conservative's twitter account (King, 2015). It appears that the tactic to

28  

highlight Trudeau's age as a disadvantage actually distanced the Conservative party from young voters. Trudeau's youthful appearance and age have contributed to the development of his brand. While the subcategory of youthful mindset had higher frequencies than the physical appearance subcategory, the reference to Trudeau's appearance is a notable finding. The physical appearance subcategory includes references to Trudeau's hair and tall stature. A significant example in this subcategory is a New York Times article that is devoted to discussing only Trudeau's physical appearance, and how it contributed to his success and eventual defeat over the other political parties. In the article, Friedman (2015) says, "Hair has not played such a big part in a political contest as far back as I can remember" (para. 5). When examining these findings on a primary level, it appears as though they are only marginally significant however when examining the context that they are used in, it is easy to recognize the implications that they hold. This is examined in my next theme.

Theme 2: The Emergence of the Nation Branding Speech Genre Having established the primary level of youthful adjectives, it is important to look at the secondary meaning of the words, which is the context in which they are used. Chilton (2002) defines political language as, "the use of linguistic, discursive and communication elements in order to persuade and bargain with listeners" (pg. 4). It is important to notice that there is not usually an intersection between branding speech genres and political speech genres. This brings me to Theme 2: The Emergence of the

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

29  

Nation Branding Speech Genre. This theme relates to my first research question, which asks if the intersection of the political and branding speech genres reveals an independent nation branding speech genre. While there are common elements between branding language and political language, such as persuasiveness, there are noticeable elements of the branding speech genre incorporated in my dataset. These include Trudeau's personal brand, the commodification of youthfulness, and the extreme point of differentiation between the Liberal and Conservative parties. Based on the discussion in my first theme, it is fair to say that there is a significant amount of branding language being used to describe Trudeau in a political context, proving my first research question to be true. The transfer of individual style into a genre that it does not belong to, warps and changes that speech genre (Baktin, 1953). This indicates that the political speech genre is moving away from discussing policies and issues in parliament, and is moving towards the inclusion of personal branding language, as seen with Trudeau in my dataset. Future studies should build upon this finding to identify the specific characteristics and features of the nation branding speech genre, as well as find other instances of where it has emerged. While my MRP identifies that an intersection has occurred, it is possible that the nation branding speech genre is present with other charismatic politicians. This is explored more throughout my next theme.

Theme 3: Trudeau as a Brand Manager While Trudeau is a politician, it is easy to argue that he has celebrity status. This is demonstrated with his Vogue magazine feature and his personal branding image. One of the most important results from my research was the use of the phrase, "Because it's

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     2015" (The Canadian Press, 2015). Trudeau gave this response when a reporter asked him why he had a gender-balanced cabinet. This phrase has since been used in articles

30  

that do not speak directly about politics or Trudeau. For example, in a New York Times article, Galanes (2016) discusses men who approach women on the street. He says, "But if you are determined to engage, borrow the terrific sentiment of the Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau: Dude its 2016!" (Galanes, 2016). Another example of this phrase being used is in fashion. Friedman (2016) writes: Along with subtle nods to the current obsession with athletic dressing (crystalstrewn tank tops and elaborately beaded baseball jackets), which has apparently filtered up to the most rarified strata of the fashion world, they seemed like a bid for the younger, hipper audience. Why? Well, as Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada might say, "Its 2016" (para. 3). This paragraph demonstrates another example of the use of Trudeau's now famous quote in reference to something other than politics. This article is also significant as it makes the connection between Trudeau and a hip, young audience, further perpetuating the focus on Trudeau's youthful age and its ability to brand him. These examples prove the star power that Trudeau has and indicate that he is a strong influencer in all areas of media. As mentioned in the introduction of this paper, Trudeau is not the first politician to use his charisma and charm to brand the nation he represents. In fact, his father Pierre Trudeau had the same ability to influence Canadians during his time in office, and had similar success with the phrase `just watch me.' In October of 1970, British Trade Commissioner James Cross and Provincial Cabinet minister Pierre Laporte were

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     kidnapped by the Front de liberation du Quebec (FLQ), and a national state of

31  

emergency was declared. As fears grew of other ministers and democrats being targeted, Trudeau brought in military power, which included army tanks and men in full army gear. When a CBC reporter questioned Trudeau on how far he will extend military power to protect citizens, he replied, "Just watch me" (`CBC Digital Archives', n.d). This famous quote was used in popular culture for years to follow, and it is still regularly used in Canadian political discussion. In fact, in March 2013, while running for Liberal party leadership, Trudeau's son Justin responded with the same phrase when asked by an airplane passenger if he could defeat Conservative leader Stephen Harper (`CBC News', 2015). This not only caused a social media frenzy, but Trudeau proved it true when he won office in October 2015. Much like his father, Trudeau has proven that charismatic leaders have the ability to brand their nation through the nation branding speech genre. By using progressive ideologies, Trudeau and his father are influencing Canada's image and have produced a positive sentiment for the country. Statements like `it's 2015' and `just watch me' are examples of the nation branding speech genre, whereby politics and branding intersect. It is important to point out that Pierre Trudeau was not trying to manage Canada's brand during the October Crisis; he was only trying to be tough on terrorism and ensure that Canadian citizens were safe. Similarly, his son Justin was only being realistic with his expectations of how a modern 2015 political cabinet should look. Both politicians, and others similar to them did not intentionally create the nation branding speech genre, but it emerges and evolves with each new leader. Not only do they both use their personal

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

32  

brands to influence Canada, but they also influence the nation branding speech genre at the same time.

Theme 4: Progressive Ideologies in Canada Theme 4: Progressive ideologies in Canada, refers to my second research question, which is whether or not Trudeau's brand is translating onto Canada's brand. To answer this I examined the use of progressive ideologies for both Canada and Trudeau. Progressive ideologies are also known as Progressive Language. This category has two subcategories, which are change language and equality language. Progressive language is defined as, "Making progress toward better conditions; employing or advocating more enlightened or liberal ideas, new or experimental methods, etc." (Dictionary.com, n.d). As a member of the Liberal party, Trudeau believes in and emulates these beliefs. An example of this is the following statement, "Sunny ways my friends, that is what positive politics can do" (`In Canada, Stunning Rout by Trudeau', 2015). Seeing as a conservative party previously led Canada, these values were not necessarily present before Trudeau took office in October 2015. This led me to predict that while the frequencies of progressive ideologies associated with Trudeau would be high, the frequency of progressive ideologies associated with Canada was not easily predictable. However, my results indicate that there is a high frequency of progressive language for both Trudeau and Canada. The frequency of change language for Trudeau was 69, while equality language was 38. The frequency of change language for Canada was 54, while the frequency of equality language for Canada was 22 (See table 4).

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Progressive Language in American News Media

33  

Table 4

High frequencies of equality language indicate that Trudeau's progressive ideologies are influencing Canada's brand. An example of this is, "We define a Canadian not by their skin color or a language or a religion or a background, but by a shared set of values" (`Canada Welcomes New Arrivals From Syria: [Foreign Desk]', 2015). While Trudeau spoke those words, my research proves that citizens in other countries believe that Canada is following the same progressive guidelines that Trudeau has instilled since he took office. While progressive ideologies are being reflected within Canada's image and values, another indication of Trudeau's branding is the amount of change language seen in my dataset. Since October 19th 2015, American newspapers have been writing about changes within Canada. My research indicates that these changes are direct results of Trudeau's election win. The political language process involves persuasion and bargaining, which Trudeau has used since he took office (Chilton, 2002). Not only do American news media write about Canada in relation to progressive ideologies, but they also state that Canada has changed. Guly (2016) writes, "Canada is back," while Cohen (2015) says, "The political tide has turned in Canada." In addition, Hassan says, "Dozens of immigrants will be sworn into Parliament, reflecting a changing country", and lastly Austen (2015) says "It's been a long time since you've heard a crowd cheering that way in Ottawa for

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     something other than a sports team" (in reference to swearing Trudeau into office). As demonstrated by these examples, it is clear that Trudeau's changes in parliament are being embraced. This finding indicates that my second research question is true, and

34  

Trudeau's personal brand of progressive ideologies and change are translating into how individuals view Canada, particularly those in the United States.

Limitations and Future Studies: While my research has yielded significant results, there are limitations worth discussing, as they have shaped the findings of my research questions. Since this is a preliminary and limited scope on nation branding, future studies may be able to further the results. I have provided a future studies section that outline factors to be considered when continuing this research.

Limitations The first limitation was the scope of my dataset. The initial plan for this research involved looking at my results based on American geography. For example, the publications chosen (New York Times, Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune) are all from different areas in the United States, which would allow for an interesting analysis of whether or not different geographical areas in America view Trudeau and Canada in the same way. While there is enough data within my research to determine the impact of demographics, the scope of this MRP does not allow for a sufficient amount of investigation into this area. While my research yielded significant results, it prohibited the analysis of geographical implications both locally and globally.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

35  

Although my results were based on three American newspapers, it would also be beneficial to examine publications from multiple countries. Doing this would determine the international impact of my research questions. It would also allow for different perspectives unique to that country. For example, communist countries would likely disagree with the progressive ideologies that Trudeau exudes, and this would be factored into their analysis of Canada. A global article analysis would also determine the relevancy and importance of Canada and Trudeau, as there may be limited amounts of newspaper articles on them in different countries. If this were the case, it would indicate that perhaps Trudeau's brand is not reflecting onto Canada. With these limitations in mind, there is room for the scope of this research to develop in future studies.

Future Studies While my limitations outline possible future areas of research, there were two themes that became known during my analysis. The first was the frequent comparison between Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau and American President Obama. A considerable amount of my data had references to Trudeau and Obama and highlighted that they have a considerable amount in common. For example, Obama and Trudeau are both passionate about climate issues, have young children, and are charismatic leaders. While this finding was not of direct use to my research, it would be an interesting intersection to study. Not only could one look to their similarities, but more analysis could be done to see if Obama's brand is translating onto the United States. There is also room for a comparative analysis of the relationship between Obama and previous Canadian Prime Minister Harper versus Trudeau. This could reveal the impact that the

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     closeness between two prime ministers has on the acceptance of them from American citizens.

36  

The second research element that would be worth investigating is the impact of a publication's audience demographics. While three American publications were examined, it would be worthwhile to investigate who the audience is for each newspaper. For example, does the New York Times have a higher percentage of young readers? What is the average income of readers? Where do they fall on the political spectrum? Some other factors that would impact individual support include income level, gender, political and religious beliefs, as well as accessibility to Canadian politics. Asking questions such as these would provide more clarity on how reader demographics impact their views on Trudeau and Canada. Aside from reader demographics, there is space to further investigate speech genres and how they are evolving. While the realm of the nation branding speech genre was touched upon in this MRP, more research could be done to determine in more depth what its characteristics are and in what other instances it has emerged. While I have determined that there is an intersection between branding and political speech genres, perhaps other intersections have occurred that would be worth looking into. More specifically, my literature review on branding and political speech genres seem to indicate similarities between the two. One of these similarities is the use of persuasion. Persuasion is a common factor in politics, and is also used in branding. My research proves that there is a nation branding speech genre, but investigating in more depth about what it is and where it emerged would be a beneficial point of research in the area of linguistics, speech genres and branding.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

37  

Lastly, while I identified the nation branding speech genre in a political setting, it would be valuable to examine other instances of where it is present. As mentioned throughout this paper, there have been previous politicians who embody the same charismatic personality that Trudeau exemplifies, including his father Pierre. By identifying other instances where political leaders personal brands influenced the country they represented, much can be discovered about nation branding. Examining other charismatic leaders is worthwhile, as it will determine how a positive personal brand influences politicians' likeability and influence.

Conclusion: With increasing competition among countries to attract foreign investment, tourists and international ratings, it is important now more than ever to strategically brand a nation. While there are multiple ways to change and enhance a nation's image in the international sphere, one way is through the use of brand ambassadors. It has been argued that celebrities are the strongest ambassadors for a country, because they are seen as a representation of that country's citizens (Hakala, 2013). With Trudeau's star power, he is undoubtedly a celebrity in many ways. By examining his impact as a brand manager, one can measure and quantify the impact that other politicians have on nation branding in their own countries. According to my research Trudeau has had a significant impact in how Canada is perceived by American news media. Thus, the articles examined are representative of what individuals in the United States think about Trudeau and Canada's brand.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Baktin's (1953) speech genre theory argues that categories of speech are

38  

determined by their context. However, while Trudeau is discussed in a political context, often times there are intersections between the political and branding speech genres. According to Baktin (1953), an intersection between two speech genres warps and changes both speech genres entirely. Thus, my results have proven that in fact an independent nation branding speech genre has emerged specifically with Trudeau, but has also been present with other charismatic leaders. This is seen in the example of Trudeau's father Pierre, and his ability to captivate Canada with a single phrase `just watch me.' The use of this phrase still exists in popular culture today, and made a significant impact in how Canada was perceived during the October Crisis. Similarly, his son Justin's use of the phrase `it's 2015' has continued to be used in 2016, and represents Canadians' desire for progressive policy including gender equality. The use of these phrases represent examples of the nation branding speech genre. This speech genre combines both the political and branding speech genres to define dynamic features that are unique to Canada. For example, Pierre Trudeau demonstrated that Canada is tough on terrorism, while his son emphasized Canada's progressive ideologies. Together, both politicians shaped Canada's image and have proven that charismatic politicians have the ability to become brand ambassadors for our country. More than ever before, brand awareness is becoming increasingly important for individuals, companies, and countries. It has been proven in this paper that the intersection of political and branding speech genres can lead to the emergence of a nation branding speech genre. While nation branding is an effective way to create a competitive advantage in an international forum, politicians' personal brands also influence their

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

39  

countries' brand. Keeping this in mind, political leaders should pay close attention to how they are acting, as the values expressed by them are a clear reflection of the country and citizens that they represent. As seen in this paper, charismatic leaders make a remarkable impression when using the nation branding speech genre, and have the ability to influence a country even after they have resigned. This study is a contribution to nation branding, and future studies should aim to build upon its results.

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Reference List Abedi, M. (2015, November 6). Liberals Unmuzzle Canadian Scientists, Promise They Can Now `Speak Freely'. The Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2015/11/06/liberals-scientistsmuzzling_n _8495962.html Agarwal, S., & Sikri, S. (1996). Country image: consumer evaluation of product category extensions. International Marketing Review, 13(4), 23-39. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/02651339610127239 Anholt, S. (2008). 'Nation branding' in asia. Place Branding and Public Diplomacy, 4(4), 265-269. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/pb.2008.22 Anholt, S. (2008). Place branding: Is it marketing, or isn't it? Place Branding and Public Diplomacy, 4(1), 1-6. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1057 /palgrave.pb.6000088 Anholt, S. (2005). Plug into your national brand. International Trade Forum, (4), 2023. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http:// search.proquest.com/docview/231364068?accountid=13631 Anholt, S. (2009). Should place brands be simple? Place Branding and Public Diplomacy, 5(2), 91-96. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/pb.2009.6 Anholt, S. (2009). The media and national image. Place Branding and Public Diplomacy, 5(3), 169-179. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/pb. 2009.11

40  

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Austen, Ian. (2015, December 12). Canada Welcomes New Arrivals From Syria: [Foreign Desk]. New York Times. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.

41  

ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/news/docview/1748076993/8DD81CDC1EF14270PQ/44? accountid=13631 Austen, Ian. (2015, October 20). In Canada, Stunning Rout by Trudeau: [Foreign Desk]. New York Times. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson .ca/news/docview/1723473970/abstract/8DD81CDC1EF14270PQ/119?accountid =13631 Bakhtin, M. (1953). The Problem of Speech Genres. In Jackson, V., & Prins, Y. (Eds.), The Lyric Theory Reader: A Critical Anthology (pp. 224-234). Baltimore, MA: John Hopkins University Press. Blair, D. (2006). Wittgenstein, Language and Information: Back to the Rough Ground! Dordrecht, NL: Springer. CBC News. (2015, October 20). Justin Trudeau's `sunny ways' a nod to Sir Wilfrid Laurier. CBC News. Retrieved from http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/novascotia/ns-prof-trudeau-sunny-ways-1.3280693 CBC Mainstreet. (2015, October 21). Justin Trudeau's `Just watch me' note to Halifax man sold on eBay. CBC News. Retrieved from http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ nova-scotia/just-watch-me-trudeau-note-kydd-1.3282002 CBC. (n.d). 1970: Pierre Trudeau says `Just watch me' during October Crisis. CBC Digital Archives. Retrieved from http://www.cbc.ca/archives/entry/ 1970-pierre-trudeau-says-just-watch-me-during-october-crisis

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

42  

Celebrity. (n.d) In Dictionaries.com. Retrieved from http://www.dictionary.com/browse /celebrity Chilton, P. (2004). Analyzing Political Discourse: Theory and Practice. New York: Routledge. De Chernatony, Gil. (1989). Branding Terminology ­ The Real Debate. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 7(7/8), 29-32. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org /10.1108/02634509010002891 Dialect. (n.d) In Dictionaries.com. Retrieved from http://www.dictionary.com/browse /dialect Dinnie, K. (2001). Advertising and the mind of the consumer: What works, what doesn't and why. Journal of Brand Management, 8(3), 233-235. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.bm.2540024 Dinnie, K. (2007). Competitive identity: The new brand management for nations, cities and regions. Journal of Brand Management, 14(6), 474. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.bm.2550086 Dinnie, K. (2008). Nation Branding: Concepts, Issues, Practice. Jordan Hill, Oxford. Elsevier Ltd. Edelman, M. (1974). The Political Language of Helping Professions. Politics & Society, 4(3), 295-310. Retrieved from http://pas.sagepub.com/content/4/3/295.extract Fan, Y. (2005). Branding the nation: What is being branded? Journal of Vacation marketing, 12(1), 5-14. Retrieved from http://journals2.scholarsportal.info. ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/pdf/13567667/v12i0001/5_btnwibb.xml

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

43  

Friedman, V. (2015, Oct 21). Justin Trudeau Takes an Image and Wins With it. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/22/fashion/justintrudeau-takes-an-image-and-wins-with-it.html Friedman, V. (2016, Jan 27). New and Old at Armani Privé and Maison Margiela. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/28/fashion /armani-margiela-paris-couture.html Galanes, P. (2016, Feb 18). Sidewalk Compliments. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/21/fashion/sidewalk-compliments.html Gaskins, B., & Jerit, J. (2012). Internet News: Is It a Replacement for Traditional Media Outlets? The International Journal of Press Politics, 17(2), 190-213. Retrieved from 10.1177/1940161211434640 Gupta, A. (2010). Branding a nation: Framework for building favorable country image. Drishtikon: A Management Journal, 1(2), 222-243. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docvie w/1477996766?accountid=13631 Hakala, U., Lemmetyinen, A., & Kantola, S. (2013). Country image as a nation branding tool. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 31(5), 538-556. Retrieved from http://www.emeraldinsight.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/doi/ pdfplus/10.1108/MIP-04-2013-0060 King, R. (2015, Oct 23). Justin Trudeau got help from youth, new voters, social media in election win. The Star. Retrieved from http://www.thestar.com/news/Canada /2015/10/23/justin-trudeau-got-help-from-youth-new-voters-social-media-inelection-win.html

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding    

44  

Lair, D., Sullivan, K., & Cheney, G. (2005). Marketization and the Recasting of the Professional Self: The Rhetoric and Ethics of Personal Branding. Management Communication Quarterly, 18(3), 307-343. Retrieved from http://journals1. scholarsportal.info.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/details/08933189/v18i0003/307_matrot ps.xml Lilleker, Darren G. (2015). Interactivity and Branding: Public Political Communication as a Marketing Tool. Journal of Political Marketing, 14(1-2), 111-128. Retrieved from 10.1080/15377857.2014.990841 Ling, J. (2015, May 25). Stephen Harper's New Attack Ad is out, and it's Hilariously Bad. Vice. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/en_ca/read/stephen-harpersnew-attack-ad-is-out-and-its-hilariously-bad Macrae, C., Ryder, I., Yan, J., Caswell, J., & Al, E. (2003). Editorial: Can brand leadership recover local trust and global responsibility? Journal of Brand Management, 10(4), 268. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/ login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/232486059?accountid=136 31 New York Times. (2005, Nov 12). An Antidote to Cynicism in Canada. New York Times. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/news/ docview/1732540213/abstract/E021A9B09C12486EPQ/1?accountid=13631 Pedwell, T. (2013, September 26). Harper: Won't Take No for an Answer on Keystone Pipeline. Huffington Post. Retrieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2013/09 /26/stephen-harper-keystone-pipeline-new-york_n_3993549.html

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Powers, J. (2015, December 9). Justin Trudeau is the New Young Face of Canadian

45  

Politics. Vogue. Retrieved from http://www.vogue.com/13377163/justin-trudeauprime-minister-canada/ Progressive. (n.d). In Dictionaries.com. Retrieved from http://www.dictionary.com/ browse/progressive Seno, D., & Lukas, B. A. (2007). The equity effect of product endorsement by celebrities. European Journal of Marketing, 41(1), 121-134. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/03090560710718148 Stevenson, A. (2016, Jan 22). Justin Trudeau Carries his `Look to Canada' Image to Davos. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01 /22/business/dealbook/justin-trudeau-carries-his-look-to-canada-image-todavos.html?_r=0 Sun, Q., & Paswan, A. (2011). Country branding using product quality. Journal of Brand Management, 19(2), 143-157. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1057/bm.2011.20 Susman, T. (2015, Oct 21). A surprise knockout in Canada; Despite famous name, lawmaker and charity boxer Justin Trudeau wasn't expected to win prime minister's job.: [1]. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from http://ezproxy.lib.ryerson .ca/login?url=http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/docview/1727422 345?accountid=13631

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     The Canadian Press. (2015, Nov 5). Trudeau's `Because its 2015' retort draws

46  

international attention. The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from http://www.theglobe andmail.com/news/politics/trudeaus-because-its-2015-retort-draws-internationalcheers/article27119856/ Van Ham, P. (2001). The Rise of the Brand State: The Postmodern Politics of Image and Reputation. Foreign Affairs, 80(5), 2­6. Retrieved from http://doi.org /10.2307/20050245 Wherry, A. (2016, January 20). Trudeau touts Canada's diversity and resourcefulness in Davos. CBC News. Retrieved from http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/trudeaudavos-future-look-economy-harper-1.3412182 Workman, D. (2016, June 2). Canada's Top Exports. Worlds Top Exports. Retrieved from http://www.worldstopexports.com/canadas-top-exports/ Whorf, B. L. (1997). The relation of habitual thought and behavior to language (pp. 443463). Macmillan Education UK. Yardley, W., & Parsons, C. (2015, Nov 7). Obama rejects Keystone proposal: President cites reported drop in unemployment, low oil and gas prices. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.lib.ryerson.ca/news/docview /1731485354/9DEBC3C3E9485CPQ/10?accountid=13631

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Appendix  A

47  

   Below  is  a  copy  of  my  codebook  used  for  my  research.  The  codebook  corresponds  to   the  coding  schedule,  which  can  be  found  on  subsequent  pages.  The  codebook   categories  are  described  in  detail  under  the  Methods  of  Analysis  portion  of  this   paper.      Table  A1     

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Appendix  B      Below  are  the  coding  schedules  separated  by  publication.  Articles  from  the  New   York  Times,  the  Los  Angeles  Times,  and  the  Chicago  Tribune  were  examined.        Table  B1:  Chicago  Tribune  Coding  Sample        

48  

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Table  B2:  Los  Angeles  Times  Coding  Sample     

49  

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Table  B3:  New  York  Times  Coding  Sample     

50  

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Appendix  C      Below  are  the  frequency  results  by  category  for  all  coding  samples.      Table  C1:  Frequency  table  for  all  categories  relating  to  Trudeau     

51  

      Table  C2:  Frequency  table  for  all  categories  relating  to  Canada     

  

     

  

Branding  Canada:  Trudeau's  Contribution  to  Nation  Branding     Appendix  D   Below  is  a  sample  of  the  table  used  in  my  grounded  theory  analysis.   Table  D1:  Sample  of  Grounded  Theory  Analysis       

52  

  

  

  


