MPC MAJOR RESEARCH PAPER

OPINION MINING FOR EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT: ARE SURVEYS EXTINCT?

PAIGE WESTBURY

Robert Clapperton The Major Research Paper is submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Professional Communication

Ryerson University Toronto, Ontario, Canada

August 27, 2015

AUTHOR'S DECLARATION FOR ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION OF A MAJOR RESEARCH PAPER I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this Major Research Paper and the accompanying Research Poster. This is a true copy of the MRP and the research poster, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research paper and/or poster to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this MRP and/or poster by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my MRP and/or my MRP research poster may be made electronically available to the public.

ii

Abstract This major research paper investigates the possibility of measuring employee engagement through online job-review sites such as Glassdoor.com (Glassdoor). Using prevalent themes from the Gallup Q12 (Q12) engagement survey as independent variables, 106 Glassdoor reviews were deductively analyzed. Literature surrounding employee engagement theory, critical managerialism and the affordances of online review-forums has been reviewed and used in conjunction with thematic content analyses to guide and answer the following research questions: 1) What are the prevalent themes addressed by the Gallup Q12? 2) Are employees addressing the themes prevalent in the Gallup Q12 in their Glassdoor reviews? 3) Are there prevalent themes addressed in Glassdoor reviews other than those addressed by the Gallup Q12? It was found that employee reviews left on Glassdoor do in fact address the themes in the Gallup Q12. However, each individual review only addressed a fraction of the 12 prevalent themes at a time. These findings suggest that while online review sites may not replace employee engagement surveys such as the Gallup Q12, they may provide useful insight into what factors should be addressed in employee engagement surveys.

iii

Table of Contents Author's Declaration ............................................................................................ ii Abstract................................................................................................................. iii Table of Contents ................................................................................................. iv List of Tables ..........................................................................................................v List of Figures.........................................................................................................v List of Appendices ..................................................................................................v Introduction ............................................................................................................1 Literature Review ..................................................................................................5 Research Questions ..............................................................................................23 Methodology .........................................................................................................24 Findings & Analysis .............................................................................................27 Discussion .............................................................................................................34 Limitations & Future Research ..........................................................................39 Conclusion ............................................................................................................40 Appendices ............................................................................................................43 References .............................................................................................................90

iv

List of Tables Table 1. Deductive Codebook .............................................................................27 Table 2. Inductive Codebook ..............................................................................30 List of Figures Figure 1. Deductive Analysis...............................................................................29 Figure 2. Inductive Analysis ...............................................................................31 List of Appendices Appendix A: BlackBerry, CIBC, IBM, Rogers Communication & Scotia Bank Figures (Deductive) ...............................................................................................48 Appendix B: BlackBerry, CIBC, IBM, Rogers Communication & Scotia Bank Figures (Inductive).................................................................................................50 Appendix C: BlackBerry Reviews ........................................................................54 Appendix D: CIBC Reviews .................................................................................61 Appendix E: IBM Reviews....................................................................................66 Appendix F: Rogers Communication Reviews .....................................................76 Appendix G: Scotia Bank Reviews .......................................................................86

v

Introduction For three decades employee engagement has garnered the attention of business managers, leaders, owners and researchers alike. There is a plethora of studies that demonstrate a link between employee engagement and organizational performance; by fostering employee engagement organizations see an increase in employee productivity, which in turn increases bottom-line profits. Although academic and practical interest is building, a unified definition of employee engagement is lacking. Employee engagement has been researched in a number of diverse academic fields resulting in numerous, varying definitions. This lack of definitive description of what employee engagement is in practice is both concerning and challenging for business managers, as measuring employee engagement has become a priority in many organizations. Without an accepted definition of employee engagement, it becomes almost impossible to measure. Managers must choose from an abundance of descriptions, definitions and components of employee engagement, making the measurement of employee engagement an inconsistent and sometimes inaccurate process. Employee engagement is most often measured via surveys, which are either distributed by third-party consultancy firms or in-house human resource departments. When answered honestly, surveys can provide valuable insight into employees' perceptions of engagement. However, surveys have many challenges: data becomes quickly dated, respondents allude only to recent events and people may only answer with what they believe the organization wants to hear (Fuller, 2014). Although surveys appear to be a tool for democracy in that they allow 1

employees to contribute their opinions, they may not be due to managerialist ideologies. Managerialism is an ideology that asserts that the performance of all organizations can be optimized by the application of generic management skills and knowledge (Klikauer, 2013, p. 5). Under this ideology, business managers are primarily concerned with efficiency, and aim to establish order through the installation of norms, values and beliefs. These beliefs and definitions often act as a template for communication within the organization, guiding both the content employees communicate and the way in which they do so. Thus, employee engagement surveys may actually perpetuate managerialist ideologies, guide employee opinions and language and hinder the measurement of employee engagement. Engagement surveys are pre-defined with questions and answers; this systematically distorts communication and suppresses potential conflict (Griffin, 2003, p. 293). In other words, management only asks the questions they define as important, eliminating the chance for employees to truly voice their opinions. To overcome issues such as outdated information and to increase democracy, many researchers have suggested mining the opinions of online reviews instead of implementing surveys. In Lovink's theory of Comment/Review culture, he refers to online reviews as `electronic word of mouth' (eWOM) (2012). Online reviews allow online consumers to generate evaluations of products and/or services and post them on company or third-party websites. Review forums give access to rich and candid opinions about company products and services. Thus, by opinion mining / conducting a sentiment analysis of online opinions and reviews, researchers can 2

access candid, altruistic, real-time opinions with little-to-no cost. Online reviews may prove more useful than surveys as they are written by engaged, motivated users whom are able to share their opinions freely, and may do so shortly after the event or purchase they are referencing in their reviews. Furthermore, online review forums do not guide reviewers' communication: reviewers can communicate about whatever topics they believe to be of importance. In order to explore further the implications of opinion mining for employee engagement, both deductive and inductive qualitative content analyses were conducted. Independent variables were derived using a well-known and widely used employee engagement survey, the Gallup Q12 (Q12). The themes prevalent in the Q12 were used to administer a deductive content analysis on employee reviews on Glassdoor.com (Glassdoor). An inductive content analysis was also conducted on employee reviews, to explore the themes discussed by employees that are not present in the Q12. During the deductive content analysis it was found that online reviews offer the same types of information acquired by the Q12. However, the quantity of such information is lesser than what would be received via surveys. In other words, each individual online review offered only a fraction of the information supplied via survey answers. In reference to RQ3 and the inductive analysis, seven prevalent themes were noted which were not addressed by the Q12. These findings suggest that online reviews cannot replace surveys, but may be used to aid in their creation as well as counteract managerialst ideologies and measure true employee engagement. This research

3

suggests that managers should analyze online reviews and note any prevalent themes before creating and implementing employee engagement surveys.

4

Literature Review The following review addresses literature in the areas of employee engagement theory, critical managerialism, and the affordances of social media and online review forums.

Employee Engagement Theory Employee engagement is of great concern to managers, leaders and Human Resource practitioners worldwide; each recognize it as a vital element for effectiveness, innovation and competitiveness within the business industry (Macey & Schneider, 2008, p.3; Welch, 2011, p. 328). Numerous studies have found that fostering employee engagement can facilitate an increase in bottomline results, as engaged employees care about the future of the company and are willing to exceed job descriptions and duties to see the organization succeed (Crim, 2006; Macey & Shneider, 2008). Gruman and Saks (2011) agree that fostering employee engagement is one of the most effective ways to enhance performance management and say "engagement is a key driver of individual attitudes, behavior and performance as well as organizational performance, productivity, retention, financial performance and even shareholder return" (p. 125). Overall, employee engagement can be seen as part of an exchange relationship whereby motivated employees take care of the organization's operations and customers in return for the investments made to motivate the employee (Balain & Sparrow, 2009, p. 8).

5

While engaging employees can lead to increased motivation, performance and overall output, failing to engage employees can have serious, adverse effects such as increased turnover rates, lower efficiency and decreased stakeholder value (Lockwood, 2007). According to Balain and Sparrow (2009), there are three types of employees: engaged, not engaged and actively disengaged (p. 9). As previously mentioned, engaged employees drive innovation, work with passion and feel a strong connection to their organization. Unengaged employees can be said to have `checked out' and essentially sleepwalk through their day, putting little energy or passion into their work. Actively disengaged employees are not only unhappy, but busy themselves by acting out on their unhappiness by undermining what their engaged co-workers accomplish (Balain & Sparrow, 2009; Crim, 2006; Lockwood, 2007). Unfortunately, 70 percent of workers fall into the categories `not engaged' or `actively disengaged'. They are emotionally disconnected from their workplace and cost companies approximately $450 billion to $550 billion each year due to loss in productivity (Gallup, 2013). In order to decrease the number of `not engaged' and `actively disengaged' employees in the work force, managers must increase their efforts of facilitation of engagement practices. While it is agreed that facilitating employee engagement leads to better organizational performance and competitive advantage, the facets of employee engagement and the ways in which it can be achieved is contested.

6

Defining Employee Engagement. Employee engagement first entered the lexicon in the 1990's largely as a business and consultancy issue, but is now gaining momentum in academia and research (Gruman & Saks, 2011; Macey & Schneider, 2009; Welch, 2011). Employee engagement is attracting an increasing amount of attention from academics in business management, psychology, organizational behavior and communication disciplines (Welch, 2011, p. 329). The interest in employee engagement across various disciplines has caused myriad definitions of the concept, resulting in confusion in the literature, research and practice. As a result, research in this field has been criticized for having substantial overlaps and redundancies between employee engagement, satisfaction and organizational commitment, as well as for lacking an accepted, uniform definition (Gruman & Saks, 2011; Kahn, 1990; Macey & Schneider, 2009). Kahn (1990) is the noted founder of the concept and theory of employee engagement, which was originally referred to as `personal work engagement' (Anitha, 2013; Welch, 2011). Kahn defined personal work engagement as "the harnessing of organizational members' selves to their work roles" and says, "in engagement, people employ and express themselves physically, cognitively, and emotionally during role performance" (1990, p. 694). Overall, Kahn believes that to be engaged means to be psychologically present when occupying and performing an organizational role (Saks, 2006, p. 601). Kahn's theory is one of the most widely accepted in the field of employee engagement but is seen as incomplete and has been adapted and expanded upon 7

by many scholars. Rothbard (2001) agrees with Kahn's definition in that engagement can be defined as being psychologically present but adds two critical components: attention and absorption (p. 656; Saks, 2006, p. 601). Rothbard says that attention is the cognitive ability and amount of time an individual spends thinking about their role at work; absorption is the immersion of an individual in a role, or, the intensity of one's focus on a role (2001, p. 656, Saks, 2006, p. 601). Researchers in the field of `burnout theory' ­ feelings of exhaustion, cynicism and inefficacy at work ­ define engagement as the opposite of this concept, which includes having increased levels of energy, involvement, vigor and dedication (Maslach et al., 2001). Although there is a wide array of definitions for employee engagement and employee engagement theory, many practitioners and academics agree that employee engagement has both psychological and behavioral facets and involves energy, enthusiasm and focused effort / vigor (Gruman & Saks, 2011; Macey & Shneider, 2008; Maslach et al., 2001; May et al., 2004; Welch, 2011). Not unlike the definition of employee engagement, the different components that facilitate employee engagement are also contested. Due to overlaps in the literature on employee engagement, employee (job) satisfaction and organizational commitment, scholars and professionals alike have many differing theories and opinions in regard to which factors aid in engaging employees.

8

Antecedents of Employee Engagement. There are many suggested antecedents of employee engagement, but there is currently no practical formula for engaging employees. The wide array of suggested facilitators of employee engagement forms challenges for practitioners aiming to increase engagement amongst their employees. While some theories and formulas are more widely accepted than others, it is possible that practitioners are wasting resources implementing practices that increase job / employee satisfaction rather than engagement. Although a universally accepted theory / formula for engaging employees is lacking, Kahn's is often used as a foundation for theoretical expansion. Kahn's theory suggests that there are three main facilitators of employee engagement: meaningfulness, safety and availability (Anitha, 2013, p. 310; Kahn, 1990; Welch, 2011, p. 330). To elaborate, Kahn defines meaningfulness as an individual's perceived value of a work goal or purpose; lack of meaning in one's work can lead to alienation or disengagement (May et al., 2004, p. 13). Safety is defined as "feeling able to show and employ one's self without fear of negative consequences to self-image, status, or career" (Kahn, 1990, p. 708; May et al., 2004, p. 13). Individuals feel safe when they believe they will not suffer negative consequences for expressing themselves at work and feel unsafe when situations are ambiguous, unpredictable and threatening (May et al. 2004, p. 13). Lastly, Kahn defines availability as an individual's belief that he or she has the physical, emotional or cognitive resources necessary to engage the self at work (Kahn, 1990). 9

May et al. (2004) expand on Kahn's facilitators of engagement and extend the theory to incorporate job enrichment, work role fit and co-worker relations under `meaningfulness'; supervisor relations and self-consciousness under `safety'; and resources and work role security under `availability' (p. 14-19). In other words, May et al. suggest that to be engaged employees must fit into the role of the job in question, have positive, rewarding and supportive relationships with co-workers and supervisors, feel confident sharing their opinions and have access to emotional and cognitive resources. Welch (2012) suggests that in order to engage employees, managers must offer rewards and recognition such as `employee of the month', job resources such as training and technology, clear and purposeful communication and shared organizational values and cultures (p. 337). Gruman and Saks (2011) focus on job resources as the main facilitator of engagement, while using the term to encompass all physical, psychological, social or organizational features of a job that help achieve work goals, reduce job demands and stimulate personal growth, learning and development (p. 126). According to the authors, factors such as pay, career opportunities, job security, supervisor and co-worker support, team climate, role clarity and agency and performance feedback can lead to greater levels of engagement (Gruman & Saks, 2011, p. 126). Balain and Sparrow (2009) agree with Gruman and Saks, but suggest that fairness and compassion within the organization's systems are equally important factors (p. 18). It is apparent that there are numerous differing opinions as to what employee engagement theory encompasses and how it is practiced. Given the 10

many formulas for engaging employees, practitioners are left to decide which method(s) best suits the organization's needs and values. After practices have been implemented with the objective of increasing employee engagement, managers and leaders must administer surveys to gage and benchmark their efforts.

Measuring Employee Engagement. Measuring employee engagement has become as important as measuring traditional business metrics (Wiedenkeller, 2009). Wiedenkeller (2009) suggests that while it is possible to manage a business without measuring employee engagement, eventually employees are going to experience fatigue and performance levels will decrease. One of the most popular means of measuring employee engagement is via survey. Surveys have many strengths and weaknesses; as a tool for measuring employee engagement, they may be outdated.

Surveys. Employee engagement surveys can be either `off-the-shelf' or companyspecific (Stoneman, 2013). Off-the-shelf surveys are those prepared by a thirdparty consultancy firm, which allow employers to draw from a large database to compare and benchmark their results with those from similar organizations. Company-specific surveys allow employers to tailor questions in order to measure the elements of employee engagement perceived as most important but do not allow for a benchmarking system (Stoneman, 2013, p. 325). Overall, the goal of 11

these surveys is to ask employees to identify their engagement through a variety of questions (Fuller, 2014). The results of the employee engagement survey are divulged to senior management of organizations, who decide strategically how to address any issues or concerns in regard to the survey feedback (Attridge, 2009; Williams, 2010). According to Fuller (2014) employee engagement surveys, when answered honestly, provide good input into employees' perceptions of engagement. However, he suggests that engagement surveys also provide some challenges: data becomes quickly dated, respondents allude only to recent events, and participants may answer only with what they believe the organization wants to hear (Fuller, 2014). Bersin (2014) agrees that there are many issues with employee engagement surveys and says they soon should and will be retired. He says that while surveys are a good tool for benchmarking the level of employee engagement in an organization, they lack detail and real-time information, and essentially, do not keep up with the ever-changing organization (2014). Other characteristics impeding the success of surveys include their length, methods of implementation and questionable anonymity. These issues arise with all employee engagement surveys, but particularly when surveys fall into the `company-specific' category, rather than `off-the-shelf'. When surveys are company-specific they often ask too many questions, which can be counterproductive (Stoneman, 2013). If a survey is too long employees may tire and begin to provide dishonest, quick-and-easy answers. Company-specific surveys are also often paper-based, which is not conducive to high participation rates; instead, employees are much more likely to participate when surveys are 12

distributed online (Wiedenkeller, 2009). Questions of anonymity also arise when company-specific surveys are distributed. Due to the fear that their employer will know their identity, employees are often reluctant to voice honest concerns in fear of retribution (Wiedenkeller, 2009). To help overcome some of these issues, companies often hire third-party consultant firms such as Blessingwhite, Hewitt, Sirota, Gallup or other (Attridge, 2009). One of the most influential approaches to measuring employee engagement comes from the Gallup Organization (Attridge, 2009; Bakker & Leiter, 2010). According to Attridge (2009): The Gallup Organization has provided perhaps the most convincing evidence of the link between engagement and company financial profits due to the sheer number of studies conducted, the large sample sizes used in the studies and the advanced methodologies that were employed. (p. 392) The Gallup Organization has implemented hundreds of studies over 30 years to create and maintain their survey (Attridge, 2009; Bakker & Lieter, 2010; Gallup, 2013). The questions in the Q12 assess numerous engagement factors, such as job resources, expectations, relationships and opportunities for growth within the organization (Gallup, 2013). These factors are scored on a five-point rating where one is `strongly disagree' and five is `strongly agree' (Bakker & Lieter, 2010; Quinn, 2015). While the survey is one of the most utilized by employers, some academics feel it is not an accurate measure of engagement. Bakker and Lieter (2010) suggest that the Q12 measures perceived resources, an antecedent of 13

engagement, instead of the experience of engagement in terms of involvement, satisfaction and enthusiasm; they believe that the Q12 measures employee satisfaction instead of employee engagement (p. 15). People First International (PFI) (2008) also criticize the Q12, saying that it targets only middle management, instead of top leaders and the organization's overall culture. According to PFI, one of the main problems with this focus is that middle managers have significantly different experiences from those of top leaders. Changing the actions of middle managers and not those of top leaders may not solve the overall problems or issues within the organization and result in distrust and dissatisfaction (People First International, 2008). Feelings of distrust and dissatisfaction may have a negative impact on middle managements' morale and engagement, which can then negatively impact employees and the overall performance of the organization. In an interview with Crush (2015), Hutton states that he doesn't believe employee engagement surveys, such as the Q12, are "worth the paper they are printed on" (para 1). Due to the fact that no one has decided or agreed upon what engagement is or what it is comprised of, Hutton doesn't believe its measurement is plausible or achievable. Hutton also suggests that the Q12 is not indicative of employee engagement due to its Likert-scale questions (Crush, 2015). He says that agree/disagree questions are ambiguous and perhaps the weakest type of questions in terms of research. Furthermore, Hutton states the correlation between the Q12 and business performance is extremely small, ranging from 0.057 to 0.191. 14

As a result of the recently found correlation between employee engagement and organizational performance, researchers and practitioners have been working to define and streamline the concept and its measurement. However, as indicated in the literature, such a definition has not been found. One of the most plausible reasons that employee engagement has yet to be defined is due to the uniqueness of each organization. Each organization has broad contextual factors that impact engagement (Delbridge & Keenoy, 2010; Jenkins & Delbridge, 2013). Factors such as the economy, industry sector, ownership and governance arrangements and organizational size majorly impact management's ability to deliver engagement (Jenkins & Delbridge, 2013, p. 2697). By assuming every organization can measure and employ engagement in the same manner, managers and academics are impeding the evolution of employee engagement research and practice. One of the main ideologies accounting for this unified notion of engagement is `Managerlialism'.

Critical Managerial Theory (Managerialism) Managerialism combines management and ideology to justify the application of managerial techniques to all areas of society and organizations on the grounds of leaders having superior training and the possession of knowledge necessary to efficiently run corporations and societies (Klikauer, 2013, p. 2). Managerialists believe that the performance of all organizations can be optimized by the application of generic management skills and knowledge (Klikauer, 2013, p. 5). The main objective of managerialism is efficiency in both growth and profit 15

(Pelsmaekers, 2014). Managerialist researchers and practitioners dedicate their time to study and implement `best practice' policies, procedures and processes in order to gain maximum efficiency (Delbridge & Keenoy, 2010). Thus, under managerialist regimes employees are often seen as material inventory framed as human resources, human capital and human material, and are assumed to be a homogenous group (Delbridge & Keenoy, 2010; Klikauer, 2013, p. p. 8). Although managerialists believe in the correlation between employee engagement and organizational performance, the way in which they promote engagement is ineffective: strategies are introduced into organizations with the explicit objective of gaining competitive advantage. The focus on specific antecedents of engagement and productivity obscures the degree to which managers are able to deliver engagement (Jenkins & Delbridge, 2013). Instead, managers need to forge a work environment that is positive and unique to the organization in question and focuses on the `human' instead of the product or result (Jenkins & Delbridge, 2013). Jenkins and Delbridge (2013) refer to managerialism as a unitarist approach to managing, and state: "Management practices are not simple, uniform, easily codified or readily adopted; the idea of universal best practices is fundamentally flawed" (p. 2697). In other words, due to the heterogeneity of organizations and their wider contexts, there is no set of `best practices' to employ for all organizations. In fact, managerialists' quest for perpetual, streamlined productivity is counterproductive as it often results in mass unemployment, poverty, misery at work and an overall decrease in the human quality of life (Griffin, 2003; Klikauer, 2013). 16

In order for leaders and management to foster an employee-engagement initiative that is unique and helpful to their organization, employee participation and collaboration in strategies and decisions need to be encouraged (Jenkins & Delbridge, 2013). True employee engagement involves an understanding of the problematic nature of the employee-employer relationship and an emphasis on the articulation of worker voice (Arrowsmith & Parker, 2013). Under managerialism, democracy is not sought as it is seen as a hindrance to efficiency and competitive advantage (Klikauer, 2013). However, by involving employees in discussions of company policy and procedures, employees have a chance to air grievances, state their desires, recommend alternative and possibly improved ways of working and essentially, counteract the effects of managerialism (Gibbs, 2001; Griffin, 2003, p. 292). According to Boxall (2013), listening to employees is critical to conceiving, growing and renewing organizations (p. 4). He also suggests that human capabilities are unique sources of value; because of their heterogeneity, human resources are idiosyncratic and each individual reserves cognitive knowledge and abilities that cannot be replicated (Boxall, 2013, p. 5). When organizations act democratically instead of bureaucratically, a mutual relationship is developed between employees and employers, where stronger alignments with talented individuals are fostered, and in turn competitive advantage is increased (Boxall, 2013, p. 13). While surveys appear to be a tool used to `listen' to employee voices and opinions, critical management and organizational studies suggest that the managerial creation and implementation of such surveys may hinder free speech and expression of ideas (Griffin, 2003, p. 292). 17

One of the criticisms of managerialism is its obstruction of democratic stakeholder participation through systematically distorted communication (Deetz cited in Griffin, 2003). Critics of managerialism suggest that the ideology has colonized everyday language in order to execute it as an instrument of control (Klikauer, 2013). It is suggested that managerialist language controls by "reducing linguistic forms and symbols of reflection, abstraction, development, critique, and contradiction" (Klikauer, 2013, p. 137). The type of language used under this ideology of management and control does not allow for the search for real truth, but establishes and imposes its own version. Managerialist language attempts to produce and reproduce an organizational culture that is sympathetic to managerial interests (Griffin, 2003; Klikauer, 2013). Delbridge and Keenoy agree that managerialist language is deconstructive toward employee relations, and suggest: ... the unreflective adoption of managerial language and managerial definitions of reality in mainstream research has led to the promotion and development of a one-sided if not singularly misleading view of how organizations function and how they are governed. (2010, p. 802) Deetz (2003) agrees with Delbridge and Keenoy and says that managerialism restricts what can openly be expressed or thought of by instilling norms and expectations within a group (cited in Griffin). He suggests that workers are deceiving themselves with the belief that they are acting and communicating freely while often managements' language, values and forms offer a template for communicating. Essentially, managerialists create what Kenneth Burke refers to 18

as a terministic screen. Burke suggests that language and vocabulary direct our attention to some aspects during interpretation, while ignoring others (Crusius, 1999, p. 16). This type of communication discloses the world, or in this case the organization, selectively and partially, with an intense spotlight on authorities' insights and opinions (Crusius, 1999, p.17). For example, employee engagement surveys often leave employees feeling empowered, having the agency to express themselves. However, managers and leaders structure such surveys with an agenda in mind. Questions and answers are readily available to employees to choose from, systematically distorting communication and suppressing potential conflict (Griffin, 2003, p. 293). In other words, managers only ask questions they deem important. Although employee engagement surveys appear to consider employee opinions and well-being, it can be argued they are a managerial construct created and implemented to maintain a managerialist culture. Due to the bureaucratic nature of managerialism and criticisms of surveys under managerialist distribution, many practitioners and scholars suggest that employee engagement surveys should be replaced with a more holistic, integrated, real-time approach (2014). One method of data collection that has recently come into fruition is the mining of opinions via social media such as online review forums (Liu, 2012).

19

Theory of Comment/Review Culture The World Wide Web originated in 1991, offering one-way communication formats such as weblogs, list servers and emails (van Dijk, 2013, p. 3). Around the year 2000, Web 2.0 was implemented and online services shifted from channels of networked communication to becoming interactive, two-way forms of communication (Chen et al., 2011; van Dijck, 2013, p. 3). Technological companies began offering platforms that allowed users to interact with one another and these public spaces for communication promised an increase in democracy. However, around 2006 a shift occurred in Web 2.0 where the interface changed from being an infrastructure for networked communication to offering a plethora of niche sociality, particular through the use of user-generated content services (Chen et al., 201; Nagendra, 2014; van Dijck, 2013). This shift is referred to as the "Dot.com crash" by Lovink (2012), who suggests that during this time businesses started to focus on profiting from free user-generated content. One of the major concerns of this era, as noted by van Dijck, is the ability to document utterances that would once be expressed offhandedly (2013, p. 3). She says that these `utterances' are now released into public domain where they have far-reaching and long-lasting effects, which unquestionably alter the nature of private and public communication (2013, p. 3). Through the capitalization of usergenerated content, a new culture has emerged: one that Lovink (2012) calls `comment culture.' Lovink says that participation in, and contribution to, an online forum has become entirely normal, expected, and encouraged by commercial platforms 20

(2013, p. 51). In other words, social networking sites and platforms encourage users to comment their own thoughts, opinions and experiences on a wide array of subject matter; these comments are usually available to the public and create a string of discourse. An adaptation of comment culture is `review culture', where users post reviews of products and / or services (Lovink, 2012). Online review forums have created immense opportunities for business leaders as they offer an abundance of rich information in a free, public space.

Online Review Forums. Online review forums are considered electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM) platforms, which allow online consumers to generate evaluations of products and/or services and post them on company or third-party websites (Purnawirawan et al., 2012, p. 244; Yin et al., 2014, p. 540). In 2007 it was estimated that 70 million consumers had contributed content to online review forums, and that this number will continue to rise exponentially (Yoo & Gretzel, 2008). Reviews were originally written for and utilized by consumers researching products and services before making a purchase. However, review forums are now affecting organizations and businesses at large: businesses now have access to rich and candid opinions about their products and services. Analysis of this information can be used to improve business products and practices (Asur & Huberman, 2010; Liu 2012). It is suggested that online review forums may provide such invaluable information for business leaders and researchers that they may eliminate the need for surveys, opinion polls and focus groups (Asur & Huberman, 2010; Liu 2012). 21

Liu (2012) suggests that by opinion mining, or conducting a sentiment analysis on online opinions and reviews, researchers can capture candid, altruistic, real-time opinions with little-to-no cost. Online reviews may prove more useful than surveys as they are written by engaged, motivated users who are able to share their opinions freely, and may do so shortly after the event or purchase which they are referencing in their reviews (Liu, 2012; Bersin, 2014). However, review forums may also be used as an outlet to rant subjectively in an act of vengeance (Purnawirawan et al., 2012). One of the criticisms of online review forums is that anonymity allows for fraudulent reviews. According to Kugler (2014), 16 percent of reviews online are fraudulent, and include negative reviews from competing businesses and positive reviews by business owners. In order to refrain from accounting for fraudulent reviews in academic and practical research, business leaders and academics must learn to recognize such fraudulence. There are several steps business leaders can take to monitor suspected fraudulent reviews: check to see if the contributor has reviewed anything else; use computer algorithms to look for Internet protocol addresses, similarity of content and word-choice; and check the time-frame in which reviews are posted (Kugler, 2014, p. 3). Current research being conducted in the field of online review forums pertains only to products, services and tangible items belonging to an organization. With online job review websites such as Glassdoor, Indeed and Vault, employer reviews are becoming more common, and users are actively engaging in the search for such information. Research needs to be conducted in 22

regards to employer reviews, as such reviews address aspects of a business that are much less tangible than the material objects considered in products reviews, and offer invaluable insights into business processes and conducts. Research Questions Although the anonymity offered via social media provides challenges for business managers, it is also one of the major affordances of online review forums. Anonymity often leads to more open and honest feedback, as users generating such content are unafraid of repercussions. Due to the anonymity and lack of structure of online review sites / forums, it is likely that opinion mining users' reviews can help overcome managerialist constructs, increase democracy and lead to deeper insight into employee engagement theory and practice. To coincide with the literature review, this project uses thematic content analyses to determine whether or not employee surveys can be replaced or supplemented by the analysis of online job-review forums. In order to address this area of research, three research questions (RQs) have been considered: 1) What are the prevalent themes addressed by the Gallup Q12? 2) Are employees addressing the themes prevalent in the Gallup Q12 in their Glassdoor reviews? 3) Are there prevalent themes addressed in Glassdoor reviews other than those addressed by the Gallup Q12?

23

Methodology

Data Collection In order to answer RQ1, a thematic content analysis was conducted using the Q12. The Q12 was one of the first employee engagement surveys to be administered and, since its first distribution, has been answered by more than 25 million employees (Gallup, 2013, p. 4). Gallup's Q12 claims to collect specific, relevant and actionable data that is proven to affect key performance metrics (Gallup, 2013, p. 11). The survey aims to measure employees' emotional engagement, which Gallup claims is a direct tie to their level of discretionary effort, or, their willingness to `go the extra mile' for their company (Gallup, 2013, p. 11). Many researchers including Anitha (2013), Balain and Sparrow (2009), Luthans and Peterson (2002) and Welch (2011) refer to the Q12 in their work. In fact, Buckingham and Coffin (1999) define employee engagement as "An employee who could answer yes to all 12 questions on Gallup's questionnaire" (p. 56). The survey's wide acceptance and popularity allow for the assumption that the themes prevalent in the Gallup Q12 are accepted as facilitators of employee engagement. The thematic content analysis was conducted manually, using the literature review to define further the themes inducted from the study. In order to address RQ2 and RQ3, a second thematic content analysis was conducted, using employee reviews on Glassdoor. Glassdoor was chosen as a platform of analysis due to its recent and rapid growth in popularity, having approximately 22.4 million unique visitors each month (quantcast.com). It is 24

plausible to assume that employee engagement surveys can be compared to Glassdoor reviews as Glassdoor contends that it allows managers to measure both organizational reputation and employee engagement (Glassdoor, 2015). To collect data from Glassdoor, the top five most popular pages based on location were reviewed. Toronto, Ontario was chosen as the geographic location of companies being reviewed as it is Canada's largest municipality and is considered a microcosm of the Nation (Marsh, 2006). The top five most popular Glassdoor pages in Toronto, Ontario are Blackberry, Roger's Communication, IBM, CIBC and Scotia Bank, respectively. Data was collected using stratified random sampling, forming strata based on the employer being reviewed. Reviews were filtered to eliminate those conducted by reviewers identifying as former employees. This decision has been made to reduce negative bias due to the possible termination of said former employees. Furthermore, former employees are not part of the intended audience for employee engagement surveys; only current employees are issued these surveys. All reviews falling into the aforementioned criteria were considered for analysis, regardless of their date. This decision has been made due to the objective of this study to find prevalent themes in the content generated on Glassdoor. Thus, time is not a factor in this research but should be considered by practitioners if this method of measuring engagement is pursued. Ten percent of each stratum was collected for analysis by using a random-number generator (random.org), which chooses true random numbers. The total number of reviews analyzed is 106.

25

Method of Analysis In order to address my research questions, inductive and deductive qualitative analyses were conducted. The thematic content analysis of the Q12 included a manual inductive analysis, which allowed for the collection of data that became the independent variable in my overall research. The themes collected from the content analysis of the Q12 then acted as a coding scheme with which to analyze the Glassdoor reviews and answer RQ2. The definitions of themes / codes were supplemented by the literature review, and were defined in the most broad sense. This was in consideration of the ways in which each individual employee might conceptualize the meaning of said themes / codes. The thematic content analysis of Glassdoor reviews included both deductive and inductive analyses. A manual deductive analysis was conducted using the coding scheme created in the first stage of my research, and addressed RQ2. A manual inductive content analysis was conducted to address RQ3.

26

Findings & Analysis The following section outlines the findings of my research. The data will be separated and presented in terms of the research question being addressed.

RQ1 Using a manual inductive thematic content analysis, 12 prevalent themes were found within the Q12. Table 1 outlines the questions addressed in the Q12 as well as the themes inducted from each question. The themes have been defined according to the literature reviewed during this project, and act as the codebook with which RQ 2 and 3 were analyzed.

Table 1. Gallup Q12 Question Q01. I know what is expected of me at work # Theme / Code Expectations Definition Proper training and clear communication about job roles, goals and accountability. Up-to-date technology and equipment, agency in decision-making, access to information, and a suitable amount of time to get the job done. Fun, exciting, challenging, enriching and meaningful work. Example "The training for my role was non-existent"

Q02. I have the materials and equipment I need to do my work right.

Resources

"People seem to always be overworked. Projects are rushed"

Q03. At work, I have Stimulation the opportunity to do what I do best every day.

"I like my job!" "The hours go by very slowly" 27

Q04. In the last seven Recognition days, I have received recognition or praise for doing good work. Q05. My supervisor, or Compassion someone at work, seems to care about me as a person.

Reward for dedication to and quality of work, either tangible or intangible. Positive, open atmosphere with a sense of humanity; employees feel valued and safe.

"Corporate policies are in place to reward exceptional employees"

Q06. There is someone at work who encourages my development. Q07. At work, my opinions seem to count.

Encouragement

Employee Opinions

Q08. The mission or purpose of my company makes me feel my job is important.

Mission / Purpose

Q09. My associates or fellow employees are committed to doing quality work. Q10. I have a best friend at work.

Co-worker Commitment / Skill Level

Friendship

"it's hard to build a close relationship with your manager(s), especially when many of them work remotely" Support and "great encouragement to supportive cofind roles that fit worker system individuals' in place" strengths. Access to many "Be more channels of transparent to communication the people throughout the below, keep organization; them in the Employees feel loop as much as heard and their possible" opinions are valued. Company values "Opportunities and philosophies to make a are shared by difference" employees; employees feel as "Very good though they are culture" part of something meaningful. Perceived level "Plenty of of competence of senior people co-workers and with deep management. domain and technology expertise" Camaraderie, "Great cotrust and feelings workers. A lot of happiness due of fun to fellow comanagers" 28

Q11. In the last six months, someone at work has talked to me about my progress.

Feedback

workers. Feedback processes for individuals and work-groups.

Q12. This last year, I have had opportunities at work to learn and grow.

Opportunities for Growth

Educational opportunities, promotions and increased responsibilities.

"...team based performance system combined with a 360 performance feedback for individuals leading to a blended performance result" "Excellent Skills building and development"

RQ2 After conducting a manual deductive content analysis on 106 Glassdoor reviews, it was found that reviewers addressed all of the themes prevalent in the Gallup Q12. It was also found, however, that individual reviews tended to address only a fraction of the themes. Furthermore, singular themes were often addressed more than once in an individual review. Overall, it was found that Q02, Q08 and Q12 were addressed most frequently in employees' reviews, while Q11 was addressed the least. Figure 1 shows the number of times each theme was addressed in employee reviews on Glassdoor.

29

Figure 1.

Figure 1 represents the total mentions of themes in the overall research. However, it is important to note that there are some variances between each individual organization that was analyzed. The IBM and CIBC strata replicated the overall research findings in terms of which themes were the most prevalent in reviews. However, the BlackBerry, Scotia Bank and Rogers Communication strata showed differences in terms of theme popularity. In the BlackBerry stratum, Q08, Q02 and Q09 were the most frequently mentioned themes. The reviews analyzed from the Scotia Bank stratum mentioned Q04, Q02 and Q09 most frequently, while those from Rogers Communication mentioned Q12, Q08 and Q09 most frequently. A full representation of each individual stratum can be found in Appendix A.

30

RQ3 Supplemented by the literature review, an inductive analysis was conducted on the 106 Glassdoor reviews. It was found that seven prevalent themes were mentioned by employees, but not addressed by the Q12. Table 2 outlines the inductive codebook created from this analysis.

Table 2. h A Theme / Code Pay Definition Rate of pay, wage or overall salary for working the allotted amount of hours. Various types of medical insurance, vacation packages, onsite facilities and / or employee discounts. Policies and process within the organization are fair and just. Lack of nepotism. Employees are able to balance their work with other life activities due to the amount of work and flexibility of work schedule. The size, presence and overall reputation of the organization. Ease of access to the physical organization(s). The feeling of safety and stability in one's current position. Example "Underpaid...so underpaid" "Need better compensation" "Excellent benefits and perks (free parking, free coffee, subsidized snacks, gym subsidies, RRSP matching, etc)." "Nepotism at the branches in hiring and promotions is evident" "Long hours and overtime required during peak periods may make maintaining a work-life balance challenging" "Customer focused bank with a global presence" "Good location" "Location: mins to Yonge/Bloor" "Secure job" "Sales staff is pushed 31

B

Benefits & Perks

C D

Fairness Work/Life Balance

E F

Reputation Location

G

Job Security

too much, they know they're easy to replace..." After applying the inductive codebook to the Glassdoor reviews, it was found that B, A and D were the most prevalent themes addressed, while F was addressed the least. Figure 2 outlines the inductive themes and their popularity in regards to the number of times mentioned in employee reviews.

Figure 2.

Figure 2 represents the overall findings in this research. However, as with the deductive analysis, it is important to note that each individual strata showed variances in terms of the popularity of themes. Although the most prevalent themes addressed by the CIBC stratum include those most prevalent in the overall research, A was most prevalent, followed by B and D. The BlackBerry stratum 32

most frequently addressed B, E and A respectively, while the IBM stratum addressed D, E and A, respectively. Scotia Bank employees most frequently mentioned A, D and G, and the Rogers Communication stratum showed great popularity amongst B, followed by C and A.

33

Discussion The analyses of 106 Glassdoor reviews have provided answers to the three research questions considered in this project, as well as lead to many unforeseen observations. This discussion of findings is organized in terms of each research question, concluding with overall observations.

RQ1 After conducting the inductive thematic content analysis of the Q12, I noted twelve prevalent themes. The themes addressed by the Q12 are resources, expectations, stimulation, recognition, compassion, encouragement, employee opinions, mission / purpose, co-worker skill level / commitment, friendship, feedback and opportunities for growth. These themes encompass physical, cognitive and emotional facets of employee engagement, as suggested and defined by Kahn's theory (1990). The survey also addresses questions regarding rewards and recognition, job resources such as training and technology, clear and purposeful communication, and shared organizational values and cultures (Welch, 2012, p. 337). However, the Q12 does not address themes such as pay, job security and fairness, which Gruman and Saks (2011) and Balain and Sparrow (2009) theorize are important factors of employee engagement. Therefore, the Q12 may be seen as incomplete as it does not address all facets of employee engagement. Secondly, the questions / themes addressed by the Q12 were found to be quite broad in nature. For example, Q02 says, "I have the materials and equipment I need to do my work right." According to Gruman and Saks (2011), May et al. 34

(2014) and Welch (2012), job resources encompass all physical, psychological, social or organizational features of a job that help achieve work goals, reduce job demands and stimulate personal growth, learning and development. These resources may include training, technology, clear communication, a support system and etcetera. The broad nature of this question could lead to misinterpretation by employees, and thus an inaccurate collection of data for management. Furthermore, because the statements and questions in the Q12 lack specificity management may not get enough details to act upon productively.

RQ2 After conducting a deductive thematic content analysis on 106 Glassdoor reviews it was found that the information addressed by the Q12 are also addressed by employee reviews online. However, this information is not addressed simultaneously. Instead, individual reviews address only a fraction of themes addressed by the Q12. This suggests that it may not be plausible to replace engagement surveys with content from online review forums. As mentioned above, however, the information addressed in online reviews may be richer, more democratic and timely than that in surveys (Liu, 2012; van Dijk, 2013). Secondly, it was noted that the popularity of themes addressed by online reviews varied considerably. Opportunities for growth, mission / purpose and resources were discussed most often in employees' reviews, while feedback was discussed the least. It is plausible to assume, due to these findings, that opportunities for growth, mission / purpose and resources are the most important 35

aspects of employee engagement from the employee's perspective, and feedback is the least. Thus, it is apparent that the facets of employee engagement are not of equal merit, and should not be dealt with as such. According to these findings, managers should focus on building opportunities for growth, clearly communicating the organization's mission and purpose, and providing vast job resources.

RQ3 During the inductive thematic content analysis on Glassdoor reviews, seven themes prevailed that were not addressed by the Gallup Q12. The seven themes noted are pay, benefits & perks, fairness, work / life balance, reputation, location and job security. All of these themes have been noted in employee engagement literature as facets of engagement, aside from reputation and location. However, these themes prevailed as important to employees and thus are considered for this study. Of the seven inductive themes, the most often addressed in online reviews are benefits and perks which were mentioned 60 times, followed by pay, mentioned 50 times. The other themes noted were mentioned a similar number of times, all falling between 24 and 39. However, this does not include location, which was mentioned the least. Location was referred to 11 times within employees' reviews. These findings suggest that pay, benefits and perks are important to employees, while the location of the organization is of lesser importance. Given these findings, it is plausible to assume that managers should 36

focus on providing quality pay, benefits and perks to employees in order to increase engagement.

General Observations Overall, it was found that although online reviews address the same information as the Gallup Q12, the quantity and consistency of information is diminished in online reviews. Thus, it is not likely that surveys could be replaced by analyzing the content of online review forums. However, the reviews analyzed provided insight into employees' perspectives of engagement. It was found that not all facets of employee engagement are given equal merit by employees, and that opportunities for growth, resources and an organization's mission / purpose are valued by employees. Without the managerialist structure of a survey, employees were also able to discuss information that is not addressed by the Q12. During the inductive analysis it was found that facets such as pay, benefits and perks are important factors in employee engagement. Lastly, it is important to note that each stratum of data produced varying results. In other words, the themes discussed the most and least differ from stratum to stratum. This reiterates Jenkin and Delbridge's statement that due to the heterogeneity of organizations and their wider contexts, there is no set of `best practices' to employ for all organizations (2013). These findings may also account for the variety of definitions of employee engagement. Due to the varied information discussed in employee reviews, it is plausible to say that employee engagement is not static, nor is it the same across all organizations. Thus, the 37

managerialist approach of surveying for employee engagement is flawed. Online review forums allow for the analysis of employee engagement concepts that are unique to individual organizations. Although they may not supplement surveys, it is suggested they be consulted before designing and formatting survey questions. With the themes derived from employee reviews, managers can design employeecentric surveys, increasing democracy, noting and addressing prominent issues that otherwise may not be, and thus increasing employee engagement and organizational performance.

38

Limitations & Future Research While product reviews have been studied in depth, my research provides initial insight into opinion-mining job reviews for employee engagement; currently, there is no research in this area. Given that my research is the first of its kind, duplication of the study is required. Furthermore, the theory derived from this study must be put into practice and empirically tested. It is suggested that a case study be conducted, where employees' reviews online are analyzed in order to dictate the template of an employee engagement survey. The survey would then need to be distributed throughout the organization. The results would need to be analyzed and compared with the overall performance of the organization. The implications of this research are vast, and could lead to greater employee engagement and satisfaction, organizational performance and a deeper understanding of employee engagement theory and practice.

39

Conclusion Academics and professionals alike have been attempting to define and measure employee engagement since it was first proven to have a strong correlation to organizational performance. Management aims to define, measure and streamline employee engagement initiatives and practices in order to increase efficiency within the organization. One of the ways in which employee engagement is often measured is via surveys, such as the Q12. This research suggests, however, that there are severe limitations when measuring employee engagement through the use of surveys. One of the main limitations of survey research that measures employee engagement is democracy, or lack thereof. Although surveys appear to be a democratic tool with which employee opinions are collected and heard, critical managerialist studies suggest otherwise. Due to managerialism and its ideological nature, employee engagement surveys are comprised of questions derived from management studies of `best practices'. Managers implementing employee engagement surveys are often too focused on efficiency, and not focused enough on employees and their well-being / engagement. In other words, surveys ask questions about generic facets of employee engagement, instead of listening to employee needs that are specific to the organization. Dominant managerialist ideology can distort employee engagement surveys to the point that they actually hinder the development of employee engagement and waste managers' time and resources. Instead, this research explored the possibility of measuring employee engagement via online review forums such as Glassdoor. 40

Online review forums, or electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), provide candid, altruistic, real-time opinions that are publicly available, free of cost. For these reasons, researchers like Asur, Huberman (2010) and Liu (2012) suggest that they may eliminate the need for surveys, opinion polls and focus groups. Online reviews may prove more useful than surveys as they are written by engaged, motivated users whom are able to share their opinions freely, and may do so shortly after the event they are referencing in their reviews. Lastly, online reviews prove more democratic than surveys as there is no managerialist structure or language guiding the communication of opinions, issues or conflicts. In order to explore the possibility of online review forums replacing and eliminating the need for surveys, comparative content analyses were conducted using the Q12 and Glassdoor reviews. After conducting the analyses it was found that online reviews offer the same types of information as the Q12, but in lesser quantities. Each individual employee review addressed at least one theme found in the Q12, but none were found to have addressed all 12 simultaneously. Thus, it is concluded that online review forums cannot replace or eliminate surveys. However, the quality of information addressed in employees' reviews may be higher than that addressed by surveys. It was found that the online reviews allowed employees to communicate about components of employee engagement that are more specific in nature and in terms of the organization in question. This specificity could allow for management to act efficiently and accordingly when implementing changes in engagement programs. On account of these findings it is suggested that managers analyze reviews such as those on Glassdoor before 41

compiling employee engagement surveys. It is hypothesized that surveys compiled with the themes addressed by employee reviews will lead to a deeper understanding of employee engagement with regards to individual organizations, and thus an increase in productivity and bottom-line results. This project has many opportunities for further research. Firstly, a duplicate study is necessary to confirm the results of this analysis, since it is the first of its kind. Secondly, a case study should be conducted whereby an employee engagement survey is developed after analyzing and compiling the themes addressed in employee reviews online. The effectiveness of the survey should be analyzed and compared to original engagement surveys. This employee-centric model of engagement has the opportunity to re- or further-define employee engagement, increase employee satisfaction and well-being, and inadvertently, increase organizational performance.

42

Appendices Appendix A The following figures show the number of times each theme inducted from the Gallup Q12 was addressed in the individual strata.

BlackBerry

43

CIBC

IBM

44

Rogers Communication

Scotia Bank

45

Appendix B The following figures show the number of times each theme inducted from Glassdoor reviews was addressed in the individual strata. BlackBerry

46

CIBC

IBM

47

Rogers Communication

Scotia Bank

48

Appendix C The following is the compilation of reviews from BlackBerry employees on Glassdoor.com, with coding.

1.

Company Name BlackBerry

Review # 137

Date of Review Jul 25 2012

Review Pros: Reasonable payA Some benefits are goodB Cons: - Heavy processQ02 - Org sucks: when encountered a problem, the first thing to consider is to create a process.Q02 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Working for a large global company had its benefits... maybe not so much nowE. Cons: Quite possibly the worst management team ever assembledQ09. Advice to Management: Fire yourselves... no really, its the only way the company has a chanceQ09. Pros: RIM is a growing companyE. if you have a few years of experience under your belt and you want to move upQ12 - this is the right time and the right place. Traditionaly rim was flat but now its growing and there are more management and leadership positions availableQ12. Also there is HUGE HUGE variety of work available both on the r&d side and on the business sideQ03. In general the salariesA are in line with the competition and the industry. the locationF is on the quite side so if you like small towns then you will love rim. also they are also expanding to the usQ12, F Cons: since the company has just started to grow E- some traditional corporate processes need to be put in placeQ02. there are no leadership trainig courses Q12. only a few have been introduced recently . more work needs to be put in to develop a comprehensive training program for both soft skills and technical skills Q01. Advice to Management: keep the momentum going and go into the consumer field fasterQ08

2.

BlackBerry

131

Sep 4 2012

3.

BlackBerry

187

Nov 30 2008

49

4.

BlackBerry

173

Nov 19 2009

5.

BlackBerry

186

Dec 24 2008

Pros: What a great, dynamic organizationQ08. There's always something going onQ03. Opportunity for many types of lateral and upward moves because of the growth rate of the company Q12. Excellent benefits and perks B (free parking, free coffee, subsidized snacks, gym subsidies, RRSP matching, etc). Cons: It is a big organizationE, so the bureaucracy is present. Many forms, many processesQ02. OD (that's HR) can be a bit surly to deal withQ10, but I assume it's because they have too few people dealing with too many employeesQ02! Advice to Management: Keep in touch with your employeesQ05. So many managers are teleworking or offsite for travel, I wonder if they see what their employees are (or aren't) up toQ09? Pros: A lot of opportunity Q12 and cool productsQ08. Appreciation of hard workQ04 and a shared company pride for Blackberry devicesQ08. Cons: Scaling up is proving to be more difficult that anticipatedQ12. Bureaucracy layer emergingQ02. Advice to Management: Scale up but keep the start up mentalityQ08. Pros: * great balance of processes & freedomQ02 * good payA relative to others in the area * peopleQ10 / culture is greatQ08 Cons: * span of control was too high... too many managersQ02, Q09 * no career growth for mostQ12... Advice to Management: given the current situation the company is in... my advice is to listen to the people from the bottom upQ07... look at what has happened when blind direction from the top is the strategyQ09. Pros: Flexibility is embedded into the cultureD, Q08 Despite the company having grown so much, that part of the culture still remains But this depends on the job function tooQ01. Cons: Market conditions, bad media and layoffs do affect moraleG Advice to Management: I think there

6.

BlackBerry

61

Nov 7 2013

7.

BlackBerry

25

Jun 4 2014

50

8.

BlackBerry

24

Jun 20 2014

9.

BlackBerry

146

Nov 20 2011

10.

BlackBerry

53

Dec 6 2013

has been a lot less politics this year and much clearer focus towards the futureQ08. Pros: The company provides comfortable working environmentQ08. It still has some great people leftQ10. Global company with many locations and "good" reputationE, F. Cons: Career killerQ12. My carrier and professional networking slowed to a crawl. There is no hi-tech culture/ feeling in the companyQ02, Q08. The management did not have a good handle on what is going on in the companyQ09. Maybe it will change now. Advice to Management: Value your employeesQ05. Develop them and keep them challengedQ06, Q03. Improve your perksB. Create a hi-tech cultureQ02, Q08. Pros: Interesting work, sometimes on the cutting edgeQ03. Working hours are flexible and micromanagement is not prevalentQ02, D. There are not many non-technical managersQ09. Cons: Poor managementQ09, particularly communication from upper managementQ07. The vision of the company, if any, is not shared with the employeesQ08. Advice to Management: Be more open with employees Q07. Less "secret" projects. Share vision with employees, be open to creative suggestions from employees regarding future technologiesQ08, Q07, Q02. Be more creative and independent; stop chasing competitors and copying what they have doneQ08. Pros: People are great and management is awesomeQ10, Q09. A really nice atmosphere to be in Q08. Cons: The only thing I could say that is bad is that job security is iffy G. Advice to Management: keep up the good work Pros: Well educated workforceQ09, interesting and challenging workQ03 Cons: Leadership is completely absentQ09, Q01, executive floor has moved to California F. New execs are brought in but leadership and communication is still close to zero Q07, Q09 . Quarterly townhalls with top exec are routinely finished early despite

11.

BlackBerry

5

Mar 7 2015

51

12.

BlackBerry

118

Oct 31 2012

13.

BlackBerry

94

Apr 21 2013

many questions unanswered. ..leaving employees feeling like there is no one on the bridge Q05, Q07. Quite discouraging. Competition is still considered the best way to manage performance, not coaching nor collaborationQ06. The prevailing management style is antiquated and autocratic at bestQ09. Advice to Management: Communicate. Really, just send an email or two per monthQ07. Don't worry about getting sued or appearing to be short on ideas. Just pretend that you care and send a note or two to the footsoldiers in Canada and you will be rewardedQ05. Pros: Good people, great timesQ10.Good good Cons: SalaryA people not very good! good good Advice to Management: Please take care of your people and they will take care of the workQ05! Pros: mobile is a happening industry
Q03

14.

BlackBerry

165

Nov 26 2010

global brand recognition E new executive team is really going for itQ09 friendly work environmentQ10 seems like pay is competitiveA seems like company is trying to attract and retain the best talentQ09 BlackBerry's story matters and will be discussed and studied, whether we succeed or fail...Q08 Cons: very few of the perks B you get at the top tech employers if the turnaround falls flat... Canadian offices are mostly not inspiring (but that is supposed to change)Q03 Advice to Management: I'm rooting for you Pros: Relaxing work cultureQ08 Flexible timeD Developer teams are free to use latest and greatest technologies when applicable Q02 Good benefitsB A Blackberry for each employeeB

52

Cons: Management lacks of direction/determinationQ09 Reasonable but not competitive payA No fun work environment (quite boring)Q03 Lack of recognition on good workQ04 High turnover rate G Advice to Management: encourage, recognize and compensate for good work instead of playing the everyoneis-equal game Q04, Q06. stock option or some sort to make employee feel like being a real part of the companyQ08. Pros: Fantastic CompanyQ08, great campus, great peopleQ10, and good oportunityQ03 Cons: Have become technologically stagnant, and need to start innovating moreQ02, Q08 Advice to Management: allow employees to test other technologies rather than frown on them for using something other than a BBQ02, Q07 Pros: Good opportunities to learn a lotQ12. can set process Q02. define strategy Q08. fexible working hrsD. good compensation and benefitsA, B. Cons: no direction from topQ09, Q01. deay in implementation Q02. ever changing priorities Q01. zero transparencyQ07. Advice to Management: Change strategy Q08 Pros: Great benefitsB, great scheduleD, easy and pleasant work.Exciting cutting-edge work: Our innovations in technology, and engineering will benefit future generationsQ03, Q08. We design great handheld devices and software which are preferred by customers who look for a brand name E .Life is beautiful. Being a part of something that matters and working on products in which you can believe is remarkably fulfillingQ08.We love our employees, and we want them to know itQ05. RIM offers a variety of benefits, including a choice of medical programs, company-matched

15.

BlackBerry

115

Dec 5 2012

16.

BlackBerry

138

Jun 14 2012

17.

BlackBerry

208

Aug 12 2008

53

18.

BlackBerry

72

Oct 6 2013

19.

BlackBerry

70

Oct 24 2013

20.

BlackBerry

174

Oct 20 2009

retirement savings, stock options, maternity and paternity leave, and much moreB.Uniting the world, one user at a time. People in every country and every language use our products E. As such we think, act, and work globally - just our little contribution to making the world a better placeQ08. Cons: Long hours, have to work nights and weekendsE. Advice to Management: Have more faith in employees and show them some respectQ02, Q05. Pros: TechnologyQ02 great peopleQ10 good payA excellent benefitsB Cons: Their position in the market place E very tough selling environment Advice to Management: stop operating in silos and listen to other groups and other employeesQ07 Pros: Nice coworkers. Nice coworkers. Nice coworkersQ10. Cons: Bad management. Bad OD team. Bad management. Bad OD teamQ09. OD, HR and management is kind of enemy of common employees at BlackBerryQ05. Isn't this interesting? Career opportunityQ12? You can make a guess.... Compensation is just OKA. Cheap resources in KW areaQ02. Culture and valueQ08? I am been in this company for 8 years and I still do not know what is BB's culture and value... maybe these are all my own fault. Advice to Management: Advice to management? Please take less golden parachute and resign ASAP. Period. Pros: Great cultureQ08 where a new grad can easily build his/her portfolioQ12. A very young and eager crowdQ09. Seniors are very helpful and friendlyQ06, Q10. Cons: If you're unlucky enough to get stuck on a really boring, uninteresting project, there's not much you can doQ03. Like any software company, it's about the project and the people so it's hit or miss. Advice to Management: Not much to complain about the seniors. They are quite friendlyQ10. Maybe even too

54

21.

BlackBerry

161

Feb 28 2011

friendly as constructive criticism is very healthy in a professional environmentQ11, Q09. Pros: free blackberryB, high-end innovationQ08, flexible work hoursD, balance between personal and career lives, gaining lots of experience since it is still a growing company D, Q12 Cons: commute to Waterloo F, engineering evironment, slow salary increases and promotionsA, Q12, dull buildings with no windows, too dynamic changes in org structure Q08 Advice to Management: N/A

55

Appendix D The following is the compilation of reviews from CIBC employees on Glassdoor.com, with coding.
Company Name CIBC Review # 41 Date of Review Jul 14 2014 Review Pros: Dynamic environment wit ample opportunity to utilize skills
Q03

1.

2.

CIBC

1

May 21 2015

3.

CIBC

111

Dec 8 2012

4.

CIBC

135

Dec 22 2011

5.

CIBC

45

Jul 2 2014

Cons: Still some elements of the old school Advice to Management: Communication, communication, communicationQ07 Pros: Friendly working placeQ10. One of Canada's top hundred employers E. Relaxed working atmosphere Q08 and great perksB. Cons: May have to work long hoursD. The salary may not be as good as what other banks offerA. Advice to Management: Reduce the layers of managementQ02. It is a great working atmosphere with a room for improvement Q08 Pros: It is lead position but it is still qualify overtimeD Cons: Sometime this job didn't has similar role like management level with less payA, Q01, C Advice to Management: N/A Pros: It fosters professional development however they are very strict with punctualityQ12. Moreover, great opportunities for work life balances D with several programs such as fitness on site, charity events, diversity events and fundraisingB. Cons: Very strict attendance. High targets are also employed. Also, the parking is an issue here B. There is no parking available at all. It is also the lowest paying bankA Advice to Management: Make it more of a family environment D. Allow for more career development and input on to processesQ12, Q07. Also increase wages to motivate employeesA. Pros: You do learn alot, depending on the department the training is amazing or non existent, Large

56

6.

CIBC

70

Oct 20 2013

7.

CIBC

154

Jun 18 2010

8.

CIBC

37

Sep 6 2014

9.

CIBC

73

Oct 27 2013

company alot of different departments to move tooQ01, Q12. Cons: Low pay compared to the other big 5 banks of course politics depending on which department your in A, Q08. Advice to Management: Hire people for merit not cause you like them or your related to them in some way C. Pros: They paid for education as long as it applied to my jobQ12, A. Cons: I found that working in a large company there wasn't a lot of personal accountabilityQ01. People either took too many coffee breaks if they were management or were tied to their desks if they were call centre or the likeQ09. Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Alternate work arrangements D , colleagues (while they last) G, occasional opportunity to do interesting work aligned with corporate mandatesQ03, Q08. Cons: Senior Team are risk adverseQ09. This boat is going to sink. Move them on... Advice to Management: find another boat to turn around -- and learn when to hand it over to the right people to get it to the destination. Pros: if you have seniority you are king Cons: Senior management cares about their bonus and their bonus onlyQ05. An ex-team member of mine really wanted me on his team when he got promoted but our exdirector who became his director wanted to keep me on contract to save money because it was near year end and they needed to meet budget for their bonuses. Even though he gave me a job offer she rescinded it for her selfish purposes C . They extended my 3 month contract 4 times instead of offering me a full time position "due to budget issues"G Advice to Management: learn to careQ05. Pros: Ability to move up quicklyQ12.

57

10.

CIBC

152

Aug 23 2010

11.

CIBC

9

Feb 26 2015

12.

CIBC

117

Oct 17 2012

13.

CIBC

60

Mar 15 2014

Cons: Systems are out of dateQ02, not put in best positions to succeed Q06 , almost always under staffed Q02 Advice to Management: Show more appreciation to employees Q05 Pros: The place is a chaos Q08 which on the bright side allows you to learn a lot on the job regarding both risk management and navigating a huge bureaucracy Q12. Cons: As soon as someone leaves the job they're replacement is hired at a higher job level. External hires are given higher job levels and current employees are kept in the dark regarding opportunities and management decisions C, Q07 Advice to Management: consult your front line employees before making decisions Q07. These are the people who understand issues that are facing the business. Stop treating your employees as expendable assets, especially in knowledge intensive areas Q05. AND stop giving excuses why you can't promote people then turn around and hire at a higher job level as soon as they leave C, Q12. Be honest with your employees Q05. Pros: Room to grow within the company Q12 Cons: May get repetitive over time Q03 . Advice to Management: No advice to management at this time Pros: espp benefits B Competitive pay A friendly peers Q10 team effort culture Q08 diversity stability G Cons: corporate ladder tough to climb Q12, many jobs are "spoken for" create contact within different areas to help climb the ladder Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Desprate for employees Trying to improve image E Renovation of Branches Marketing Material is updated regularly Culture is different from other banks Q08

58

Cons: Their homework is not good
D

14.

CIBC

140

Jul 6 2011

15.

CIBC

168

Jan 17 2009

Apply tricks of the trade Very Bad training Q01 Advice to Management: Listen to employees Q07. Not impose. Look at market conditions Pros: good imperial service offer to clients Q08 Cons: too muc exoected from employees- jack of all trades rather than specializing in one areaQ01, Q02, Q03 . Advice to Management: really need to spend money to upgrade systems and heavy learning curve for some employees Q02, Q01 Pros: Reasonably interesting work Q03 and interaction with people from many departments Q10 Cons: Decisions require too many meetings, people and time to be spent making the process very inefficient and not entrepreneurial
Q02

16.

CIBC

88

May 9 2013

17.

CIBC

76

Sep 26 2013

Advice to Management: Cut out the unnecessary meetings Pros: big on building team spirit and helping out the community Q08 Cons: Lower salary compare to other 4 big banks A Advice to Management: N/A Pros: - Job Stability G- as long as you achieve the basic activities your job is secure -Good pay and benefits compared to alot of other employers A,B -Vacation time in your first year B -I am fortunate to have a very good manager Q09 -Achievers recognition program although very hard to earn Q04 -Very competitive products and services Q08 -Can be proud to sell investments and mortgages as we offer best on the street Q08 Cons: Focus is on sales sometimes client experience comes second Q08 -Of couse would like to make more money and earn more vacation,.... A,
B

-Some managers are not good unwilling to stand up to middle and

59

18.

CIBC

80

Aug 21 2013

upper manager on targets or goals that are un-attainable Q01, Q09 -Bonuses could be bigger / and given quarterly B -Removal of support roles in branch - more work being added onto staff that remain Q02, Q06 -Outbound calls are a focus -which I understand - but often calling the same clients over and over --- gets frustrating Q03 -Company often looks outside own talent pool to higher outside the bank when they have qualified candidates C, Q09 Advice to Management: Switch to quarterly bonus structure B -- would keep employees fresh and motivated Increase base salaries A Targets are not always attainable Q02 Most of top performign employees in my role are not hitting all targets .... something is wrong Q09 -Adverstising is getting better -- but need to keep pushign this area Pros: -job stability G -decent hours( get sunday off) D -working for big 5 bank E Cons: -depending on branch, moving can be difficult Q12 -salaried for sales role. no room for making extra money A Advice to Management: N/A

60

Appendix E The following is the compilation of reviews from IBM employees on Glassdoor.com, with coding.
1. Company Name IBM Review # 12 Date of Review Nov 22 2014 Review Pros: Lab facilities, flexible working hours
Q02, D

2.

IBM

53

Jan 16 2013

3.

IBM

131

Apr 28 2010

Cons: N/A, every thing is great so far. Advice to Management: Benefits and compensation A, B Pros: There are many good opportunities to learn and obtain experience. Q12 Cons: Busy life and high workload Q02, D Advice to Management: Service quality is equally important as new signings Q08. Pros: Very good culture
Q08

4.

IBM

112

May 18 2011

5.

IBM

152

Aug 12 2009

Good products and approach to R&D Q08 Truly values employees and customersQ05 Cons: Large and complicated E, Q01 Sometines difficult to get everyone on the same page Q01, Q08 Advice to Management: Continue to manage by core values Q08 Focus on analytic applications is very compelling Pros: IBM is great in terms of encouraging employee with continue education Q06, Q12 Cons: office politics Q08, people get lazy doing the same job without desire to advance or make change in career Q03, Q09 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: There are none. Honestly. Might look

61

good on resume I suppose E. Cons: Below market salaries A, no paid o.t, Q04 crap pager pay, every little benefit B is being taken away whilst we watch executives getting richer whilst our teams get smaller C, Q02. Advice to Management: You will rot in hell for what you are doing absolutely raping IBM for every penny for yourselves. Dan Fortin - just a puppet for Sam. Pros: A diverse set of roles are available for those looking to move within the company Q03, Q12 . Significant opportunity to work with other Fortune 500 companies and clients Q12. Cons: The relative ranking system is now causing solid workers to be flagged as poor performers; someone has to do the grunt work Q01, C . Extremely difficult to move between software group brands or to different divisions Q12. Advice to Management: Scrap the current individual relative ranking system for now in favor of a team based performance system combined with a 360 performance feedback for individuals leading to a blended performance result Q11. Significantly change the performance metric system every 5 years. Pros: Many opportunities to learn, grow, great support for

6.

IBM

104

Nov 10 2011

7.

IBM

41

Apr 12 2013

62

moms, lots of different avenues Q12, Q06 Cons: salary A, employee reward and recognition lacking Q04 Advice to Management: more investment and recognition to employees
Q06, Q04

8.

IBM

156

Apr 6 2009

Pros: IBM looks very good on the resume E. Additionally, IBM has a lot of opportunity for training, especially for IBM products Q12. They also offer a nice tuition re-reimbursement for part time studies B. On paper IBM has some very nice work/life balance programs, however depending on where you land in the organization and who your manager is, your mileage may vary on taking advantage of the programs D. Like any corporation the roles at IBM are narrowly focused Q01. You are expected to be very good at one or two specific things Q03. That said, they do allow, and encourage movement with the company, so building a broad skill-set is possible Q06, Q12. IBM Canada has a strong sales / marketing / operations presence E. Serious technical work is typically done in IBM US or other countries. So bear that in mind if you're a techy looking for a challenge - you probably won't find it at IBM Canada Q03, F. Cons: IBM Canada is a company in decline. Originally IBM Canada was looked to by IBM

63

US as an internal 'outsourcing partner' (1960 to around 2000) E. A large majority of the work at IBM Canada is in fact working with IBM US business direction and funding (Toronto Lab Missions, Helpdesks, Inside Sales, etc). IBM US is now looking to BRIC countries for the work that IBM Canada performed. The pure Canadian market is small, and IBM Canada would be 1/3rd of the size it is today if it only dealt with Canadian business. As IBM US looks for other outsourcing partners in the world, expect IBM Canada to massively contract Q08. Technical work is declining, or leaving IBM Canada G. The large bulk that remains is sales, and operational type work. If you are looking for that type of work, IBM Canada may be a good match Q01. Advice to Management: Focus on growing share in the Canadian markets so you can give a soft landing to the people who are losing their jobs to BRIC outsourcing through IBM US decisions G. Soften ties with IBM US, and work toward self sustainability for IBM Canada as an entity without IBM US dollars Q08. Pros: great supportive co-worker system in place Q06 Cons: sometime too much paperwork and

9.

IBM

32

Nov 7 2013

64

10.

IBM

123

Aug 25 2010

11.

IBM

28

Dec 18 2013

process Q02. Advice to Management: N/A Pros: This is a great company to launch your career as you get to work on some large commercial projects for big customers and can learn about the corporate culture and how to navigate it Q03, Q08, Q12. The schedule is flexible with the ability to work from anywhere with a phone and Internet connection D. Cons: It takes long to get promoted unless you are a key player on a key project Q12. Compensation is good for starting but annual increases are abysmal of late and awards are nonexistent A, Q04. Advice to Management: Great place to start your career and learn how to work in a large multinational corporation bugger than done countries Q12. The key is to find a growing area of business if you want to advance your career. Sales and consulting are where the magic happens. Pros: Great people Q10, strong process, in many ways a truly SMART workplace Q08 Cons: A generally recognized challenge with promoting people internally, resulting in many leaving the firm to return later at a higher band Q12, G. Not an entirely healthy situation. Advice to Management: Keep "going organic" in internal growth Q12, lest people leave and not

65

12.

IBM

6

Mar 1 2015

actually come back. Pros: The people are excellent Q10, work from home is a nice thing to have D, and access to best practices is nice too Q02. Cons: There have been so many cuts over the years: cuts to salaries A (some even docked 10% for not "keeping their skills up to date" even though IBM has cut the training budget drastically years ago Q12), cuts to simple things like the Thank You Award Q04 you could give a peer to buy $25 in IBM logo wear - now gone, cuts to bonuses Q04(most don't get one), little if any raises Q12, cuts to travel even if necessary for your work, massive layoffs G (or worse: trying to manage people out without severance through poor ratings and performance improvement programs Q11 ). Most targeted for layoffs are the highly skilled and experienced workers in their 40's and 50's meanwhile the company hires new grads or offshore personnel to replace them C. It is surprising that this company gets away with these shady practices but it does Q08. Oh and there are so few remaining that it is getting more and more difficult to deliver Q02 . And recently in Canada, benefits were cut (no more paramedical) while prices went up over $100 per month B. So if you are a new grad and you want a year or two of experience, then great. But if you are in your

66

13.

IBM

31

Oct 27 2013

14.

IBM

117

Dec 5 2010

40's, just be aware that you may be targeted for dismissal not too many years from now G. Advice to Management: Stop the continual layoffs of critical people G, Q09 . Those of us left are finding it impossible to make deliverables and as a result we are losing customers Q02. It's fine to build up the CAMSS (Cloud, Analytics, Mobile, Social, Security) side of the business but not at the expense of the traditional side of the house Q08. The traditional side is what is paying the bills currently, plus if you destroy customer relationships on that side, you'll never sell the CAMSS side to them. Pros: Solid company G, strong vision, good solutions Q08 Cons: Very large company, so easy "to get lost" E, Q01 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: - Great to have on your resume E - Work from home option D - Treated as an adult (without managers looking over your shoulder) Q02, Q05 - Benefits are above average B Cons: - Jobs are outsourced, and outsourced employees are not held accountable
Q01

- Too much red tape which does not allow for any innovation Q02, Q03 - Putting in extra hours is expected of each employee as departments are always understaffed and employees are

67

15.

IBM

95

Sep 5 2011

16.

IBM

160

Feb 26 2009

expected to pick up the work load Q02, D - Almost impossible to get things done as everyone hides behind policies Q02! - Perks B do not really exists unless your in sales, promises of salary A alignments to market value etc never usual show up . - Work life balance, that term doesn't exist D Advice to Management: When I joined IBM I was all excited to be part of the team. However, my felling after the years of employment is that management feels that employees are cheap labour to be found anywhere Q05. Also make sure employees feel like they have a future with the company G. It seems my next job role will be which ever department needs help with because my "Band" is not good enough for positions in IBM Q03! (Ironically I've been interviewing externally for similar or the same positions with success). Pros: I like the job Q03 I have a good salery A and i can abalance it with my home life and my kids are with me D Cons: sometime there is too much work Q02 and I am stresset but usually it's OK. The hours go by very slowly Q03 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: There are lots of opportunities to do interesting projects as long as you get to know the right people Q03, C. The home work situation is very flexible D. As

68

17.

IBM

52

Jan 14 2013

18.

IBM

23

Mar 12 2014

long as you get your work done, you can set your own timetable D, Q02. Cons: Too big E! Sometimes the amount of administration overwhelms the delivery people on a project Q01, Q02 . For every one person providing a solution with technical skills, there is a lawyer, an accountant, and some assistant burdening the project with overhead. It's unbelievable how IBM still manages to make money. Advice to Management: Share some more of the wealth. While executives take home millions little of it in actual salary, the bonuses for the rank and file are so little it's pathetic A, C. Pros: benefit is good and stable B Cons: has macro manager, damage the team Q09 Advice to Management: spend time to find out who can work who can just speak Q09. Pros: Plenty of senior people with deep domain and technology expertise
Q09

Large organization providing plenty of opportunities to learn and grow Q12 Industry leading solutions and mostly the first company to innovate
E

Great respect for individual Q05 Cons: Old and senior folks holding the power mostly Q02 Lack of broader skills in consultants (very deep skilled though) Q09

69

19.

IBM

176

Sep 3 2008

Advice to Management: N/A Pros: - IBM allows flexible working hours D which is far more interesting compared to a steady 9 to 5 working schedule Q03. - It is a global company which means opportunities can present itself anywhere in the world E, Q12. - People in IBM, management or nonmanagement are generally laid-back and helpful Q10, Q06. - The pay and benefits in IBM are quite competitive A, B. - The wide range of business units means you have the opportunities to explore different jobfields and industries Q12 . Cons: - Large companies means slower and sometimes lack of communication Q02, Q07. - Due to the matrix structure, an employee may have several managers to report to, which means it's hard to build a close relationship with your manager(s), especially when many of them work remotely Q02, Q05 . - Although there are many opportunities, it may take you a long time to get to the position you want due to standards and structures that must be followed in order to get promoted Q02, Q12. Advice to Management: - Be more transparent to the people below, keep them in the loop as much as possible Q07. Many times it is better to let people know the truth

70

than to surprise them with unpleasant news.

Appendix F The following is the compilation of reviews from Rogers Communication employees on Glassdoor.com, with coding.
Company Name Rogers Communication Review # 204 Date of Review Jun 3 2012 Review Pros: -Employee discount on wireless and cable products B - Very affordable Rogers gym membership with access to fitness classes, including yoga and many more
B

1.

- Tim Hortons located at the OMP campus B - Location: mins to Yonge/Bloor F - Reasonable parking can be found at nearby condos/apartments B Cons: - Senior Leadership Team (don't think I need to expand on this point) Q09 - Company is too reactive in everything they do... from marketing campaigns to how they treat they employees... as a result, they lose loyal customers and tenured employees Q08 - Tenured employees are paid ~30% less than their peers who do not have industry experience A, C - The only time you "may" get a raise is when you either get another offer or you threaten to leaveQ04 - Annual merit increases do not align with inflationQ04 - You don't get feedback Q11 when they reject you for a new position; hiring process can take over 5 months before you get a declined email from HR Q02! - There are some cases wherein Mgers are reporting to their peer! Same level of mgt. Not really sure how this creates a "mentor relationship Q06"? - Bad people Mgers due to lack of training/coaching/mentorshipQ06, Q09, Q12 Advice to Management: - Reward your loyal customers - Recognize your tenured employees by compensating them fairlyQ04... what's fair is fair and fair market value is what is fair and appreciated C - Take a good look at how your

71

2.

Rogers Communication

184

Sep 16 2012

3.

Rogers Communication

200

Jun 29 2012

4.

Rogers Communication

1

May 13 2015

5.

Rogers Communication

52

Sep 6 2014

Directors are treating their middle mgtQ05 - Your org is too vertical and too horizontalQ12 - Some teams have multiple people working on the same projects/processes, stepping all over each otherQ01 - You need to have better mgt training for all levels of mgtQ12, Q09 Pros: Recognizes meritQ04. Little to no discrimination within head office Q05. Opportunity for everyone to succeedQ12, Q03 . Cons: People seem to always be overworked. Projects are rushedQ02. Not a lot of accountabilityQ01. Advice to Management: Install a sense of accountability Q01. Learn from failures. Pros: Great benefits , 50% discount on all services B, room for growthQ12, a comapny that leads with product innovation Q08, u are most of the time rewarded for ur hardworkQ04. The company is headed in the right direction, they have a very clear cut 5 yr business plan, they know where they want to be n know how to there tooQ08. Cons: Some policies need to be straightened out Q02 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: The company is the most Innovative in Canada E Cons: The Large family oriented company makes it hard to be agile Q08 Advice to Management: Keep it going Pros: Corporate networking is available Q12 lots of products and services to sell and promote Q03. Cons: A lot to learn over the yearQ12. Advice to Management: Give your reps more support and better rogers systems needed to be functional Q02, Q06. Quicker retail communication. More competitiveness Q08. Pros: - Employee perks (phone/cable discounts, 50% off baseball tickets, etc.) B - There's a Starbucks on site B Cons: - Negative office environment riddled with school-yard politics at the

6.

Rogers Communication

47

Oct 1 2014

72

management level Q08 - Lack of direction, continuous flipflopping on strategic initiativesQ01, Q08 - Most customers truly hate the company, so there's that E - Misuse of talent and resources across the boardQ03 - Heavy reliance on third-party products and services, in spite of enormous capital funding to create their own Q08 - Low compensation, low bonus payout, low merit increases are the norm A,
Q04

7.

Rogers Communication

203

May 25 2012

8.

Rogers Communication

105

Mar 5 2014

- Borderline ridiculous work-load with unfeasible expectations from upper managementQ02, Q01 - Smoke screen corporate cultureQ08, heavy on the buzzwords, light on the results - Limited opportunity for growthQ12 Advice to Management: I worked for Rogers for 2 years during a time of transition under new leadership, and was happy to find new employment on my own accord. I did have some good experiences in my time there, but these were few and far in between. Hopefully Guy Laurence can turn it around, as there are some great, long standing people working for Rogers that deserve better Q09, Q10. Pros: The people !!! They are amazing and truly care about their jobs and fellow employeesQ10, Q05, Q09. Cons: Corporate atmosphere Q08!!! Senior management only cares about profit, not employeesQ05, not ensuring employees have the proper tools to do their jobs Q02. Advice to Management: Your biggest asset is your employees. Invest in them and the company will prosper Q06. Neglect them and you're the company will suffer. Q05 Pros: Excellent Skills building and developmentQ12. Good structure, hard work is well rewardedQ04. Management tries their best to be available at all times and take personal efforts to try and connect with you whenever they get the chanceQ05, Q06. The pay is reasonably good compared to other companies out there A Cons: Inter-department collaboration isn't really structured properly Q07.

73

9.

Rogers Communication

112

Mar 17 2014

10.

Rogers Communication

27

Jan 7 2015

Advice to Management: Customers! Customers! Customers! and then the Employees! Focus on them, they are the driving force, very very passionate about what they do and this company Q09 ! Pros: Good location F and subsidized gym and cafeteria B Cons: The red tape is ridiculous. Getting anything accomplished is next to impossibleQ02. They also are about 15 years behind in technology Q02. It's ridiculous that the sales staff isn't using CRM in this day and age. You have to actually call a human being in order to get information on a client. If that one human being that has that information is on vacation... well guess where that leaves you?! Imagine if that person up and quit one day? It's just absolutely absurd that anything runs this way. The training for my role was nonexistantQ01. The day I started I was left in the lobby for close to an hour because no one made any arrangements to come get me (and I had security call several people) Q05 . I didn't have a functioning email address for two weeks Q02. Advice to Management: Get with the times! Pros: - lots of open positions to move intoQ12 - great atmosphere Q08 - good benefits /perks B Cons: - salary is not at market level A - frequent layoffs G - frequent management changes Q09 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Benefits, employee discounts B and working for an innovative company Q08 . I've been @ Rogers over 15 years and my wife also works there for longer than myself. Many friends (from school) also work there for a long timeQ10, Q09. There are loyal Rogers employees who still serve the customer, the company's vision and Ted Roger's visionQ08, Q09. Cons: Rampant cronyism C. If you love challenging 'status quo' thinking, look elsewhereQ03. Corporation has been built on 'yes men' and those 'yes

11.

Rogers Communication

26

Mar 21 2015

74

men' (and women) are now in positions of authority and do not like their branches to be shaken Q07. Complete lack of management training. Not a meritocracy at allQ09, Q01. Loyalty & tenure get you nothingQ04. Especially at the expense of personal developmentQ12 to help the company get through tough times. Advice to Management: This is for Guy, you're on the right track but your directives are being misinterpreted by middle management types Q09. Set up a hotline for employees to escalate these examples of misconductQ07. And that process shouldn't go through Human Resources, who is horribly bureaucratic and far too close to business units to be objective & impartial Q02, Q07. Invest in your current employees, train them, nurture themQ05, Q12. Stop the constant hiring of 'mercenaries' who come & go within 2 years timeQ09. They collect their `unearned' MANAGER title and leave the company for greener pastures now that they can say, "Hey look! I'm a manager, than means I'm good, right?" Pros: excellent pay A and employee benefits B (50% off products). training was easiest part, you just sit in class for 4 weeks and do some simple tests at end of weekQ01. then you go onto the floor and have 2 team managers to give you support and answer your questionsQ06 great opportunity to get salary increase, and bonus Q04. and overtime always available Q12. Cons: stressful place to work Q08. some team managers are very unreasonable, and treat employees with very little respect Q06, Q05. heavily driven on stats and very liitle recognition for meeting those statsQ04. can get screw over on shifts as it depends on your seniority C, G . Advice to Management: threat employees with respectQ05 Pros: The biggest Telecom company in Canada, different products within the area E

12.

Rogers Communication

260

Apr 24 2009

13.

Rogers Communication

190

Aug 22 2012

75

14.

Rogers Communication

146

Jun 19 2013

15.

Rogers Communication

80

May 18 2014

16.

Rogers Communication

174

Dec 13 2012

17.

Rogers Communication

5

May 1 2015

18.

Rogers Communication

28

Jan 20 2015

19.

Rogers

96

Apr 28 2014

Cons: No innovation, no mood rising environment Q08, so stingy since late 2011, no motivational and team plansQ01, Q03, Advice to Management: Value the work force Q05 and try to raise the productivity mood by taking the right actions. Pros: aggresive approach Q08, always on toes, new technologyQ02 Cons: too many management layers Q02 , less value for education, and more value for inside company experience C. Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Great opportunities to move withinQ12 Cons: IT does not have good leadershipQ09 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Pay A & benefits B Discounts on company owned products & services i.e. cable, internet, wireless, The Blue Jays, The Shopping Channel, etc. B Cons: Very political Q08 Not empowered to make decisionQ02 The culture is not great and you're not valued as an employeeQ08, Q05 Advice to Management: Empower and recognize your employees on an ongoing basis even with a "Thank You" or small gift cardQ04, Q06. If you make people feel like they have control in the tasks, they will believe in the company and work harder and smarter Q02. Have open communications with your employees especially during tough times Q07. Pros: Great working environment and staff Q10 Cons: management team should support employees to advance within the companyQ04, Q12 Advice to Management: Monitor upper management Q09 Pros: Benefits B and working environment Q08. Lack of micromanagement Q02 Cons: minimal opportunity for advancementQ12, different arms of the company is a bit clique-y Q10 Advice to Management: Strongly consider candidates for jobs outside your immediate area/branch Q09 Pros: Rogers Communications strives

76

Communication

hard to be a world class company and has world class products E. Rogers has terrific corporate facilities including a cafeteria and gym B. Rogers has fair compensation A, time-off policies and benefits B. Corporate policies are in place to reward exceptional employees Q04 however, they do not translate into a successful program. The recognition programs are based on external community contributions and aren't relevant across the company Q04. Cons: Unfortunately Rogers Media has embraced the 'kiss-up and slapdown' kind of manager Q09. It isn't unusual to witness a person of authority insult, steal credit, threaten Q05(as in 'everyone is replaceable' or 'we will smoke out the terrorists' when discussing change management) and/or withhold crucial information Q07. As a result, the majority of employees spend more energy protecting themselves than helping the company G, Q09. There is an abundance of tearing others down to steal credit, passive aggressive leadership, destructive gossip, conniving politics, and abundant negativityQ06, Q10. And there is a level of mid-management whose sole responsibility is to justify their position by creating unnecessary work via reporting, creating road-blocks and micro managing Q02, Q06, Q09. But they know how to make their boss look good which adds to the inequity in promotions and acknowledgements Q04, C . Worst of all, the stellar employees and managers who rise above the dysfunctions and perform aren't acknowledged corporatelyQ04,Q09 (even when the marketplace, industry and colleagues do) and they eventually quit or are even let go G. Advice to Management: Shared authority and group decision making does not work Q02. Collaboration is key but there also needs to be accountability and responsibility in every roleQ01. If someone has the power to make a decision which will affect costs but has no accountability to the PNL, that is an obvious issue. If someone has the power to override another's decision but the outcome will not affect them because they have no actual

77

responsibility for that decision that is an obvious issue. Rogers should be one company ­ Media should not be an isolated island. Pros: -Great benefits (Vision, Dental and Medical - Travel insurance is also included in the benefits) B -Depending on the location, there is an on site gym which only charges $5.00 per pay cheque. F, B -At head office there is a Tim Horton's and dry cleaner on site. B Cons: -Unqualified people get promoted for all the wrong reasons (they might be friends of the managers, which results in more qualified subordinates having to train their new supervisor)C,Q09 -There's a lot of "buck passing" Q01 -Not enough communication Q07 Advice to Management: Managers need to make the effort to retain the good employees, overworking and not acknowledging employees and thier efforts result in negitive feelings towards the organizationQ04, Q06 Pros: The benefits are great B. Nice subsidized cafe at bloor location. Couch area at Brampton. Discounts on Rogers bill. Cons: - The people at bloor location F (mobile campaigns division) were very clicky, not sharing knowledgeQ06, Q10, Q12 . In Brampton people keep to themselves. Not open to ideasQ07. Advice to Management: Brampton: bring your staff together more, not work in silos Q07. Bloor: document, or help people learnQ06, Q12 Pros: Great chances for advancement and room to expand your skills and freedom to choose your pathQ12, Q03. Excellent benefits Bpackages and opportunities for social events and networking. Overall a very good place to work and start your career, I've been very very happy iwth my progress at rogers since I started there, and would recommend it as a place for my friends to seek work. Cons: Always changing, if you're not

20.

Rogers Communication

246

Aug 16 2010

21.

Rogers Communication

60

Aug 30 2014

22.

Rogers Communication

268

Nov 22 2008

78

23.

Rogers Communication

178

Nov 2 2012

24.

Rogers Communication

177

Nov 19 2012

25.

Rogers Communication

248

Jul 8 2010

accustomed to change, be prepared for your job description to change every year or so Q01. Other than that, I have no complaints with working at Rogers or the enviroment I work in Q08. Advice to Management: Keep up the good work. Pros: Great Co-workers Alot of fun managersQ10 great discounts on rogers products, really good benefits B Cons: hard to move up in the companyQ12, get pigeon'd holed and stuck. alot of people fighting over the same posisitions Q10. Hard to get a good shift even after 3.5 years not getting a very good shift, good if your single its hard if you have a family to balance both C, D Advice to Management: Need to give everyone a chance, even high performing agents dont get many oppertunitiesC, Q12 Pros: fairly stable company and they promote growth opportunity G, Q12.Lot of thing you learn about this company and it can be used in your professional life Q12. Cons: Very hard to get in and you do have to know your stuff and specially the selling and technological stuff Q09 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Good career developmentQ12 Great Benefits and Employee stock option plan B Opportunities to make a differenceQ03,
Q08

26.

Rogers Communication

217

Nov 22 2011

Experienced Senior Managers to lead the organizationQ09 Cons: Not many downsides at Rogers Wireless Not many opportunities to travel Can't work from home D Long hours often including weekends D Advice to Management: Look for opportunities outside of Canada Outsource call center jobs to reduce costs Q08 Improve IT process Q02 to reduce costs and improve delivery Pros: Lots of young people and good energy Q10 Leading company in its industry E Nice perks like employee discounts B Cons: A bit bureaucratic Q02 In the wrong team, your prospects for

79

27.

Rogers Communication

9

Apr 17 2015

28.

Rogers Communication

32

Dec 8 2014

advancement can be limitedQ12, Q09 Advice to Management: Watch for blockers among managers Q06 Pros: benefits are pretty good medical, vision, dental. pension is good. B stock and rrsp options. most managers let you telework D. there is an annual review and you can get a bonusQ04, Q11. Cons: internal employees not valuedQ05. we don't even get considered for open positions C, Q12. no room for advancement unless you work in TorontoQ12. senior leadership does not care about transparency or the impact reorgs have on employees Q05, Q07. constant reorgs every 2-3 years Advice to Management: be transparent, have empathy for what employees are going through, value internal employeesQ05, Q07 Pros: -access to trainingQ01 -diverse work portfolioQ03 -many internal opportunitiesQ12 -excellent benefits package and good comp B -great work/life balance D Cons: -communication between groups is not free flowing Q07 Advice to Management: N/A

80

Appendix G The following is the compilation of reviews from Scotia Bank employees on Glassdoor.com, with coding.
Company Name Scotia Bank Review # 82 Date of Review Nov 23 2013 Review Pros: You would never get fired G Cons: -Favoritism C -Hard to move up Q12 -They want you to give everything and expect nothing Q01, Q04 Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Great management supportQ06 and training programQ01 Cons: Paperwork heavy and long working hoursQ02,
D

1.

2.

Scotia Bank

93

Jul 2 2013

3.

Scotia Bank

76

Nov 28 2013

Advice to Management: N/A Pros: open, equity, and diverse and positive people
Q05, Q10

4.

Scotia Bank

128

Sep 23 2012

5.

Scotia Bank

25

Nov 9 2014

Cons: low pay A, pricing not very flexible Advice to Management: more listeningQ07, better system Q08 Pros: The company philosophy is greatQ08. Cons: Lack of support for new employees working in the Scotiabank branchesQ06, Q01. Most of new staff in the comercial area get lost and some just gave up of the jobQ01, Q09. Advice to Management: Develop a better support for new employeesQ01. Salary is not competitive A. Pros: Employees are all really nice, I love working with the staffQ10, , the customers are 99 percent friendly and love talking. Training is easyQ01, you just have to get used to everything, policies and company valuesQ08 are great, it's a good mix

81

6.

Scotia Bank

87

Sep 4 2013

7.

Scotia Bank

131

Aug 4 2012

8.

Scotia Bank

28

Nov 4 2014

9.

Scotia Bank

134

Aug 30 2012

between being professional and friendly Q10. Cons: No Cons to name, I really like working for this bank. Advice to Management: Maybe do some more simulations for weird things you don't usually get with customersQ12. Pros: FriendlyQ10 colleagues that are very helpfulQ06. Being a part of large exciting development projects Q03,, working in large teams. Cons: Management is okay Q09 but a lot of the projects are disorganized, with adhoc methods used more often than notQ01. Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Banking is funQ03, meeting clients face to face. Cons: Lot of paper work even in he age of technologyQ02. Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Good trainingQ01, the people are greatQ10 and helpfulQ06, flexible hours if you ask D. A lot of different projects happening so you get a good feel for the different work flows in the bank Q01, Q03 . Cons: Organizing between various departments can be a challenge especially if they are working on different things Q07. I was tasked with a few different projects and the time allocationQ02 was a challenge I had to face. Advice to Management: N/A Pros: Nothing positive about Scotia Capital! Cons: Where to start?!

82

10.

Scotia Bank

195

Jun 12 2008

Low pay A and the place is run by a bunch of asskisser Q09! Advice to Management: You guys should take an Pros: Honestly at this point length of service and proximimity to retirement date. In the past it was a great place. Because of the size and multiple locations it does offer diversity in job optionsQ12, E., F. Cons: In the past the Bank had employees now they have resourcesQ05. Overtime is a big issue, for the job level I now occupy some overtime is expectedQ02, D. The problem is due to the nature of the job you can hit stretches where you need to put in an additional 20 hours for many weeks in a row. No compensation is offeredQ04, A and it has been made very clear, that you had better not even askQ07. In other departments at the same level excessive overtime is compensated with time off or pay A, Q04. I have families and a personal lifes and when I am at work I am not the only wo is deprived D. Advice to Management: Keep staff informed of coming changes Q07. We are not naive, and know when re-structures or terminations are coming G. It is not fair to keep us around to protect the customers and shareholders and then when you have your plan you cut us loose. We also are customers and we have families and responsibilities D. If I am going to be displaced at a future date, give me the choice of staying or

83

11.

Scotia Bank

130

Aug 24 2012

12.

Scotia Bank

61

Apr 17 2014

13.

Scotia Bank

160

Jun 14 2011

14.

Scotia Bank

180

Mar 14 2010

leaving G. The current process does not respect or honour the individualQ05 Pros: Favorable opportunities for career developmentQ12. Global reach E. Fast paced and ChallengingQ03. You can feel you are part of something impactful and important in the lives of so many peopleQ08. Cons: Have to know where you want to go within the organization otherwise you will be stuck ib the same position foreverQ12. Advice to Management: Notice employees going above and beyond and commend and compensate accordinglyQ04, Q09. Pros: Good work life balance D. Environment is subjective but I'm on a good teamQ09. Cons: Not challengingQ03. Brain turns to mush Advice to Management: N/A Pros: - Flexible working hoursD (especially within my dept) - People are mostly friendlyQ10 - Bank fees are waived for employees (but you have to open an account) B - Secure job G Cons: - Outdated IT environmentQ02 - No opportunities to growQ12 - Favouritism for promotion C - Won't be fired even if the performance is poor G Advice to Management: To acknowledge when we have problems (please do not ignore) Q07. Pros: -Work-life balance
D

-Job stability G

84

-Good training groundQ01 -Good place to come if you are in middle of your career Q12 -Good place if you land in a looking forward dept. or one with resources Q02 (i.e. Scotia Capital, Corporate Offices) -Great place if you are a new Canadian (mainly if you come from Spanish speaking countries) Cons: -Bureaucracy Q02 -Technology is under parQ02 - cost control culture
Q08

15.

Scotia Bank

88

Aug 11 2013

-Siloed thinking Q07 -Not a great place if you are recently out of school or have fast track expectationsQ12 -Career development is pretty much up to you Q12 (network, network, network...) Advice to Management: Come downstairs. The world is changing at surprising speed and it seems you guys are lagging behindQ09. Invest in your peopleQ04, Q06; upgrade your technologyQ02. Maintain the work cultureQ08; fire bully managersQ05. Pros: I love the work I doQ03, I love the people I work withQ10 and their committment to their work is outstanding Q09 Cons: At the moment, i have nothing negative to share Advice to Management: we should do more to attract more retail clients and do better at marketing
Q08

16.

Scotia Bank

167

Apr 6 2011

Pros: It is a great bank, lots of knowledge, opportunities to study internal coursesQ12, good place to start a career, has decent HR policies as per

85

17.

Scotia Bank

73

Dec 9 2013

Canadian standards, overall proud to tell anyone I work here Q08. Cons: Management at the branch level is not highly educatedQ09, most have long tenures in Scotiabank, internal hires, so have oldfashioned management techniques, poor on IT skills. Sales staff is pushed too much, they know that easy to replace,so they do not respect sales staff as they shouldQ05, Q02, G. More focus on numbers and results than efforts Q04. Neopitism at the branches in hiring and promotions is evident C. Very little recognition for achievementsQ04. If you excel at 18/20 criteria, they will keep bugging you for the 2 not met, and never mention the 18 you reachedQ11. No union, so employees are taken advantage ofQ05. Advice to Management: Get some modern, young managers with higher education and up to date skills to manageQ09. Enhance the salaries A and rewards for sales staffQ04. The sales staff is the driving force for the company, but are paid the least A. The Applause points are too demotivating Q04, Q06. 200 points equals $10, and sometimes 25 points or 50 points are given for great acheivementsQ04. Pros: Customer focused bank with a global presence E, & highly qualified, diverse, knowledgeable and professional staffQ09. Many opportunities to work abroad, advance educationQ12. Strong corporate culture and

86

18.

Scotia Bank

30

Oct 29 2014

valuesQ08. Cons: Long hours and overtime required during peak periods may make maintaining a work-life balance challenging D. Compensation A and benefits B are competitive but not outstanding. Advice to Management: Continue to elicit feedback from staff regarding compensation A and benefits B, Q07. Corporate strategy needs to be more widely discussed and disseminated Q07, Q08. Pros: Steady Jobs in general G; Reward Royalty Working pace tends to be slow, for good or badQ04 People are very friendlyQ10, typical Canadian work place Cons: Strong ranking cultureQ08 even in front office trading department, so doesn't matter how well you work but how many years you served Q03, C Internal politics is really something that is bothering
Q02

Technology lagging competitorsQ02 compensation relatively low compared with peers A Advice to Management: People is what distinguishes business. Like Goldman Saches, they succeed not because their names but they consistently get best stuffs on their bench. If talent is not awarded for their performanceQ04,they will leave and only people who doesn't want to improve or who can't improve will stayQ09. Pros: - Resume, resume, resume E - Corporate discounts B - Friendly approachable

19.

Scotia Bank

162

Jun 1 2011

87

colleagues/managementQ10,
Q06

- Possible to move about within the company (exceptions apply-see below)Q12 Cons: - Underpaid...so underpaid A. Colleagues with same experience get 15% more C - CSC qualified - 1 year experience - No compensation for good work throughout the year...gotta wait till year endQ04 - If your numbers aren't that high, it can be the difference of $2000 bonus or $4000 Q04 - No benefit of receiving Scotia Applauses, can only brag to your colleaguesQ04 - REVIEW YOUR CONTRACT. Need manager approval before changing jobs Q12. 12 or 18 months. - Same old workQ03. Same problems as a year ago. Nothing seems to get much better - No one in Operations dept answers the phone. Gotta send emails, never receive response Q07 - Transfers take anywhere from 1 week to 4 months....No one knows...BUT HOW DO YOU TELL THE CLIENT!!!!! Q02 - Integration of iTRADE/SMDI is a nightmare. - Different reps give different advice, clients constantly complain Q01 - I received a 6 week training program. New reps receive 2 weeks (understaffed)Q01, C - Vacation and sick days are terrible B

88

20.

Scotia Bank

68

Jan 16 2014

- 2 weeks paid vacation. 5 sick days that DONT carry over. 3 Personal days that DONT carry over B. - Employee Share Ownership start only 1 year after full time, I want to own a part of my company Advice to Management: Too many to list. Just shut down all discount brokerage for 3 months and get everything back in order. Need better compensation A year through. Stop being so stingy with salary A, If im doing a good job, SHOW ME THE MONEY Q04. Pros: Low stress, nine to five, compensation is better than in most places A , get to work on whatever technology we wantQ03. Cons: Skillset not transferable to other jobsQ12: one gets too tied up in the infrastructure, takes too long to setup any software tools, etc.Q02 Advice to Management: N/A

89

References Anitha, J. (2013). Determinants of employee engagement and their impact on employee performance. International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, 63(3): 308-323. DOI 10.1108/IJPPM-01-2013008 Arrowsmith, J. & Parker, J. (2013). The meaning of `employee engagement' for the values and roles of the HRM function. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24(14): 2692-2712. DOI 10.1080/09585192.2013.763842 Attridge, M. (2009). Measuring and managing employee work engagement: A review of the research and business literature. Journal of Workplace Behavioral Health, 24(2009): 282-298. DOI 10.1080/15555240903188398 Asur, S. & Huberman, B. (2010). Predicting the future with social media. International Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent, (1). DOI 10.1109/WI-IAT.2010.63 Balain, S. & Sparrow, P. (2009). Engaged to perform: A new perspective on employee engagement. CPHR. Retrieved from http://www.lancaster.ac.uk/media/lancaster-university/contentassets/documents/lums/cphr/Employee_Engagement_.pdf Bersin, J. (2014). It's time to rethink the `employee engagement' issue. Forbes.com. Retreived from http://goo.gl/8HdBzz

90

Boxall, P. (2013). Mutuality in the management of human resources: Assessing the quality of alignment in employment relationships. Human Resource Management Journal, 23(1): 3-17. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/EzRmpO Buckingham, M. and Coffman, C. (1999), First, break all the rules: What the world's greatest managers do differently. New York, NY: Simon & Shuster. Chen, Y. et al. (2011). The Role of Marketing in Social Media: How Online Consumer Reviews Evolve. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 25(2): 8594. DOI 10.1016/j.intmar.2011.01.003 Crim, D. (2006). What engages employees the most, or the 10 C's of employee engagement. Ivey Business Journal. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/h0fprc Crusius, T. W. (1999). Kenneth Burke and the conversation after philosophy. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. Delbridge, R. & Keenoy, T. (2010). Beyond managerialism?. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 21(6): 799-817. DOI: 10.1080/09585191003729309 Employee Benefits (2007). Employee engagement: How to measure employee engagement. Centaur Communications Ltd. ISSN 13668722 Fuller, R. (2014). A primer on measuring employee engagement. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/F6QTrv

91

Gallup (2013). State of the American workplace: Employee engagement insights for U.S. business leaders. Gallup. Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/topic/employee_engagement.aspx Gibb, S. (2001). The state of human resource management: Evidence from employees' views of HRM systems and staff. Employee Relations, 23(4): 318-336. ISSN: 0142-5455 Griffin, E. (Ed.) (2003). A first look at communication theory (5th ed.). New York, NY: The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. ISBN 0-07-248392-X Gruman, J. A. & Saks, A. M. (2011). Performance management and employee engagement. Human Resource Management Review, 21(2011): 123136. DOI: 10.1016/j.hrmr.2010.09.004 Jenkins, S. & Delbridge, R. (2013). Context matters: Examining `soft' and `hard' approaches to employee engagement in two workplaces. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 24(14): 26702691. DOI 10.1080/09585192.2013.77078 Kahn, W. A. (1990). Psychological Conditions of Personal Engagement and Disengagement at Work. Academy of Management Journal, 33(4): 692724) Klikauer, T. (2013). Managerialism: A critique of an ideology. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9781137334275 Kugler, L. (2014). Keeping online reviews honest. Society. DOI 10.1145/2667111

92

Liu, Bing (2012). Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Toronto: Morgan & Claypool. DOI: 10.2200/S00416ED1V01Y201204HLT016 Lockwood, N. (2007). Leveraging employee engagement for competitive advantage. SHRM Research Quarterly. Retrieved from http://www.shrm.org/research/articles/articles/documents/07marr esearchquarterly.pdf Lovink, G. (2012). Networks without a cause: A critique of social media (1st ed.). London: Polity Press. Luthans, F. & Peterson, S.J. (2002). Employee engagement and manager selfefficacy: Implications for managerial effectiveness and development. Journal of Management Development, 21(5): 376-87. DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/02621710210426864 Macey, W. H. & Schneider, B. (2008). The meaning of employee engagement. Soceity for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 1(2008): 33-30. DOI 1754-9426/08 Marsh, J. (2006). A microcosm of the Canadian mosaic. Cities in Time. Retrieved from http://citiesintime.ca/toronto/story/market-micro/ Maslach, C. et al. (2001). Job burnout. Annual Review of Psychology, 52(2001): 397-422. DOI 10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.397 May, D. et al. (2004). The psychological conditions of meaningfulness, safety and availability and the engagement of the human spirit at work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 2004(77): 11-37. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/39tulb 93

Nagendra, A. (2014). Paradigm shift in HR practices on employee life cycle due to influence of social media. Elsevier B.V., 11(2014): 197-207. DOI 10.1016/S2212-5671(14)00188-9 People First International (2008). Pitting Gallup's Q12 against the People First Cultural Health Assessment. PeopleFirstInternational.com. Retrieved from http://www.thinkpeoplefirst.com/people-first-vs-gallup.php Purnawirawan, N. et. al (2012). Balance and sequence in online reviews: How perceived usefulness affects attitudes and intentions. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26(2012). 244-255. DOI 10.1016/j.intmar.2012.04.002 Quantcast (2015). Glassdoor network. quantcast.com. Retrieved from https://www.quantcast.com/glassdoor.com Quinn, K. (2015). Localizing employee engagement surveys: Cultural biases in responses. Business 2 Community. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/alZfBU Random.org (2015). True random number generator. Randomness and Integrity Services Ltd. Retrieved from https://www.random.org/ Rothbard, N. P. (2001). Enriching or depleting? The dynamics of engagement in work and family roles. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(2001): 655684. DOI 0001-8392/01/4604-0655/$300 Saks, A. M. (2006). Antecedents and consequences of employee engagement. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 21(7): 600-619. DOI 10.1108/02683940610690169 94

Stoneman, S. (2013). What is the best way of measuring employee engagement? Strategic HR Review, 12(6): 324-325. DOI 1108/SHR-05- 2013-0053 Sundaram, H. et al. (2012). Understanding community dynamics in online social networks. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine. DOI 10.1109/MSP.2011.943583 van Dijck, J. (2013). The culture of connectivity: A critical history of social media. Oxford Scholarship Online. Welch, M. (2011). The evolution of the employee engagement concept: Communication implications. Corporate Communications: An International Journal, 16(4): 328 ­ 346. DOI: 10.1108/13563281111186968 Wiedenkeller, K. (2009). Are you measuring engagement or only employee satisfaction? Film Journal International, 112(6). Retrieved from http://goo.gl/tfZDNS Williams, R. (2010). Employee engagement: Define it, measure it and put it to work in your organization. Workforce. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/Skq9lk Yin, D. et al. (2014). Anxious or angry? Effects of discrete emotions on the perceived helpfulness of online reviews. MIS Quarterly, 38(2). 539-560. Retrieved from http://goo.gl/jCo9T3 Yoo, K. & Gretzel, U. (2008). What motivates consumers to write online travel reviews?. Information Technology & Tourism, 10(4): 283-295. Retrieved from

95

http://ro.uow.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2589&context=commpap ers

96


