FREE TRADE-OFF: GLOBALIZATION'S IMPACT ON CANADIAN DRESS IDENTITY FROM 1985-2010 by Jenifer Forrest BAA, 2001, Ryerson University A Major Research Project presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the Program of Fashion

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2012 © Jenifer Forrest 2012

Author's Declaration I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this major research project. This is a true copy of the major research project, including any required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this major research project to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this major research project by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research. I understand that my major research project may be made electronically available to the public.

 

ii 

Abstract

Free Trade-Off: Globalization's Impact on Canadian Dress Identity From 1985-2010 Master of Arts 2012 Jenifer Forrest Fashion Masters, Ryerson University Key words: Canada, Canadian identity, Canadian culture, dress identity, trade liberalization, globalization, fashion.

This research explores Canadian dress identity from 1985-2010 by analyzing editorial fashion images from Flare magazine. The study includes images produced before the implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994 and after the lapse of all protectionist legislation in 2003. A content analysis using dichotomous attributes on a seven-point scale was used to code data. Images from Vogue magazine were also coded to provide a point of comparison. Analysis shows that Canadian fashion design is more conservative, practical, and subtly sexy than designs from other countries. It also incorporates some militaristic elements and a whimsical sense of humour. Canadian brand names are less recognized than international fashion brands and they are not as widely distributed within Canada. Significantly, the number of Canadian designs featured in Flare declined over the study period.

 

iii 

Acknowledgements Dr. Lu Ann Lafrenz Dr. Alison Matthews David Dr. Nancy Rudd Judy Gunhouse Kas Dunn

 

iv 

Table of Contents

Title Page .......................................................................................................................... i Author's Declaration ......................................................................................................... ii Abstract ............................................................................................................................iii Acknowledgments ........................................................................................................... iv Table of Contents ............................................................................................................. v List of Figures..................................................................................................................vii List of Appendices ........................................................................................................... xi

1. Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1 2. Literature Review ......................................................................................................... 6   2.1 Canadian Culture, Canadian Content...................................................6 2.2 The Marginalization of Fashion...........................................................8 2.3 Dress Identity and the Nation State....................................................10 2.3.1 British Roots.....................................................................10 2.3.2 Mass Culture.....................................................................11 2.3.3 Defining Britishness, Defining Canadianness............................13 2.3.4 A Northern Nation...............................................................14 2.3.5 A Warring Nation?...........................................................................16 2.3.6 A Funny Nation...................................................................18 2.4 Globalization................................................................................19 2.4.1 Agent or Chooser?...........................................................................19 2.4.2 Global Patterns of Production and Consumption.........................22

 

v 

3. Methodology............................................................................................................... 26 4. Results, Analysis, and Discussion ............................................................................. 29   4.1 Canadian Dress Identity Takes Shape.................................................29 4.2 Lost to Liberalization........................................................................32 4.3 More than Mounties and Maple Syrup.................................................34 5. Conclusion ................................................................................................................. 36

Appendices .................................................................................................................... 39   Appendix A- Figures..............................................................................39 Appendix B- Coding Sheet....................................................................64 Appendix C- Coding Guide....................................................................66 Appendix D- Coded Images...................................................................90 Works Cited.................................................................................................................. 103
 

 

vi 

List of Figures Figure 1. This table shows the Canadian designers featured in the Canadian Fashion Annual 1989. It indicates that only nine of the 36 designers are currently designing in Canada. Robertson, Donald, comp. Canadian Fashion Annual 1989. Scarborough, ON: Prentice-Hall Canada, 1988. Print. Figure 2. This graph shows that clothing imports increased from just over $2 billion to over $6 billion between 1991 and 2005. Graph from Wyman, Diana. "Trade Liberalization and the Canadian Clothing Market." Canadian Economic Observer. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Dec. 2006. n.pag. Web. 7 Nov. 2011. Figure 3. This graph shows production for the domestic market falling from over $5 billion to approximately $3 billion between 1992 and 2005. Graph from Wyman, Diana. "Trade Liberalization and the Canadian Clothing Market." Canadian Economic Observer. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Dec. 2006. n.pag. Web. 7 Nov. 2011. Figure 4. This graph shows the loss of approximately 34,000 jobs in the Canadian garment manufacturing industry between 2002-2005. Graph from Wyman, Diana. "Trade Liberalization and the Canadian Clothing Market." Canadian Economic Observer. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Dec. 2006. n.pag. Web. 7 Nov. 2011. Figure 5. A poster produced by the Canadian Department of Communication in 1981-82 titled Canada's Cultural Industries Are Big Business. Image from Canadian Department of Communication. Canada's Cultural Industries Are Big Business. 1981-82. Poster. Library and Archives Canada, Department of Canadian Heritage Collection, Ottawa, ON. Figure 6. Canada Picture No. 07, 2001 by Douglas Coupland. Image from the book titled Souvenir of Canada, 2002. 84-85. Print. Figure 7. Alexander McQueen dress made of ivory silk tulle with a bolero jacket of red silk velvet embroidered in gold bullion. From The Girl Who Lived in the Tree collection, Autumn/Winter 2008-2009. Image from the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition and book Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty. 2011. 116. Print. Figure 8. Labatt's Blue Light promotional T-shirt featuring a polar bear in sunglasses. The polar bear has been used to advertise this brand of beer since the 1980s. Image from "Super Logo!! Vintage Labatt Blue Beer Polar Bear Tshirt Large." Tshirt Time Machine. N.p.:n.d. Web. 23 Mar. 2011.

 

vii 

Figure 9. Canada Goose Expedition Parka for women. The company's official website describes this product thusly, "Canada Goose takes pride in creating authentic gear to help real people living in extreme conditions battle the elements. Originally developed for scientists working in research facilities at McMurdo station in Antarctica, the Canada Goose Expedition Parka allows its wearers to withstand the most frigid temperatures" (Canada Goose). Image from Canada Goose. "Arctic Program." Products. Canada Goose, n.d. Web. 21 Mar. 2012. Figure 10. Canada Goose parkas on the streets of Toronto in -1 degree Celsius (30.2 degrees Fahrenheit) weather on March 6, 2012. Image from Forrest, Jenifer. Canada Goose Parkas in Toronto. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Photograph. Figure 11. Royal Canadian Air Force Kit Bag by Red Canoe. Other icons used by Red Canoe include RCMP, Canadian Army, CBC/Radio Canada, and De Havilland Aviation. Image from Red Canoe. "RCAF Kit Bag." Canadian Aviation. Red Canoe, n.d. Web. 21 Mar. 2012. Figure 12. The silkscreened image of former Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau on a pair of ladies underwear is significant in a country with a long history of political humour. It is interesting that this design appeared 35 years after December 12, 1967 when he stated "There's no place for the state in the bedrooms of the nation" (Trudeau Interview). Smoking Lily by Trish Tacoma, 2002. Forrest, Jenifer. Smoking Lily Trudeau Panties. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2011. Photograph. Figure 13. Dsquared2 is based in Milan, however their Fall/Winter 2004 collection made obvious use of iconography and poked fun at Canadian stereotypes. This is seen in the mix of fur, plaid, and work wear. Images from Style.com. "Dsquared2 Fall 2004 RTW." Dsquared2. Condé Nast, 2012. Web. 21 Mar. 2012. Figure 14. This chart illustrates that Canadian designed garments featured in Flare have been coded as Humourous 84.6% of the time. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 15. This chart illustrates that 46.2% of Canadian designed garments featured in Flare have been coded as being Conservative as compared to 23.1% of other designs featured in Flare and 23.0% of designs featured in Vogue. It should be noted that the occurrence of Avant Garde designs was more consistent across the three categories. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Conservative/Avant Garde Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 16. Practicality was coded in 92.2% of Canadian designed garments and Impracticality was coded in only 7.7% of Canadian designed garments. By comparison, 53.8% of the garments in Vogue were coded as Practical and 26.9% were coded as Impractical. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Practical/Impractical Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

viii 

Figure 17. Only 7.7% of Canadian designed garments were coded as overtly Sexy compared with 46.2% of other designs in Flare and 46.1% of the designs in Vogue. However, 61.5% of Canadian designed garments were coded as Subtly Sexy which was substantially higher than the other designs in Flare and Vogue. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Sexy/Plain Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 18. Although the majority of Canadian designs do not possess Militaristic characteristics, they are more Militaristic than other designs in Flare and Vogue. The most significant finding is that 61.6% of the designs featured in Vogue were coded as Peaceful. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Militaristic/Peaceful Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 19. These camouflage pants by Izzy Camilleri incorporate the seemingly disparate characteristics of militarism and humour in one garment. Image from "At Ease." Flare Mar. 2001: 126. Print. Figure 20. This illustrates the disproportionate number of Toronto designers featured in the images coded from Flare magazine. Forrest, Jenifer. Coded Designers Featured in Flare 1985-2010. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 21. This chart illustrates a decline in the number of Canadian fashions featured in the coded Flare magazine editorials. Note that NAFTA legislation took effect in 1994 and all trade restrictions on clothing were eliminated for World Trade Organization member countries by 2003. Forrest, Jenifer. Canadian Fashions Featured in Flare. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 22. This chart illustrates a decline in the number of American fashions featured in the coded Vogue magazine editorials. Note that NAFTA legislation took effect in 1994 and all trade restrictions on clothing were eliminated for World Trade Organization member countries by 2003. Forrest, Jenifer. American Fashions Featured in Vogue. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 23. This chart illustrates that international brand names are more recognized than those of Canadian fashion brands. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Brand Name Recognition. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 24. Significantly, other designers featured in Flare are more widely available than Canadian designers are. Canadian fashions are less widely available at the end of the period than at the beginning. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Availability. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 25. This illustrates the use of Canadian stereotypes was not significant. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Canadian Stereotypes in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

ix 

Figure 26. This illustrates the use of American stereotypes was not significant. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for American Stereotypes in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 27. Humourous styling was significant in both Flare and Vogue. Neutral styling was also used for Canadian designs in Flare, but serious styling was not. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 28. Neutral environments were used more frequently for Canadian designs in Flare than warm or frigid environments. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Warm Environment/Frigid Environment in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 29. This chart indicates that Flare uses studio shoots more often than Vogue, though not to a significant degree. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Studio Shoot/Location Shoot. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. Figure 30. Canadian designs in Flare are not photographed in natural environments, but in urban locations. While non-Canadian designs in Flare are frequently photographed in natural locations. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Natural Location/Urban Location. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

x 

List of Appendices Appendix A. Figures Appendix B. Coding Sheet Appendix C. Coding Guide Appendix D. Coded Images

 

xi 

1. Introduction The fashion design and apparel production sector used to be a thriving part of Canada's economy, producing clothing for both domestic consumption and export. As recently as the year 2000 Canadian production was $7.9 billion, but the industry has been in decline since 2001 and is losing market share and jobs to foreign competitors (Wyman, "Trade", Bloskie). Since 1994, various international trade agreements have put pressure on the industry's ability to compete with imports from producers in countries with lower wage labour. Specifically, the substantial reduction of trade restrictions ushered in by the World Trade Organization's Agreement on Textiles and Clothing, which eliminated import quotas on countries such as Bangladesh, China, and India seems to be a factor in this recent decline (Wyman, "Trade"). Up until the 1960s, Canadians wore Canadian designed and produced apparel. Prior to trade liberalization, boutiques, retail chains, department stores, and mail order catalogues sold Canadian designed and produced apparel to consumers across the country. Most of these goods were designed by Canadian educated fashion professionals and produced by immigrant labour in the garment districts of Vancouver, Winnipeg, Toronto, and Montreal (see fig. 1). Well into the 1980s, most Canadians had articles of clothing in their closets that were manufactured domestically, but by the mid 2000s foreign imports had increased and consumption of domestically produced garments had dramatically decreased (Wyman, "Stretching"). Between 1991 and 2005 clothing imports increased from just over $2 billion to over $6 billion (see fig. 2) (Bloskie) and between 1992 and 2005, production for the domestic market had fallen from over $5 billion to approximately $3 billion (see fig. 3) (Wyman, "Stretching"). This means that

 

1 

employment in the garment-manufacturing sector has rapidly decreased (see fig. 4) and a mass-market Canadian interpretation of fashion is no longer as widely available as it once was. The challenges facing the Canadian garment industry are not simply a matter of academic pursuit for me as I have experienced some of the negative side effects of trade liberalization in my own career. Since 1997, I have been employed in the garment sector and during that time, I have witnessed manufacturers in Toronto's garment district close their doors or relocate to suburban areas with reduced workforces. I, along with many others, have had difficulty sourcing materials and supplies because small-tomedium sized local suppliers have gone out of business, leaving a gap in the marketplace that is impractically filled with large, off-shore vendors. I have seen retail locations previously held by local independent businesses become flagship stores for multinational retailers and perhaps more significantly, I have seen that Canadian consumers are becoming progressively more price resistant, more brand aware, and are choosing imported products that satisfy these needs over goods produced domestically. With increased free trade in the 1990s and early 2000s, the clothing choices available to the average Canadian have become identical to the choices available to consumers in most developed countries due to the presence of multinational clothing retailer/manufacturers such as the Gap, H&M, and Zara, who design their products in America, Sweden, and Spain respectively. Many of these retailers offer products that are less expensive than those offered by local producers and as a result, they are taking over the Canadian retail landscape. In fact, the average price paid for a garment in

 

2 

Canada has dropped 5.8% from 2001 to 2005 as a result of imported goods (Wyman, "Trade"). If we understand that individuals create their dress identity from the fashion choices available to them, it can be said that the average Canadian's dress identity has been altered by globalized patterns of production and consumption and may no longer be distinct. Many of these same forces have dramatically changed representations of fashion in Canadian magazines, which can arguably have an impact on clothing consumption and ultimately national dress identity. In the mid-1980s, Canadian designs were heavily featured in domestic fashion magazines; both in editorial photo shoots and advertising. By 2010, most advertisers were multinational corporations that originated outside of Canada and fewer Canadian designers were featured in editorial photo spreads. While it is true that the Canadian government has offered some protection to Canadian magazine publishers by way of subsidies (Vipond 147) and that Canadian Content regulations specify Canadians must be employed in the production of magazine images, there are no regulations that specify Canadian designs are to be represented in these images (Canada Magazine Fund 3-4). It is often thought that Canadian dress identity is indiscernible from American dress identity because fashion magazines, costume historians, and the general public have not recognized the minor differences between them (Palmer 3-4). I suggest that Canadians dressed differently than their American counterparts prior to the implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994 because domestic designers were creating uniquely Canadian fashions (see fig.1). They were designing garments under their own name or for private label manufacturers

 

3 

that would be consumed at shopping malls, department stores, independent boutiques, or through mail order catalogues by average Canadians from every corner of the country. These designers created a dress identity that considered the practicalities of winter weather with a shared sense of humour that is present in other areas of Canadian culture, such as fine art, film, music, literature, and television (Grace 10, Rasporich 51). While fashion journalists have often mentioned these traits, they have not identified them as being elements of a Canadian dress identity. Consequently, Canadian designers are not known for pioneering a Canadian look; rather they are known for producing high-quality, durable, and wearable clothing that does not take itself too seriously. Although this may be seen as a positive reputation for Canadian manufacturers, it shifts the focus from aesthetics to function and limits the cultural significance. Sadly, before Canadian fashion culture could gain a reputation for its unique offering (and before fashion could be acknowledged as part of Canadian culture), vast changes as a consequence of trade liberalization have left Canadian designers out in the cold. As globalization homogenizes choice in many aspects of our lives, it seems that now is the time to investigate what this may mean for Canadian dress identity. The opportunity to understand this issue will become more challenging with the passage of time because fewer artifacts from this period will remain. In this research, I argue that a decline in the domestic design and production of garments and an increase in the consumption of foreign designed and produced fashions have altered the way Canadians dress. This change can be seen in how Canadian dress identity is represented in print media; specifically, editorial photo spreads in Flare magazine,

 

4 

which had national distribution during the study period 1985-2010. For the Canadian designers and manufacturers who continue to produce clothing this study will shed light on the challenges they face and the importance of their work in differentiating Canadian fashion from other expressions of dress. Conclusions from this study may be important to those who design, produce, or market Canadian fashions.

 

5 

2. Literature Review 2.1. Canadian Culture, Canadian Content Well into the twentieth century, high culture and produced commodities such as fashion were separate phenomenon with distinct values and meanings. Cultural objects and institutions were not considered a part of the day-to-day commerce of nations, but rather they were held in trust by the privileged classes or by the government for those from more humble backgrounds. Indeed, early proponents of Canadian arts and culture, such as Vincent Massey, Arthur Surveyor, Norman A. M. MacKenzie, Georges-Henri Lévesque, and Hilda Neatby who conducted the Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts, Letters, & Sciences of 1951, encouraged poets, painters, and actors to develop and perform work, but felt strongly that popular culture and material culture were lower, corrupting forms of expression to be avoided (Massey, Royal 5, 272, 295-297, 380-382 ,Edwardson 30-31). The advent of mass media, first in the form of publishing, then radio, film, and eventually television complicated this issue by making popular culture more accessible than high culture. Not only was it more accessible, but it was more profitable as mass media became the much-needed link between massproduction and mass-consumption in the form of advertising. Although the same can be said for many other industrialized countries, Canada's position was unique as much of the so-called corrupting influence came from across the border in the United States. The prospect of a new nation like Canada being able to conceive of an identity apart from commercial interests became increasingly dim with the passing decades and government intervention in cultural concerns became an inevitable side-effect.

 

6 

In the 1930s, government intervention was meant to stem the tide of American periodicals across the border through tariffs and quotas (Edwardson 41-49). These magazines and pulp-fiction novels were objectionable not only for their content, which was very different from that being produced within Canada at the same time, but also because their popularity was creating competition for domestic publishers. What was once an issue of cultural taste started to become an issue of economic profitability (Vipond 35-36). Governments also came to see the important role that media would play in influencing public opinion in political matters and began to take an interest in shaping this mechanism of propaganda. The government created the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) in 1932, the National Film Board (NFB) in 1939, and eventually the Canada Council for the Arts in 1957. These agencies were tasked with funding uniquely Canadian projects, however with increasing amounts of tax dollars being used to fund arts and culture, justification moved beyond buoying a Canadian identity that could compete with the dominant American culture and turned to cultural industries that created tax revenue and employed Canadians. Figure 5 is a poster produced by the Canadian Department of Communication in 1981-82, which touts the benefits of the cultural industries, not so much for how they express Canadian identity but for how they contribute to the nation's economy. In other words, culture was a wise investment for the Canadian taxpayer. As of 2012 Canadian Heritage, the current government agency charged with the task of fostering Canadian culture, supports book publishing; magazine and newspaper publishing; radio, television, and digital media broadcasting; film and video production; and music production. They are also responsible for the performing arts and cultural spaces such as festivals, museums, and

 

7 

galleries (Canadian Heritage). Fashion, while widely considered a part of culture by theorists such as Wilson (1-15), Veblen (111-124), Simmel (130-155), and Lipovetsky (3-12), is noticeably absent from this list. 2.2. The Marginalization of Fashion Interestingly, the omission of fashion from Canadian Heritage protection and funding is not mentioned in the literature, so the reasons for it are unclear. However, an underlying gender bias may explain a lack of support for the industry both presently and historically, because as Elizabeth Wilson asserts, "fashion has been associated with all that is feminine" (48). According to Lou Taylor, the marginalization of fashion has also been widespread in academia where the subject is often ignored, or in some cases denigrated for its perceived associations with femininity (1-2). These two feminist theories are relevant to the Canadian context because as cultural policy was being framed in the twentieth century, the pursuit of the "Canadianization" of academic research was also underway. Many advocates of Canadian Studies shared a common philosophy with those who supported the cause of Canadian culture in political circles (Edwardson 183-184). It is plausible that these concomitant ideologies that canonized the list of culture industries worthy of government support excluded fashion because of its feminine associations. Canadian studies programs omitted fashion from their curriculum, and this no doubt had an influence on the future discourse that was to surround the politics of Canadian culture. Indeed, the belittling of the study of fashion persists in Canada as Alexandra Palmer indicates in Fashion: A Canadian Perspective when she writes, "[fashion] is an arena that is traditionally equated with frivolous feminine trifles" (Palmer 8).

 

8 

Another possible reason for the exclusion of the fashion industry from Canadian Heritage protection and funding may be rooted in the Anglo-Canadian origins of the Canadian culture movement, which emphasized the superiority of cultural norms that came from Canada's British heritage (Massey, On Being 5, 15-27, 99-112). Contrary to this ideology, the twentieth century garment industry of Canada was dominated by immigrant entrepreneurs and labourers who created communities that preserved their native culture. In "Jewish Immigrants and the Garment Industry of Toronto, 1901-1931: A Study of Ethnic and Class Relations", Daniel Hiebert refers to this as an "ethnic enclave economy" (243) and states that the garment industry of Toronto was comprised of many Jewish-run businesses that employed recent Jewish immigrants to the city between 1910-1931 (243, 266). This created an economically interdependent community that was geographically concentrated in one area of the city (Hiebert, "Jewish Immigrants" 267). Religion, customs, and cultural norms could be preserved in this community and assimilation with the larger Anglo-Canadian culture was not necessary for economic and social success. This pattern was repeated with new waves of immigrants and Toronto's garment industry has been dominated at different times by Jewish, Italian (Steedman, Angels 21), Vietnamese, and Chinese entrepreneurs and workers (Hiebert, "Integrating Production" 212). This phenomenon is not unique to Toronto and has been documented in other garment producing cities such as Montreal (Hiebert, "Integrating Production" 207), New York (Green 170, Zhou 113), and Paris (Green 170). In the context of Montreal, the perceived superiority of Anglo culture may have played an even greater role in diminishing the importance of fashion to Canadian culture as the majority of garment workers were Francophone (Steedman, Angels 21-

 

9 

22). It is likely that multiple prejudices based on gender and ethnicity have played a role in the exclusion of fashion from Canada's official list of cultural industries. 2.3. Dress Identity and the Nation State 2.3.1. British Roots Canada's present day national identity is tied to its colonial past by necessity because Canada is still a part of the British Commonwealth. As we have already seen, Anglo-Canadian culture was central to those who desired to define Canadianness. Although this myopic perspective excluded the diverse voices that were part of Canada from its infancy, such as First Nations and Francophone points of view, a deeper exploration of the relationship between British culture and Canadian culture is needed. In The Englishness of English Dress, Christopher Breward, Becky Conekin, and Caroline Cox use Nikolaus Pevsner's book The Englishness of English Art as a point of reference for their exploration of British identity as revealed through dress. Benedict Anderson's theory of Imagined Communities surfaces several times in this book and is relevant to any discussion of nationalism. Of the nation state, he says "It is imagined because the members of even the smallest nation will never know most of their fellowmembers, meet them, or even hear of them, yet in the minds of each lives the image of their communion" (Anderson 6). To Anderson, the novel plays an important role in the "imagining" of nations as it allows the author to write a narrative that refers to "calendrical time and a familiar landscape" (32) that readers in the same place and time can relate to or "imagine" (25-32). He asserts that this similar construction of place and time is also present in newspapers and therefore, he credits mass-produced print media as being the key to the imagined community, not only for its content and structure but

 

10 

because these commodities can be read by many individuals simultaneously, thus influencing multitudes with identical narratives (Anderson 32-36). In Anderson's theory, mechanisms of capitalism are integral to the distribution of these commodities and are responsible for increased notions of nationalism that began in the Enlightenment and continued into the twentieth century (38-46). If print media can have this effect, cannot other communicative objects? Carolyn Steedman poses this question in "Englishness, Clothes and Little Things" when she asks, "if the mass-produced commodity fiction that we now call the novel could play a part in bringing into being national identity and national consciousness, why do we not attribute the same effects to drinking out of a Staffordshire teacup, nor to ... accessories and items of clothing...?" (30). In her essay "English-style Photography", Penny Martin echoes this sentiment in reference to print images by stating, "the ability to recognize and repeat the signs of national culture is fundamental to the process of identification and participation in an imagined community" (184). 2.3.2. Mass Culture Certainly, the Royal Commission's definition of Canadian culture did not include popular culture such as novels and newspapers nor the mass-produced trappings of modern life in the way of teacups and sweaters. However, most Canadians include mass media and material objects in their characterization of Canadian identity. Perhaps in the absence of grand architecture and monuments that had universal meaning for all Canadians, furniture, automobiles, clothing, movies, and magazines eventually came to be seen as the constituent components of modern Canadian culture. In fact, some of these objects, such as hockey sticks and maple syrup, have come to symbolize

 

11 

Canadianness and have been infused with meaning unrelated to their use value. Douglas Coupland recognizes this link between material objects, culture, and national identity in his book of photo essays called Souvenir of Canada where collections of stereotypical Canadian goods are arranged in vignettes accompanied by text (see fig. 6). This phenomenon, as it relates to nations in general, is acknowledged by scholars in the field of cultural studies such as Stuart Hall, who says: what the nation `means' is an on-going project, it is under constant reconstruction. We come to know its meaning partly through its objects and artefacts which have been made to stand for and symbolize its essential values. Its meaning is constructed within not above or outside representation. It is through identifying with these representations that we come to be its `subjects'by `subjecting' ourselves to its dominant meanings. (5) This re-visioning of what constitutes culture brings together traditional media and everyday objects. Marshall McLuhan's theory that "the medium is the message" (7-21) from his influential book Understanding Media: the Extensions of Man, informed this perspective in the social theories that followed. Marita Sturken and Lisa Cartwright summarize McLuhan when they write, "a medium is any extension of ourselves through a technological form. Media are not just those technologies that convey information. They include cars, trains, lightbulbs, and even vocal and gestured or signed speech" (229). Given that clothing is widely thought to be communicative by theorists such as Barthes (25-32), Veblen (111-124), Barnard (1-39) and Davis (148-157), it surely can be included as part of the "media" that shapes our culture (McLuhan 119-122). As Wilson states:

 

12 

Clothes are among the most fraught objects in the material world of things, since they are so closely involved with the human body and the human life cycle. They are objects, but they are also images. They communicate more subtly than most objects and commodities, precisely because of that intimate relationship to our bodies and our selves, so that we speak (however loosely) of both a `language' and a `psychology' of dress. (vii) Understanding the cultural significance of fashion objects is difficult, however neglecting the study of fashion is ignoring the most profound relationship that exists between people and communicative mass-produced objects. 2.3.3. Defining Britishness, Defining Canadianness The struggle for national dress identity is not unique to Canada. British designers have also been frustrated by a lack of recognition for local design and the preference of many consumers for French fashion. In his autobiography Norman Hartnell recounts, "I suffered from the unforgivable disadvantage of being English in England" (Hartnell 14). The lack of respect that fashion received as an art, a form of media, and as an industry was highlighted by Alison Settle in 1945 at a time when French fashion dominance was vulnerable and people in both Britain and the United States desired to assume supremacy. She writes: Success cannot come to English fashions, so long as men of the country treat fashion as being essentially frivolous and even laughable...Only when fashion trends, colours and the whole philosophy of clothes is talked about- as films, pictures or music are discussed- can the textile trades of Britain regain their merited superiority in the eyes of the world. (qtd. in de la Haye 151)

 

13 

However, despite these statements to the contrary, British dress has a recognized identity, although it seems to be more clearly defined outside of Britain than within it. Brands such as Mulberry, Aquascutum, and Burberry are popular in North America and Asia (Goodrum 18) and seem to be trading on their historic associations with the colonial power of the British Empire and the hierarchical class structure of traditional England. In other words, these companies are perpetuating an iconic notion of Britain to those distanced with the realities of being British. This version of Britishness ignores the irreverence and eccentricity of street style that has long been a hallmark of British culture and dress (Goodrum 17-18). Indeed, punk style is just as British as a Liberty print and designers such as Vivienne Westwood and Alexander McQueen have successfully incorporated British historicism with modern cynicism and non-conformism (see fig. 7). This duality was summed up by Martin when she posits, "Whereas the culture of late capitalism makes it necessary for fashion constantly to attach itself to new discourses in order to inspire identification, Englishness relies upon its apparent continuity with its past for meaning" (186). 2.3.4. A Northern Nation Breward, Conekin, and Cox's use of Pevsner as a starting point leads to an examination of On the Art of Being Canadian by Sherrill Grace, which gives insight into Canadian national identity as expressed in fine art. She identifies three subjects from which Canadian art has drawn much of its inspiration; the North, War, and Iconic Figures. The presence, or absence, of these themes in fashion may shed light on the relationship between art, fashion, and national identity. Grace states, "that people tend to understand themselves, not only in relation to the actual world around them, but also

 

14 

(and perhaps more profoundly) through the artfully constructed world of an imagined national iconography" (16). It should also be considered that much of the art discussed in Grace's book was likely made possible through government funding through the Canada Council for the Arts, Canadian Heritage, the National Film Board, and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Cognizant of the central role that Canada's most famous landscape painters, the Group of Seven, have played in definitions of Canadianness, Grace explains how this national fascination has led to an understanding of Canada as a "Northern" country (517). While many parts of Canada experience long, cold winters, the vast majority of Canadians will never know the arctic conditions and the vulnerability that isolation in any part of the Canadian wilderness would bring. Yet, artists, advertisers, and fashion designers tap into this facet of Canadian identity as though it were a shared experience or right of passage. We see this in countless beer promotions (see fig. 8) and in the multitudes of Torontonians suited up in Canada Goose parkas engineered for arctic temperatures (Canada Goose) on winter days when the thermometer reads a mere -1 degree Celsius (30.2 degrees Fahrenheit) (see fig. 9,10). Few can lay claim to an authentic Northern experience and work such as Zacharias Kunuk's film Atanarjuat (The Fast Runner) highlights the vast difference between an authentic connection to the North and a fictitious one. Thus, according to Anderson's theory, Canada's imagined community is part of a cold and foreboding environment that the majority of the Canadian population, which huddles around the 49th parallel, will never experience in reality.

 

15 

2.3.5. A Warring Nation? Similarly, Canada's military history is a part of this same imagined community even though Canada is thought to have come of age during the First World War (Grace 11, Vipond 34). While many Canadians are aware of their country's military history and recognize the names of famous battlefronts like Vimy and Ypres, few have a genuine connection to these places and the realities of war. Grace asserts that since the 1970s, Canada's military history has been a growing subject of interest for writers, curators, and filmmakers (58-59). She cites novels such as Michael Ondaatje's The English Patient, Jane Urquhart's The Stone Carvers, and Margaret Atwood's The Blind Assassin as examples. She also highlights the works of official war artists that were largely unseen until the touring exhibition Canvas of War brought them to the public's attention between 2000-2004 (Grace 11). Also of note are films like The Valour and the Horror and Passchendale, which depict the gritty actuality of conflict. Grace theorizes that these artists' renewed interest in war goes beyond their desire to tell the story of Canada. In fact, they are warning that "we are susceptible to the rhetoric of patriotism, to the propaganda of fear, and to the bigoted repression of dissent, but that we are also deeply suspicious of individualistic heroics, macho bravado, and unself-critical pride" (Grace 100). Although Grace is writing in 2009, this cautionary and self-effacing understanding of national identity may be seen during the war years in the way women were expected to dress. Chatelaine described Canadians as "a warring people away from the war" and women were instructed to expect "simple and quiet clothes, ... for the clothes women wear are, and have been for generations, the barometer of the time" (qtd. in Turnbull

 

16 

Caton 250). Uniforms for women were seen as important not only for their functionality, but for what their aesthetics did socially: The uniform levels social barriers. This is important in a group embracing all types of racial, religious and economic backgrounds. The uniform is practical. The uniform sets the standard of grooming. The uniform is the visible reminder of the wearer's responsibility to her God, and her King. (Gibb 177) With the exception of the mention of "God" and "her King", this statement is in keeping with a contemporary understanding of what it means to be Canadian. The emphasis on social cohesion and acceptance of diversity from an article written in 1941 indicates that these values were already a part of the imagined community of Canada at that time. Virtues that may still exist in Canadian dress identity, such as practicality, good grooming, and uniformity are also present in this description. While uniformity played a role in creating cohesion at home, it may have further significance for national identity. The birth of a nation as a result of war is explored in Linda Colley's Britons: Forging the Nation 1707-1837 where she posits that by emphasizing difference with the enemy and uniformity amongst allies, an "Other" is created (1-9, 376-377). War serves to "fashion" national identity (Steedman, "Englishness" 31) by creating similarities through uniformity in dress, conduct, and shared beliefs and at the same time vilifying those traits in other groups of people. Colley's theory lends support to Grace's speculation that Canadian artists' fascination with war is not to glorify it, but to emphasize that Canada, like every other country, is indeed "susceptible to the rhetoric of patriotism" (Grace 100).

 

17 

2.3.6. A Funny Nation Grace also explores the idea that iconic figures play a role in the creation of art and singles out the famous Canadians to whom artists have paid homage. While there are few examples of Canadian fashions inspired by historical or cultural figures, icons in the semiotic sense of the word seem to play a role. These icons serve as signs (Peirce 1: 524; Fisch xlii) of Candianess and are often used to emphasize a stereotypical understanding of Canada. Mounties, `hosers', hockey players, military uniforms, and the occasional politician have all made appearances in contemporary Canadian fashion. While some of these icons are used in all seriousness, such as Red Canoe's Royal Canadian Air Force Kit Bag (see fig. 11), most are approached with a tongue-in-cheek sense of humour. Grace says, "there is a mixture of romance and irony, an undercurrent of self-conscious comic nostalgia...that [she] often detect[s], to varying degrees, in many examples of Canadian art" (Grace 10). While Beverly Rasporich suggests humour is a hallmark of Canadian culture that has developed from our complex relationship with Britain and the United States, Canadians use humour to avoid conflict while asserting our sovereignty (51-63). Many of the humourous icons used in fashion are intended for a Canadian audience, such as Smoking Lily's Trudeau panties (see fig. 12), however design duo Dean and Dan Caten of Milan-based Dsquared2 use humour to play-up their Canadian roots on an international stage (see fig. 13). The Canadian perception of a shared sense of humour seems to be of growing importance for matters of national identity. Something as intangible as a sense of humour reinforces Anderson's theory of an imagined community, but at the same time, the popularity of our comedic media suggests this is more than a figment of our collective imaginations. However, unlike

 

18 

comedic expressions of Canadian identity on television and in print media, funny fashions do not benefit from government support or protection. 2.4. Globalization It seems Canadians share more than a sense of humour in the age of trade liberalization. The mass-produced wardrobe staples of the last century, such as jeans, tshirts, sneakers, and polo shirts, stock shopping malls (and closets) from coast to coast. It is clear that changes in the production of fashion have altered consumption patterns not just in Canada, but worldwide. People on every continent have access to massproduced fashion whether it is purchased from H&M in Montreal or whether it is from a secondhand clothing market in Zambia (Tranberg Hansen, "Youth" 115). In both of these locales, creativity remains in how consumers create identities from the available choices, leading many scholars to maintain that this demonstrates a democratization of fashion (Tranberg Hansen 125, Maynard 40, Eicher and Sumberg 303-305). While there is no doubt that the ability to interpret fashion and create meaningful dress identities is a continuing phenomenon, the fact remains that most clothing in the global market is designed in Europe and the United States by a select few who create fashions for multinational corporations that have a global reach. 2.4.1. Agent or Chooser? The designers and other decision makers who work for global fashion companies have a lot of power as their decisions about production methods, styles, fabrics and colours can change how people on other continents pay their employees, govern their people, grow their crops, and dress their bodies. Arjun Appadurai asserts that while the power of global corporations over that of local forces is undeniable, a fetishism of

 

19 

production can obfuscate. "The locality...becomes a fetish that disguises the globally dispersed forces that actually drive the production process" (42), meaning that whether content or disillusioned with the current state of globalized production, consumers focus on labels such as `Made in China' rather than `Made by Wal-Mart'. Since the 1970s, nation states such as America and Britain, and trade institutions such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), have been associated (and perhaps implicated) with the changes in global production patterns. However, large corporations often wield more power than governments and can be somewhat invisible forces in the production marketplace. Palatial flagship retail stores can seem divorced from the sub-contracted offshore production facilities that produce the goods sold within them (Skoggard 66-69). This separation not only exists in the minds of consumers, but also in the legalities of globalized free trade, as most global fashion brands do not own the factories that produce their goods (Bonacich et al., "Global Economy" 6-7). This is especially true in developing economies where the promise of economic development in the short-term can cause governments to enter into arrangements that jeopardize vulnerable citizens in the long-term (Bonacich et al., "Global Economy" 5). While small decisions about the fashions we purchase are common to all people engaged in the global economy, the big decisions are still in the hands of an elite group of people in the developed world, mostly in Europe and the USA. Consumers' small decisions are often spurred by persuasive advertising campaigns that seem to empower and bring democracy to the marketplace; however, Appadurai calls this the fetishism of the consumer where the illusion of agency is propagated by sophisticated marketing imagery. In reality, "These images of agency are increasingly distortions of a world of

 

20 

merchandising so subtle that the consumer is consistently helped to believe that he or she is an actor, when in fact he or she is at best a chooser" (42). Marketers effectively tie capitalist consumption with equality and democracy, however Naomi Klein states that "market-driven globalization doesn't want diversity; quite the opposite. Its enemies are national habits, local brands and distinctive regional tastes" (129). Corporate resistance to regional taste is not limited by the terms of binary opposition between East and West or advanced and developing economies. Relationships between mythologized global dress identities and local dress identities are far more complex than these labels suggest. Countries such as Canada or those within the European Union are not immune from the corporate forces that shape the global fashion ideal. When editions of international magazines such as Vogue and Marie Claire entered the Greek market, their influence on national identity was twofold. Not only did Greek magazines that had previously thrived with their unique take on fashion crumble with the new competition, recent entrants in the marketplace had a desire to mould the former "unfashionable" citizen with mainstream European fashion. In Michael Skafidas' article "Fabricating Greekness" he states, "In the beginning, Greek editions of international magazines as a rule avoided featuring Greek models or local brands on their covers and in editorials" (160). In his discussion with a former editor of Marie Claire he learned, "The French (publishers) would object to it on the grounds that the Greek market was not ripe to impose its own modern Western symbols and brands. It took a while to infuse the Greek society with the mentality of the international fashion culture" (160). Clearly, there are those in the fashion system who wish to maintain hierarchies that reinforce the power of decision makers located in traditional fashion

 

21 

cities such as Paris. The attitude of this editor resembles that of a tyrannical despot rather than that of a democratic leader and emphasizes the importance of Canadian laws that protect the domestic publishing industry. 2.4.2. Global Patterns of Production and Consumption When traditional textile and clothing production is forced to compete with that of globalized fashion the negative impact is evident (Bonacich et al. "National Development" 367). In countries such as Indonesia and Kenya, the current practice of wearing Western style garments has been related to the use of clothing as an indication of rank during colonial rule (Molnar 45, Eicher and Sumberg 303). Western dress is being adopted by more men than women and connotes modernism, progress, and development in some communities (Molnar 55). As more consumers in developing economies adopt forms of dress that are not produced locally, domestic textile makers, designers, cutters, and sewers face a shrinking demand for their skills. Although these workers may find employment in the global apparatus of fashion production for export, the opportunity to develop fashions for one's own community diminishes. This absence means that dress identity is no longer constructed from within an ethnic group or nation, but from the outside. In globalization's current form, decision makers in the developed world now have more influence on dress identity in the developing world than ever before. While adjusting second-hand Western styles to suit local purposes is possible, the positive economic impact of this activity is far less than the domestic manufacture of textiles and garments. Fewer opportunities for creative individuals to design fashions for their own communities is not the only downside to the production of export goods. Export

 

22 

Processing Zones, which are areas set up by governments in developing countries that attract foreign investment by making production more efficient may "offer tax breaks, lax regulations and the services of [militaries] willing and able to crush labor unrest" (Klein 206). "Companies just ship in the pieces of cloth ... -free of import tax- and the cheap, non-union workforce assembles it for them. Then the finished garments ... are shipped out, with no export tax" (Klein 207). Although factories in these zones offer wage labour to underemployed communities, the long-term benefits are questionable. As governments compete to attract manufacturers to their zone, they extend tax breaks and freeze wages sometimes to the point where communities lose ground in their quest for development (Klein 208). While globalization has certainly affected traditional fashion producers in the developing world, garment industries in advanced economies such as Canada are not immune. Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, and Winnipeg, which are Canada's major garment production centres, have experienced a dramatic decline in the number of garment manufacturers in the past three decades (Vinodrai 13). Unlike similar transformations in New York and Paris (Green 2-3), this is not only a loss of production capacity, but also a loss of fashion designers, as few have been able to compete in the global marketplace. Designers in fashion's world cities such as New York, Paris, London, and Milan have fared better because they had developed export markets outside of their own borders before trade liberalization took place (Green 80). Canadian dress identity is no longer shaped by the designers who worked for large department stores like Eaton's and The Hudson's Bay Company, but rather by foreign-designed fashions available at H&M, Zara, and Forever 21. Fewer Canadian interpretations of

 

23 

mass-market fashions are available, meaning that Canadians are often wearing the exact same clothes as consumers in France, Spain, Japan, Australia, and the United States, which suggests homogeneity in the global marketplace. This is a recent phenomenon not seen prior to the 1980s that is rarely mentioned in the literature. While these changes to dress identity may not be as marked as those experienced by indigenous communities adopting Western dress, they are equally significant to those who designed and produced clothing prior to globalization. As more trade agreements are signed and global fashion corporations continue to centralize design functions while outsourcing production, fewer individuals are determining what the world wears. Although people may `style' new forms of dress from jeans, t-shirts, and other commodified garments, this making-do should not be confused with democratization. The power dynamics between fashion's powerful multinationals and the rest of the world echo that of imperial powers and colonies. As we have seen, the taste makers who produce today's fashions such as the former editor of Marie Claire Greece are not interested in allowing diverse voices to construct what fashion is, but rather they are interested in marketing their version of fashion in expanding and potentially lucrative new markets. Simmel's theory that fashion trickles down (135) has largely been abandoned for post-modernist theories that indicate a bubble-up effect from street wear and the fashions of other cultures (Entwistle 62). Although this is demonstrable in the aesthetic of the designs we see on runways and in stores, it does not mean that there is equality in the fashion production system. One side of the equation benefits financially, while the other is merely used for inspiration. Most of those who profit financially from this

 

24 

arrangement reside in Europe and the United States. The pressures created from an influx of mass-produced clothing from certain multinational fashion producer/retailers have caused the loss of traditional textile and clothing industries in countries as diverse as Canada and Kenya. While there are many clothes for consumers to choose from, their design, production and distribution have been decided by a small number of people in certain advanced economies. Homogenization as a descriptor of global fashion choices is too simplistic. Creative individuals will always find a way to construct unique identities from the resources available to them, be it the redundant fashions from the global retailers at the local mall or the ubiquitous jeans and t-shirts at the third world bazaar. However, democratization is too generous a descriptor when so few people actually have the power to make decisions that will shape the way clothes are designed, produced, and ultimately consumed.

 

25 

3. Methodology A mixed methods approach was used to conduct this study. It should be noted here that my role in this research is one of participant-observer as my current position as a designer and entrepreneur within the Toronto fashion industry may affect my objectivity in ways that I might not be aware. Quantitative research of secondary sources from 1985-2010 was used to better understand the domestic garment industry. These sources indicated changes in the number of firms, changes in revenues generated by the industry sector, and changes in the number of employees. The Canadian Apparel Directory and the Canadian Apparel Market Report was consulted in order to identify the companies who were producing garments in Canada throughout this timeframe. These were sourced from libraries and from the Canadian Apparel Federation. A quantitative content analysis has been conducted on images of women's fashions from Canadian and American magazines from 1985-2010 (George 144). The March and September issues of Flare and Vogue magazines were studied for every other year in the period. These print resources have been sourced from various libraries and private collections. One editorial image with a single model was selected at random from each magazine. The featured clothing was then coded for the presence of seven characteristics (George 145). These characteristics are dichotomous adjectives (Osgood 436) and they have been measured on a seven-point scale. Given that multiple garments may be present in an image, certain codes (Recognized Brand Name/Unknown Brand and Widely Available/Limited Availability) were applied to each garment separately. The outfit as a whole was coded for each of the other five sets of

 

26 

adjectives (Humourous/Serious, Conservative/Avant Garde, Sexy/Plain, Practical/Impractical, and Militaristic/Peaceful). In order for the study to consider the effects of how the image was constructed by fashion editors, stylists, and photographers, they were coded for the presence of Canadian Stereotypes/No Canadian Stereotypes, American Stereotypes/No American Stereotypes, and Humourous Styling/Serious Styling. Environment was considered as well by coding for a Warm Environment/Frigid Environment, Studio Shoot/Location Shoot, and a Natural Location/Urban Location. A coding guide was created that provided photographic examples and definitions of the coding terms (see appendix B, C). To ensure consistency, coding was validated by another individual who has been trained to analyze these characteristics. The coders achieved 90% agreement as a minimum to consider the results reliable (Krippendorff 354). A quantitative study was conducted on these same images to see how the number of Canadian designed and produced garments that are featured have changed over time. This required coding that measured whether the clothing was Designed in Canada/Designed Elsewhere and Manufactured in Canada/Manufactured Elsewhere. Once again, each garment was coded separately for these characteristics. Brand or designer names have been cross-referenced with the Canadian Apparel Directory to determine if garments were designed and produced in Canada. Again, to ensure consistency two individuals conducted the coding. This mixed methods approach revealed the multiple potential causes that have collectively contributed to changes in Canadian dress identity. The fact that this study is a comparison between fashion magazine images in Canada and the United States, to

 

27 

the exclusion of other countries that may influence Canadian dress, is a limitation of this research. It is acknowledged that images in fashion magazines may not accurately represent what people wear, but rather what is being proposed as fashionable dress at a given time. Both magazines used in this study are national publications to avoid regional differences.

 

28 

4. Results, Analysis, and Discussion 4.1. Canadian Dress Identity Takes Shape From the 26 Flare magazine images coded, 13 of them featured Canadian designed garments and 13 did not. There were no Canadian designed garments in the 26 images from Vogue magazine. The non-Canadian fashions in Flare and Vogue are from American, French, British, Italian, German, and Australian designers. A comparison of Canadian designs with non-Canadian designs reveals that certain characteristics coded higher for the Canadian fashions. Specifically, 84.60% of the Canadian designs in Flare contained humourous elements while only 46.20% of the non-Canadian designs in Flare and 49.90% of the non-Canadian designs in Vogue coded as `Humourous' (see fig. 14). This seems to verify that a sense of humour, which exists in other areas of Canadian culture, is also apparent in Canadian fashion. It is important to note that although a large percentage of Canadian designs contained humourous elements, the coders considered these whimsical or light-hearted rather than obvious forms of humour such as visual puns or satire. This means that while other components of Canadian culture, such as television and movies are outright comedic, fashion's humour is subtle and akin to that used in literature or fine art. Results also indicate that Canadian fashion is more conservative than design from other countries. For this study, the definition of `Conservative' is, "[d]esigns that utilize traditional silhouettes, fabrics, textures, and subdued colours. These fashions reference the past and do little to reinterpret it in new ways. They may be described as `classic' and do not challenge social norms." Of the Canadian designs studied, 46.20% coded as `Conservative' as compared to 23.10% for non-Canadian fashions in Flare

 

29 

and 23.00% for non-Canadian fashions in Vogue (see fig. 15). This characteristic may be tied to `Practicality', which was coded in 92.20% of Canadian designs (see fig. 16) and is defined as, "[d]esigns that can function in many different environments and garments that are comfortable to wear". While Canadian fashion seems to be less avant garde and more practical than other expressions of dress featured in both Flare and Vogue, it was not regarded as utilitarian by the coders. Only one image was coded as being extremely `Conservative' and no images were coded as being extremely `Practical' meaning that innovation and creativity were present in nearly all of the designs examined. In one category Canadian fashions coded much lower than their international counterparts did. Canadian designs were considered overtly `Sexy' only 7.70% of the time as compared with 46.20% of the non-Canadian designs in Flare and 46.10% of the designs in Vogue. However, 61.50% of Canadian fashions were coded as `Subtly Sexy', but appropriate for the workplace. This subtle sexiness may be a distinctive characteristic of Canadian fashion as only 15.40% of the other designs in Flare and 34.60% of the designs in Vogue were coded as such (see fig. 17). This is consistent with findings in other categories, which reveal a Canadian dress identity that is somewhat cautious, but not entirely staid and traditional. This observed trend toward more `Conservative' and `Practical' design seems to be in keeping with the Canadian dress identity that was established in the first half of the twentieth century as the nation went twice to war. In fact, Chatelaine's descriptor of the 1940s Canadian woman in "simple and quiet clothes" (qtd. in Turnbull Caton 250) may not be out of place today. The wartime influence on Canadian design is a factor

 

30 

throughout the study period as `Militarism' was present in 30.80% of Canadian fashions coded in Flare, while it was only present in 7.70% of non-Canadian fashions. Of the Canadian garments studied, 30.80% coded as `Neutral' and 38.50% were `Peaceful'. Perhaps the most interesting finding for this category is from Vogue magazine where 19.20% of the fashions were coded as `Militaristic', 19.20% as `Neutral', and 61.60% as `Peaceful' (see fig. 18). Significantly, garments from 10 of the 26 Vogue images were coded as extremely `Peaceful'. Although Canadian designers draw on military influence for less than one-third of their work, a clear contrast can be seen between their relative comfort with uniforms, badges, and military inspired garb (see fig. 19) and Vogue magazine's preference for fashions with soft, fluid lines. It is noteworthy that the trend toward `Peaceful' design in Vogue is most evident later in the period, specifically after the American invasion of Iraq in 2003. This reinforces Grace's theory that art, which has war as its subject matter, serves as a cautionary tale (100). The presence of the previously mentioned characteristics; humour, conservatism, practicality, subtle sexiness, and militarism, that coded as being significant to Canadian dress identity appeared consistently throughout the period, and did not diminish as time progressed. In other words, the identified Canadian design aesthetic is stable. Yet, it is important to note here that designers from Canada's fashion cities are not represented equally in the randomly selected images from Flare. Of the 14 designers profiled, 12 are based in Toronto, one is based in Montreal, and one is based in Vancouver (see fig. 20). This means that regionalisms that may exist in Canadian dress identity may not be identifiable in the images used for coding in this study.

 

31 

4.2. Lost to Liberalization Understanding changes in Canada's trade policy can help contextualize patterns in the collected data. To clarify how certain findings correspond with larger economic forces, the study period has been further divided into three sub-periods. During the first period, which is 1985-1994, a quota system was in place, restricting the amount of goods imported from other countries. It is also before the enactment of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), though it is noted that the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between Canada and the United States took effect in 1989. The second period is 1995-2002 after NAFTA took effect, but before the full elimination of the quota system with other international trading partners. At this time, China had not entered the market on a large scale. Finally, the third period is 2003-2010 when the quota system was largely gone and China entered the market without impediment. Although the previously identified Canadian design aesthetic was stable from 1985-2010, the number of Canadian designs featured in Flare magazine decreased over that time-period. This has a significant impact on Canadian dress identity because fewer domestic designs are influencing consumer's perceptions of what is fashionable. From 1985-1994, 62.50% of the designs coded were Canadian, from 1995-2002 41.00% were Canadian, and from 2003-2010, only 20.00% were Canadian (see fig. 21). Rather than suggesting a change in Flare's editorial direction as being causal for this decline, the reason is more likely related to larger forces of trade liberalization, as this same phenomenon was present in the data from Vogue magazine in that fewer American designers were featured later in the period (see fig. 22). A suggested reason for this decline is the increased competition for market-share created by globalization

 

32 

and the consumer's greater demand for internationally recognized luxury brands. As well, these brands are more likely to have the resources to purchase advertising space in fashion magazines and this may influence the selection of garments for editorial fashion shoots. While Canadian content regulations stipulate that the majority of people who create editorial images are Canadian, they do not specify a percentage of Canadian-designed fashions be included in these images. Modern fashion is often associated with iconic labels, therefore brand name recognition was coded. Fashion editorials are not the only influence on brand name recognition, as advertising also has a heavy affect. Brands that were coded as very recognized were `household names' and advertised in magazines such as Vogue, Harpers Bazaar, and Elle. Brand name recognition relates to dress identity in that if a brand is very recognized it is likely that it has some influence on consumer's perceptions about what is fashionable (Corneo 344-345, Hamilton 165-167). Likewise, if a brand is virtually unknown, it is probably not altering patterns of consumption. Only 44.00% of Canadian brands were coded as `Recognized' while 81.40% of other designs in Flare were coded as such (see fig. 23). Of the 14 Canadian designers represented in the images coded from Flare magazine only two of them, Alfred Sung and Club Monaco were considered `household names'. Interestingly, neither of these names can be associated with contemporary Canadian fashion as Alfred Sung's ready-to-wear women's collection is no longer in production and Ralph Lauren purchased Club Monaco in 1999 and moved the company's design functions to New York. Not only are there fewer Canadian fashions in Flare and less brand recognition for Canadian labels, but also the designs featured are not as widely available as they

 

33 

were earlier in the period. Of the seven garments featured from 1995-2002, six were available through national retailers. In the last seven years of the period from 20032010, two of the three Canadian designs profiled had limited availability and were only for sale in a small number of boutiques located in Montreal and Toronto. This timeperiod corresponds with an influx of fast fashion retailers in the Canadian market and a decrease of Canadian owned retail chains. When the period is looked at as a whole, 60.00% of Canadian designs were `Widely Available' as compared with 81.50% of the other designs in Flare (see fig. 24) (60.00% of the designs in Vogue were `Widely Available', but haute couture items that are only available via custom order skew these results). This means that regionalisms in Canadian fashion may occur because fewer domestically designed fashions are available through national retailers. Perhaps more importantly, these numbers reveal that fashions designed outside of Canada are more widely available than those designed domestically. This suggests that international forces are changing what Canadians purchase and wear, therefore changing Canadian dress identity. 4.3. More than Mounties and Maple Syrup Garments are not the only elements to consider when coding editorial fashion images. The styling used to contextualize fashions can influence the viewer's perception. In this study, garments and styling were coded separately to ensure that characteristics of dress identity were not confused with styling elements. The coding results indicate there is no significant presence of `Canadian Stereotypes' such as hockey sticks, maple syrup, and canoes, or `American Stereotypes' such as the American West, suburbia, and the Statue of Liberty (see figs. 25,26). `Humourous'

 

34 

styling was consistent at 61.50% for Canadian designs in Flare and designs in Vogue, while 46.20% of other designs in Flare coded as `Humourous' and 30.80% coded as `Serious'. No Canadian designs were styled in a serious manner and this trend toward humour is consistent with the garment coding (see fig. 27) although it is clear that Vogue has a heavy preference for light-hearted or humourous styling as well. The environment of the photo shoot was also considered while coding and Canadian designs in Flare were shot in a `Warm Environment' far less than other designs in Flare and designs in Vogue (see fig. 28). However, the preference was for a neutral environment with even lighting and a balance of warm and cool colours, rather than a frigid one. Flare's use of location shoots for Canadian and non-Canadian designs were consistent (see fig. 29), but showed a strong preference for shooting Canadian designs in urban or man-made locations over natural environments. All location shoots that featured Canadian designs were in urban locales while 71.43% of the location shoots for other designs in Flare were shot in natural areas (see fig. 30). This seems counter to notions of Canadian identity that emphasize the North, nature, and the wilderness. Considering this factor and the lack of Canadian stereotypes used in Flare's styling, it may be that their editorial decision makers wish to move Canadian fashion beyond the imagined community that seems to prevail in public perception. Interestingly, many of Canada's most commercially successful brands, such as Roots and Canada Goose, embrace icons of the imagined Canadian community. This strategy seems to work for both domestic and export markets.

 

35 

5. Conclusion The global fashion industry is a highly competitive place inhabited by multinational corporations that have extensive reach into the Canadian marketplace. When international trade restrictions disappeared in the 1990s and early 2000s, the domestic fashion industry was ill equipped to compete and lost significant market share. Consequently, Canadian fashion became less visible and not as widely available in the age of `democratized' fashion than it was during the protectionist era. Although this seems to be an inevitable result of trade liberalization, it is important to note that Canada's other culture industries were not affected the same way; some, such as publishing, music, film, and television, received protection and financial support from the federal government and remain competitive. While it is unclear why there is no protective legislation for Canadian fashion, the associations with femininity, immigrants, (and in the Quebec context the Francophone population), could be reasons for this inequity. The economic impact of a shrinking Canadian fashion sector can be measured in job losses and decreasing revenue, however the cultural repercussions are more difficult to analyze. This study has shown that the uniqueness of the Canadian fashion industry is quantifiable and that foreign competitors are overwhelming the distinctive voice of Canadian designers. Although Canadian identity has always struggled under the weight of its inherited legacy of being a loyal British colony and the largest consumer of American culture outside of the United States, some recognizable traits resonate across different cultural genres. Canada's status as a Northern nation, its coming of age during two world wars, its embrace of icons, and its funny bone can be seen in media as diverse as painting,

 

36 

film, and literature. The basis for these Canadian characteristics are not necessarily the day-to-day realities of Canadian life, but rather they are part of the imagined community of what it means to be Canadian. This study has shown that while fashion seems to be moving beyond the use of Northern stereotypes and Canadian icons, other shared cultural markers that reside in the collective imagination, such as humour and militarism are present. While Canadian fashion's conservative and practical side may be rooted in a military tradition, these characteristics have become part of Canadian dress identity in their own right. At the same time, a subtle sexiness and sense of humour prevents it from being too serious, stoic, or static. When analyzed, Canadian fashion design is largely in tune with the narrative of Canada's other culture industries. While individual Canadians still have the ability to create unique identities from the choices available to them in the marketplace, as a whole Canada has become less of an agent in the global fashion industry and more of a chooser as domestic products become less accessible to consumers. This means that Canada enjoys fewer economic and cultural benefits of having a thriving fashion industry. Essentially, this loss of cultural identity has occurred because fashion is associated with mass culture, rather than high culture, and has not received the same government protection and support that other cultural industries have. Verification of the aforementioned results will occur in a future study that increases the number of images analyzed, employs an additional coder, and utilizes statistical analysis. The data collection method used in this study has proven effective and can be employed in future research (Krippendorff 354, Osgood 436). Given that the majority of Canadian designers analyzed in this study were Toronto based, continued

 

37 

research on this subject will compare images from Flare magazine with a magazine based in Quebec and newspaper features from Vancouver, over the same study period of 1985-2010. This should indicate whether Canadian dress identity and the effects of globalization were consistent across multiple regions. Concurrently, an analysis of the number of print media advertisers whose fashions are used in Canadian fashion editorials will be conducted, as it may reveal causation for the declining number of Canadian fashions featured.

 

38 

Appendix A- Figures
Designer Category Location of Design Premises Currently Designing and Producing in Canada

Alfred Sung Club Monaco Debora Kuchmé Hilary Radley Leighton Barrett Mr. Jax Ports International Selina Tenzer Tu Ly Wesley and Winsa Clotheslines Dean/Dan Dominic Bellissimo Jean Claude Poitras Judith Ann Bates Pat McDonagh Robert Krief Roger Edwards Wayne Clark Winston Kong Linda Lundstrom Abby Kanak Anne Seally Babel Bent Boys Comrags Emily Zarb Gloria Superstein Loucas Parachute Price Roman Roots XL Yes and No Zapata

Mens and Womens Mens and Womens Womens Womens coats and suits Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens fur and leather Womens Womens Womens Womens leather Womens Womens eveningwear Womens eveningwear Womens coats Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Womens Women Mens and Womens Women Mens and Womens Mens and Womens Mens and Womens Womens

Toronto Toronto Toronto Montreal Montreal Vancouver Toronto Toronto Montreal Toronto Toronto Toronto Toronto Toronto Montreal Toronto Toronto Montreal Toronto Toronto Toronto Toronto Vancouver Toronto Toronto Toronto Toronto Toronto Montreal Toronto Montreal Toronto Toronto Toronto Vancouver Toronto

No No- in USA No No- in USA Unknown No Yes- Designing No No No No No- in Italy No Yes Yes No Yes No Unknown Yes No Yes No No No No Yes No No No No Yes Yes No No No

Fig. 1. This table shows the Canadian designers featured in the Canadian Fashion Annual 1989. It indicates that only nine of the 36 designers are currently designing in Canada. Robertson, Donald, comp. Canadian Fashion Annual 1989. Scarborough, ON: Prentice-Hall Canada, 1988. Print.

 

39 

Fig. 2. This graph shows that clothing imports increased from just over $2 billion to over $6 billion between 1991 and 2005. Wyman, Diana. "Trade Liberalization and the Canadian Clothing Market." Canadian Economic Observer. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Dec. 2006. n.pag. Web. 7 Nov. 2011.

 

40 

Fig. 3. This graph shows production for the domestic market falling from over $5 billion to approximately $3 billion between 1992 and 2005. Wyman, Diana. "Trade Liberalization and the Canadian Clothing Market." Canadian Economic Observer. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Dec. 2006. n.pag. Web. 7 Nov. 2011.

 

41 

Fig. 4. This graph shows the loss of approximately 34,000 jobs in the Canadian garment manufacturing industry between 2002-2005. Wyman, Diana. "Trade Liberalization and the Canadian Clothing Market." Canadian Economic Observer. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Dec. 2006. n.pag. Web. 7 Nov. 2011.

 

42 

Fig. 5. A poster produced by the Canadian Department of Communication in 1981-82 titled "Canada's Cultural Industries Are Big Business". Image from Canadian Department of Communication. Canada's Cultural Industries Are Big Business. 198182. Poster. Library and Archives Canada, Department of Canadian Heritage Collection, Ottawa, ON.  

43 

Fig. 6. Canada Picture No. 07, 2001. Douglas Coupland image from the book titled Souvenir of Canada, 2002. 84-85. Print.

 

44 

Fig. 7. Alexander McQueen dress made of ivory silk tulle with a bolero jacket of red silk velvet embroidered in gold bullion. From The Girl Who Lived in the Tree collection, Autumn/Winter 2008-2009. Image from the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition and book Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty. 2011. 116. Print.   45 

Fig. 8. Labatt's Blue Light promotional T-shirt featuring a polar bear in sunglasses. The polar bear has been used to advertise this brand of beer since the 1980s. Image from "Super Logo!! Vintage Labatt Blue Beer Polar Bear Tshirt large." Tshirt Time Machine. N.p.:n.d. Web. 23 Mar. 2011.

 

46 

Fig. 9. Canada Goose Expedition Parka for women. The company's official website describes this product thusly, "Canada Goose takes pride in creating authentic gear to help real people living in extreme conditions battle the elements. Originally developed for scientists working in research facilities at McMurdo station in Antarctica, the Canada Goose Expedition Parka allows its wearers to withstand the most frigid temperatures" (Canada Goose). Image from Canada Goose. "Arctic Program." Products. Canada Goose, n.d. Web. 21 Mar. 2012.

 

47 

Fig. 10. Canada Goose parkas on the streets of Toronto in -1 degree Celsius (30.2 degrees Fahrenheit) weather on March 6, 2012. Image from Forrest, Jenifer. Canada Goose Parkas in Toronto. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Photograph.

 

48 

Fig. 11. Royal Canadian Air Force Kit Bag by Red Canoe. Other icons used by Red Canoe include RCMP, Canadian Army, CBC/Radio Canada, and De Havilland Aviation. Image from Red Canoe. "RCAF Kit Bag." Canadian Aviation. Red Canoe, n.d. Web. 21 Mar. 2012.

 

49 

Fig. 12. The silkscreened image of former Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau on a pair of ladies underwear is significant in a country with a long history of political humour. It is interesting that this design appeared 35 years after December 12, 1967 when he stated "There's no place for the state in the bedrooms of the nation" (Trudeau Interview). Smoking Lily by Trish Tacoma, 2002. Forrest, Jenifer. Smoking Lily Trudeau Panties. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2011. Photograph.

 

50 

Fig. 13. Dsquared2 is based in Milan, however their Fall/Winter 2004 collection made obvious use of iconography and poked fun at Canadian stereotypes. This is seen in the mix of fur, plaid, and work wear. Image from Style.com. "Dsquared2 Fall 2004 RTW." Dsquared2. Condé Nast, 2012. Web. 21 Mar. 2012.

Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Characteristics in Garments
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%
Humourous (code of 1-3) Neutral (code of 4) Serious (code of 5-7)
0% 46.2% 49.9% 38.5% 30.7% 19.2% 15.4% 15.4% 84.6%

Fig. 14. This chart illustrates that Canadian designed garments featured in Flare have been coded as Humourous 84.6% of the time. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

51 

Coding Results for Conservative/Avant Garde Characteristics in Garments
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

50.0% 45.0% 40.0% 35.0% 30.0% 25.0% 20.0% 15.0% 10.0% 5.0% 0.0%

46.2% 38.5% 30.8% 23.1% 23.0% 15.4% 38.5%

46.2% 38.5%

Conservative (code of 1-3)

Neutral (code of 4)

Avant Garde (code of 5-7)

Fig. 15. This chart illustrates that 46.2% of Canadian designed garments featured in Flare have been coded as being Conservative as compared to 23.1% of other designs featured in Flare and 23.0% of designs featured in Vogue. It should be noted that the occurrence of Avant Garde designs was more consistent across the three categories. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Conservative/Avant Garde Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

52 

Coding Results for Practical/Impractical Characteristics in Garments
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%

92.2%

53.8% 46.2% 30.8% 0% 19.2% 7.7% 23.1% 26.9%

Practical (code of 1-3)

Neutral (code of 4)

Impractical (code of 5-7)

Fig. 16. Practicality was coded in 92.2% of Canadian designed garments and Impracticality was coded in only 7.7% of Canadian designed garments. By comparison, 53.8% of the garments in Vogue were coded as Practical and 26.9% were coded as Impractical. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Practical/Impractical Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

53 

Coding Results for Sexy/Plain Characteristics in Garments
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%
Sexy (code of 1-3) Subtly Sexy (code of 4) Plain (code of 5-7)
7.7% 15.4% 46.2% 46.1% 34.6% 30.8% 19.2% 38.5% 61.5%

Fig. 17. Only 7.7% of Canadian designed garments were coded as overtly Sexy compared with 46.2% of other designs in Flare and 46.1% of the designs in Vogue. However, 61.5% of Canadian designed garments were coded as Subtly Sexy which was substantially higher than the other designs in Flare and Vogue. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Sexy/Plain Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

54 

Coding Results for Militaristic/Peaceful Characteristics in Garments
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%
Militaristic (code of 1-3) Neutral (code of 4) Peaceful (code of 5-7)
7.7% 30.8% 19.2% 30.8% 19.2% 46.1% 38.5% 46.2% 61.6%

Fig. 18. Although the majority of Canadian designs do not possess Militaristic characteristics, they are more Militaristic than other designs in Flare and Vogue. The most significant finding is that 61.6% of the designs featured in Vogue were coded as Peaceful. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Militaristic/Peaceful Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

55 

Fig. 19. These camouflage pants by Izzy Camilleri incorporate the seemingly disparate characteristics of militarism and humour in one garment. Image from "At Ease." Flare Mar. 2001: 126. Print.

 

56 

Coded Designers Featured in Flare 1985-2010

Toronto-based Vancouver-based Montreal-based

Fig. 20. This illustrates the disproportionate number of Toronto designers featured in the images coded from Flare magazine. Forrest, Jenifer. Coded Designers Featured in Flare 1985-2010. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

57 

Canadian Fashions Featured in Flare
24 15

1985-1994

1995-2002

17 7 Total Fashions Canadian Fashions 15 3

2003-2010

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Fig. 21. This chart illustrates a decline in the number of Canadian fashions featured in the coded Flare magazine editorials. Note that NAFTA legislation took effect in 1994 and all trade restrictions on clothing were eliminated for World Trade Organization member countries by 2003. Forrest, Jenifer. Canadian Fashions Featured in Flare. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

58 

American Fashions Featured in Vogue
12 4

1985-1994

1995-2002

12 6 Total Fashions American Fashions 11 1

2003-2010

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Fig. 22. This chart illustrates a decline in the number of American fashions featured in the coded Vogue magazine editorials. Note that NAFTA legislation took effect in 1994 and all trade restrictions on clothing were eliminated for World Trade Organization member countries by 2003. Forrest, Jenifer. American Fashions Featured in Vogue. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

59 

Coding Results for Brand Name Recognition
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%

91.4% 81.4%

52.0% 44.0% 4.0% 14.8% 8.6%

3.7% 0%

Recognized Brand Name Somewhat Known Brand (code of 1-3) Name (code of 4)

Unknown Brand Name (code of 5-7)

Fig. 23. This chart illustrates that international brand names are more recognized than those of Canadian fashion brands. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Brand Name Recognition. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.
Coding Results for Availibility
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%

81.5% 60.0% 60.0%

32.0% 0% 18.5%

34.4%

8.0%

5.7%

Widely Available (code of 1-3)

Somewhat Available (code of 4)

Limited Availabilty (code of 5-7)

Fig. 24. Significantly, other designers featured in Flare are more widely available than Canadian designers are. Canadian fashions are less widely available at the end of the period than at the beginning. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Availability. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.   60 

Coding Results for Canadian Stereotypes in Styling
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%

100% 76.9% 84.6%

23.1% 15.4%

0%

Canadian Stereotypes (code of 1-3) No Canadian Stereotypes (code of 4)

Fig. 25. This illustrates the use of Canadian stereotypes was not significant. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Canadian Stereotypes in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.
Coding Results for American Stereotypes in Styling
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%

100% 76.9% 73.1%

23.1% 0%

26.9%

American Stereotypes (code of 1-3) No American Stereotypes (code of 4)

Fig. 26. This illustrates the use of American stereotypes was not significant. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for American Stereotypes in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

61 

Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Styling
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%
61.5% 46.2% 38.5% 23.1% 30.8% 19.2% 0% 19.1% 61.5%

Humourous Styling (code of 1-3)

Neutral Styling (code of 4)

Serious Styling (code of 5-7)

Fig. 27. Humourous styling was significant in both Flare and Vogue. Neutral styling was also used for Canadian designs in Flare, but serious styling was not. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

Coding Results for Warm Environment/Frigid Environment in Styling
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0% Warm Environment (code of 1-3) Neutral Environment (code of 4) Frigid Environment (code of 5-7)
15.4% 30.8% 53.9% 50.0% 53.8%

38.5%

30.8% 19.2% 7.7%

Fig. 28. Neutral environments were used more frequently for Canadian designs in Flare than warm or frigid environments. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Warm Environment/Frigid Environment in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.   62 

Coding Results for Studio Shoot/Location Shoot
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0% Studio Shoot (code of 1) Location Shoot (code of 2)
46.2% 46.2% 38.5% 53.8% 53.8% 61.5%

Fig. 29. This chart indicates that Flare uses studio shoots more often than Vogue, though not to a significant degree. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Studio Shoot/Location Shoot. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.
Coding Results for Natural Location/Urban Location
Canadian Designs in Flare Other Designs in Flare Designs in Vogue

100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0.0%

100.0%

71.4% 56.3% 43.8% 28.6% 0%

Natural Location (code of 1)

Urban Location (code of 2)

Fig. 30. Canadian designs in Flare are not photographed in natural environments, but in urban locations. While non-Canadian designs in Flare are frequently photographed in natural locations. Forrest, Jenifer. Coding Results for Natural Location/Urban Location. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.   63 

Appendix B- Coding Sheet

 

64 

 

65 

Appendix C- Coding Guide

 

66 

 

67 

 

68 

 

69 

 

70 

 

71 

 

72 

 

73 

 

74 

 

75 

 

76 

 

77 

 

78 

 

79 

 

80 

 

81 

 

82 

 

83 

 

84 

 

85 

 

86 

 

87 

 

88 

 

89 

Appendix D- Coded Images

 

90 

 

91 

 

92 

 

93 

 

94 

 

95 

 

96 

 

97 

 

98 

 

99 

 

100 

 

101 

 

102 

Works Cited "2-for-1 Special." Vogue Sept. 2008: 766, 769. Print. "24 Sussex Drive." Flare Mar. 2002: 125, 130. Print. "About a Boy." Vogue Sept. 2004: 702. Print. "Accidental Tourist." Flare Mar. 2009: 116. Print. "Adding it All Up." Vogue Feb. 2005: 182. Print. "A Fine Romance." Vogue Mar. 1997: 404. Print. "A Gilded Age." Vogue Sept. 1999: 555. Print. "Alberta Days." Flare Sept. 1999: 149. Print. "Alice in Wonderland." Vogue Dec. 2003: 241. Print. "All in Stride." Flare Mar. 2009: 128. Print. "American Splendor." Vogue Nov. 2003: 429, 440. Print. Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London, UK: Verso, 2006. Print. Appadurai, Arjun. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1996. Print. "Arizona Blues." Flare Mar. 1995: 78. Print. "Around Town." Flare Sept. 2003: 178. Print. "At Ease." Flare Mar. 2001: 126. Print. "At Ease." Vogue Mar. 1987: 498. Print. Atwood, Margaret. The Blind Assassin. New York, NY: Anchor Books, 2000. Print. Barnard, Malcolm. Fashion as Communication. London, UK: Routledge, 1996. Print. Barthes, Roland. The Language of Fashion. Trans. Andy Stafford. Oxford, UK: Berg,

 

103 

2005. Print. "Best in Show." Flare Sept. 2004: 288. Print. "Best of Canada." Flare Sept. 1991: 102. Print. Bloskie, C. "Canada's Textile and Clothing Industries." Canadian Economic Observer. Mar. 2005: n. pag. Statistics Canada. Web. 22 Mar. 2012. Bonacich, Edna, Lucie Cheng, Norma Chinchilla, Nora Hamilton, and Paul Ong. "The Garment Industry in the Restructuring Global Economy." Global Production: The Apparel Industry in the Pacific Rim. Eds. Edna Bonacich, Lucie Cheng, Norma Chinchilla, Nora Hamilton, and Paul Ong. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1994. 3-20. Print. ---. "The Garment Industry, National Development, and Labor Organizing." Global Production: The Apparel Industry in the Pacific Rim. Eds. Edna Bonacich, Lucie Cheng, Norma Chinchilla, Nora Hamilton, and Paul Ong. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1994. 365-373. Print. Breward, Christopher, Becky Conekin, and Caroline Cox. "Introduction: Dyed in the Wool English?" The Englishness of English Dress. Oxford, UK: Berg, 2002. 1-12. Print. Canada Goose. "Arctic Program." Products. Canada Goose, n.d. Web. 21 Mar. 2012. Canada Magazine Fund. Support for Editorial Content. Ottawa, ON: Heritage Canada, 2009. Web. 11 Mar. 2012. "Canada Nothing but the Best." Flare Sept. 1987: 176. Print. Canadian Apparel Federation. Canadian Apparel Directory. Toronto, ON: Naylor, 1998. Print.

 

104 

Canadian Apparel Federation and Apparel Management Insights. Canadian Apparel Market Report. Ottawa, ON: CAF/AMI, 1998. Print. "Canadian Club." Flare Apr. 1985: 85. Print. "Canadian Club." Flare Sept. 1989: 159. Print. Canadian Department of Communication. Canada's Cultural Industries Are Big Business. 1981-82. Poster. Library and Archives Canada, Department of Canadian Heritage Collection, Ottawa, ON. Canadian Heritage. "Arts and Culture Industries." Canadian Heritage. Government of Canada, 14 Feb. 2010. Web. 21 Mar. 2012. "Carrie-Anne Moss." Flare Mar. 1999: 85. Print. "Checks and the City." Vogue Sept. 2010: 626. Print. "Chic to Cheek." Flare Mar. 1989: 88. Print. "Code Red." Flare Sept. 1995: 114. Print. "Cold Comfort." Flare Sept. 2007: 230. Print. Colley, Linda. Britons: Forging the Nation 1707-1837. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009. Print. "Cool Britannia." Flare Nov. 1987: 153. Print. Corneo, Giacomo, and Olivier Jeanne. "Snobs, Bandwagons, and the Origin of Social Customs in Consumer Behavior." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization. 32 (1997): 333-347. Web. 9 Apr. 2012. Coupland, Douglas. Souvenir of Canada. Vancouver, BC: Douglas & McIntyre, 2002. 84-85. Print. "Couture Club." Vogue Sept. 2004: 791. Print.

 

105 

Davis, Fred. "Do Clothes Speak? What Makes Them Fashion?" Fashion Theory: A Reader. Ed. Malcolm Barnard. New York, NY: Routledge, 2007. 148-158. Print. "Day Dreams." Vogue Sept. 2004: 684. Print. de la Haye, Amy. "Gilded Brocade Gowns and Impeccable Tailored Tweeds: Victor Stiebel (1907-76) a Quintessentially English Designer." The Englishness of English Dress. Ed. Christopher Breward, Becky Conekin, and Caroline Cox. Oxford, UK: Berg, 2002. 147-157. Print. "Double Entendre." Vogue Mar. 1989: 462. Print. "Dress Revival." Flare Mar. 2005: 122. Print. "East Coast Escape." Flare Sept. 2009: 194. Print. Edwardson, Ryan. Canadian Content: Culture and the Quest for Nationhood. Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 2008. Print. Eicher, Joanne, B, and Barbara Sumberg. "World Fashion, Ethnic, and National Dress." Dress and Ethnicity. Ed. Joanne B. Eicher. Oxford, UK: Berg, 1995. 295-306. Print. Entwistle, Joanne. The Fashioned Body: Fashion Dress and Modern Social Theory. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2000. Print. "Fall Favourites." Flare Sept. 2007: 190. Print. Fisch, Max H. Introduction. Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition. By Charles Sanders Peirce. Ed. Max H. Fisch. Vol. 1. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1982. Web. "For Real." Flare Mar. 1997: 92. Print. Forrest, Jenifer. American Fashions Featured in Vogue. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012.

 

106 

Print. ---. Canada Goose Parkas in Toronto. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Photograph. ---. Canadian Fashions Featured in Flare. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coded Designers Featured in Flare 1985-2010. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for American Stereotypes in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Availability. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Brand Name Recognition. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Canadian Stereotypes in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Conservative/Avant Garde Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Humourous/Serious Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Militaristic/Peaceful Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Natural Location/Urban Location. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Practical/Impractical Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print.

 

107 

---. Coding Results for Sexy/Plain Characteristics in Garments. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Studio Shoot/Location Shoot. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Coding Results for Warm Environment/Frigid Environment in Styling. Chart. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2012. Print. ---. Smoking Lily Trudeau Panties. Toronto, ON: N.p., 2011. Photograph George, Alexander. "Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches to Content Analysis." The Content Analysis Reader. Eds. Klaus Krippendorff and Mary Angela Bock. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009. 144-155. Print. Gibb, Norma. "Women in Uniform." A Women's Place: Seventy Years in the Lives of Canadian Women. Ed. Sylvia Fraser. Toronto, ON: Key Porter Books, 1997. 177. Print. "Glamorama." Vogue Mar. 2007: 490. Print. "Going with the Flow." Flare Mar. 1993: 101. Print. Goodrum, Alison. The National Fabric: Fashion, Britishness, Globalization. Oxford, UK: Berg, 2005. Print. "Go to Town." Flare Sept. 1993: 110. Print. Grace, Sherrill. On the Art of Being Canadian. Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia Press, 2009. Print. Green, Nancy, L. Ready-to-Wear and Ready-to-Work. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1997. Print. Hall, Stuart. "Whose Heritage? Un-settling `The Heritage', Re-imagining the Post-

 

108 

nation." Third Text 49 (1999-2000): 3-13. Print. Hamilton, Jean, A. "The Macro-Micro Interface in the Construction of Individual Fashion Forms and Meanings." Clothing and Textiles Research Journal. 15.3 (1997): 164171. Web. 9 Apr. 2011. Hartnell, Norman. Silver and Gold. London, UK: Evans Brothers, 1955. Print. "Haute Canadiana." Flare Mar. 2010: 136. Print. Hiebert, Daniel. "Integrating Production and Consumption: Industry, Class, Ethnicity, and the Jews of Toronto." The Changing Social Geography of Canadian Cities. Ed. Larry S. Bourne and David F. Ley. Montreal, QC: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1993. 199-213. Print. ---. "Jewish Immigrants and the Garment Industry of Toronto, 1901-1931: A Study of Ethnic and Class Relations." Annals of the Association of American Geographers 83.2 (1993): 243-271. Print. "Into the Woods." Vogue Sept. 2009: 466. Print. Klein, Naomi. No Logo: Taking Aim at the Brand Bullies. Toronto, ON: Vintage Canada, 2000. Print. Krippendorff, Klaus. "Testing the Reliability of Content Analysis Data." The Content Analysis Reader. Ed. Klaus Krippendorff and Mary Angela Bock. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009. 350-357. Print. Kunuk, Zacharias, dir. Atanarjuat (The Fast Runner). Alliance Atlantis, 2002. DVD. "Lace Incorporated." Flare Jan. 1985: 68. Print. "Lady in Red." Vogue Sept. 1995: 570. Print. "Lean Machine." Vogue July 2006: 167. Print.

 

109 

Lipovetsky, Gilles. The Empire of Fashion: Dressing Modern Democracy. Trans. Catherine Porter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994. Print. "Live and In Color." Vogue Mar. 1991: 338. Print. "Magic in the Makeup." Vogue Sept. 2004: 786. Print. Martin, Penny. "English-style Photography?" The Englishness of English Dress. Ed. Christopher Breward, Becky Conekin, and Caroline Cox. Oxford, UK: Berg, 2002. 173-187. Print. Massey, Vincent. On Being Canadian. Toronto, ON: J.M. Dent & Sons Limited, 1948. Print. Massey, Vincent, Arthur Surveyor, Norman A. M. MacKenzie, Georges-Henri Lévesque, and Hilda Neatby. Royal Commission on National Development in the Arts Letters & Sciences. Privy Council of Canada. Ottawa, ON: Edmond Cloutier, 1951. Print. Maynard, Margaret. Dress and Globalization. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 2004. Print. McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York, NY: McGraw Hill, 1964. Print. Metropolitan Museum of Art. Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty. New York, NY: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2011. Print. "Mighty Aphrodite." Vogue Mar. 2003: 482. Print. "Mighty Mighty." Vogue Mar. 2001: 440. Print. "Mixed Messages." Vogue Sept. 1997: 586. Print. Molnar, Andrea, K. "Transformations in the Use of Traditional Textiles of Ngada

 

110 

(Western Flores, Eastern Indonesia): Commercialization, Fashion and Ethnicity." Consuming Fashion: Adorning the Transnational Body. Eds. Anne Brydon and Sandra Niessen. Oxford, UK: Berg, 1998. 39-56. Print. "Monsters Inc." Vogue Sept. 2010: 682. Print. "New Sensations." Vogue Sept. 2007: 698. Print. "New York News." Vogue Sept. 1989: 646. Print. "New York New York." Flare Aug. 1987: 81. Print. "Noble Endeavor." Vogue Sept. 2008: 722. Print. "On a Whim." Vogue Sept. 2008: 715. Print. Ondaatje, Michael. The English Patient. Toronto, ON: McClelland and Stewart, 1992. Print. "On the Western Front." Flare Sept. 1985: 111. Print. Osgood, Charles, E. "Objective Indicators of Subjective Culture." Issues in CrossCultural Research 285.1 (1977): 435-450. Print. "Paint the Town." Vogue Mar. 2005: 467. Print. "Pale Fire." Vogue Mar. 2009: 388. Print. Palmer, Alexandra. Fashion: A Canadian Perspective. Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 2004. Print. "Paris." Flare Feb. 1985: 60. Print. "Paris Pastels." Flare Mar. 1991: 80. Print. Passchendaele. Dir. Paul Gross. Alliance, 2009. DVD. Peirce, Charles Sanders. Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition. Ed. Max H. Fisch. Vol. 1. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1982. Web.

 

111 

21 Mar. 2012. "Personal Dressing." Vogue Mar. 1985: 526. Print. Pevsner, Nikolaus. The Englishness of English Art. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1964. Print. "Pink Lady." Flare Mar. 2003: 142. Print. "Power Trip." Flare Sept. 1997: 148. Print. "Pretty Tough." Vogue Sept. 2010: 639. Print. "Private Lives." Fashion Feb. 2011: 97. Print. "Rain or Shine." Flare Sept. 2002: 186. Print. Rasporich, Beverly. "Canadian Humour and National Culture: Move Over, Mr. Leacock." Canadian Cultural Poesis: Essays on Canadian Culture. Ed. Garry Sherbert, Annie Gérin, and Sheila Petty. Waterloo, ON: Wilfred Laurier University Press, 2006. 51-66. Print. "Ravishing Couture." Vogue Mar. 1999: 385. Print. Red Canoe. "RCAF Kit Bag." Canadian Aviation. Red Canoe, n.d. Web. 21 Mar. 2012. "Road Trip." Flare Sept. 2001: 179. Print. Robertson, Donald, comp. Canadian Fashion Annual 1989. Scarborough, ON: PrenticeHall Canada, 1988. Print. "Say it with Diamonds." Vogue Sept. 2004: 799. Print. "Scotch on the Rocks." Flare Sept. 2004: 250. Print. "Sheer Artistry." Vogue Mar. 1993: 339. Print. Simmel, Georg. "Fashion." International Quarterley 10 (1904): 130-155. Print. Skafidas, Michael. "Fabricating Greekness: From Fustanella to the Glossy page." The

 

112 

Fabric of Cultures: Fashion, Identity, and Globalization. Eds. Eugenia Paulicelli and Hazel Clark. New York, NY: Routledge, 2009. 145-163. Print. Skoggard, Ian. "Transnational Commodity Flows and the Global Phenomenon of the Brand." Consuming Fashion: Adorning the Transnational Body. Eds. Anne Brydon and Sandra Niessen. Oxford, UK: Berg, 1998. 57-70. Print. "Something Gold, Something Blue." Vogue Feb. 2005: 164. Print. "Stallone on the Range." Vogue Sept. 1991: 190. Print. Steedman, Carolyn. "Englishness, Clothes and Little Things." The Englishness of English Dress. Ed. Christopher Breward, Becky Conekin, and Caroline Cox. Oxford, UK: Berg, 2002. 1-12. Print. Steedman, Mercedes. Angels in the Workplace: Women and the Construction of Gender Relations in the Canadian Clothing Industry, 1890-1940. Toronto, ON: Oxford University Press, 1997. Print. Sturken, Marita and Lisa Cartwright. Practices of Looking: An Introduction to Visual Culture. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2009. Print. Style.com. "Dsquared2 Fall 2004 RTW." Dsquared2. Condé Nast, 2012. Web. 21 Mar. 2012. "Style of the 80s." Flare Mar. 1985: 92. Print. "Super Logo!! Vintage Labatt Blue Beer Polar Bear Tshirt large." Tshirt Time Machine. N.p.:n.d. Web. 23 Mar. 2011. "Sweater Girl." Vogue Sept. 2010: 612, 614. Print. Taylor, Lou. The Study of Dress History. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 2002. Print.

 

113 

"Tender is the Night." Vogue Sept. 2010: 698. Print. "The Best in Black and White." Vogue Mar. 1995: 407. Print. "The Best of Paris." Flare Mar. 1987: 116. Print. "The Empress and Her New Clothes." Flare Mar. 2004: 155. Print. "The Greatest Show on Earth." Vogue Sept. 2002: 623, 628. Print. "The Long of It." Vogue Sept. 1993: 550. Print. "The M.V.P." Vogue Sept. 2005: 644. Print. "The New Shape." Flare Sept. 2005: 192. Print. "The Right Angles." Flare Oct. 1995: 113. Print. "The Right Mix." Flare Mar. 2004: 164. Print. "The Season Begins with Something Glorious." Vogue Sept. 1987: 684. Print. "The Season Takes Shape." Vogue Sept. 1985: 616. Print. "The Total Lady." Vogue Sept. 2003: 601. Print. "The Untouchables." Flare Oct. 1987: 171. Print. The Valour and the Horror. Dir. Brian McKenna. Galafilm, CBC, NFB, 1992. Videocassette. "The Wild Bunch." Vogue Sept. 2001: 622. Print. Tranberg Hansen, Karen. "Youth, Gender, and Secondhand Clothing in Lusaka, Zambia: Local and Global Styles." The Fabric of Cultures: Fashion, Identity, and Globalization. Eds. Eugenia Paulicelli and Hazel Clark. New York, NY: Routledge, 2009. 112-127. Print. Trudeau, Pierre Elliott. Interview. CBC Television. 21 Dec. 1967. CBC Digital Archives. Web. 21 Mar. 2012.

 

114 

Turnbull Caton, Susan. "Fashion and War in Canada, 1939-1945." Fashion: A Canadian Perspective. Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press, 2004. 249-269. Print. "Twisted Classics." Vogue Sept. 2002: 642,648. Print. "Urban Odyssey." Flare Mar. 2007: 134. Print. Urquhart, Jane. The Stone Carvers. Toronto, ON: McClelland and Stewart, 2001. Print. Veblen, Thorstein. The Theory of the Leisure Class. 1899. Ed. Martha Banta. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2007. Print. Vinodrai, Tara. "A Tale of Three Cities: The Dynamics of Manufacturing in Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver, 1976-1997." Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper Series Statistics Canada 177 (2001): v-58. Print. Vipond, Mary. The Mass Media in Canada: Who Decides What we Read, Watch, and Hear? 4th ed. Toronto, ON: James Lorimer and Company, 2011. Print. "Wanderlust." Vogue Sept. 2008: 671, 683. Print. Wilson, Elizabeth. Adorned in Dreams: Fashion and Modernity. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1985. Print. Wyman, Diana. "Stretching or Shrinking? The Textile and Clothing Industries in Canada." International Trade Division. Feb. 2005: n.pag. Statistics Canada. Web. 22 Mar. 2012. ---. "Trade Liberalization and the Canadian Clothing Market." Canadian Economic Observer. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Dec. 2006. n.pag. Web. 7 Nov. 2011. Zhou, Yu "New York: Caught Under the Fashion Runway." Unravelling the Rag Trade: Immigrant Entrepreneurship in Seven World Cities. Ed. Jan Rath. New York, NY: Berg, 2002. Print.

 

115 

