MPC  MAJOR  RESEARCH  PAPER           Swept  to  the  Shores:   An  Analysis  of  Crisis  Response  Strategies  by  Canadian  Political  Leaders  in  the  Aylan   Kurdi  Crisis              Sara  Siddiqi   500721262            Supervisor:  Dr.  Duncan  Koerber         The  Major  Research  Paper  is  submitted  in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for   the  degree  of  Master  of  Professional  Communication            Ryerson  University   Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada                                                                        1  

Author's  Declaration:        I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  Major  Research  Paper  and  the   accompanying  Research  Poster.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  MRP  and  the   research  poster,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my   examiners.  I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  major  research  paper  and/or   poster  to  other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.  I   further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  and/or  poster  by   photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other   institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.  I  understand  that   my  MRP  and/or  my  MRP  research  poster  may  be  made  electronically  available  to   the  public.  

  

2  

Abstract:        Motivation:  This  MRP  explored  Stephen  Harper  and  Chris  Alexander's  responses  to   the  Aylan  Kurdi  crisis  Canada  faced  in  September  2015.  Aylan  Kurdi,  a  three-year- old  boy,  was  found  dead  and  photographed  on  the  Turkish  shore,  close  to  where  he   drowned  on  September  2,  2015.  Tima  Kurdi,  Aylan  Kurdi's  aunt,  told  the  media  that   the  family  had  been  trying  to  come  to  Canada  through  a  G5  sponsorship  agreement   but  had  been  denied  entry  by  the  Canadian  government.  Alexander  and  the   Canadian  government  were  criticized  ­  and  a  crisis  resulted.    The  crisis  was   particularly  important  as  it  came  forward  during  the  2015  Canadian  election,  when   the  Conservative  government's  refugee  policies  gained  increasing  attention.     Arguably,  this  impacted  professional  image  and  reputation,  as  well  as  Canada's   national  reputation.     Purpose:  The  purpose  of  this  MRP  is  to  identify  the  types  of  image  repair  strategies   Chris  Alexander  and  Stephen  Harper  used  to  respond  to  the  crisis  in  terms  of  both   professional  and  national  reputation.     Methods:  Two  video  responses  were  selected  for  examination;  they  were   representative  of  Harper's  and  Alexander's  initial  responses  to  the  Aylan  Kurdi   Crisis.  The  videos  were  chosen  based  on  frequency  of  words  such  as:  crisis,   apologize,  tragedy,  failure,  action,  and  blame.  These  words  have  come  up  frequently   in  the  literature  review  conducted  for  this  MRP.  A  content  analysis  was  conducted   for  this  MRP.  Both  videos  were  transcribed  and  coded  to  determine  the  types  of   crisis  response  strategies  used  by  these  leaders.  The  strategies  examined  are   categorized  into  four  types:  denial,  evasion  of  responsibility,  reducing  offensiveness,   and  mortification.  Descriptors  for  each  category  (or  sub-strategies  under  each   category)  included  shifting  the  blame,  defeasibility,  bolstering,  and  apology.  All  15   descriptors  were  drawn  from  the  works  of  Coombs  and  Benoit  (based  on  Image   Repair  Theory  and  Situational  Crisis  Communication  Theory).  To  quantify   percentages,  the  entire  numbers  of  crisis  responses  were  divided  the  number  of   times  a  particular  crisis  response  strategy  was  used.       Results:   Results  indicated  that  both  Harper  and  Alexander  used  crisis  response  strategies  of     reducing  offensiveness,  denial,  evasion  of  responsibility,  and  mortification.  Both   leaders  mainly  focused  on  reducing  offensiveness  in  terms  of  transcendence,   bolstering,  corrective  action,  and  performance  history.  Through  an  analysis  of  their   responses,  it  was  evident  that  both  leaders  addressed  Canada's  national  reputation.  
  

Conclusion: The  findings  of  this  MRP  present  a  key  area  for  further  exploration  in  crisis   communication:  how  nations  use  image  repair  strategies  to  restore  a  tarnished   image.    

  

3  

Acknowledgements:        I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  my  supervisor  Duncan  Koerber,  and  my   second  reader  Dr.  Catherine  Schryer,  for  their  useful  feedback,  comments,  and   engagement  through  the  learning  process  and  development  of  my  Major  Research   Paper.        The  completion  of  this  Major  Research  Paper  could  not  have  been  accomplished   without  the  support  of  Professor  Duncan  Koerber.  Professor  Koerber  has  provided   continuous  support  since  I  began  working  on  this  project.  He  helped  me  find  an  area   of  crisis  communication  to  focus  on.  In  addition,  he  helped  me  reformulate  my   research  questions  and  stay  focused  within  the  aim  of  the  MRP,  guiding  me  as  I   developed  my  MRP  from  the  beginning  stages  to  the  end.        I  would  also  like  to  thank  Dr.  Catherine  Schryer  for  being  my  second  reader.  Dr.   Schryer  has  also  provided  continuing  support  in  the  duration  of  this  MRP.  Dr.   Schryer  helped  me  focus  my  research  questions  and  aims,  while  providing  feedback   at  all  stages  (from  the  draft  proposal,  to  the  first  draft,  to  the  final  draft).                                                                                            4  

Table  of  Contents:      v Author's   Declaration..............................................................................................................2   v Abstract...................................................................................................................3   v Acknowledgements................................................................................................4   v Introduction  and  Background...............................................................................6   v Literature  Review...................................................................................................9   v Data  Collection  and  Method  of  Analysis.............................................................41     v Sample  Findings  Chris  Alexander.......................................................................43   v Sample  Findings  Stephen  Harper.......................................................................45     v Findings................................................................................................................47     v Conclusion.............................................................................................................58     v Appendix  1A:  Chris  Alexander  Full  Findings.....................................................61   v Appendix  1B:  Stephen  Harper  Full  Findings......................................................66   v Appendix  2A:  Chris  Alexander  Video  Transcription.........................................70   v Appendix  2B:  Stephen  Harper  Video  Transcription..........................................74   v Bibliography.........................................................................................................76                                                                                          5  

   Introduction  and  Background      In  today's  24-hour  news  environment,  we  are  often  overwhelmed  by  stories   of  crises.  We  live  in  a  society  that  is  driven  by  globalization  (Lindholm  and  Olsson,   2011),  where  images  and  stories  of  war,  trauma,  natural  disasters,  social  and   economic  conflicts,  political  crises,  and  corporate  wrongdoings  travel  almost   instantly  across  the  globe.  The  world  is  more  interconnected  than  ever  and  a  crisis   happening  in  one  part  of  the  world  could  have  an  impact  in  another  part  (J.  Hale,  P.   Hale  &  Dulek,  2005).  It  is  within  this  framework  of  increased  public  awareness,  as   well  as  interconnectivity,  that  the  field  of  political  crisis  communication  finds  great   significance.     This  Major  Research  Paper  (MRP)  seeks  to  explore  crisis  response  strategies   in  the  Canadian  political  arena.  The  context  of  the  MRP  is  around  Aylan  Kurdi,  a   victim  of  the  Syrian  refugee  crisis.  Aylan  was  a  three-year-old  Syrian  boy  whose   dead  body  was  found  and  photographed  lying  on  Bodrum  beach  in  Turkey,  close  to   where  he  drowned  on  September  2,  2015  (Taber  &  Ha,  2015).    Aylan  was  among  11   other  Syrian  refugees,  including  his  mother  and  brother,  who  died  while  crossing   the  Mediterranean  in  an  attempt  to  reach  the  Greek  Island  of  Kos  for  refuge.  Turkish   news  agency  DHA  (Dogan  Haber  Ajansi),  whose  journalist  Nilufer  Demir  took  the   photographs,  was  first  to  release  an  article  on  the  tragedy  on  September  2,  2015  at   8:  42  a.m.  The  article  led  with  one  of  the  four  pictures  of  Aylan  taken  by  Demir  (Vis,   Faulkner,  D'Orazio  &  Proitz,  2015).   This  personal  tragedy  that  ascended  from  the  conflict  in  Syria  soon  shook  the   world,  making  global  headlines  and  becoming  one  of  the  most  symbolic  image-led      6  

news  stories  of  our  time.  The  photograph  circulated  to  20  million  screens  in  a   matter  of  12  hours  after  it  was  released.  Engagement  with  these  photographs  on   Twitter  and  other  online  networks  proved  to  be  meaningful  in  raising  discussions   around  political  efficiency  and  response.  By  September  3,  2015  at  8  p.m.,  dialogues   on  the  Syrian  refugee  crisis  as  well  as  Aylan's  death  had  reached  a  staggering  53   thousand  tweets  per  hour  (Vis  et  al.,  2015).    Evidently,  the  story  galvanized  the   global  conscience  and  triggered  emotional  engagement,  causing  uproar  and  a  call  for   closer  attention  to  this  particular  case  as  well  as  the  entire  Syrian  refugee  crisis.     In  Canada,  the  story  took  on  a  different  light  as  Tima  Kurdi,  Aylan  Kurdi's   aunt,  told  the  media  that  the  Kurdi  family  had  been  trying  to  come  to  Canada   through  a  G5  refugee  sponsorship  application  but  was  denied  entry  by  the   government  (Kestler-D'Amours,  2015).  In  early  2015,  NDP  leader  Fin  Donnelly  had   dropped  off  the  Kurdi  file  to  Minister  of  Citizenship  and  Immigration,  Chris   Alexander,  who  had  said  he  would  look  into  it  (Glavin,  2015).  The  file  was  eventually   returned  to  the  family,  as  the  government  required  proof  of  convention  refugee   status,  which  was  not  provided.  In  a  press  conference  addressing  the  tragedy,  Tima   stated  that  those  documents  were  impossible  to  obtain,  as  the  Turkish  government   had  not  issued  the  Syrian  people  those  documents.  The  Kurdi  family  was  in  Turkey   at  the  time.  In  the  same  press  conference,  Tima  held  the  Canadian  government   accountable  for  the  tragedy.  The  prospective  blame  for  Kurdi's  death  consequently   fell  to  the  Conservative  government,  in  particular  the  Minister  of  Citizenship  and   Immigration,  Chris  Alexander,  as  well  as  Prime  Minister,  Stephen  Harper,  resulting   in  worldwide  criticism  and  a  crisis  for  the  government.  This  Canadian  connection  

  

7  

was  also  noted  by  various  media  outlets  around  the  world  such  as  Italy's  La   Repubblica,  UK's  Independent  and  the  Times,  Algeria's  El  Watan,  America's  Time   Magazine,  and  Fox  News  (Panetta,  2015),  bringing  political  responses  from  both   Canadian  leaders  into  an  important  spotlight.     Aylan  Kurdi's  case  and  its  Canadian  connection  are  significant  and  worthy  of   study  for  three  reasons.  Primarily,  the  case  raised  a  debate  about  the  responsibility   of  the  Canadian  government  for  Kurdi's  death.  This  responsibility  is  rooted  in  the   operations  that  denied  the  Kurdi  family  entry  into  Canada  as  accepted  refugees.   Second,  this  case  acted  metonymically,  where  Kurdi's  death  became  representative   of  many  other  refugees  in  similar  situations.  The  Canadian  connection  called  for   attention  to  Canada's  refugee  and  immigration  policies  on  both  a  national  and  global   scale,  where  Canada's  reputation  as  a  country  that  values  "compassion  and  fairness"   and  has  a  refugee  protection  program  that  helps  the  "worlds  most  vulnerable,"  came   into  question  (Government  of  Canada,  2016).  Third,  this  case  came  forward  during   the  2015  Canadian  election  where  different  political  leaders  spoke  publicly  about   how  the  case  was  handled,  and  how  the  crisis  should  be  resolved  moving  forward  ­   each  presenting  their  own  platforms.  How  leaders  respond  to  crisis  impacts  their   legitimacy,  image,  and  reputation  (Olsson,  2014).    Crisis  response  strategies  in  this   situation  became  significantly  important  for  both  Harper  and  Alexander.  Their   responses  were  not  only  necessary  in  addressing  public  outcry  for  Kurdi's  death,   but  also  significant  in  speaking  to  their  credibility  and  repute  as  leaders,  especially   as  the  crisis  was  situated  during  the  election.    

  

8  

This  Major  Research  Paper  will  explore  public  responses  from  Chris   Alexander  and  Stephen  Harper  to  determine  how  both  leaders  responded  to  the   crisis.  Part  one  of  the  MRP  begins  with  a  literature  review  that  is  conducted  as  an   introduction  to  the  theory  and  literature  on  crisis  response  strategies.        Literature  review   What  is  a  crisis?  What  is  crisis  communication?  What  is  the  goal  of  crisis   communication?        A  crisis  is  a  situation  that  is  commonly  distinguished  from  regular  situations  

by  feelings  of  urgency  and  anxiety  that  the  issue  will  become  worse  if  there  is  an   absence  of  action  (Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009).    There  is  general  consensus  in  crisis   communication  literature  that  crises  prompt  feelings  of  danger,  anxiety,  and  anger   (Boin,  Hart  &  McConnell,  2009;  Coombs,  2015).  Stakeholders  may  believe  the   organization  (or  the  individual  accused)  allowed  the  crisis  to  happen,  producing   feelings  of  anxiety  and  anger.  Stakeholder  perceptions  that  the  crisis  will  cause   harm,  or  fear  that  the  crisis  will  repeat,  results  in  anxiety.  These  sentiments  impact   how  stakeholders  interact  with  the  organization.  Crisis  response  strategies  are   significant  in  reducing  these  feelings  (Coombs,  2015).   Apart  from  impacting  stakeholder's  feelings,  crises  also  threaten  the   fundamental  structures  of  an  organization.  Crisis  communication  is  imperative  in   managing  details  of  the  crisis  situation,  and  managing  the  meanings  stakeholders   attribute  to  the  crisis  in  order  to  protect  the  organization's  reputation.  Eid  and  Fyfe   (2009)  state  that  a  crisis  "offers  a  serious  threat  to  the  basic  structures  or  

  

9  

fundamental  values  of  a  social  system  which  under  time,  pressure  and  highly   uncertain  circumstances  necessitates  critical  decision  making."  Crisis   communication  and  response  is  at  the  heart  of  this  critical  decision-making.  Coombs   (2015)  states  that  there  are  two  approaches  for  crisis  communication:  managing   information  and  managing  meaning.  Yum  and  Jeong  (2014)  define  crisis   communication  in  terms  of  the  first  strategy.  Yum  and  Jeong  (2014)  state  that  crisis   communication  is  the  "collection,  processing,  and  dissemination  of  information"  that   is  necessary  in  speaking  to  a  crisis  situation  (Yum  and  Jeong,  2014).  Crisis  response   strategies  can  include  an  organization's  responses  during  a  crisis  and  its  post-crisis   actions  (Yum  and  Jeong,  2014).  The  second  approach  ­  managing  meaning  ­   involves  efforts  that  are  taken  to  influence  how  stakeholders  perceive  the  crisis,  or   the  individual/organization  that  is  held  responsible  for  the  crisis  (Coombs,  2015).     The  bulk  of  crisis  communication  literature  has  been  oriented  towards  managing   meaning  in  terms  of  image  and  reputation  (Coombs,  2006).        Crisis  response  strategies  have  gained  in  importance  over  the  course  of  the  

last  20  years  (Koerber,  2014).  Part  of  this  growing  interest  is  driven  by  increased   public  exposure  to  crises  around  the  world.  Globalization  and  technology  advances   have  increased  our  consciousness  of  crises  and  their  impact  (Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009).  This   view  is  evident  in  how  quickly  the  Kurdi  crisis  gained  virality  in  both  the   mainstream  media,  as  well  as  the  online  realm.  How  organizations  respond  to  such   crises  has  significant  ramifications  for  their  legitimacy,  image,  and  reputation   (Huang,  2006;  Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2011).  Additionally,  crisis  response  strategies  

  

10  

become  a  reflection  of  an  organization's  ability  to  reduce  and  contain  harm  (Seeger,   2006).     Crisis  response  strategies  gain  further  importance  when  a  crisis  is  of  a  multi- level  nature.  A  multi-level  crisis  presents  a  critical  challenge  for  crisis  actors  to   contain  the  crisis.  Despite  the  rise  of  globalization,  crisis  communication  theories   have  mainly  focused  on  the  idea  that  crises  are  the  result  of  a  single  cause,  confined   to  a  particular  sphere,  with  an  identifiable  beginning  and  end  (Lindholm  &  Olsson,   2011).  However,  as  the  Kurdi  case  proves,  crises  can  quickly  transcend  borders  and   have  an  impact  in  multiple  spheres,  raising  issues  of  communication  on  different   levels.  Crisis  communication  is  particularly  imperative  in  the  public  sector  as  the   public  turns  to  the  government  for  assurance  and  trustworthy  information  during   challenging  times.        What  causes  political  crises?   According  to  neo-institutional  theory,  organizations  are  seen  to  be  legitimate  when   they  meet  stakeholder  expectations  and  conform  to  societal  norms.  This  conformity   leads  to  credibility  of  the  organization  as  an  entity  that  can  be  trusted  (Coombs   2006).  Coombs  (2015)  states  that  competence  and  integrity  are  two  critical   elements  of  reputation.  Research  suggests  that  individuals  are  more  willing  to   forgive  violations  of  trust,  as  opposed  to  violations  of  integrity  (Coombs,  2015;   Theissen  &  Ingenhoff,  2011).      The  government,  much  like  any  other  organization,   can  become  a  target  for  distrust  and  crises  if  it  acts  against  the  norms  and  values   that  its  stakeholders  believe  in  (Dean,  2004).  Such  norms  include  acting  in  an  

  

11  

honest,  responsible  manner,  adhering  to  the  law,  and  exhibiting  concern  for  the   community  (Dean,  2004).  Apart  from  generally  accepted  societal  norms,  Canada  is   also  known  for  its  norm  of  "external  responsibility"  (Zyla,  2013)  and  its   "humanitarian  tradition,"  moving  beyond  exhibiting  concern  for  the  local  and   national  community,  to  also  exhibiting  a  shared  responsibility  for  those  that  are   prosecuted,  displaced,  and  in  need  of  humanitarian  aid  (Government  of  Canada,   2016).  The  Kurdi  crisis  is  imperative  to  study  in  this  light  as  it  not  only  involved  a   death,  but  also  It  was  a  story  that  went  viral  and  brought  a  different  twist  to  the   perception  of  Canada  as  a  reputable  nation  known  for  its  humanitarian  aid  and   refugee  policies.  Denying  the  Kurdi  family  refuge  was  viewed  as  a  contradiction  of   the  norms  Canada  endorses,  as  well  as  the  policies  it  implements.     Theme  1:  Political  crises   Traditionally,  crisis  communication  theories  have  focused  on  private   organizations  in  terms  of  image,  reputation,  and  blame  avoidance  strategies.   However,  the  public  sphere  is  noteworthy  of  exploration  as  it  has  a  considerably   large  responsibility  for  communicating  and  handling  large-scale  societal  crises   (Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2011).     Who  responds  to  political  crises?   In  political  crisis,  political  leaders  are  generally  involved  in  delivering   frontline  information  to  the  public  and  responding  to  the  crisis  situation.  Ewart  et.   al.  (2009)  suggest  that  perceptions  of  trust  increase  with  higher  levels  of  presenter   authority.  Consequently,  an  individual  in  the  highest  role  of  an  organization  should   deliver  crisis  response.    The  manifestation  of  a  crisis  and  the  speed  at  which  political  

  

12  

leaders  respond  to  a  crisis  plays  a  critical  role  in  how  blame  for  the  crisis  is  assigned   (Ewart,  2016).  Politicians  are  primary  decision  makers  in  the  government  sector;   they  are  publicly  elected  to  have  an  impact  on  effective  decision-making  and   responding  to  the  norms  and  values  of  stakeholders.  As  such,  in  the  event  of  a  crisis   blame  for  ineffectiveness  traces  back  to  the  Ministers  and  leaders  of  government   (Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009).  In  terms  of  these  ideals,  responses  from  Stephen  Harper  (leader   of  the  Canadian  government)  and  Chris  Alexander  (leader  of  the  Department  of   Citizenship  and  Immigration)  were  necessary  in  addressing  issues  of  trust,   legitimacy,  and  government  decision  making  in  the  Kurdi  case  as  well  as  the  Syrian   refugee  crisis  overall.     What  external  challenges  does  a  political  crisis  bring  forward?     1)  The  issue  of  partisan  politics     Koerber  (2014)  argues  that  crisis  is  a  normal  facet  of  politics.  Political  crises   present  significant  challenges  for  the  crisis  respondent.  Primarily,  Politics  by  nature   is  partisan  and  the  political  audience  is  not  unified  (Benoit,  1997a;  Koerber,  2014;   Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2011;  Rosenthal  &  Kouzmin,  1997;  Sheldon  &  Sallot,  2008).   Canada  is,  of  course,  a  democratic  nation  where  citizens  elect  politicians.  Politicians   vote  on  legislature  that  impacts  the  lives  of  their  constituents.  In  cases  of  crisis   politicians  must  direct  crisis  responses  that  meet  the  needs  of  these  constituents  in   order  to  be  re-elected  for  parliament  (Sheldon  &  Sallot,  2008).  Koerber  (2014)   identifies  two  main  audiences  for  elected  leaders:  the  entire  general  public  that  the   politician  is  responsible  for  governing  in  a  fair  manner,  and  the  partisan  community  

  

13  

who  voted  for  the  politician.  This  brings  forward  the  challenge  of  managing   communication  at  different  levels.     The  politician  must  balance  multiple  interests  by  adjusting  their  response   strategies  in  relation  to  the  norms  and  values  of  each  constituency,  or  decide  to   pursue  one  interest  at  a  loss  of  the  other  (Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2011).  Politicians,   partisan  groups,  and  the  media  are  constantly  contesting  meaning  and  framing   actions  and  speeches  as  discursive  breaks  that  fall  outside  legitimacy  and  accepted   ways  of  speaking  and  acting  (Koerber,  2014).  Crises  create  political  space  for  actors   both  within  and  outside  of  government  to  reformulate  the  political  agenda,  striking   at  opponents  in  an  attempt  to  foster  their  own  political  ideologies  and  solutions  and   keep  the  offensive  acts  in  the  public  eye  as  long  as  possible  (Sheldon  &  Sallot,  2008).     This  creates  what  Boin  et  al.  (2009)  term  a  "political  exploitation  game"  where   opponents  aim  to  ensure  their  frame  gains  majority  support  in  political  arenas  that   are  processing  the  crisis  situation  (Boin  et  al.,  2009).  This  political  exploitation  game   brings  forward  questions  of  how  well  leaders  are  controlling  and  managing  the   crisis,  and  becomes  a  reflection  of  their  leadership  and  legitimacy  (Ewart,  2016).     This  partisanship  nature  is  highly  evident  in  political  response  to  the  Aylan   Kurdi  crisis.  This  partly  owes  credit  to  the  timing  of  the  2015  Canadian  election   where  leaders  of  the  Liberal  and  NDP  party,  Justin  Trudeau  and  Tom  Mulclair,  used   the  situation  to  addressed  how  Kurdi's  case  was  handled  and  introduced  their  own   ideas  about  how  Canada  ought  to  manage  the  refugee  crises  (CBC  News,  2015).  The   crisis  also  gave  the  opposing  parties  an  opportunity  to  critique  how  the   Conservative  government  had  handled  refugee  reform  and  policies  while  in  power  

  

14  

(CBC  News,  2015).  Analyzing  political  crisis  responses  from  the  opposing  parties  is   beyond  the  scope  of  this  Major  Research  Paper  ­  opposition  leaders  inherently  did   not  have  control  of  the  situation,  so  their  responses  are  neither  important  nor   pertinent  to  the  analysis  of  crisis  response.  However,  the  ideal  of  partisanship   presents  an  important  backdrop  for  investigating  whether  Harper  and  Alexander   addressed  multiple  audiences  and  spoke  to  their  legitimacy  as  leaders,  strategies   recommended  in  the  crisis  communication  literature.     2)  The  problem  of  perception     Political  crisis  response  also  brings  forward  the  challenge  of  perception.   Whether  or  not  a  crisis  exists  is  not  a  `fact,'  per  se,  but  it  is  based  on  audience   perception  of  whether  it's  a  crisis  (Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009).  The  Privy  Council  Office  in  the   Government  of  Canada  points  out  that  a  situation  becomes  a  crisis  when  it  is  labeled   as  such  by  the  government,  media,  or  credible  interest  groups  (Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009).   Perception  is  more  important  than  whether  or  not  a  crisis  is  real  or  apparent   (Benoit,  1997;  Boin  et  al,  2009;  Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009;  Stromback  &  Nord,  2006).  Benoit   and  Pang  (2008)  maintain  that  "threats  to  image  that  are  not  based  in  reality  can  be   just  as  damaging  as  threats  arising  from  the  accused's  harmful  actions."  Perception   is  also  linked  to  responsibility.  Benoit  (1997a)  contends  that  in  a  crisis  situation,  it  is   unreasonable  to  develop  a  negative  perception  of  an  organization,  unless  that   organization  is  believed  to  be  responsible.  These  ideals  are  significant  in  the  Kurdi   case.  Responsibility  for  Kurdi's  death  was  linked  to  the  Canadian  government,  as  the   media  presented  the  perception  that  denial  of  the  Kurdi  family's  application  led  to   the  Kurdi  family  searching  for  an  alternate  means  of  refuge.  This  indirectly  implied  

  

15  

that  had  the  Canadian  government  accepted  the  application,  Aylan  may  have  been   alive  and  in  Canada.  Despite  the  actual  facts  of  the  sponsorship  case,  the  public   perception  was  oriented  towards  the  Canadian  connection  and  Canada's  perceived   responsibility  for  the  tragedy.   Coombs  (1995)  contends  that  crisis  severity  plays  a  significant  role  public   inclination  to  attribute  crisis  responsibility.  Clayes,  Cauberghe  and  Vyncke  (2010)   add  to  this  idea  by  highlighting  that  the  more  severe  the  public  judges  a  crisis  to  be,   the  more  negatively  the  organizations  reputation  is  impacted.  This  tenet  is  rooted  in   the  belief  that  individuals  hold  others  to  be  more  personally  responsible  for   negative  actions  as  opposed  to  positive  ones.  In  addition,  research  has   demonstrated  that  negative  actions  are  not  only  more  easily  captured  but  also  more   easily  remembered  (Payne,  2006).    Severity  is  closely  connected  to  damage,  which  is   often  indicated  by  whether  or  not  there  were  victims,  or  if  death  was  a  resulting   factor  in  a  crisis  situation  (Coombs,  1995).  Severe  crises  that  involve  death  solicit   questions  for  both  victims  and  non-victims,  in  addition  to  requiring  some  form  of   reparation  from  the  organization.  Both  groups  want  to  know  that  sufficient  actions   are  being  executed  to  address  the  crisis  and  ensure  that  the  crisis  will  not  repeat   itself.  The  ideas  reflected  in  this  theme  suggested  that  as  long  as  there  was  public   perception  that  the  Government  was  even  partially  responsible  for  Kurdi's  death,  by   association  the  leaders  Harper  and  Alexander  needed  to  respond  to  the  crisis  to   prevent  threats  to  their  images  and  reputations.  In  addition,  they  needed  to  address   the  severity  of  the  crisis  and  the  actions  the  Canadian  government  was  taking  to   mitigate  the  damage  caused.    

  

16  

Theme  2:  Image  and  reputation   Image  and  reputation  are  two  recurrent  themes  in  crisis  response  literature.   Two  scholars  in  particular,  William  L.  Benoit  and  W.  Timothy  Coombs,  have   described  and  classified  strategies  that  are  generally  used  by  crisis  responders  in  a   wide  variety  of  situations  (Benoit  1997a;  Benoit  1997b;  Benoit  2015;  Brinson  &   Benoit,  1996;  Coombs  1995;  Coombs  2006;  Coombs  &  Halladay,  2008;  Coombs,   2015).  Benoit  identifies  image  as  the  "perception  of  a  person  (or  group,  or   organization)  held  by  the  audience,  shaped  by  the  words  and  actions  of  that  person,   as  well  as  by  the  discourse  and  behavior  of  other  relevant  actors"  (Benoit  1997a).     Image:     Image  becomes  particularly  important  during  a  crisis  situation,  as  it  impacts   the  relationship  the  individual  or  organization  has  with  its  stakeholders  (Brinson  &   Benoit,  1996).  For  an  image  to  be  threatened,  the  individual  or  organization  must  be   perceived  as  having  responsibility  for  the  act,  and  the  act  must  be  perceived  as   offensive  (Benoit  1997a;  Benoit1997b).  Evaluating  one's  image  is  restricted  to  a   certain  point  in  time,  for  a  specific  period  of  time.   In  the  Kurdi  crisis,  Tima  Kurdi  accused  the  Canadian  government  of  denying   Kurdi  and  his  family  entry  into  Canada.  This  provoked  the  sentiment  that  had  the   Canadian  government  permitted  the  Kurdi  family  refuge,  Aylan  may  have  been  alive.   The  perceived  offensive  act  in  this  situation  can  be  viewed  as  the  denial  of  refuge  by   the  Canadian  government  to  the  Kurdi  family,  bearing  an  indirect  responsibility  on   the  government  for  Aylan's  death.  According  to  Benoit  (2015),  believable  messages  

  

17  

that  critique,  attack,  or  express  suspicion  can  tarnish  image,  and  as  such  image   repair  strategies  become  greatly  important  in  response.     Benoit  argues  that  a  healthy  image  is  closely  linked  to  credibility  and  trust.   Image,  credibility,  and  trust  can  be  impaired  as  an  result  of  an  actual  or  perceived   offensive  act.  As  such,  when  an  individual's  image  is  threatened,  the  individual  often   feels  obligated  to  provide  defense,  justifications,  or  apologies  for  the  offensive   behavior.  Benoit  (2015)  contends  that  politicians  are  newsworthy  in  general  and   because  of  the  partisan  nature  of  politics,  they  can  expect  to  be  faced  with  ongoing   image  attacks  from  the  opposition  or  other  interest  groups.     Eid  and  Fyfe  (2009)  add  to  this  notion  by  stating  ongoing  stakeholder   involvement  in  service  delivery  and  policy-making  impacts  how  management   operates  in  the  government  sphere.  In  addition,  tools  such  as  the  Internet  have   resulted  in  an  increasingly  erudite  citizenry.    Together,  these  factors  contribute  to   how  quickly  an  image  can  become  tarnished  in  the  public  sphere.  This  gives  image   repair  strategies  in  crisis  response  great  importance.  Image  repair  strategies  can  be   used  to  respond  to  threats  in  various  ways.  These  responses  are  anticipated  to   reduce  the  impact  of  the  attack  on  the  organization  by  protecting  its  image  or  by   repairing  it  if  it  is  damaged  (Brinson  &  Benoit,  1996;  Coombs,  1995).     Benoit  (1997a)  outlines  five  main  categories  of  crisis  response  strategies  that   can  be  used  to  defend  images:  denial,  evasion  of  responsibility,  reducing   offensiveness,  corrective  action,  and  mortification.  Each  defense  strategy  has  a  sub- category  of  specific  defense  strategies.  Denial  includes  simply  denying  an  offensive   act  took  place  or  shifting  the  blame  to  another  individual  (Benoit  1997a).  

  

18  

Alternatively,  it  could  involve  acknowledging  that  the  act  took  place  but  denying   that  it  was  damaging  (Brinson  &  Benoit,  1996).  In  the  Kurdi  case,  simple  denial  did   not  occur  as  both  Harper  and  Alexander  acknowledged  the  existence  of  a  crisis  and   recognized  its  impact  by  speaking  to  the  media.     Of  the  subcategories  related  to  evading  responsibility,  defeasibility  has   received  significant  attention  in  the  area  of  political  crisis  communication  (Len-Rios,   2010).  Defeasibility  is  used  to  reduce  perceived  responsibility  for  the  offensive  act.   In  this  strategy,  the  accused  claims  that  they  lacked  information  or  power  over   significant  elements  of  the  situation  or  crisis  (Benoit,  1997a).  This  is  a  common   strategy  in  politics  due  to  the  diffused  responsibility  in  complex  political   organizations.  Benoit  (2006)  demonstrated  that  former  American  President  George   W.  Bush  used  defeasibility  as  an  image  repair  strategy  when  he  was  accused  of  a   groundless  invasion  of  Iraq.  The  criticism  sparked  from  the  US  government  claiming   that  they  knew  Iraq  had  weapons  of  mass  destruction  but  failed  to  find  them  when   the  country  went  to  war.  In  defense  of  his  decision  to  send  troops  to  Iraq,  Bush   contended  that  his  actions  were  founded  on  information  and  evidence  that  he  had  at   the  time.  He  continued  by  arguing  that  the  weapons  could  have  been  destroyed  by   the  war,  moved  to  another  nation,  or  hidden  by  the  Iraqi  government.  In  stating  so,   Bush  demonstrated  that  he  lacked  control  of  the  situation  at  that  particular  time   (Benoit,  2006).  In  the  Kurdi  case,  Alexander  also  aimed  to  reduce  percieved   responsibility.  He  stated  that  he  was  not  directly  involved  in  deciding  cases  and  that   this  responsibility  was  delegated  to  immigration  officers  who  decided  the  case  in   accordance  to  the  rules  set  out  by  the  department.  Thereby,  demonstrating  a  

  

19  

personal  lack  of  control  over  the  decision  making  process.  Benoit  (2006)  cautions   using  defeasibility  as  a  political  image  restoration  strategy.  He  contends  that  a  lack   of  control  can  influence  the  authority  and  credibility  that  may  be  expected  of  a   leader,  since  leaders  are  generally  expected  to  be  in  control  of  situations.       According  to  Len-Rios  (2010),  research  on  reducing  offensiveness  has   demonstrated  that  bolstering  is  a  commonly  used  strategy.  In  this  strategy,  an   individual  or  organization  attempts  to  increase  legitimacy  by  referring  to  previous   positive  behavior  or  action  (Brinson  &  Benoit,  1996).  Coombs  (1995)  states  that  a   crisis  is  negative  and  can  taint  the  positive  aspect  of  one's  image.  Bolstering  reminds   the  public  of  positive  behaviors  that  are  associated  with  an  organization.  This   should  counterbalance  the  negative  feelings  organizations  face  during  a  crisis   (Coombs,  1995).  Bolstering  also  offsets  the  negative  feelings  stakeholders  or  the   audience  may  have  towards  the  offensive  act  (Benoit  1997a).  Len-Rios  (2010)   contends  that  bolstering  is  successful  when  there  is  a  long-term  public  admiration   and  support  for  individual  or  organization.     Transcendence  is  another  popular  strategy  in  the  "reducing  offensiveness"   category  of  image  repair  theory.  Transcendence  includes  placing  the  act  in  a  larger   organizational  context.  Those  facing  crisis  can  point  to  higher  values  to  justify  the   act  (Huang,  2006).  It  is  significant  to  understand  whether  Alexander  and  Harper   used  transcendence  as  a  strategy,  as  the  Kurdi  crisis  was  part  of  the  larger  issue   Canada  faced:  the  Syrian  refugee  crisis.       Benoit  (1997a)  states  that  corrective  action  or  an  inclination  to  repair  the   damage  caused  by  a  crisis  can  help  rebuild  the  accused's  image.  Corrective  action  

  

20  

may  also  suppress  public  discontent  that  results  from  a  crisis  (Sheldon  &  Sallot,   2008).  This  strategy  may  include  confessing  to  a  mistake  and  apologizing,  but  these   features  are  not  a  necessary  requirement.  Len-Rios  (2010)  argues  corrective  action   obliges  the  accused  to  take  a  specific  future  course  of  action  in  repairing  the   damage.  As  such,  of  all  the  image  repair  strategies  corrective  action  is  the  most   forward  looking.  Corrective  action  can  help  establish  trust.  Trust  is  the  perception   that  the  accused  (individual  or  organization)  will  do  all  it  can  to  meet  the   expectations  of  stakeholders.  In  crisis  situations,  this  is  mainly  linked  to  reducing   the  uncertainties  victims  and  stakeholders  have  (Kim,  2015).     In  terms  of  responsibility  and  corrective  action,  Hearit  (1995)  contends  that   by  using  corrective  action,  the  organization  assumes  some  blame  for  the  crisis.  In   terms  of  politics  and  the  government,  corrective  action  can  present  a  significant   challenge.  Unless  the  crisis  involves  a  tangible  action,  politicians  can  only  promise   that  the  offensive  act  will  not  repeat  itself.  This  tenet  is  reflected  in  the  Kurdi  crisis.     The  Kurdi  crisis  gave  rise  to  the  conservative  government's  promises  of  refugee   intake,  placing  a  further  burden  of  crisis  response  on  the  government.         The  fifth  and  final  category  of  image  repair  strategies  that  Benoit  (1997a)   outlines  is  mortification.    Mortification  involves  admitting  responsibility  and   pleading  for  forgiveness.  Ethically,  if  the  accused  knows  it  is  at  fault,  an  apology  is   recommended  (Coombs  &  Halladay,  2008).  Benoit  (1997a)  notes  that  the  audience   may  forgive  the  wrongful  act  if  the  apology  is  deemed  sincere.  Cohen  (2008)  adds  to   this  notion  by  stating  that  apologies  must  also  be  voluntary  (apologies  are   occasionally  a  result  of  external  pressures,  as  opposed  to  inner  repentance).  

  

21  

Voluntary  apologies  reflect  sincerity  as  they  are  based  on  the  premise  that  the   accused  feels  remorse  for  the  offence.  In  political  crisis  situations,  this  might  be   linked  to  circumstances  where  the  public  is  angered  by  some  aspect  of  the   politician's  behavior,  requiring  the  politician  to  apologize  (Koerber,  2014).  Koerber   suggests  that  generally  mortification  strategies  are  believed  to  be  effective  in   reducing  damage  caused  by  a  crisis  and  moving  forward  from  the  response  phase.   The  Kurdi  crisis  ­  and  the  context  of  the  Federal  election  ­  are  the  kinds  of   situations  in  which  mortification  could  be  useful  in  ensuring  political  images  remain   positive  or  to  repair  an  image.     However,  full  apologies  are  contested  in  the  political  sphere.  This  is  based  on   the  premise  that  apologies  can  create  legal  liabilities  (Coombs,  2006;  Coombs  &   Halladay,  2008;  Coombs,  2015,  Len-Rios,  2010).  Also,  the  effectiveness  of  apologies   is  challenged  in  crisis  communication  literature.  On  one  hand,  apologies  may  be   viewed  as  a  sign  of  inner  strength  and  character  (Cohen,  2008).    Nonetheless,  Benoit   (1997a)  notes  that  people  do  not  like  to  admit  they  are  wrong.  However,  individuals   that  have  the  courage  to  accept  responsibilities  for  their  actions  are  admired  in   general.  Nonetheless,  accepting  responsibility  and  admitting  to  a  mistake  could  also   be  viewed  as  a  sign  of  weakness  (Cohen,  2008).  This  reality  raises  critical   implications  for  whether  politicians  should  use  apologies,  particularly  if  direct   responsibility  for  the  crisis  is  unclear,  as  in  the  Kurdi  crisis.  Additionally,  in  multi- level  crises  such  as  Kurdi's,  who  should  apologize?  The  Canadian  government  did   not  have  a  direct  hand  in  Kurdi's  death  on  the  shores  of  a  European  country.    

  

22  

Some  scholars  point  out  that  the  scope  of  an  apology  is  significant  (Cohen,   2008;  Coombs).  Expressions  of  sympathy,  compassion,  regret,  or  concern  can  be  just   as  efficient  as  apologies  in  influencing  perception  that  the  organization  is  taking   responsibility  (Coombs,  2006;  Coombs  &  Halladay,  2008).  Expressions  of  sympathy   without  accepting  responsibility  may  also  be  effective  in  cases  where  responsibility   is  ambiguous  or  difficult  to  establish  (Coombs  &  Halladay,  2008;  Patel  &  Reinsch,   2003).  However,  expressions  of  sympathy  should  not  be  used  as  the  sole  or  primary   image  repair  strategy  (Len-Rios,  2010).          Reputation:     Image  has  been  closely  linked  to  reputation,  another  key  theme  in  crisis   communication  literature.  Reputation  is  the  audience's  overall  evaluation  of  a   person  (or  group,  or  organization)  established  over  time  (Huang,  2006).  Reputation   is  viewed  as  a  fusion  of  many  images,  and  many  attitudes  as  opposed  to  an  image   that  is  formed  based  on  individual  and  subjective  characteristics  amongst   stakeholders.  Reputation  can  be  formed  through  stakeholders'  engagement  with  the   organization  (or  individual),  or  second  hand  information  received  from  other   sources  such  as  the  Internet,  media,  or  other  individuals  (Coombs,  2008).  In   relation,  Theissen  and  Ingenhoff  (2011)  state  that  reputation  can  be  viewed  as  the   perception  of  an  organization's  ability  to  meet  the  needs  of  its  stakeholders  and  is  a   combination  of  an  organization's  past  performances  and  future  prospects.  As   relational  capital,  reputation  helps  establish  trust.  Before  the  Kurdi  case  hit,  the   Conservative  leadership  had  long-standing  reputations  ­  one  within  its   Conservative  community  and  one  outside  ­  developed  over  many  years  in  power.    

  

23  

Research  has  also  linked  a  positive  reputation  to  positive  organizational   results,  including  government  influence  (Coombs,  2006).  As  such,  reputation   becomes  an  intangible  asset  for  any  organization  and  damage  should  be  avoided.     Coombs  (2008)  contends  that  a  crisis  provides  individuals  with  motives  to  think   badly  of  an  organization.  In  relation,  crisis  as  an  attack  on  reputation  may  serve  as  a   threat  or  an  opportunity  depending  on  how  the  organization's  behavior  is  perceived   by  its  key  stakeholders  (Theiseen  &  Ingenhoff,  2011).  Theiseen  and  Ingenhoff   (2011)  state  that  good  reputation  acts  as  a  reservoir  of  support  for  an  organization   in  times  of  a  crisis.   Coombs  (1995)  adds  to  the  image  repair  strategies  Benoit  has  outlined  by   expanding  the  entire  range  of  crisis  response  strategies  into  five  main  categories:   nonexistence,  distance,  ingratiation,  mortification,  and  suffering.  Some  of  these   categories  overlap  with  strategies  that  Benoit  has  also  suggested.     Nonexistence,  distance,  and  suffering  strategies  seek  to  influence  the  amount   of  crisis  responsibility  that  is  attributed  to  the  accused.  Nonexistence  strategies   attempt  to  establish  that  there  is  no  crisis.  Distance  strategies  highlight   unintentional  action  (excuse)  or  provide  justification  for  the  crisis,  thereby   attempting  to  decrease  the  amount  of  responsibility  that  is  linked  to  the  individual   or  organization.    The  suffering  strategy  (similar  to  Benoit's  strategy  of  evading   responsibility  via  defeasibility)  suggests  that  the  organization  is  an  unjust  victim  of   accusations  by  an  outside  entity,  and  that  crisis  was  external  and  uncontrollable   (Coombs,  1995).    

  

24  

Ingratiation  and  mortification  strategies  are  impactful  in  offsetting  negative   attributions  with  positive  impressions  of  the  accused.  Ingratiation  strategies  are   impactful  when  a  public  approval  of  the  organization  is  sought.  Similar  to   performance  history,  ingratiation  strategies  remind  stakeholders  of  previous   positive  actions  of  the  organization.  Mortification  is  helpful  if  the  organization  or   individual  wants  to  attain  forgiveness  of  the  publics  and  establish  acceptance  for  the   crisis.  This  adds  to  a  positive  attitude  of  the  accused  in  the  sense  they  addressed  the   crisis,  and  accepted  a  degree  of  responsibility  (Coombs,  1995).     Moving  beyond  organizing  crisis  response  strategies  into  broader  categories,   Coombs  (1995)  also  states  that  the  nature  of  the  crisis  (or  crisis  type)  should  also  be   considered  significant  in  determining  which  crisis  response  strategies  to  use.   Moving  away  from  a  case-based  approach  that  Benoit  and  many  image  repair   theorists  focus  on,  Coombs  proposes  Situational  Crisis  Communication  Theory   (SCCT)  as  an  evidence-based  framework  for  increasing  reputational  protection   (Coombs,  2007).  Researchers  using  this  theory  rely  greatly  on  experimental   methods  such  as  constructed  scenario  experiments  to  determine  how  the  audience   perceives  crisis  responsibility.  The  main  goal  of  this  theory  is  to  pair  crisis  response   strategies  to  the  level  of  crisis  responsibility  and  reputational  threat  attributed  by   individuals  to  a  crisis  (Coombs,  2006).  Coombs  (1995)  indicates  that  the  level  of   responsibility  stakeholders  attribute  for  a  crisis  impacts  how  negatively  the   individual  or  organization  is  viewed.  The  higher  the  level  of  perceived  crisis   responsibility,  the  greater  the  amount  of  reputational  damage  (Coombs,  2015).   SCCT  uses  a  two-step  process  to  evaluate  attributions  of  responsibility.  In  the  first  

  

25  

step,  a  crisis  type  is  identified.  In  the  second  step,  intensifying  factors  such  as   performance  history  and  relationship  history  are  evaluated.  These  intensifying   factors  strengthen  how  much  responsibility  is  attributed  to  the  accused  for  the  crisis   and  indicate  reputational  damage  overall  (Coombs,  2015).  Benoit  and  Coombs'   strategies  for  image  and  reputation  repair  will  be  used  in  the  analysis  of  the  Kurdi   case  in  the  next  segment  of  this  MRP.  In  terms  of  Coombs'  the  analysis  will   particularly  explore  whether  or  not  Alexander  and  Harper  used  mortification  and   ingratiation  (previous  positive  actions)  to  address  the  crisis  situation.     Coombs  (1995)  identifies  four  different  crisis  types:  faux  pas,  accidents,   terrorism,  and  transgressions.  A  faux  pas  is  when  an  organization  takes  actions  it   believes  are  correct,  and  as  such  there  is  no  intent  for  doing  any  wrong.  However,  in   this  situation,  an  agent  external  to  the  organization  contests  the  appropriateness  of   the  action.  Accidents  are  unintentional  events  that  occur  during  normal  operations.   Transgressions  are  actions  that  are  intentionally  taken  by  an  organization  knowing   that  they  pose  a  risk  or  harm  to  stakeholders  and  the  public.  The  final  crisis  type,   terrorism,  involves  intentional  actions  taken  by  external  agents  designed  to  directly   or  indirectly  harm  an  organization,  resulting  in  victims.  In  terms  of  Coombs'  (1995)   classification  of  the  four  crisis  types,  it  can  be  argued  that  the  Aylan  Kurdi  crisis  falls   under  a  "faux  pas."  The  organization  (Conservative  government)  took  actions  it   believed  were  appropriate  (denying  the  Kurdi  family  entry  into  Canada  due  to   insufficient  documents).  The  government  considered  this  as  an  appropriate  action,   as  such  demonstrating  that  there  was  no  intention  to  do  harm  ­  it  could  not  have   foreseen  the  death  of  the  boy  ­  but  due  to  system  protocols,  documents  were  

  

26  

needed  to  continue  the  case.  However,  Tima  Kurdi,  the  external  agent  challenged  the   appropriateness  of  the  Conservative  government's  decision.  As  ambiguity  is  a  key   feature  of  the  faux  pas,  the  public  must  decide  whether  or  not  the  actions  of  the   government  were  appropriate  or  not.  A  severe  threat  to  reputation  in  a  faux  pas   requires  the  accused  to  bolster  his  or  her  image  by  reminding  the  public  of  past   positive  performance  history  (Sheldon  &  Sallot,  2008)   Coombs  (1995)  argues  that  an  organization's  performance  history  is   imperative  in  the  event  of  a  crisis  as  it  helps  establish  legitimacy.  Coombs  contends   that  the  public  is  more  forgiving  when  the  organization  has  had  a  positive   performance  history.  If  the  public  does  not  know  of  the  organization's  performance   history,  it  gives  the  organization  an  opportunity  to  present  an  image  of  its   performance  in  a  manner  that  causes  the  public  to  believe  the  organization's  claims   (that  the  organization  is  reputable  and  trustworthy).  If  the  claims  are  viewed  as   credible,  the  source  is  legitimized.  In  addition,  Coombs  (1995)  also  suggests  that  if   an  organization  has  a  positive  performance  history,  the  crisis  may  seem  unstable.  In   such  cases,  stakeholders  are  less  likely  to  place  blame  on  the  organization,  or  view   the  organization  as  the  cause  of  a  crisis.  Sheldon  and  Sallot  (2008)  support  this   supposition.  They  contend  that  by  reinforcing  positive  acts,  the  gravity  of  the  threat   on  one's  political  legitimacy  is  significantly  reduced.  Arguably,  performance  history   is  comparable  to  Benoit's  "bolstering"  strategy  as  bolstering  is  an  attempt  to   increase  legitimacy  by  referring  to  previous  positive  actions  (Brinson  &  Benoit,   1996).    

  

27  

Crisis  responses  that  address  reputation  are  significant  in  the  Kurdi  crisis,  as   the  crisis  occurred  during  the  2015  Federal  election  when  immigration  and  refugee   policies  were  one  of  key  topics  referenced  by  all  parties  (Black,  2015).  This  brought   forward  questions  of  the  Conservative  government's  performance  history  in  regards   to  the  number  of  Syrian  immigrants  the  government  announced  it  would  accept  in   relation  to  the  actual  number  of  immigrants  it  accepted.  Additionally,  the  Aylan   Kurdi  case  shed  light  on  the  larger  humanitarian  refugee  crisis  in  the  Middle  East,   and  propelled  questions  of  the  Conservative  party's  future  plans  for  immigrants   (Black,  2015).     Consensus  on  types  of  strategies  used      There  is  general  consensus  about  certain  types  of  image  repair  strategies.  

Apologies  should  not  be  used  alone  (Len-Rios,  2010;  Benoit,  1995).  Apologies  are   more  effective  than  strategies  such  as  denial  or  shifting  the  blame  (Sheldon  &  Sallot,   2008;  Verhoeven  et  al.,  2012).  Corrective  action  cannot  be  used  with  denial,  as  it   signifies  that  the  accused  holds  some  responsibility  for  the  crisis  (Brinson  &  Benoit,   1996;  Len-Rios,  2010).  Denial  is  ineffective,  especially  in  situations  where  the  truth   eventually  becomes  known  (Benoit,  2015).  Expressions  of  sympathy  (including   disappointment,  concern,  regret)  are  just  as  effective  as  an  apology  (Coombs,  2006;   Coombs  &  Halladay,  2008).  This  is  especially  the  case  when  fault  is  ambiguous   (Cohen,  1998;  Coombs  &  Halladay,  2008,  Patel  &  Reinsch,  2003).  The  cases   examined  in  the  studies  cited  include  a  university's  response  to  a  sexual  scandal  on   its  Men's  lacrosse  team,  a  politician's  racist  remarks,  and  a  health  corporation's   long-term  responses  to  the  safety  of  its  breast  implants.  The  consensus  

  

28  

demonstrates  that  there  is  an  apparently  widespread  applicability  of  crisis  response   strategies.  Koerber  (2014)  argues,  however,  that  this  perceived  widespread   applicability  might  lead  to  an  uncritical  application  of  these  strategies.    For  instance,   in  a  case  where  apology  was  determined  to  be  an  effective  approach,  it  may  indicate   that  apology  should  always  be  used  in  similar  situations.  In  terms  of  which  strategy   to  use,  the  general  consensus  is  that  a  single  strategy  alone  does  not  work  (Sheldon   &  Sallot,  2008).  Therefore,  to  ensure  effective  crisis  communication,  multiple  crisis   response  strategies  should  be  used  to  tackle  the  crisis  (Len-Rios,  2010).  When   responding  to  the  Kurdi  crisis,  Alexander  and  Harper  used  multiple  crisis  response   strategies.  The  specific  types  of  crisis  response  strategies  will  be  explored  in  the   following  section  of  this  MRP.     Criticisms  of  image-repair  &  reputation  repair  strategies   Image  repair  and  reputation  repair  strategies  have  received  some  criticism  in   crisis  communication  literature.  Payne  (2006)  states  that  reputations  are  difficult  to   manage  due  to  their  intangible  nature.  Reputations  involve  multiple  signals  ­   actions,  stories,  reports,  interviews,  and  meetings.  Managing  all  these  signals  to   achieve  the  best  possible  reputation  is  difficult.  Dean  (2004)  argues  good   reputations  act  as  a  double-edged  sword.  On  one  hand,  good  reputation  could  result   in  stakeholders  having  high  expectations  of  the  actor  in  terms  of  taking  appropriate   measures  to  address  the  crisis  (such  as  corrective  action).  At  the  other  end,  even  a   "sterling"  reputation  may  not  help  an  organization  especially  if  tragic  incidents  are   involved.    

  

29  

In  addition,  some  scholars  have  classified  image  repair  theories  as  promoting   the  tendency  that  image  repair  can  be  reduced  to  a  two-step  sequence  (Burns  &   Bruner,  2000).  In  the  first  step,  an  offensive  act  is  identified  which  poses  threat  to   one's  image.  In  the  second  step,  the  individual  or  organization  responds  to  the   threat  using  image  restoration  strategies.  Burns  and  Bruner  (2000)  contend  that   this  oversimplification  suggests  that  an  individual's  image  can  simply  return  to  its   original  state  after  image  restoration  strategies  have  been  used.  Some  practitioners   have  found  that  apology  and  performance  history  may  help  repair  image,  but  cannot   restore  the  image  to  its  initial  state  (Sheldon  &  Sallot,  2008).  As  such,  the  actor's   image  will  likely  be  comprised  moving  forward.    This  tenet  is  significant  for   exploring  the  study  to  come.  In  order  to  understand  how  image  repair  strategies   were  used  by  both  practitioners.  Although  evaluating  how  image  was  impacted  by   the  responses  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  MRP,  this  tenet  is  significant  for  assessing   whether  and  how  image  repair  strategies  were  used  by  both  Alexander  and  Harper.         What  about  national  image/reputations?        The  above  findings  indicate  that  an  individual's  or  organization's  image  and  

reputation  can  be  greatly  impacted  by  a  crisis.  Most  of  the  cases  examined  in  these   articles  refer  to  straightforward  corporate,  organizational  or  individual  crises   (Benoit,  1997a;  Brinson  &  Benoit,  1996;  Dean  2004;  Ewart  et  al.  2016;  Koerber,   2014;  Len-Rios,  2010;  Patel  &  Reinsch,  2003;  Sheldon  &  Sallot,  2008;  Stromback  &   Nord,  2006;  Young,  2008).  The  Aylan  Kurdi  crisis  brings  forward  a  unique  challenge   in  understanding  issues  of  image  and  reputation  since  it  required  managing  crisis   on  two  levels:  professional,  and  national.  On  the  professional  level,  it  involved  image  

  

30  

and  reputation  management  at  the  level  of  those  who  had  responsibility  for   oversight  of  policies  (Alexander  and  Harper).  At  the  national  level,  it  involved  how   the  Canada  as  a  nation  was  perceived  for  its  immigration  policies  and  response  to   the  Syrian  refugee  crisis.  As  such,  the  issue  became  not  only  about  managing   professional  image  but  also  Canada's  image  and  reputation  as  a  nation.        To  understand  the  Kurdi  case  crisis  response  strategies  better,  it  is  important  

to  look  at  national  images  and  how  they  have  become  damaged  in  crises.  Zhang  and   Benoit  (2004)  note  that  nations  have  images  and  relationships  between  countries   are  influenced  by  images.  Generally,  a  nation's  choice  to  engage  in  national  image   repair  may  be  motivated  by  long-term  repercussions  on  national  reputation  and   promoting  diplomatic  relationships  between  nations  (Peijuan,  Ting  &  Pang,  2009).   Several  countries'  efforts  to  repair  their  national  reputations  have  been  noted  in   crisis  communication  literature.  However,  most  of  these  efforts  are  conducted  post- crises  (L'etang,  2009;  Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2013;  Payne,  2009;  Peijuan  et  al.,  2009;   Zang  &  Benoit,  2004).     Olsson  (2013)  states  that  the  ideal  of  public  diplomacy  can  be  used  during  a   crisis  to  address  national  reputation.  Tuch  (1990)  defined  public  diplomacy  as  "a   government's  process  of  communicating  with  foreign  publics  in  an  attempt  to  bring   about  an  understanding  for  its  nation's  ideas  and  ideals,  its  institutions  and  culture,   as  well  as  its  national  goals  and  current  policies."  (Tuch  1990,  pg.  3).  Public   diplomacy  has  traditionally  been  focused  on  campaigns  directed  at  foreign  publics,   through  the  media  or  cultural  programs  (Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2011;  Peijuan  et  al.).   However,  the  shift  towards  global  transparency  and  interconnectedness  has  

  

31  

emphasized  the  need  for  a  dialogic  approach  that  establishes  understanding  with   foreign  audiences.     Signitzer  and  Coombs  (1992)  suggest  that  the  expansion  of  communication   technology  has  allowed  for  a  greater  public  participation  in  international  affairs.   These  technologies  have  brought  forward  interconnectedness  and  established  a   global  marketplace  of  ideas,  and  increased  world  opinion.  They  contend  that  world   opinion  (the  opinion  of  foreign  publics)  affects  the  policies  and  behaviors  of   governments.  Lindholm  and  Olsson  (2011)  argue  that  although  globalization  and   advancing  communication  technologies  can  establish  increased  cultural   understanding  they  can  also  create  friction  between  social,  cultural  and  national   groups.  This  results  in  the  need  for  national  governments  to  have  an  open  dialogue   that  also  engages  other  nations.  International  affairs  are  no  longer  only  about   governments  establishing  mutual  understanding  and  relationships;  they  are  also   about  speaking  to  another  countries  citizens  and  influencing  their  attitudes   (Signitzer  and  Coombs,  1992).  Foreign  publics  can  be  classified  as  another   stakeholder  in  national  image  repair  efforts.  It  is  significant  to  note  that   stakeholders  are  not  just  passive  receivers  of  information  but  have  the  potential  to   heighten  or  mitigate  the  crisis  (Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2011).     Speaking  to  foreign  publics  promotes  self-portrayal  (how  foreign  publics   view  a  nation,  its  culture  and  institutions),  information  exchange,  a  reduction  of  bias   (towards  the  country),  establishing  sympathy  and  understanding  of  a  nations  model   of  society,  and  image  building.  In  politics,  public  diplomacy  has  been  used  for  a  

  

32  

variety  of  purposes  including  controlling  information,  framing  public  issues  and   dialogue,  managing  crises,  and  gaining  political  advantage  (L'etang,  2009).     From  a  public  diplomacy  perspective,  dealing  with  issues  of  national   reputation  in  crisis  management  has  three  facets:  recognizing  stakeholder's  values,   building  relationships  with  stakeholders,  and  communicating  in  a  way  that   resonates  with  stakeholders.  Recognizing  key  values  stakeholders  believe  in  is   important  in  successful  massaging.  In  examining  the  Danish  government's  response   to  the  Mohammed  Cartoon  crisis  of  2005,  Lindholm  and  Olsson  (2011)  state  that  the   government  failed  to  take  key  stakeholder  values  into  account,  which  had  significant   consequences  for  how  national  and  international  publics  interacted  with  Denmark.   In  this  crisis,  a  Danish  newspaper  published  cartoons  of  Prophet  Muhammad.   Muslim  organizations  reacted  to  the  publications  stating  that  the  publications   promoted  Islamophobia.  These  groups  protested  on  several  occasions.  The   government  ignored  the  concerns  of  these  stakeholders  framing  the  issue  as  a   domestic  issue  of  constitutionally  protecting  citizens  and  media  rights  to  "freedom   of  speech."  The  issue  eventually  escalated  to  an  international  level,  and  international   audiences  that  were  offended  by  Denmark's  actions  (or  lack  thereof)  began  taking   actions  such  as  boycotting  Danish  products  (Lindholm  &  Olsson,  2011).  By  failing  to   take  into  account  how  much  national  and  international  stakeholders  were  impacted   and  offended  by  this  crisis,  the  Danish  government  caused  the  crisis  to  escalate  and   intensify.  Peijuan  et  al.  (2009)  contend  that  a  nation's  image  repair  work  could  be   done  through  the  media.  Similar  to  professional  and  organizational  image  repair,  if  a   nation  is  trying  to  reform  its  image  through  the  mass  media,  it  should  provide  

  

33  

consistent  messaging  and  have  a  strong  media  presence.  Alternatively,   communications  campaigns  could  also  promote  positive  democratic  relationships.        The  cases  in  the  studies  cited  above  identify  the  importance  of  national  

reputation  and  how  to  address  it  from  a  public  diplomacy  and  image  repair   standpoint.  However,  none  of  the  cases  is  representative  of  crises  where   responsibility  is  ambiguous.  In  addition,  most  cases  are  based  on  organizational   efforts  to  enhance  national  reputation  in  the  post  crisis  stage  and  not  during  a  crisis.   This  poses  the  question:   1) What  kinds  of  image  repair  strategies  are  used  by  politicians  of  a  nation  in   multi-national  level  crises  where  responsibility  is  ambiguous?        The  Kurdi  crisis  is  worthy  of  study  in  this  regard  as  it  was  a  multi-national  level   crisis  that  arguably  brought  negative  light  to  Canada's  reputation.  In  addition,   Canada's  direct  responsibility  for  Kurdi's  death  was  ambiguous.        Theme  3:  Guidelines  for  best  practices     When  responding  to  crisis  like  the  Kurdi  case,  it  is  imperative  to  take  into   account  several  guidelines  for  best  practices  that  are  found  in  existing  research.   Payne  (2006)  refers  to  crisis  response  guidelines  as  a  framework  that  allows  crisis   managers  to  respond  effectively  to  negative  public  relations  exposure  by  choosing   the  best  crisis  response  strategy.  Seeger  (2006)  states  that  best  practices  may  be   used  as  a  general  set  of  standards,  norms,  or  references  points  that  inform  practice.   Guidelines  for  best  practices  suggested  in  literature  can  be  classified  into  two  

  

34  

categories:  establishing  credibility  and  collaboration.  Credibility  is  significant  as  it   establishes  trust  between  the  public  and  crisis  managers  (Seeger,  2006).  To   establish  credibility  the  crisis  manager  must  speak  in  an  open,  honest  and   empathetic  manner  (Ewart  et  al.,  2016;  Kim,  2015).  This  could  include   demonstrating  concern  for  individuals  impacted  or  harmed  (Ewart  et  al.,  2016).  The   public  responds  more  favorably  when  a  crisis  manager  expresses  human   compassion  and  concern  for  any  harm  caused  by  a  crisis  (Seeger,  2006).     Openness  can  be  achieved  by  collaborating  with  the  public.  Seeger  (2006)   states  that  during  a  crisis  the  public  has  a  right  to  know  what  is  happening  and  the   risks  it  may  face.  Openness  involves  promoting  an  environment  of  risk  sharing  by   providing  stakeholders  with  what  they  need  and  want  to  know  after  a  crisis  hits.     Openness  is  considered  a  best  practice,  especially  in  cases  where  responsibility  for   crisis  is  known  and  the  public  or  stakeholders  can  obtain  information  from  other   credible  sources.  In  such  cases,  one  should  be  open  by  accepting  responsibility   (Seeger,  2006).  Seeger  (2006)  suggests  that  crisis  communicators  should  also  be   open  about  uncertainty  in  situations  where  it  exists.  This  allows  the  communicator   to  refine  the  message  as  new  information  becomes  available  and  helps  counter   providing  false  information  to  the  public.         Papagiannidis,  Stamati,  and  Hartmut  (2013)  contend  that  crisis  can  establish   a  need  for  direct  communication  to  combat  negative  feelings  such  as  anxiety.  As   such,  politicians  should  not  only  be  open  to  employees,  the  public,  and  other   stakeholders  during  a  crisis,  but  also  be  open  online.  Online  engagement  is  critical  in   today's  society  where  users  constantly  demand  information  and  turn  to  online  

  

35  

sources  (Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009).  Openness  is  linked  to  transparency.  Transparency   involves  an  inclination  to  give  a  meaningful  account  of  one's  self.  Transparency   poses  the  challenge  of  balancing  informational  needs  and  interests  of  the  public   with  organizational  interests(Kim,  2015).  Transparency  demonstrates  trust  and  an   organizations  willingness  to  meet  stakeholder's  expectations  (mainly  in  providing   information  openly  and  reducing  uncertainty).  Kim  (2015)  contends  that   transparency  is  significant  in  stakeholders  understanding  what  actions  are  being   taken  by  an  organization  (in  times  of  a  crisis)  and  to  understand  the  rationale   behind  them.     In  relation,  ongoing  interactions  are  significant  in  establishing  credibility  as   they  help  build  positive  relationships  necessary  in  successful  crisis  management.   Ongoing  interaction  can  be  achieved  using  two-way  communication.  This  method   fosters  an  understanding  amongst  the  different  parties  involved  in  a  crisis.  Two-way   communication  involves  assessing  and  responding  to  stakeholder's  fears,  needs,  and   actions  (Kim,  2015).  A  best  practice  in  crisis  communication  is  to  communicate  with   stakeholders  or  the  public  in  a  timely  manner.  Timely  response  reduces  anxiety  and   uncertainty  (Kim,  2015).  Ongoing  interactions  also  help  establish  positive   relationships  that  are  necessary  in  successful  crisis  management  (Seeger,  2006).       Another  best  practice  cited  throughout  crisis  communication  literature  is   collaboration  with  the  media  (Boin  et  al.,  2009;  Eid  &  Fyfe,  2009;  Ewart  et  al.,  2016;   Erikson  et  al.,  2012;  Gurevitch  et  al.,  2009;  Hale  et  al.,  2005;  Seeger,  2006;  Sheldon  &   Sallot,  2008;  Stromback  &  Nord,  2006).  The  media  plays  a  significant  role  in   providing  information  and  messages  from  authorities  to  the  public  during  a  crisis  

  

36  

(Seeger,  2006;  Stromback  &  Nord,  2006).  However,  the  media  poses  a  challenge  for   those  involved  in  a  crisis.  Media  frames  can  be  highly  prominent  in  terms  of  how  the   public  feels  and  the  attitudes  they  hold  towards  those  perceived  responsible  for  the   crisis  (Ewart  et  al.,  2016).  As  such,  frames  tend  to  promote  "problem  definition,   causal  interpretation,  moral  evaluation,  and  or  treatment  recommendations"   (Stromback  &  Nord,  2006).  Hale  et  al.  (2005)  propose  that  a  facet  of  successful  crisis   communication  is  to  disseminate  information  as  quickly  and  accurately  as  possible.   In  relation,  Seeger  (2006)  suggests  providing  consistent  information,  accepting  that   uncertainty  exists,  and  avoiding  overly  reassuring  messages  when  speaking  through   the  media  to  stakeholders.  Seeger  (2006)  points  out  that  crisis  communicator   should  receive  media  training  and  remain  accessible  to  the  needs  of  the  media,  as   effective  crisis  communication  requires  being  accessible  to  stakeholders  needs.  As   described  later  in  this  study,  Alexander  and  Harper  engaged  with  the  media  to   communicate  their  crisis  responses.        Political  crisis  communication  best  practices:        Although  the  bulk  of  best  practices  can  be  applied  to  different  types  of  crises,  

some  best  practices  are  mentioned  in  relation  to  politicians  or  government   managers  responding  to  crises.  In  terms  of  political  crisis  best  practices,  Fyfe  and   Eid  (2009)  suggest  three  core  competencies  for  effective  government   communication.  Primarily,  politicians  and  bureaucrats  must  develop  the  ability  to   manage  information,  especially  when  it  comes  from  multiple  sources.  Managing   information  requires  prompt  decision  making  (Rosenthal  &  Kouzmin,  1997).  Seeing  

  

37  

as  politicians  and  government  officials  have  specific  responsibilities  (to  the  public),   it  is  suggested  that  they  intervene  immediately.  Rosenthal  and  Kouzmin  (1997)   state  that  for  every  hour  of  non-activity,  the  threat  (anger,  fear,  uncertainty,   reputational  damage)  can  be  multiplied,  having  detrimental  impacts.        It  is  also  suggested  that  government  agents  dealing  with  crises  think  

horizontally,  working  with  both  the  organization  and  external  stakeholders.  Lastly,   it  is  suggested  that  they  develop  the  ability  to  effectively  deal  with  authoritative   ambiguity,  as  accountabilities  between  bureaucrats  and  officials  are  not  as  clear  as   they  used  to  be.  A  key  external  stakeholder  politicians  need  to  collaborate  with  is   the  media.  In  today's  society,  government  and  politicians  are  faced  with  an   unpredictable  media  environment  (Gurevitch  et  al.,  2009).  As  such,  Sheldon  and   Sallot  (2008)  advocate  that  politicians  should  use  the  media  as  a  medium  for   communicating  sympathy  and  remorse.  In  addition,  they  should  provide  consistent   messages,  as  opposing  political  parties  may  attempt  to  keep  the  crisis  in  the  news  if   there  is  inconsistency.  Gurevitch  et  al.  (2009)  add  to  this  suggestion  by  stating  that   politicians  should  construct  "sincere  and  authentic  personas"  that  can  establish   trust  and  generate  interaction.  Stakeholders  critically  judge  how  a  politician   performs  in  front  of  the  media.  A  poorer  performance  (one  that  appears  insincere,   fails  to  meet  the  informational  needs  of  the  public)  could  have  negative   consequences  for  the  politician's  image  (Erikson  et  al.,  2012),  which  is  of  even   greater  concern  during  a  Canadian  Federal  election.        The  issue  with  best  practices  

  

38  

  

Although  best  practices  can  be  used  to  improve  professional  or  

organizational  practices  in  times  of  crises,  they  also  present  certain  challenges.   Seeger  (2006)  states  that  every  crisis  is  different.  In  relation,  professional  or   organizational  contexts  are  diverse.  As  such,  best  practices  that  work  in  one   industry  may  not  work  well  in  others.       Summary:     The  purpose  of  this  literature  review  is  to  understand  key  themes  that  are   present  in  crisis  communication  literature,  especially  in  terms  of  political  crisis   communication.    The  literature  review  begins  with  outlining  the  goals  of  crisis   communication.  The  first  theme  outlined  looks  specifically  at  crisis  response   strategies  within  a  political  context.  It  seeks  to  demonstrate  the  importance  of   political  crisis  response  and  the  challenges  crisis  respondents  face  when  addressing   political  crises.       The  second  theme  addresses  crisis  response  strategies  in  terms  of  protecting   and  repairing  image  and  reputation.  The  articles  examined  in  this  theme  focus   mainly  on  two  key  theories:  Benoit's  Image  Repair  Theory  and  Coombs'  Situational   Crisis  Communication  Theory.  These  two  theories  are  significant  in  understanding   the  strategies  used  by  crisis  responders  in  a  wide  variety  of  settings,  including   political  crises.  This  theme  further  establishes  a  general  consensus  between   academics  on  the  strategies  used,  as  well  as  criticisms  (and  perhaps  limitations)  of   image-repair  and  reputation  repair  strategies.    Lastly,  this  theme  addresses  the  idea   of  national  image  and  reputation.  This  is  particularly  significant  to  understanding   the  Kurdi  crisis  and  the  importance  of  addressing  the  Canadian  connection  and  

  

39  

Canada's  reputation.  This  section  outlines  that  most  cases  studied  are   representative  of  crises  where  responsibility  (for  the  crisis)  is  identifiable  to  an   individual,  or  organization.  In  addition,  most  cases  are  based  on  organizational   efforts  to  rebuild  national  reputation  after  a  crisis,  as  opposed  to  during  a  crisis.   None  of  the  cases  have  examined  Canadian  national  image  or  reputation.  This   presents  a  gap  in  research  that  the  Kurdi  crisis  could  fill,  in  terms  of  addressing   whether  politicians  in  multi-national  level  crises  use  national  image  repair   strategies  in  situations  where  national  responsibility  is  ambiguous  and  based  on   perception.     The  third  theme  identified  in  the  literature  is  guidelines  for  best  practices  in   crisis  communication.  It  begins  by  outlining  general  best  practices,  followed  by   political  crisis  communication  best  practices.  Finally  it  outlines  the  issue  (or   limitation)  of  best  practices.        Research  Questions:   Based  on  the  key  themes  cited  in  the  literature  review,  the  second  part  of  this  MRP   focuses  on  answering  the  following  research  questions:        1) What  types  of  crisis  response  strategies  did  Chris  Alexander  and  Stephen  Harper   use  in  the  Aylan  Kurdi  crisis?     a. Did  they  deny  or  accept  the  crisis?     b. Did  they  attempt  to  evade  responsibility?       c. Did  they  reduce  offensiveness  for  the  crisis?   d. Did  they  apologize?     2) Did  they  address  national  reputation?                    40  

Data  Collection  and  Method  of  Analysis      Data  Collection  Method:     To  address  the  research  questions,  a  content  analysis  was  conducted  based   on  initial  public  responses  from  Alexander  and  Harper.  Alexander  did  not  hold  a   press  conference  to  address  the  Kurdi  crisis  and  its  Canadian  connection.  However,   on  September  3,  2015  ­  the  day  the  images  were  released  by  the  media  ­  Alexander   made  himself  available  to  the  media  by  talking  to  national  television  and  responded   to  the  crisis  via  interviews.  The  interview  chosen  for  content  analysis  of  Alexander's   responses  was  his  interview  with  Don  Martin  on  "Power  Play,"  a  Canadian  public   affairs  television  show.  This  interview  was  one  of  the  first  public  responses  from   Alexander  on  national  television,  and  is  9  minutes  long.  Harper  on  the  other  hand   did  address  the  Kurdi  crisis  via  a  press  conference  held  on  September  3,  2015.  This   video  was  captured  by  Rebel  Media,  another  Canadian  news  source,  and  is  roughly  6   minutes  long.  These  two  videos  were  chosen  based  on  the  frequency  of  certain   words  such  as:  crisis,  apologize,  tragedy,  failure,  action,  and  blame.  These  words   came  up  frequently  in  the  literature  review  conducted  for  this  MRP  and  serve  as  a   preliminary  search  for  individual  keywords  that  led  the  way  for  a  more  in-depth   analysis  of  the  types  of  crisis  response  strategies  used.    Method  of  analysis:     A  content  analysis  was  conducted  for  this  MRP.  Both  videos  were  transcribed  and   coded  to  determine  the  types  of  crisis  response  strategies  used  by  these  leaders.  The   method  analysis  was  inductive,  as  it  drew  on  observations  to  determine  if  there  was   a  pattern  in  responses,  and  to  ultimately  explain  crisis  response  strategies  used   within  the  context  of  pre-existing  theories.  The  strategies  examined  are  categorized  

  

41  

into  four  types:  denial,  evasion  of  responsibility,  reducing  offensiveness,  and   mortification.  Descriptors  for  each  category  (or  sub-strategies  under  each  category)   include  shifting  the  blame,  defeasibility,  bolstering  and  apology.  It  is  significant  to   note  that  the  literature  review  illustrated  a  close  similarity  between  bolstering  and   performance  history  in  the  reducing  offensiveness  category.  These  two  categories   were  separated  based  on  tangible  statistics  and  numbers  provided  by  crisis   responders  (performance  history)  as  opposed  to  past  good  works  (good  traits  and   actions).  All  15  descriptors  were  drawn  from  the  works  of  Coombs  and  Benoit   previously  mentioned  in  this  MRP.  Examples  related  to  the  descriptors  are  given  in   the  codebook  alongside  the  quantity  of  times  the  crisis  response  was  used.  To   quantify  percentage,  the  entire  number  of  crises  responses  were  divided  by  the   number  of  times  a  particular  crisis  response  strategy  was  used.                                                            

  

42  

