Marketing the Environment: A For-Profit Vs. Nonprofit Approach

Caitlin Boros Dr. Jessica Mudry (Supervisor) Major Research Project August 28, 2014

Boros- PC8003- Page 2

i. Author's Declaration When first conceptualizing the direction that this Major Research Project (MRP) would take, I knew immediately that I wanted to focus on the communication of environmental issues. The topic of the `environment' is one that has been recurrent throughout my academic career, spanning historical, social, political, scientific and theoretical research. Recognizing my interest and personal passion in environmental issues, I sought to conduct a study that would address gaps in the existing literature and prove meaningful to the greater field of communication research. While this deep interest acted as a motivational force in conducting this project, I understood early on the need to avoid a personal bias. The comparative approach of this study aims to achieve this. This project also focuses on more traditional methods of communication, something that I believe is somewhat lacking in recent literature. While modern trends such as social media and the web have become common areas of focus, I feel it is still important to recognize the impact of television and print media, as these avenues continue to be some of the most relevant and effective means of mass communication. ii. Abstract This research project will focus on the use of social marketing tactics for the purpose of environmental issues. More specifically, it will examine how environmental discourse, social marketing, and social cognitive theory influence modern marketing of the environment. In using a representative case study analysis, the project will directly compare a for-profit environmental campaign with a nonprofit environmental campaign.

Boros- PC8003- Page 3

Text and image analysis will be used as the primary methodologies, providing insight into any noticeable differences or similarities that may exist between the for-profit and nonprofit approaches. Conclusions address the tactics, strengths and weaknesses of both parties, and provide considerations for improving the effectiveness of environmental marketing campaigns moving forward. iv. Acknowledgements I would like to first acknowledge the dedication of my Supervisor, Dr. Jessica Mudry, in assisting me with this project and encouraging me throughout. Without her support, `surviving' the MRP would have been not only more difficult, but a significantly less enjoyable task. Additionally, I would like to acknowledge the ongoing support of both the MPC Faculty and my fellow classmates. A project's greatness is most often achieved through collaboration, and without the feedback I received and the ability to bounce ideas off some other great minds, this project would not have been the same. Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for their endless patience in dealing with what could only be described (at times) as the `rants and raves' of a slightly crazed person... Your ongoing support and compassion, as well as the ability to make me laugh in even the most stressful of times, is what kept me motivated throughout this project.

Boros- PC8003- Page 4

iii. Table of Contents I. Introduction ............................................................................................. Page 8 II. Literature Review ..................................................................................... Page 9 2.1 The Environmental Issue: Discourse and History ..................... Page 9 2.2 Social Marketing ........................................................................ Page 11 2.3 Environmental Social Marketing ................................................ Page 15 2.6 Environmental Semiotics ........................................................... Page 17 2.5 Social Cognitive Theory ............................................................ Page 18 III. Research Questions ................................................................................. Page 20 IV. Methods ................................................................................................ Page 21 4.1 Introduction ............................................................................... Page 21 4.2 Text Analysis ............................................................................. Page 22 4.3 Image-based Analysis ................................................................. Page 23 V. Sampling ................................................................................................. Page 24 5.1 Materials .................................................................................... Page 24 5.2 Case Studies ............................................................................... Page 25

Boros- PC8003- Page 5

VI. Analysis ................................................................................................. Page 27 6.1 Data Collection and Techniques ................................................ Page 27 6.2 Sample Data Collection ............................................................. Page 28 VII. Results .................................................................................................. Page 30 7.1 Environmental Discourse Present in Text and Image ................ Page 30 7.2 Environmental and Social Tropes ............................................. Page 34 7.3 Dominant Themes: Water, Wilderness and Children ................ Page 38 VIII. Discussion ........................................................................................... Page 41 8.1 Introduction ............................................................................... Page 41 8.2 Social Marketing ....................................................................... Page 42 8.3 Social Cognitive Theory ........................................................... Page 47 IX. Conclusions and Recommendations ..................................................... Page 50 Bibliography/Works Cited .......................................................................... Page 54 Appendices .................................................................................................. Page 58

Boros- PC8003- Page 6

iv. List of Tables Table 1 ­ Sample Analysis Category Chart Table 2 ­ Number of Instances of Environmental Discourse Present in CAPP Campaign Table 3 ­ Number of Instances of Environmental Discourse Present in Earth Day Canada Campaign Table 4 ­ Social/External Factors in Text and Image (CAPP campaign) Table 5 ­ Social/External Factors in Text and Image (Earth Day Canada campaign) Table 6 ­ Water, Wilderness and Children in CAPP Canada's Energy Campaign Table 7 ­ Water, Wilderness and Children Found in Earth Day Canada's campaign v. List of Figures Figure 1 ­ `Energy the World Needs' Figure 2 ­ `EcoKids ­ Wildlife' Figure 3 ­ Screenshot of `Canada's Energy ­ Kids' Figure 4 ­ Screenshot of Earth Day PSA Figure 5 ­ Screenshot of `Canada's Energy ­ Water' Figure 6 ­ `EcoKids ­ Ocean'

Boros- PC8003- Page 7

vi. List of Appendices i. Advertisements Transcripts ii. Print Advertisements iii. Master Chart ­ Text and Image Analysis iv. Water, Wilderness and Children Charting

Boros- PC8003- Page 8

I. Introduction

- Cathy Wilcox (www.cathywilcox.com.au) Around the time I began this project, I remember sitting in a movie theatre waiting for a film to begin. As the lights dimmed and the audience quieted, the first images came onto the screen. The reel depicted multiple examples of energy use, from a tractor in a field to a plane in the sky, and beautiful landscapes and modern cityscapes provided an idyllic background. As the clip concluded, the message finally came: energy is an essential part of life and the Alberta oil sands will support our growing energy demands for generations to come. The final statement ­ there's more to the story ­ was enough for me to know that I had just partook in a live example of an environmental marketing campaign. And that I wanted to know more about them. The purpose of this Major Research Project (MRP) is to examine the use of social marketing in environmental campaigns. The project will compare and contrast strategies

Boros- PC8003- Page 9

used by nonprofit and corporate organizations whose focus is the environment and natural resources. This project will feature two representative case studies that I will analyze using a mixed-method approach, including textual and contextual analysis. This analysis will offer insight into the textual foci of environmental social marketing campaigns as well as the social context in which these campaigns exist This topic area is highly relevant to the field of communication. With a significant increase in environmental campaigns over the past decade, this area of social marketing has become easily recognizable. Though the notion of `greenwashing' has become largely popularized since the coining of the phrase in 1986, very little research has been done directly comparing the nonprofit versus corporate approach. The goal of this research study is to compare and contrast the two approaches, identifying similarities that may exist and offering recommendations for the future of environmental social marketing. II. Literature Review 2.1 The Environmental Issue: History and Discourse Environmentalism as an ideology can arguably be traced back to 1962, when a single book-- Rachel Carson's Silent Spring-- brought to the public's attention the numerous ecological issues facing our world. The first Earth Day took place on April 22, 1970 and anti-pollution campaigns became popularized in the mid 70s. Since this time, the ideology of environmentalism has progressed, expanded, and intensified due to increasing vulnerability and disaster. At the root of environmentalism is the belief that the

Boros- PC8003- Page 10

environment is something that needs to be protected. Environmentalists believe that "at the heart of the world's problems of pollution, resource depletion and environmental deterioration are domineering and exploitative attitudes to nature." (Pepper, 2002, p. 10). Thus, environmental issues relate directly to a threat or problem facing the natural world. Though this is a broad definition, it serves well in understanding the scope of issues that fall under the environmental `umbrella'. Inherent in the history and development of environmentalism are a variety of guiding tropes which have shaped the way in which societies have reacted to environmental issues. These include romantic notions of landscape, majestic rivers, and wild animals, just to name a few. However when it comes to the environment, tropes are varying, meaning something for one person (or society), and something completely different for another. In his book Modern Environmentalism: An Introduction, David Pepper discusses the complexity of such ideologies. He describes the contrast that exists within environmental ideologies, giving the example of the countryside. He states, "the countryside is, or was, a place of harmony, peace and serenity... conversely, countryside has been portrayed as a place of hard work, harshness and `idiocy'." (Pepper, 2002, p. 2). These tropes are meant to provide context, however when it comes to environmentalism, such notions are never `truths', but rather assumptions born out of societal beliefs. One potential opposing ideology to environmentalism is capitalism. In capitalism, the monetary sustainability of a market, company, etc. is prioritized over everything else. While environmentalism focuses on the sustainability of nature, capitalism focuses on the

Boros- PC8003- Page 11

sustainability of the market. To illustrate this, I present the example of natural resources. Where rapid depletion of resources may have dire consequences for the environment, the sale and continued use of these resources could prove valuable in a capitalist economy. Capitalism is just one opposing ideology to environmentalism; however, this example illustrates some context and potential barriers environmental discourse faces. 2.2 Social Marketing In order to analyze the environmental campaigns proposed as case studies for this project, it is imperative to have detailed knowledge of the concept of social marketing and its associated methods. It has been described as "a process that applies marketing principles and techniques to create, communicate, and define value in order to influence target audience behaviors that benefit society... as well as the target audience." (Kotler, P. Et al., 2006, as quoted in Mackenzie-Mohr et al., 2012, p. 4). Here, the emphasis is on impacting the behaviours of an audience, implying an outcome of action of inaction. Additionally, another definition proposes, "social marketing is the application of marketing principles to shape markets that are more effective, efficient, sustainable and just in advancing people's well-being and social-welfare." (Phils et al., 2008 as quoted in Lefebvre, 2012, p. 120). In this sense, social marketing is used as a tool to create a positive effect as defined by the organization using it. These definitions provide a good foundation for understanding the many complexities of social marketing. For the purpose of this project, social marketing can be broadly defined as a strain of marketing that uses similar tactics not to sell a product, but

Boros- PC8003- Page 12

rather to sell an idea or set of values that will in turn influence individual or group action or inaction. Multiple elements determine the success and effectiveness of social marketing campaigns and must be discussed in detail. There are several key components of social marketing that make it unique. Differing from consumer marketing, social marketing focuses on specific issues that affect society. In Social Marketing in the 21st Century, Alan Anderson acknowledges that social marketing addresses a `social problem'-- an element that undermines what society deems acceptable (2006, p. 215). A social problem indicates a wide-spread issue that affects a large audience. Due to their scope, these issues require an action (or inaction) in order to address the problem; this is where social marketing plays a key role. To illustrate what may be considered a `social problem', I will give a brief example of social marketing. In 2004, a mass social marketing campaign was launched in the area surrounding Chesapeake Bay. The campaign was created as a response to contamination of the Bay due to the use of lawn fertilizers in the spring (Tools of Change, 2012). In order to motivate people living in the area to change their fertilizing habits, a social problem was presented: seafood. The `Save the crabs ­ Then eat `em!' campaign stated that if contamination of the Bay continued, local seafood (a much-enjoyed staple in the area) would no longer be available (Tools of Change, 2012). In focusing on the immediate effects of the issue on the lives of people in the area, a social problem was identified and became the primary motivator for the campaign's audience. While a social problem is essential in any social marketing campaign, another notable aspect of this form of marketing is the communication of risk. Since its early

Boros- PC8003- Page 13

origins in health-based initiatives, social marketing has been used to relay risks to widespread audiences in order to influence behaviours. In fact, "The effective communication of risk... is widely held to be a vital element in the success of social marketing programs" (McGovern, 2008, p. 128). However, risk itself can be recognized as a broad term, defined in part by the people it affects. An understanding of risk is important as it applies directly to the causation and success of social marketing. In seeking a description of risk, it seems only appropriate to turn to the work of Ulrich Beck. He states, "The category of risk reflects the response to uncertainty" and recognizes that as societies have modernized, greater uncertainty exists (Beck, 2009, p. 5, 7). Risk, then, is created whenever a society identifies a factor of uncertainty, most often related to a social problem (such as the one described in the Chesapeake Bay example above). Beck uses the term `risk society' to describe "an era of modern society that no longer merely casts off traditional ways of life but rather wrestles with the side effects of successful modernization" (2009, p. 8). In addressing modernization as the primary factor in increasing uncertainty (and risk), Beck pinpoints a divide that exists between the expectations of society and the consequences that occur as a result of the demands of our modern world. Furthermore, he discusses risk as experiential, describing it as "the discovery, the suffering, the prediction of the unpredictable, the gear, the desire, the surprise, the occasional anticipation of death, which risk smuggles into everyday life" (Beck, 2009, p. 5). Though Beck does not identify one solitary, all-encompassing definition, his insights into uncertainty, the state of society, and experience help to provide a greater understanding on the broad concept of risk.

Boros- PC8003- Page 14

To better understand the communication of risk and its importance in social marketing, I want to refer back to my previous exam ple. The `Save the crabs ­ Then eat `em!' campaign identified a social problem that directly related to their target audience; however, the campaign also used the communication of risk as an essential part of its strategy. In identifying the problem of seafood depletion due to contamination in the Bay, the campaign also communicated the risk that seafood may not be available to residents in the long-term. The potential loss of this locally enjoyed food-staple forced the campaign's audience to consider the risks associated with fertilizer runoff. Communicating the potential consequences (or risk) of social problems is an effective tool used by social marketers as a persuasive technique for inspiring action. Once risk has been associated with a specific issue, it creates a need for interpretation, which is where social marketing campaigns find a purpose. In using risk, campaigns play into the uncertainty that exists among its audience, providing a stronger connection to the issue and a greater rational behind adopting or rejecting a specific behaviour. However, a key factor in determining the success of `communication of risk' lies with the audience. Much like traditional consumer marketing, the audience plays an integral role not only in the success of the campaign, but in its initial planning stages. A campaign must be shaped around the needs of its audience, and in social marketing this means that the issue being addressed must be developed and directed with a relevant audience in mind. Anderson argues that social marketers need to have an audience centered mind-set, as "The target audience member is the one who ultimately determines success. Therefore,

Boros- PC8003- Page 15

the challenge is to understand where this audience member is "coming from" and respond to this learning.' (Anderson, 2006, pp. 95-96). A focus on the audience is necessary in order to facilitate an effective approach to behavioural adoption or rejection. Again, the Chesapeake Bay example illustrates the importance of the audience in social marketing campaigns. The issue of contamination in the Bay could be directly connected to the use of fertilizer by the area's residents. The effects of the contamination (a reduced seafood population) were also directly connected to the area's residents. With this in mind, the `Save the crabs ­ Then eat `em!' campaign strategically focused on a local audience, increasing its chances in changing local behaviours, the ultimate goal of the campaign. These three themes, a social problem, communication of risk, and the audience, are integral elements in any social marketing campaign. As evidenced in research and the Chesapeake Bay example, these three areas provide the foundation for effective belief and behavioural change strategies. The themes will inform the use and understanding of social marketing in this project. 2.3 Environmental Social Marketing For this project, I will focus specifically on the use of social marketing in campaigns regarding environmental issues. Environmental social marketing is a subgenre with its own unique nuances. One proposed definition suggests that, "Environmental marketing is a systematic process that leads to knowledge of the sustainable development market." (Funaru and Baranov, 2012, p. 55). While education is

Boros- PC8003- Page 16

often an essential element in these types of campaigns, it does not always lead to an embodiment of values or associated behaviours. "While the public needs to understand the implications of such serious issues as global warming, toxic waste, or ozone depletion, they also need to be told what positive action they can take" (Mackenzie -Mohr et al., 2012, p. 16). In this sense, an essential element of environmental social marketing is not only providing the target audience with an awareness of social problems, but also providing direction for how such problems can be managed on an individual level. Environmental social marketing can be used for a variety of issues; however, key components across campaigns should remain intact. In " [A] targeted social marketing approach for community pro-environmental behavioural change", Haq et al. describe these components, ranging from the planning of the campaign to its outcome. They state, "information provided should enable practical action; impacts of behaviour should be made visible; new behaviours should fit within existing routines; provide feedback and rewards on the changes made; target a whole community or neighbourhood to instil collective change and take account of the rebound effect." (Owens 2000, Bedford et al. 2004, Abrahmse et al. 2005, Jackson 2005 as stated in Haq et al., 2013, p. 1135). These elements emphasize a behavioural approach that involves stopping or encouraging specific behaviours. In the `Save the crabs ­ Then eat `em!' campaign example discussed in the previous sub-section, a clear call to both inaction and action was made. Fertilizer use in the spring was identified as a behaviour to stop, while switching to fertilizer use in the fall was encouraged (Tools of Change, 2012). What is apparent in this process is a

Boros- PC8003- Page 17

need for tangible solutions to the identified environmental problem, incentives for change, and/or an understanding of outcomes and consequences. As environmental social marketing often relies on traditional marketing tools such as advertising, videos, images, or text-based materials (emails, newsletters, etc.), it is important to understand how to analyze these elements in proficient detail. This can be achieved through text and image analysis, which will be discussed in greater detail in subsequent sections. However, one important development can be recognized as a tool for image analysis of environmental social marketing: environmental semiotics. 2.4 Environmental Semiotics As will be discussed in later sections, both text and image analysis are used as primary methodologies for this project. However, it is important to note the lack of available literature discussing the greater symbolic value associated with environmental imagery, especially in social marketing campaigns. To address this issue, I offer a new area of study: environmental semiotics. The study of environmental symbolism in social marketing campaigns is a subject area with little to no research or academic literature; it is essentially unrecognized. Due to this `gap', I propose a new definition as a framework for analysis. Based on environmental discourse, environmental semiotics (for the purpose of this study) is defined as signs or symbols that directly relate to the relationship between human beings and the natural environment. This definition will guide the analysis of images used in the case studies for this project.

Boros- PC8003- Page 18

2.5 Bandura's Social Cognitive Theory The final theoretical framework that will be used to inform this project is Albert Bandura's social cognitive theory, which addresses issues surrounding behavioural change. This theory is detailed in its concepts, with Bandura's work spanning nearly 60 years of research and having progressed to encompass modern innovations, such as the technology now available for mass communication. For the purpose of this discussion, the primary elements of the theory will be presented with a specific focus to those most relevant to social marketing. Bandura describes the basis of his theory as a `model of triadic reciprocality' where "behaviour, cognitive and other personal factors, and environmental influences all operate interactively as determinants of each other." (Bandura, 1986, p. 23). This approach identifies outside influences as directly linked to personal values through cognitive processes. Additionally, an important aspect of social cognitive theory is the self regulatory capability of human beings. Bandura believes that the ability to adopt a set of personal standards or beliefs lies within the individual's own decis ion-making process (Bandura, 1986, p. 20). Furthermore, he argues that such beliefs must align with one's internal motivations. Bandura says, "This theory posits a multifaceted causal structure in which self-efficacy beliefs operate in concert with cognized goals, outcome expectations, and perceived environmental impediments and facilitators in the regulation of human motivation, action, and well-being." (1998, p. 2). Evidently, for one to adopt or reject an action, it must align with their personal motivations and be recognized as valuable.

Boros- PC8003- Page 19

Bandura proposes a four-step cognitive process as a system for behavioural adoption. This process begins with `modeled observation' and ends with `matched responses', however, in between lie different stages of cognition . First, there are `Attentional Processes' which signify the primary reception of a modeled behaviour (Bandura, 2001, p.273). Next are `Retention Processes' such as symbolic coding that organizes the modeled event or behaviour in one's memory. This if foll owed with `Production Processes' and `Motivational Process' which determine what action an individual should take and why they should do so. (Bandura, 2001, p. 273). If at any point the modeled event does not resonate with the individual, the next step of cognitive process may not take place. This would result in a failed attempt at transferring behaviours. Bandura highlights multiple tools which he recognizes as effective in influencing behaviour. Firstly, he acknowledges the power of symbolism. He states, "It is with symbols that people process and transform transient experiences into cognitive models that serve as guides for judgement and action." (Bandura, 2001, p. 267). Such semiotic modeling is identified as an effective method for self-processes. Another aspect highlighted by Bandura is the notion of forethought. He argues that forethought is one of the guiding factors of cognitive processes (Bandura, 2001, p. 268). Furthermore, he attests, "conceived futures can operate anticipatorily as motivators a nd regulators of current behaviour" providing "direction, coherence and meaning to one's life." (Bandura, 2001, p. 268). These tools are a few of many that offer influential means for affecting an individual's behaviour and guiding principles.

Boros- PC8003- Page 20

Finally, Bandura acknowledges the importance of innovative technology and communication. He states, "Whereas previously, modeling influences were largely confined to the behavior patterns exhibited in one's immediate environment, the accelerated growth of video delivery technologies has vastly expanded the range of models to which members of society are exposed" (Bandura, 2001, p. 271) . Mass communication has provided an increased opportunity for influence, enabling modeling to occur at both the individual and group level. Bandura continues, "New ideas, values, behaviour patterns and social practices are now being rapidly diffused worldwide by symbolic modeling in ways that foster a globally distributed consciousness." (2001, p. 271). This social consciousness represents shared behaviours, ones which Bandura believes can be directly influenced through the implementation of social cognitive theory in modern communication methods. Social cognitive theory can easily be applied to a greater understanding of social marketing campaigns. A social marketing initiative's ultimate purpose is to change the behaviours or beliefs of an audience. Bandura's discussion of value alignment, symbolism and forethought as elements of effective behavioural change align well with the structure and strategy of social marketing campaigns. In providing a greater understanding of the cognitive processes involved in decision-making and identifying the most effective ways in which to influence behaviour, Bandura offers a foundation for social marketing practices that can be applied to all issues, including environmental. III. Research Questions

Boros- PC8003- Page 21

To understand the use of social marketing in environmental campaigns, I have identified two primary `parties' making use of this strategy: for -profit companies and nonprofit organizations. Environmental nonprofit organizations rely on social marketing as a method to garner support for their cause. In the same way, for-profit organizations whose businesses have environmental implications use social marketing to garner support for the work of their company. Though it is clear both parties use social marketing, I want to gain insight into how each of these parties approach this specific type of campaign. In comparing a for-profit environmental campaign and a nonprofit environmental campaign, what strategies exist? What similarities and differences exist within these strategies? I also want to consider how these approaches, whether similar or completely different, could better differentiate themselves; in other words, how one could be specifically identified as for-profit and one as nonprofit. In order to understand if clarity of messaging has the potential to improve these campaigns, I ask: would either party (forprofit or nonprofit) `do' the environment differently? In other words, how can the information gained from the case study analysis provide insight into future environmental social marketing strategies? IV. Methods 4.1 Introduction For this project, I will be using text and image analysis to interpret the selected materials. Text and image analysis will prove useful in identifying surface-level similarities and differences that may exist in the advertisements. However, contextual

Boros- PC8003- Page 22

analysis will provide greater insight into these findings, incorporating social marketing tactics, environmental discourse, and social cognitive theory. 4.2 Text Analysis I will use text analysis as one of the primary frameworks to analyze the proposed case studies. While there are many approaches to textual analysis, they can --for the most part--be separated into two distinguished categories. In "Text, Discourse, Concept: Approaches to Textual Analysis", Jan Ifverson discusses varying methods of textual analysis. He says, "Some approaches tend to work at the micro -level, where the role and meaning of the singular text becomes important. Other approaches are oriented towards a macro-level where many texts are studied in order to make wide-ranging claims" (Ifverson, 2003, p. 68). This important differentiation speaks to the varying capacities of textual analysis, ranging from the study of a specific text to a broader understanding of an idea or concept based on the study of multiple texts. For the purpose of this study, I will use the macro-level approach as I will include a variety of materials in my analysis, focusing on greater discourse in more than one text. Textual analysis is not simply the study of specific words or phrases, but includes greater discursive exploration. This being the case, I will use Fairclough's discussion of textual analysis to build upon the macro-level approach. Fairclough (1992) argues that textual analysis consists of two complementary types: linguistic and inter-textual. He states, "Whereas linguistic analysis shows how texts selectively draw upon linguistic systems... intertextual analysis shows how texts selectively draw upon orders of

Boros- PC8003- Page 23

discourse--the particular configurations of conventionalized practices (genres, discourses, narratives, etc.)" (Fairclough, 1992, p. 194). In this study, I will use intertextual analysis to recognize environmental discourse within the text. I have chosen the macro-level, intertextual approaches to text analysis in order to recognize environmental discourse across all case study materials. As I discussed briefly in section one, environmental discourse is a broad concept composed of a variety of ideologies. Muhlhausler and Peace present an overarching definition of environmental discourse "as comprising the linguistic devices articulating arguments about the relationship between humans and the natural environment" (Muhlhausler and Peace, 2006, p. 458). I will use this definition as it provides a clear and succinct description of the considerations that can be classified as environmental discourse. This definition will guide the analysis of the selected case studies. 4.3 Image-based Analysis For this project, I will focus on one specific area of image analysis. I will use the guiding theory of semiotics, supplemented with only easily identified nuances such as colour. Charles Saunders Pierce wrote extensively on semiotics, discussing the meaning and context of signs in great detail. He identifies a sign as something that "conveys to a mind an idea about a thing", or in other words, acts as a representation (Peirce, 1998, p. 5). Peirce also identifies three different types of signs. First are icons, which convey ideas about things through simple imitation. Next are indications, which provide information about a thing simply by being in close proximity to them (Peirce, 1998, p. 5). Lastly there

Boros- PC8003- Page 24

are symbols, "which have become associated with their meanings by usage" (Peirce, 1998, p. 5). All three categories are important in understanding any and all possible meaning that could be associated with an object. Put simply, semiotics is the study of signs, particularly symbols. Signs are physical forms that embody meaning, whether it is an emotion, event or social setting. Sebeok and Pabel echo this, stating that signs "allow people to recognize patterns in things; they act as predictive guides or plans for taking actions; they serve as exemplars of specific kinds of phenomena..." (2001, p. 20). In this sense, signs act as an interpretive force in understanding the visual world. Images often reflect a symbolic purpose, offering insight into a meaning or context that exists outside of the image itself. I will be using the previously proposed definition for environmental semiotics to guide the image analysis of the two case studies. Using the foundation of semiotics, this approach will identify environmental discourse within the imagery of the two campaigns. This will not only help to identify similarities and differences that may exist, but will also demonstrate the effective application of environmental semiotics. V. Sampling 5.1 Materials Data collection for this study requires the use of publicly accessible materials. As such, I will access all necessary content on the two organizations' primary websites. I am

Boros- PC8003- Page 25

able to download and save all material, as to avoid issue with removal or interference online. No content beyond what is publicly available will be used in this study. 5.2 Case Studies In order to examine the contrast between corporate and non-profit environmental campaigns, I have chosen to contrast the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers ' (CAPP) `Canada's Energy' campaign with Earth Day Canada's `EcoKids/Hometown Heroes' campaign as representative examples of both approaches. Encompassed within these two campaigns are a variety of materials, including print, audio, and video advertisements. However, as previously mentioned, video and print will be the sole materials used for this study. Online, CAPP refers to the material as `TV and Print Ads' , while Earth Day Canada presents the material as `Public Service Announcements' (PSAs). It is important to understand the general context of these two campaigns. The `Canada's Energy' campaign, run by CAPP, addresses the issue of oil production in the Alberta Tar Sands. The primary focus of the ads is the creation of energy in Canada, and how Canada's oil sands are an integral part of energy production both now and in the future. The ads highlight the benefits of the tar sands, informing audiences of their economic value, their impact to the lives of Canadians, and the positive environmental initiatives that have been taken while harvesting the sands. Ads are presented primarily in video format (four videos), secondarily in print (two magazine ads). The main themes of these ads are water, landscapes, and children. The EcoKids/ Hometown Heroes campaign

Boros- PC8003- Page 26

run by Earth Day Canada focuses on several environmental issues that are of concern to Canadians. The campaign can be broken down into three areas: one primary video ad (in the :60 format) with an over-arching Earth Day theme, three print ads promoting the Hometown Heroes competition, and three print ads for the EcoKids aspect of the campaign. The primary themes of the ads include water, wildlife, children and trees. Prior to analyzing text and images, I would like to draw comparisons between the two campaigns. First, both campaigns use children as a trope for their messages. More specifically, the campaigns highlight how children are affected by the issues presented in the campaign. Second, both campaigns address issues related to trees/landscape and water. Finally, the two campaigns both identify with Canadians, taking a local approach that limits the target audience. These similarities will act as a starting-point in more rigorous analysis. There are some potential limitations inherent in the materials being used for this study. For both campaigns, I have access only to the advertising materials themselves, and no further information regarding timelines (how long the ads ran), location (TV channels, publications, etc.), or analytics (how many people did the ad reach? Did the campaign meet its objectives?). I will be using the raw materials simply as they are, with no greater insight into the specific campaign. Through study and analysis of these two representative cases, I will draw conclusions surrounding the marketing of environmental issues. In using an identical framework, preliminary results indicate similarities, differences, and potential outcomes.

Boros- PC8003- Page 27

After examining these case studies in detail, it is the hope that this research will speak to the greater field of environmental social marketing campaigns and provide insight on the future of this area of communication. VI. Analysis 6.1 Data Collection and Techniques To study the case materials described earlier, I will use text and image analysis. Through this analysis, I will also make connections to the context of these campaigns. The proposed discursive and semiotic approaches to text and image analysis will relate directly to environmental discourse, the principles of social marketing, and Bandura's social cognitive theory. To do this, I have created five categories for coding and analysis. These categories reflect specific environmental, social, and semiotic discourses, as outlined in earlier portions of this paper. The categories are as follows: Examples of environmental discourse present in the text, environmental or social tropes found in text, environmental symbols or signs present in imagery, other symbols or signs, and environmental or social tropes found in imagery. A comparison of both the number of examples present in the selected sample as well as an analysis of the tropes used will provide a clear understanding of the strategies used by both campaigns and will indicate any similarities or differences that may exist.

Boros- PC8003- Page 28

This method of analysis will provide relevant insight into the guiding research questions for this project. In addressing both contextual and textual analysis, this representative case study comparison will provide greater insights into the differences and similarities that may exist between corporate and nonprofit social marketing of environmental issues. It will also provide insight for the future of environmental social marketing by identifying areas of improvement in the current strategy. 6.2 Sample Data Collection and Analysis The first piece of material I will analyze in order to provide a sample of the proposed methods of analysis for this study is the "Canada's Energy ­ Water" video advertisement created by the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP). This video is sixteen seconds long, and incorporates both image and script. These two elements will be analyzed for their textual discourse and semiotic representation. Table 1- Sample Analysis Category Chart # of instances related to environmental discourse (text) Canada's Energy Water 5 Social tropes found in text # of environmental symbols or signs (image) # of other symbols or signs (image) External/social factors found in images

2

4

1

0

Though relatively brief, the text portion of this advertisement contains multiple instances of environmental discourse. The first three words of the script are "Abundant

Boros- PC8003- Page 29

fresh water". Water is identified as the subject of this phrase, the natural resource that identifies this as tied to environmental discourse. Relating directly to human use are the words `abundant' and `fresh'. `Abundant' implies mass access to this resource, which is particularly relevant to the Canadian audience, as the country ranks fourth in containing the most freshwater worldwide (Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, 2014). `Fresh' indicates its quality, connecting directly to human consumption. Continuing with this same approach, the script contains five words or phrases that align with environmental discourse. This includes repetition of the word water, and multiple references to its human use. The environmental trope of recycling is also mentioned. Multiple images are included in this short advertisement, including several examples of environmental semiotics. These include waves, a water droplet, and the symbol for recycling. The colour blue (the colour of water) is also used consistently throughout. There are four examples of environmental signs used in the images presented in this advertisement, making up the majority of all images shown. Based on the methods of text and image analysis used above, it is clear that the advertisement draws directly on environmental discourse. Additionally, environmental social marketing tactics are present. CAPP markets the idea of recycling, a policysupported social behaviour, making direct connections between this act and the company's use of water. Social cognitive theory suggests that the best way to increase likelihood of value adoption is to present behaviours that are already deemed `acceptable'; in this case, CAPP has done exactly this. Though only one example, it is

Boros- PC8003- Page 30

clear that this advertisement makes use of environmental discourse through both image and text, and that additional marketing strategies were used to make the ad more appealing to a mass audience. VII. Results In my examination of the texts and images of the CAPP Canada's Energy campaign and Earth Day Canada's Eco Kids/Hometown Heroes campaign, results indicate multiple similarities and differences. In what follows, I will review the prominent similarities emergent in the data. Unsurprisingly were dominant themes of water, wilderness and children. Also important to note was the strong presence of nonenvironmental social themes. In the subsequent section I will address social marketing and social cognitive theory, however in this section I will focus on the primary quantitative indicators that became apparent in coding. 7.1 Environmental Discourse Present in Text and Image The CAPP Canada's Energy campaign focused primarily on addressing key issu es associated with the Alberta tar sands. It became apparent in early coding that environmental discourse was indeed present, both in the text and image aspects of multiple ads. Two of the six advertisements had five or more examples of environmental discourse present in the text associated with the ad. This included words or phrases such as "abundant fresh water", "bio-diverse landscape", "precious resources", "land", "trees", "grass" and "recycled". Two of the ads also contained one example of environmental

Boros- PC8003- Page 31

discourse in the text, while the final two contained no direct references to environmental discourse. Figure 1 ­ `Energy the World Needs'

Source: CAPP, 2014

Multiple examples of environmental semiotics were also present in these advertisements. Two of the six ads contained 5 or more environmental symbols or signs, which included water, wild plants, forested landscapes, and rivers and streams. These images dominated the imagery present in these two advertisements. Additionally, two of the campaign materials contained three or more examples of environmental semiotics, while two contained none. It is important to note that the ads that contained environmental symbolism were also those that utilized environmental discourse in text.

Boros- PC8003- Page 32

Table 2 ­ Number of Instances of Environmental Discourse Present in CAPP Campaign

Environmental discourse (text) CAPP Canada's Energy (video) CAPP ­ `Water' (video) CAPP ­ `Land' (video) 7 CAPP ­ `Kids' (video) 0 CAPP ­ Energy the world needs (print) CAPP ­ Energy at work for all Canadians (print) 1 0 1 5

Environmental Semiotics (image) 5 4 3 0 5 0

It was evident early-on that environmental discourse was a useful tool for this marketing campaign, however not completely dominant. As discussed, environmental discourse was the primary focus in only one-third of the ads studied, and present in only two-thirds of the CAPP materials. This indicates that while environmental discourse was a significant element in the marketing strategy of this campaign, it was not the only tool used to appeal to the target audience. In studying Earth Day Canada's EcoKids/Hometown Heroes c ampaign, examples of environmental discourse were found in all text and image elements. Four of the seven advertisements contained two or more examples of environmental discourse in the associated text. This included references to "the earth", "ocean", "wildlife", "greenhouse effect", "eco-friendly" and "sustains" among others. Three of the seven samples had only one reference to environmental discourse, and was the same for all three: "environment".

Boros- PC8003- Page 33

Figure 2 ­ `EcoKids ­ Wildlife'

Source: Earth Day Canada, 2014

Similarly, environmental semiotics was present in all seven Earth Day Canada advertisements. One presented seven examples of environmental imagery, which included trees, leaves, flowers, a world map, and the constant use of the colour green. The six others all included two-to-three environmental symbols or signs. These contained images such as fish, birds, the sky, and water. Similar to the previous set of advertisements, the Earth Day ads that displayed environmental imagery also contained examples of environmental discourse in text. Table 3 ­ Number of Instances of Environmental Discourse Present in Earth Day Canada Campaign Environmental Discourse (text) Earth Day Canada PSA Environmental Semiotics (image)

Boros- PC8003- Page 34

(video) EcoKids ­ Ocean (print) EcoKids ­ Wildlife (print)

2 3 2

7 2 2 3 2 3 3

EcoKids ­ Arctic (print) 3 Hometown Heroes ­ Trees (print) Hometown Heroes ­ Fish (print) Hometown Heroes ­ Birds (print) 1 1 1

It is important to note that while environmental discourse was present in all text and imagery in the Earth Day Canada campaign, it was at significantly less intensified levels than the CAPP campaign. Only one ad contained environmental references of five or higher, with the majority of ads averaging at two-to-three examples of both text and images. This indicates that environmental discourse was unlikely the sole strategy used. 7.2 Environmental and Social Tropes The categories included in this area of coding were: environmental/social tropes found in text, other symbols or signs (non-environmental) and external/social factors found in imagery. Environmental/social tropes referred to other dominant examples of discourse that could not be directly identified as `environmental discourse' base d on the previously stated definition. Other symbols referred to non-environmental semiotics, while external/social factors referred to non-environmental discourse present in the ad's images.

Boros- PC8003- Page 35

In the CAPP campaign, multiple examples of all three categories were found. In the text element of the advertisements, one of the six contained nine examples of environmental or social tropes. This included references to "Canadian energy", "creating jobs", "helping to pay for public resources", among others. Two o f the ads included four examples, while the other three contained two. Additional examples included "Got kids?", "reclaiming land", "revenue", "people are using more energy", and "how Canada is perceived in the world". This indicates a variety of social trope s present in the marketing strategy of this campaign. Figure 3 ­ Screenshot of `Canada's Energy ­ Kids'

Source: CAPP, 2014

Additionally, the images present in the CAPP Canada's Energy campaign also supported non-environmental and social factors. Two advertisements included eight or more non-environmental signs or symbols, one included four examples and three included one. Examples of signs include buses, streetcars, hard hats, test tubes, a maple leaf, a baby, a briefcase, a child, and a microscope. These pointed to a variety of factors

Boros- PC8003- Page 36

that could be derived from the imagery, including (but not limited to) public transportation, power, business, science, education, economics, and nationalism. A recurrent element found in both text and image aspects of the CAPP campaign was the reference to Canada. This theme will be discussed in greater detail in subsequent sections. Table 4 ­ Social/External Factors in Text and Image (CAPP Campaign) Environmental/Social Tropes (text) CAPP Canada's Energy (video) CAPP ­ `Water' (video) CAPP ­ `Land' (video) CAPP ­ `Kids' (video) CAPP ­ Energy the world needs (print) CAPP ­ Energy at work for all Canadians (print) NonEnvironmental Symbols (image) 8 1 1 9 1 Social/External Factors (image)

9 2 2 2 4

6 0 0 1 0

4

4

1

Similarly, Earth Day Canada's EcoKids/Hometown Heroes campaign also contained non-environmental references in both text and image. Environmental/social tropes were strongly prevalent in the text, with all ads containing four or more examples. This included words or phrases such as "teaching our children", "giving back", "catalyst for change", "doing something", "responsible outlook", "mistakes of today", and "change

Boros- PC8003- Page 37

tomorrow". These elements were equal if not more dominant than the environmental discourse previously noted in the text examples. Figure 4 ­ Screenshot of Earth Day PSA

Source: Earth Day Canada, 2014

The images present in this campaign also presented environmental/social factors. This included examples of symbols or signs in all seven advertisements, with all containing one-to-four instances. Examples included doors, a plate setting, people holding hands, a rubber ducky, Lego pieces, a chainsaw, a net, and a high-rise building. Factors associated with these images included home, growth, innocence, death, destruction, and childhood. Danger and fragility were more easily identified in this sample of advertisements, an example of risk or consequences which will be discussed in subsequent sections.

Boros- PC8003- Page 38

Table 5 ­ Social/External Factors in Text and Image (Earth Day Canada Campaign) Environmental/Social Tropes (text) Earth Day Canada PSA (video) EcoKids ­ Ocean (print) EcoKids ­ Wildlife (print) EcoKids ­ Arctic (print) Hometown Heroes ­ Trees (print) Hometown Heroes ­ Fish (print) Hometown Heroes ­ Birds (print) NonEnvironmental Symbols (image) 4 Social/External Factors (image)

4

3

5 6 6 4

3 2 3 1

2 3 3 1

4

1

1

4

1

1

Evidently, social tropes were used as a significant part of the marketing strategy present in both campaigns. With strong prevalence in the majority of ads, it is obvious that environmental discourse, while clearly present, was not the sole focus of these campaigns. 7.3 Dominant Themes: Water, Wilderness and Children The dominant similar themes predicted early-on and confirmed in coding and analysis were Water, Wilderness and Children. Water included any reference or image related to water, its use, etc. Wilderness referred to landscapes, plants and animals present in the advertisements. Lastly, any ads with words or images related to children

Boros- PC8003- Page 39

were noted. At least one of these dominant themes was present in all of the materials studied. These three themes were identified on multiple occasions in the CAPP Canada' s Energy campaign. References to water were present in four of the six advertisements, with one video containing five instances of water. This included images of waves, water droplets, ponds and creeks as well as text references such as "lakes and ponds" and "abundant fresh water". Though not present in all advertisements, it was clear that the topic of water was an important element of this campaign. Figure 5 ­ Screenshot of `Canada's Energy ­ Water'

Source: CAPP, 2014

Additionally, multiple instances of Wilderness were found in the CAPP advertisements. Wilderness references were identified in half of the ads, both in image and text. In two instances, wilderness was referenced four times, and in one instance

Boros- PC8003- Page 40

eight times. These instances included both text and image elements. Depictions of forested landscape, a skyline, fields of flowers and pieces of the earth were present, among other things, in imagery. Words or phrases such as "bio-diverse landscape", "trees" and "land" were mentioned. While present in fewer advertisements, the density of wilderness references when depicted was high. Lastly, references to children were present in multiple CAPP ads. The least prevalent, instances of children were noted in two of the six campaign materials. This included text references such as "Got kids?" and "schools" as well as imagery of a baby and a child. Though less obvious, the theme of children was clearly present, with one ad focusing specifically on the topic. Table 6 ­ Water, Wilderness and Children in CAPP's Canada's Energy Campaign # of instances Water CAPP Canada's Energy (video) CAPP ­ `Water' (video) CAPP ­ `Land' (video) CAPP ­ `Kids' (video) CAPP ­ Energy the world needs (print) CAPP ­ Energy at work for all Canadians (print) 1 5 2 0 1 0 # of instances Wilderness 4 0 8 0 4 0 # of instances Children 0 0 0 2 0 2

References to the themes of Water, Wilderness and Children were also found in the Earth Day Canada campaign materials. The theme of water was found in three of

Boros- PC8003- Page 41

seven ads, both in text and image aspects. This included multiple image depictions of water, as well as the text term "ocean". Though not found in all ads, the theme of water was definitely important to the campaign, with one ad specifically dedicated to a water theme (Eco-Kids -"Ocean"). Wilderness was the most dominant theme of this campaign. Found in six of seven ads, wilderness references were a constant. Multiple text references were made, including examples such as "wildlife" and "arctic". Image examples included trees, leaves, flowers, fish and birds. With such a predominant presence in the ads, it is evident that the theme of wilderness was a central element of the Earth Day Canada campaign. Lastly, mentions of children could be found in three of the seven ads. These included text references to "teaching our children" and "schools". An image of a child was also depicted. Though not as prevalent a theme as wilderness, children were clearly a significant part of the approach for this campaign as noted in the three `EcoKids' ads dedicated to this topic. Table 7 ­ Water, Wilderness and Children in Earth Day Canada's Campaign # of instances Water Earth Day Canada PSA (video) EcoKids ­ Ocean (print) EcoKids ­ Wildlife (print) EcoKids ­ Arctic (print) Hometown Heroes ­ Trees (print) 0 2 0 1 0 # of instances Wilderness 4 0 2 2 1 # of instances Children 0 1 3 1 0

Boros- PC8003- Page 42

Hometown Heroes ­ Fish (print) Hometown Heroes ­ Birds (print)

1 0

1 2

0 0

VIII. Discussion 8.1 Introduction While the results discussed in the previous section indicated multiple similarities and themes, the numbers provide only a top-level analysis in comparing the two case studies. In this section, elements of the CAPP Canada's Energy campaign and Earth Day Canada's EcoKids/Hometown Heroes campaign will be re -examined through the lens of social marketing and social cognitive theory. This will provide insight not only into similarities that may exist, but also the more specific strategic elements of the two campaigns. 8.2 Social Marketing As described in Section 3, social marketing uses traditional marketing strategies not to sell a product, but rather an idea, belief or set of values that lead to audience action or inaction. In examining the two case studies, it is immediately apparent that the campaigns' purpose is social as opposed to consumer-based, as they are not directly selling a product. To delve into this deeper, the CAPP and Earth Day Canada campaigns will be analyzed, focusing specifically on the three primarily elements of social marketing: a social problem, communication of risk, and audience.

Boros- PC8003- Page 43

As noted in Section 8, the Canada's Energy campaign uses examples of both environmental discourse and social tropes. While these identify the general subject matter of the ads, they also speak to underlying social issues. As mentioned previously, a social problem is "an element that undermines what society deems acceptable" (Anderson, 2006, p. 215). Three `social problems' can be clearly noted in the CAPP campaign. The first is energy. As the primary focus of these advertisements, energy is depicted as a societal need that needs to be met in order to support and maintain our current way of life. This can be evidenced in multiple instances, including depictions of transportation, lights and power in the city, and in phrases such as "moving us", "heating us" and "Canada's energy". Energy is identified as essential, and therefore a social problem in recognizing the ongoing need for energy production. A second social problem identified within the ads is economic opportunity. The ads speak to the creation of jobs and the support of future generations with these opportunities. This relates directly to the social problem of employment and stability, and the need to support areas of the economy that have the potential for ongoing growth. Within this plea for economic stability also resides a third underlying social problem: the vulnerability of children. In specifically referencing `kids' and using t he image of an infant, a problem is identified in recognizing a difficult future in an increasingly competitive job climate. In highlighting this danger, CAPP is able to introduce the oil sands as a sensible solution.

Boros- PC8003- Page 44

The Canada's Energy campaign also makes use of the communication of risk. As discussed in Section 3, "The category of risk reflects the response to uncertainty" (Beck, 2009, p. 5). Though less overt, risk is implied in multiple ads. The oil industry is presented as something that financially supports "doctors, teachers, hospitals, schools" and is "helping pay for public services". This indicates that without this industry, these essential services could be put at risk. Additionally, the environment is recognized as an area of risk. Water is referred to as a "precious resource" and the idea and symbol of recycling is used. This addresses the environmental risk associated with oil production, however in this case acts as an acknowledgement and understanding of said risk. Lastly, the `Canada's Energy - Kids' ad specifically addresses the issue of employment as uncertain element in Canada's future, implying the risk of non -existent opportunities for today's children. In using public services, the environment and children as focal areas associated with risk, the ad identifies vulnerabilities that exist, and matches this with benefits of the oil sands. It is also important to recognize the social marketing element of `audience' in the CAPP advertisements. It's clear that these ads are specifically tailored to Canadians, both in the language used ("here in Canada, we're pretty good at this"), the images shown (Canadian landscapes, map of Canada, and a maple leaf in the logo that appears in each ad), and the title of the campaign (`Canada's Energy'). Every aspect of this campaign speaks to Canadians, whether it is the identified problems or risks addressed, the social values incorporated, or the direct use of the word `Canada'. The ads integrate Canadian social values, using features like public transportation, health care, natural resources and

Boros- PC8003- Page 45

education as primary contributions of the oil sands. This intense emphasis on the Canadian audience is a dominant aspect of the social marketing strategy used to garner support for CAPP and its beneficiaries. Earth Day Canada's EcoKids/Hometown Heroes campaign also makes use of these three social marketing tactics. Throughout multiple advertisements, social problems related to environmental discourse are recognized. This includes topics such as water contamination, wildlife extinction, disappearing landscapes and natural resources. The ads portray these areas as vulnerable, identifying them as an immediate problem. Education is also presented as a problem. In questioning what children are learning about the environment, the ads market the idea that greater environmental education is needed. This campaign presents these social problems overtly and obviously, framing them as issues of certainty. The communication of risk is another important strategy for this campaign. All six print ads are centered around an associated environmental risk, including oil spills in the ocean, endangered wildlife, and resource depletion. Though these risks are depicted in less conventional ways (for example, an oil spill is illustrated through Lego pieces), they are easily recognized by a general audience. Children are also identified as vulnerable, with the ads indicating risks surrounding the education and future opportunities for today's kids. In focusing the campaign on risk, Earth Day Canada employs its audience to take action to ensure these risks are avoided.

Boros- PC8003- Page 46

Figure 6 ­ `EcoKids ­ Ocean'

Source: Earth Day Canada, 2014 While less easily identifiable than the previously discussed campaign, the EcoKids/Hometown Heroes advertisements speak to multiple audience groups as an important aspect of the marketing strategy employed. The EcoKids campaign addresses people or groups connected to children. This could include parents, families, schools, teachers, caretakers, and many others. It also addresses issues at the policy-level, confronting potential downfalls of the current education structure and government priorities. Hometown Heroes speaks to a wider audience, but hones in on those who specifically make contributions towards environmental betterment, conservation or sustainability in their communities through their offer of recognition (refer to text in Appendix). The Earth Day Canada PSA video advertisement also addresses a more general audience, using widespread issues and topics to appeal to both environmental supporters and other members of society in promoting an environmental agenda. This

Boros- PC8003- Page 47

multi-audience approach identifies specific target groups, while also offering nonexclusive materials to ensure the potential for connection with all possible audiences. All three advertisements speak to a Canadian audience, as acknowledged in the presence of the organization's name (Earth Day Canada) throughout the campaign materials. In identifying the social marketing strategies used in both the CAPP Canada's Energy campaign and the Earth Day Canada EcoKids/Hometown Heroes campaign, it is clear that both environmental and social topics are used. With both present in the two campaigns, it is evident that each party has recognized the need to integrate a variety of appeals while maintaining a social marketing strategy. It is important to note that while slightly different environmental and social tropes exist amongst the two campaigns, the portrayal of both indicates a strategic similarity. 8.3 Social Cognitive Theory In his framework of social cognitive theory, Albert Bandura acknowledges multiple factors and `influencers' that impact the human decision -making process. As mentioned in Section 3, the first of these is value alignment. Bandura states, " selfefficacy beliefs operate in concert with cognized goals, outcome expectations, and perceived environmental impediments and facilitators in the regulation of human motivation, action, and well-being." (1998, p. 2). This means that in order for an audience to adopt values or behaviours, they must align with their own predispositions. It is evident that both the CAPP Canada's Energy and Earth Day Canada EcoKids/Hometown Heroes campaigns have used appeals that align with commonly-held

Boros- PC8003- Page 48

societal values. In the CAPP advertisements, themes such as recycling, health care, education and an economically-sound future are depicted. As publicly-funded, government-supported aspects of Canadian society, these themes speak to the widespread values Canadians acknowledge as collectively important. In identifying and portraying these valued aspects of Canadian life, the CAPP advertisements have greater potential to resonate with their audience. The ads used by Earth Day Canada also make use of Canadian values1 in the appeals presented. Issues surrounding nature, resources, education and childhood are present in different aspects of this campaign. These align with areas of concern for Canadians. As a primary economic stronghold, Canada's natural resources are of wide lyheld value. Additionally, the education-system and the future of Canadian children are topics that relate directly to a large number of Canadians, including parents, families, community leaders, etc. Once again, alignment with values is present, creating what Bandura would recognize as a greater opportunity for value adoption, motivation or action. As mentioned in an earlier section, social cognitive theory also identifies symbolism and forethought as two primary influencers in adopting modeled behaviour or beliefs. As discovered in Section 8, environmental semiotics as well as nonenvironmental symbols were used throughout both of the campaigns studied. This

1

Both the CAPP Canada's Energy campaign and the Earth Day Canada campaign contained direct reference to Canada. Though a strong focus on `nationalism' was identified in these ads, for the purpose of this project the topic was not explored. However, this does identify an interesting area for future study in recognizing the strong presence of national appeals in Canadian environmental advertisements.

Boros- PC8003- Page 49

indicates an understanding of symbolic messaging and its effective use in both the forprofit and nonprofit approach. Forethought is another element of social cognitive theory that was addressed in both sets of advertisements. Bandura describes forethought as "conceived futures" that can act as "motivators and regulators of current behaviour" (2001, p. 268). In both campaigns, two dominant uses of forethought were present. The first is the presentation of future environmental sustainability. The CAPP campaign used environmental semiotics and words such as "bio-diverse", "recycle" and "precious resources" to present a case for an environmentally sound future. The EcoKids/Hometown Heroes ads also use forethought to focus on environmental sustainability, primarily through depictions of potential environmental disasters including oil spills, Arctic ice melting and wildlife extinction. An additional example of forethought can be found in the two campaigns' focus on the future of today's children. The CAPP campaign addresses this future in discussing the years of job opportunities that will potentially be provided by the oil sands. They also acknowledge this issue in referencing education and schools as public services that will be supported by oil sands revenue. In directly referring to the possibilities that could exist for today's children, this campaign capitalizes on forethought. Similarly, the Earth Day Canada advertisements speak to the importance of future opportunities and decision-making abilities for today's children. This includes propose d educational

Boros- PC8003- Page 50

changes with a focus on new methods of teaching to those who will have the greatest impact on our collective future: children. In demonstrating strategic use of value alignment, symbolism and forethought, it is clear that both the CAPP Canada's Energy campaign and the Earth Day Canada EcoKids/Hometown Heroes campaign make use of elements of social cognitive theory. In using the previously mentioned approaches, these campaigns have a higher likelihood of audience resonation. According to social cognitive theory, this offers a greater chance of value or behaviour adoption for the two campaigns. IX. Conclusions and Recommendations This study sought to use two primary cases, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP) Canada's Energy campaign and Earth Day Canada's EcoKids/Hometown Heroes campaign, to examine the strategies and tactics used in forprofit and nonprofit environmental ad campaigns. The purpose of this comparative approach was to both avoid personal bias and determine areas where for-profit and nonprofit organizations could better differentiate their appeals. Using text and image analysis, elements of social marketing, and social cognitive theory, this project sought out differences and similarities between the two campaigns while gauging their potential for audience resonation. During text and image analysis, it became apparent that multiple similarities existed between the two campaigns. Though not present in all ads, environmental discourse was noted in both text and image elements of the two campaigns. This

Boros- PC8003- Page 51

confirmed that an environmental theme was present in both cases. Additionally, examples of social tropes were found in the text and image elements of both campaigns, speaking to themes such as nationalism, education, future generations, and the economy. This concentration of non-environmental factors spoke to a mixed-appeal strategy that incorporated multiple messages in each ad. Dominant themes that emerged in text and image analysis included Water, Wilderness and Children. The two campaigns had ads specifically dedicated to both water and children (CAPP's `Water' and `Kids' and Earth Day Canada's `Ocean', `Arctic' and `EcoKids'), while wilderness was a prevalent theme throughout. These themes connected with both environmental and social factors, and identified a target audience. Additionally, these themes were recognized to connect with Canadian values, though the scope of this project did not allow for further exploration. The project identified social marketing tactics present in both case studies. The ads contain a variety of social problems, including issues surrounding environmental sustainability, economic stability, education, and public services. The communication of risk is prevalent in multiple ads for both the CAPP and Earth Day campaigns. Target audiences could be identified in both campaigns, including a focus on groups associated with children (parents, teachers, families, community leaders, etc.). Findings of this project indicate that multiple similarities exist between the forprofit and nonprofit approaches to social marketing of the environment. This is indicative of a similar strategy that included the use of environmental discourse, environmental

Boros- PC8003- Page 52

semiotics, social tropes and social marketing tactics. Such prevalence of strategy similarity indicates that a clear differentiation of a for-profit versus a nonprofit campaign may prove difficult for a wide audience. Whether a similar strategy can be identified as a `strategic' move in itself is unclear. Perhaps parallel approaches have proven successful for both parties. Or perhaps both for-profits and nonprofits have selected tactics that rely too heavily on similar discourse, requiring a `refresh' in order to better differentiate themselves in a highlycompetitive messaging market. If two very different parties with separate objectives inspire the same message resonation in audiences, it should be imperative that, at the minimum, one recognizes the need to distinguish their purposes more effectively. In addition to the aforementioned comparisons, this project also proved the validity of the concept of environmental semiotics. Through its defining, method and application, this project illustrated the viability of this concept and how it can be used. It also serves as a tool for future research in the area of environmental imagery. The future of environmental social marketing is ever-expanding, providing unique opportunities for both for-profit and nonprofit organizations. However, it is the recommendation of this study that these two parties better differentiate themselves in order to `do' the environment differently. This requires not only knowledge of social marketing tactics, but also a better understanding of competition in the environmental communication market. Appeals must indicate not only what the message is, but ensure the distinctiveness of that message in order to provide effective audience resonation.

Boros- PC8003- Page 53

Through the practical application of social marketing, social cognitive theory and environmental discourse combined with an understanding of market competition, both for-profits and nonprofits can improve the effectiveness of their advertisements.

Boros- PC8003- Page 54

Works Cited/ Bibliography Andreasen, A. (2006). Social marketing in the 21st century. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Bandura, A. (1998). Health promotion from the perspective of social cognitive theory. Psychology and Health, 13, 623-649. Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory of mass communication. Mediapsychology, 55, 165-299. Beck, U. (2009). World at Risk. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. Beckerman, W. (1996). Through Green-Colored Glasses: Environmentalism Reconsidered. Washington, D.C.; Cato Institute. Belt, A. F. (2012). The Elements of Photography. Waltham, MA: Elsevier Inc. CAPP (2014). TV & Print Ads. Taken on March 30, 2014 from: < http://www.capp.ca/ canadaIndustry/oilSands/Innovation/media/Pages/default.aspx > Chung, C. K., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). The psychological function of function words. Social Communication: Frontiers of Social Psychology , 343­359. Earth Day Canada (2014). Public service announcements. Taken on March 30, 2013 from: < http://www.earthday.ca/media/psas >

Boros- PC8003- Page 55

Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and Power. New York, NY: Longman Inc. Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and text: Linguistic and intertextual analysis within discourse analysis. Discourse and Society, 3 (2), 193-217. Fairclough, N. (2003). Analysing Discourse: Textual analysis for social research . New York, NY: Routledge. Furanu, M. and Baranov, A. (2012). Environmental marketing- Element for asserting the management of sustainable development. Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braov, 5 (54), pp. 53-58. Haq, G., Cambridge, H., and Owen, A. (2013). A targeted social marketing approach for community pro-environmental behavioural change. Local Environment, 18 (10), 1134-1152. Harrison, C. (2003). Visual Semiotics: Understanding how still images make meaning. Technical Communication, 50 (1), 46-60. Ifverson, J. (2013). Text, discourse, concept: Approaches to textual analysis. Kontur, nr. 7, 61-69. Lefebvre, C. (2012). Transformative social marketing: Co-creating the social marketing discipline and brand. Journal of Social Marketing, 2 (2), 118-129. Mackenzie-Mohr, D., Lee, N., Schultz, W., Kotler, P. (2012). Social marketing to protect the environment. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Boros- PC8003- Page 56

McGovern, E. (2008). Transport behavior: A role for social marketing. Journal of Nonprofit and Public Sector Marketing, 17 (1-2), 121-134. Muhlhausler, P. And Peace, A. (2006). Environmental Discourses. Annual Review of Anthropology, 35, 457-479. Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources (2014). The nature of water resources. Taken on March 30, 2014 from: <http://www.mnr.gov.on.ca/en/Business/Water/ 2ColumnSubPage/STEL02_163400.html> Peirce, C.S. (1998). The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 2. Indiana University Press. Retrieved on June 26, 2014 from: < http://books.google. ca/books?id=T2weTOqdjqcC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false> Pepper, D. (2002). Modern Environmentalism: An Introduction. Routledge. Sebeok, T.A. and Pabel, H.M. (2001). An Introduction to Semiotics. Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press. Tools of Change (2012). "Save the crabs ­ Then eat `em!". Retrieved on June 26, 2014 from: < http://www.toolsofchange.com/en/case-studies/detail/90> van Leeuwen, T. (2005). Introducing Social Semiotics. New York, NY: Routeledge. Welford, R. (1997). Hijacking Environmentalism: Corporate Responses to Sustainable Development. UK: Earthscan Publications Ltd.

Boros- PC8003- Page 57

Zelezny, L.C. and Schultz, P.W. (2000). Promoting Environmntalism. Journal of Social Issues, 56 (3), 365-371.

Boros- PC8003- Page 58

Appendices i. Advertisement Transcripts Canada's Energy "The oil sands is a powerful source of Canadian energy. Moving us. Heating us. Creating jobs. Helping pay for public services. But energy from the oil sands happens because of the human energy that goes into it. New ideas. People striving to do better. That's Canada's energy at its best. Moving Canadian products to customers everywhere, while working to reduce impact on the environment. That's as Canadian as it gets. Here in Canada, we're pretty good at this." Canada's Energy ­ Water "Abundant fresh water is one of our country's most precious resources. That's why over 80% of water used in the oil sands is recycled. Because every drop of water counts." Canada's Energy ­ Land "Years ago reclaiming land meant planting trees and grass. Today we create a more biodiverse landscape including lakes and ponds, trees, shrubs and plants." Canada's Energy ­ Kids

Boros- PC8003- Page 59

"Got kids? Over the next 25 years Canada's oil sands could create over 800,000 new jobs across Canada, in all sorts of fields." Energy the World Needs "Energy the world needs. The approach Canadians expect. Everywhere people are using more energy, and Canada has become a leading supplier. How our companies operate reflects how Canada is perceived in the world. Canadians expect a constant effort to improve our environmental performance. Find out how we are doing at oilsandstoday.ca. Energy at work for all Canadians." Energy at Work for All Canadians "What do the oil sands mean to all Canadians? Want the answer in hospitals, schools, doctors or teachers? Harnessing the oil sands will mean $311 billion in revenue for the federal government over the next 25 years. Money that can help pay for doctors, teachers, hospitals, schools and other things we value as Canadians. Our energy builds Canadian communities. Energy at work for all Canadians." Earth Day PSA "The Earth. It houses us. Sustains Us. Surrounds us.

Boros- PC8003- Page 60

For 20 years, Earth Day Canada has proven one thing. That giving back is really quite simple. Earth Day isn't just a day. It's a movement. Every time someone joins Earth Day they're more than just a member. They're a catalyst for change. It's time to join the movement and make every day Earth Day." EcoKids ­ Ocean "This shouldn't be what we're teaching our children about the ocean. With the EcoKids environmental education profram, the reality of things like oil spills are not ignored. Instead, our curriculum cultivates a responsible outlook ­ one that uses knowledge to ensure an eco-friendly future. To find out more about EcoKids, visit earthday.ca. Teach today. Change tomorrow." EcoKids ­ Wildlife "This shouldn't be what we're teaching our children about wildlife. The EcoKids environmental education program can't stop the demand for ivory. But through curriculum that promotes an eco-friendly outlook, injustices such as these can be combated by a whole new generation. To find out more about EcoKids, visit earthday.ca. Teach today. Change tomorrow." EcoKids ­ Arctic

Boros- PC8003- Page 61

"This shouldn't be what we're teaching our children about the arctic. The EcoKids environmental education program combats realities of the greenhouse effect with knowledge. To do so, we foster a responsible outlook that promotes an eco-friendly future. This way, the mistakes of today can be prevented tomorrow. To find out more about Ecokids, visit earthday.ca. Teach today. Change tomorrow." Hometown Heroes ­ Trees "It doesn't have to end like this. Are you doing something about it? If you make outstanding contributions to the environment, you could be recognized as Earth Day Canada's next Hometown Hero. Nominate yourself or someone you know at earthday.ca/hometown." Hometown Heroes ­ Fish "It doesn't have to end like this. Are you doing something about it? If you make outstanding contributions to the environment, you could be recognized as Earth Day Canada's next Hometown Hero. Nominate yourself or someone you know at earthday.ca/hometown." Hometown Heroes - Birds "It doesn't have to end like this.

Boros- PC8003- Page 62

Are you doing something about it? If you make outstanding contributions to the environment, you could be recognized as Earth Day Canada's next Hometown Hero. Nominate yourself or someone you know at earthday.ca/hometown." iv. Print Advertisements CAPP ­ Energy the World Needs

Boros- PC8003- Page 63

CAPP ­ Energy at Work for All Canadians\

Boros- PC8003- Page 64

EcoKids ­ Arctic

Boros- PC8003- Page 65

EcoKids ­ Oceans

Boros- PC8003- Page 66

EcoKids - Wildlife

Boros- PC8003- Page 67

Hometown Heroes - Birds

Boros- PC8003- Page 68

Hometown Heroes - Fish

Boros- PC8003- Page 69

Hometown Heroes - Trees

Boros- PC8003- Page 70

Environmental discourse present in text Canada's Energy (CAPP) Canada's Energy - Water (CAPP) Canada's Energy - Land (CAPP) Canada's Energy - Kids (CAPP) Energy the World Needs (CAPP) Energy at Work for All Canadians (CAPP) Earth Day Canada PSA Eco Kids - Ocean "the earth", "sustains" "ocean", "oil spills", "eco-friendly" "widlife", "eco-friendly" "arctic", "greenhouse effect", "eco-friendly" "environment" "environment" "environment" "environmental performance" "working to reduce the impact on the environment"

# of instances related to environmental discourse (text)

Environmental/Social Tropes found in text # of social tropes found in text

1 Canadian energy, "moving us", "heating us", "creating jobs", 9 "helping pay for public serv

"abundant fresh water", "precious resoures", "water", "recycled", 5"every "recycled", drop "one of water of our counts" country's most precious resources" 2

"land", "trees", "grass", "biodiverse landscape", "lakes and ponds", 7 "reclaiming "trees", "shrubs land", and "create plants" a more bio-diverse landscape"

2

0 "Got kids?", "Canada's oil sands could create over 800,000 new 2 jobs across Canada, in all s

1 "people are using more energy", "Canada has become a leading 4 supplier", "how Canada

0 "revenue", "doctors, teachers, hospitals, schools and other things 4 we value as Canadians

2 "houses us","surrounds us", "giving back", "movement", "catalyst 4 for change"

3 "teaching our children", "environmental education", "responsible", 5 "knowledge", "chang

iii. Master Chart ­ Text and Image Analysis
Eco Kids - Wildlife Eco Kids - Arctic Hometown Heroes - Trees Hometown Heroes - Fish Hometown Heroes - Birds

2 "teaching our children", "environmental education", "demand 6 for ivory", "injustices", "n

3 "teaching our children", "environmental education", "knowledge", 6 "responsible outlook

1 "it doesn't have to end like this", "doing something", "outstanding 4 contributions", "hero

1 "it doesn't have to end like this", "doing something", "outstanding 4 contributions", "hero

1 "it doesn't have to end like this", "doing something", "outstanding 4 contributions", "hero

# of environmental symbols Environmental symbols or signs (image) or signs (image) Other symbols/signs # of other symbols/signs

External/social factors found in images

# of External/social factors found in images

green forested landscape, creek, changing skyline, field of flowers, 5 buses, piece streetcar, of earth oil pumps, city lights, men in hard hats, test8tubes, public soccer transit, ball, oil production, maple leaf (in city logo) power, science, engineering, 6 health

Boros- PC8003- Page 71

waves of water, water droplet, symbol for recycling, colour blue 4 maple (water) leaf (in logo) trees (various types), pond, wild grass 3 maple leaf (in logo)

1 1

0

0

0 baby, people, map of Canada, microscope (science), briefcase 9 nationalism (business), hard hat (engineering), factory, box, maple leaf 1(in logo) wild plants, water, landscape, sun, sky (horizon) 5 maple leaf (in logo) 0 chalkboard, child, pencil, maple leaf (in logo) world map, green (colour), trees, leaves, flowers, rocks, Canada 7 doors, map,plate setting, people holding hands, calendar leaf (logo), water leaf (logo), elephant polar bear, water, leaf (logo) trees, leaf (logo) fish, leaf (logo), water birds, leaf (logo), sky 2 toy, doorway 3 rubber duckie, bathtub, towel 2 chainsaw 3 net 3 high-rise 2 chalkbord, lego pieces, wooden floor 1 4 learning 4 home, meal, growth 3 childhood, oil spill

0

1

3

2

2 childhood, death/cruelty, inocence

3

3 childhood, toys, innocence 1 destruction 1 death 1 death

3

1

1

1

Boros- PC8003- Page 72

Water Canada's Energy (CAPP) Canada's Energy - Water (CAPP) Canada's Energy - Land (CAPP) Canada's Energy - Kids (CAPP) Energy the World Needs (CAPP) Energy at Work for All Canadians (CAPP) Earth Day Canada PSA Eco Kids - Ocean "ocean", water 0 0 trees, leaves, flowers, rocks 2 0 "wildlife", elephant water 1 "arctic", polar bear 0 trees water 1 fish 0 birds, sky water 0 "lakes and ponds", pond creek (image)

# of instances

Wilderness

# of instances

Children

# of instances

1 green forested landscape, changing skyline, 4 field of flowers, piece of earth

0

waves, water droplet, "abundant fresh water", 5 "water", "every drop of water" 0

0

2 "land", "trees", "grass", "biodiverse landscape", 8 "trees", "shrubs and plants", trees, 0 wild grass 0 "Got kids?", baby

2

1 wild plants, landscape, sun, sky (horizon) 4 0 "schools", child 4

0

2

0

0 "teaching our children"

1

iv. Water, Wilderness and Children Charting
Eco Kids - Wildlife Eco Kids - Arctic Hometown Heroes - Trees Hometown Heroes - Fish Hometown Heroes - Birds

2 "teaching our children", "new generation", 3 toy

2 "teaching our children" 1 1 2

1

0

0

0

