   MPC  MAJOR  RESEARCH  PROJECT         `YOU  HAVE  THE  RIGHT  TO  REMAIN  SILENT'     AN  EXPLORATION  OF  PUBLIC  PERCEPTIONS  OF  FREE  SPEECH         NATALIE  CARRAGHER   500539481                  MRP  Supervisor   Dr.  Linda  Schofield   The  Major  Research  Paper  is  submitted   in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of   Master  of  Professional  Communication         Ryerson  University     Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada   September  5,  2013

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  MAJOR   RESEARCH  PAPER            I   hereby   declare   that   I   am   the   sole   author   of   this   Major   Research   Paper   and   the   accompanying   Research   Poster.   This   is   a   true   copy   of   the   MRP   and   the   research   poster,  including  any  required  final  revisions,  as  accepted  by  my  examiners.      I   authorize   Ryerson   University   to   lend   this   major   research   paper   and/or   poster   to   other  institutions  or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I   further   authorize   Ryerson   University   to   reproduce   this   MRP   and/or   poster   by   photocopying  or  by  other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions   or  individuals  for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.      I   understand   that   my   MRP   and/or   my   MRP   research   poster   may   be   made   electronically  available  to  the  public.              

  

i  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

   ABSTRACT  

  

   This   study   explores   the   online   public's   reaction   to   the   National   Security   Agency's   surveillance   Prism   programs   in   light   of   the   confidential   government   document   leakage   to   the   public   on   June   7,   2013.      Through   an   in-depth   qualitative   analysis   of   top   recommended   user   comments   to   the   news   article   published   in   The   Guardian   describing   the   technicalities   of   the   Prism   program,   public   perceptions   of   civil   liberties   like  free  speech  in  new  media  communication  are  explored.  Overarching  themes  and   salient  discourses  on  the  public's  understanding  of  their  democratic  rights  emerged  in   the  analysis.  The  findings  revealed  a  number  of  competing  views  of  liberty,  and  while   the   majority   of   the   users   opposed   government   surveillance   and   agreed   it   was   in   violation  of  their  rights,  further  examination  revealed  a  temptation  to  withdraw  from   using   new   media   communication   susceptible   to   government   surveillance,   thereby   hindering  the  Internet's  ability  to  act  as  a  valuable  arena  for  public  debate  as  afforded   by  new  media  communication.                         

  

ii  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  

  

I   would   cordially   like   to   thank   my   supervisor,   Dr.   Linda   Schofield   for   her   patience,   guidance   and   support   throughout   the   MRP   process.   I   would   also   like   to   thank   my   second   reader   Dr.   Wendy   Freeman,   for   additional   notes   and   encouragement.   Finally,   I   would  like  to  thank  my  classmates.  Without  their  moral  support,  this  research  study   would  have  never  been  possible.                                                    

  

iii  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

   TABLE  OF  CONTENTS     

  

Author's  Declaration.....................................................................................................................................i   Abstract..............................................................................................................................................................ii   Acknowledgements.....................................................................................................................................  iii   List  of  Tables....................................................................................................................................................  v     Introduction.....................................................................................................................................................  1   Literature  Review..........................................................................................................................................  5               Freedom  of  Speech.................................................................................................................5     Public  Sphere....................................................................................................................................  8     New  Media  Communication..................................................................................................12     Chilling  Effects  of  Surveillance...............................................................................................  14  

Methodology.................................................................................................................................................  18     Findings  and  Discussion..........................................................................................................................  27              Critical...............................................................................................................................................  27   Pessimistic  .....................................................................................................................................  32   Supportive................................................................................................................36  

  Conclusion.....................................................................................................................................................  38   References......................................................................................................................................................  42                 

  

iv  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

      LIST  OF  TABLES     

  

Table  1:  Commenter  stance  on  NSA  Surveillance  Practices.............................................24   Table  2:  Emergent  themes  and  Definitions........................................................................25   Table  3:  Emergent  Themes  and  Exemplars.......................................................................26   Table  4:  Emergent  Themes  and  Occurrences.....................................................................27

  

v  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

INTRODUCTION         As   the   Internet   continues   to   become   a   popular   medium   for   online   public  

discussion,   individuals   have   become   accustomed   to   openly   sharing   personal   information   (Marsoof,   2011).      This   public   sharing   of   personal   beliefs,   ideas,   and   opinions   has   created   a   vibrant   arena   for   expression   that   has   resulted   in   widespread   implications   for   the   online   public   sphere.   The   volume   of   information   exchanged   has   invited   control   measures   such   as   filtering,   monitoring   (Lessig,   1999),   and   even   government  surveillance.        Surveillance   refers   to   any   collection   or   processing   of   personal   data   for   the  

purpose   of   "influencing,   or   managing   those   whose   data   has   been   garnered"   (Lyon,   2001:   p.   2).   Both   government   and   private   agencies   are   taking   advantage   of   new   information   systems   capable   of   collecting   and   processing   user   data   as   a   means   to   acquire  knowledge  about  consumer  preferences  and  citizen  behaviour;  to  detect  and   prevent   security   breaches;   and   to   obstruct   crimes   and   terrorism   (Dinev,   Hart,   Mullen,   2007).   With   the   introduction   of   the   Patriot   Act   in   2001,   following   the   attacks   of   September   11th,   the   U.S.   government   enhanced   resources   to   intercept   and   obstruct   suspected   terrorism   in   order   for   the   American   people   to   feel   safe   in   their   country.   While  the  Act  was  put  in  place  to  protect  Americans,  government  officials,  as  a  result,   were   given   permission   to   obtain   information   on   suspected   terrorists   through   electronic  surveillance.  The  need  to  protect  the  public  from  unwanted  terrorism  while  

  

1  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

balancing   other   civil   liberties   like   free   speech   is   a   difficult   task   for   any   government.   Oftentimes   issues   of   free   speech   are   balanced   against   governmental   and   societal   interests  wherein  such  instances  the  courts  typically  determine  which  civil  right  has   priority   (Creech,   2007).   However,   the   subjectivity   of   the   judge   could   be   a   limitation,   particularly   as   new   cases   continue   to   surface   with   the   rise   of   new-media   communication.   The   circumstances   will   continue   to   change   as   new   forms   of   expression  emerge  on  the  Internet.  While  the  goal  of  the  Patriot  Act  is  to  protect  U.S.   citizens  from  future  acts  of  terror,  the  extent  to  which  the  National  Securities  Agency   (NSA)   surveillance   program,   Prism,   monitors   online   communication   has   concerned   those   who   see   a   threat   to   civil   liberties   (Review   of   NSA   surveillance   programs   to   be   led  by  panel  of  intelligence  insiders,  August  22,  2013).          The   NSA   Planning   Tool   for   Resource   Integration,   Synchronization,   and  

Management   (Prism)   program   is   designed   to   allow   officials   "warrantless   access   to   search  history,  content  of  emails,  file  transfers  and  live  chats"  (Greenwald  &  MacAskill   2013,   June   7).   Government   officials   did   not   present   the   information   on   the   NSA   Prism   program   to   the   public.   Instead,   former   NSA   contractor   Edward   Snowden   leaked   the   surveillance  practices  and  the  disclosures  were  published  in  articles  in   The  Guardian   and   Washington   Post   on   June   7,   2013   in   an   attempt   to   inform   the   public   of   the   capabilities   of   a   surveillance   program   like   Prism.   Publicizing   the   confidential   document  that  describes  government  access  to  user  data  from  major  Internet  servers  

  

2  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

like  Google,  Facebook  and  Apple,  has  caused  the  public  to  question  the  transparency   of  the  U.S.  government  and  its  respect  for  freedom  of  expression  and  privacy.        This   MRP   will   investigate   the   public's   understanding   of   free   speech   and  

expression   as   well   as   explore   user   expectations   of   online   freedom   from   government   intrusion   within   new   media   communication.   The   basis   for   this   study   is   a   content   analysis   of   online   user   comments   to   Greenwald   and   MacAskill's   news   article,   "NSA   Prism   program   taps   into   user   data   of   Apple   Google   and   others",   published   in   The   Guardian,  June  7,  2013.  The  article,  which  explains  exactly  how  Prism  infiltrates  digital   communication   channels,   prompted   comments   that   reveal   public   notions   of   civil   liberties  and  democratic  rights.        Although   this   research   study   has   a   relatively   small   data   set,   the   findings   are  

relevant   to   future   research   on   civil   rights   like   free   speech   in   computer-mediated   communication.   Advances   in   technology   have   increased   the   use   of   new   media   communication  on  both  a  personal  and  professional  level,  and  as  of  December  2012,   81%  of  American  adults  over  the  age  of  18  used  the  Internet  (Pew  Research  Center,   2012).   Furthermore,   an   astounding   88%   of   Internet   users   send   and   receive   email,   while   67%   used   social   networking   sites   like   Facebook,   Twitter,   and   Google+   (Pew   Research  Center,  2012).  These  figures  demonstrate  the  widespread  adoption  of  new   media   communication   in   the   U.S.   and   the   enormous   potential   impact   on   free   expression  of  the  Prism  program.        

  

3  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

LITERATURE  REVIEW            The  literature  review  is  divided  into  four  subsections:  freedom  of  speech;  the  

public   sphere;   new   media   communication;   and   the   chilling   effect.   First,   I   will   review   scholarly   works   on   freedom   of   speech   as   it   relates   to   my   research,   and   then   explain   how   Habermasian   concepts   of   the   public   sphere   can   be   applied   to   new   media   communication   sources   such   as   online   comments.   In   addition,   I   will   examine   the   academic   literature   on   new   media   communication   and   the   potential   impact   on   free   speech.  Finally,  I  will  review  the  academic  literature  discussing  the  chilling  effects  of   Internet   surveillance   and   how   the   fear   of   being   scrutinized   can   potentially   create   issues  of  free  speech  in  a  computer-mediated  setting.   Freedom  of  speech      To  provide  a  focused  context  for  public  perceptions  of  free  speech,  I  will  begin  

my  research  by  providing  a  detailed  breakdown  of  the  legal  definition  of  freedom  of   speech.   I   will   also   pair   the   legal   definition   of   free   speech   with   concepts   of   liberty   explored   by   liberal   pioneers   such   as   John   Locke,   J.   S.   Mill,   and   John   Dewey,   with   those   of  later  scholars  like  Milton  Friedman  and  Laura  Stein,  to  explore  how  free  speech  is   conceptualized   by   the   public   in   a   computer   mediate   setting   following   the   NSA   surveillance  leak.        The   U.S.   First   Amendment   states,   "Congress   shall   make   no   law   respecting   an  

establishment   of   religion,   or   prohibiting   the   free   exercise   thereof,   or   abridging  

  

4  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

freedom   of   speech   or   of   the   press,   or   the   right   of   the   people   to   assemble,   and   to   petition  the  Government  for  a  redress  of  grievances"(Constitution  of  the  United  States   of  America,  1791/1979:  31).  The   Nolo's  Plain-English  Law  Dictionary  (2013)  provides   this   basic   definition:   "The   right   to   freedom   of   speech   allows   individuals   to   express   themselves   without   interference   or   constraint   by   the   government"   (p.   180).   The   concept   of   free   speech   is   not   limited   to   expression   but   also   freedom   of   information   and   freedom   of   inquiry   and   according   to   Stone   (2008)   is   the   cornerstone   of   any   democratic  society.  The  right  to  free  speech  and  expression  is  not  only  recognized  at  a   national   level   in   the   U.S.,   but   is   also   found   at   international,   and   regional   levels   (Marsoof,   2011).   Internationally,   Article   19   of   the   Universal   Declaration   of   Human   Rights   acknowledges   freedom   of   speech   as:   "Everyone   has   the   right   to   freedom   of   opinion   and   expression;   this   right   includes   freedom   to   hold   opinions   without   interference  and  to  seek,  receive  and  impart  information  and  ideas  through  any  media   regardless   of   frontiers"   (p.   3).   Although   the   legal   definitions   under   the   First   Amendment  and  Universal  Declaration  of  Human  Rights  provide  a  basic  description  of   free   speech   and   expression,   a   variation   of   understandings   and   interpretations   exist   within  both  the  public  and  academic  spheres.        Early   political   theorists   such   as   Locke   and   Mill   express   liberal   notions   of   free  

speech  and  posit  that  private  spheres  should  be  exempt  from  state  intervention.  The   dichotomy  between  the  private  and  public  sphere  according  to  Locke  and  Mill  refers   to   the   division   between   state   and   society   (Locke,   1688/1996;   Mill,   1859/1993).    

  

5  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Specifically,  Locke  (1688/1996),  argues  the  public  should  be  left  to  itself  and  the  role   of  government  should  be  limited  to  ensuring  these  private  spaces  are  maintained.  Mill,   on   the   other   hand,   (1859/1993)   asserts   that   government   intrusion   should   be   prohibited  and  believes  that  free  speech  rights   can--and  should  be--maintained  by  the   public's   ability   to   self-regulate.   It   is   important   to   note   that   the   terms   intrusion   and   coercion   are   used   interchangeably   throughout   this   study   to   describe   government   interference.   Although   Locke   was   an   advocate   of   free   speech,   to   some   degree   he   believed  government  coercion  was  necessary  for  maintaining  the  ideal  conditions  for   which   free   speech   could   occur.   Mill,   however,   objected   to   any   kind   of   government   intervention,  and  placed  a  greater  faith  in  the  public's  ability  to  self-regulate.        Similar   to   Locke,   neo-liberalists   such   as   Friedman   (1962)   presume   that   each  

individual   has   inherent   rights   that   should   be   protected   by   government   (Nozick,   1974;   Stein,   2006).   The   neo-liberalist   perspective   not   only   poses   that   government   should   maintain   a   private   sphere   of   individual   liberty,   but   that   this   is   only   possible   by   ensuring   the   necessary   conditions   to   a   competitive   marketplace.   The   marketplace   allows  an  open  economy  and  exchange  that  "decentralizes  power"  among  a  vast  group   of  individual  decision-makers  (Friedman,  1962:  12-13),  creating  a  neutral  space,  free   from  coercion  where  individuals  can  exercise  their  own  free  will.  Dewey  (1927/1954)   proposes  an  even  more  empowering  view  of  liberty,  arguing  that  freedom  of  speech  is   critical  to  the  public's  ability  to  engage  in  social  inquiry,  develop  social  knowledge  and   formulate   public   opinions.   Similar   to   Dewey   (1927/1954),   T.   H.   Green   (1881/1991:  

  

6  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

21)   describes   liberty   as   "social   conditions   that   permit   individuals   to   act   on   their   will."   In   order   for   an   individual   to   act   in   the   social   world,   these   social   conditions   must   be   free  from  coercion.        More  recently,  and  highly  relevant  to  my  study,  Stein  (2006)  has  explored  First  

Amendment   normative   definitions   of   how   members   of   the   public   articulate   the   meaning  of  civil  liberty  and  free  speech.  Stein  (2006)  uncovered  two  conflicting  views   of  free  speech.  The  first  is  `Defensive';  wherein  freedom  exists  in  privately  controlled   spaces   secured   against   government   coercion.   The   second   view,   "empowering',   holds   that  freedom  exists  in  public  spaces  in  which  individuals  find  opportunities  to  speak,   free  from  both  government  and  non-government  intrusion.  This  empowering  view  of   speech  rights  was  revealed  by  Stein  (2006)  to  be  the  best  approach  for  a  democratic   society.        While   it   is   widely   agreed   by   scholars   (Mill,   1859/1993;   Green,   1881/1991;  

Stein,   2006)   that   a   laissez   faire   attitude   is   required   to   promote   free   speech   in   a   democratic   society,   such   freedoms   can   conflict   with   other   inherent   rights   such   as   privacy   and   security.   Creech   (2007)   asserts   that   some   kinds   of   speech   lose   First   Amendment   rights   when   there   is   a   threat   to   public   safety.      In   this   case,   competing   rights  can  call  into  question  our  understanding  of  speech  rights,  leaving  such  incidents   to  be  determined  by  the  courts  (Marsoof,  2011).        

  

7  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE      Public  Sphere     

  

  

The   concept   of   the   public   sphere,   as   originated   by   Jürgen   Habermas   (1989),  

describes   an   arena   where   meaningful   and   open   communication   can   occur.   Public   settings   like   coffee   houses,   saloons   and   bars   were   the   foreground   of   the   public   sphere   where  private  people  united  as  a  public  (Habermas,  1991).  The  public  sphere  is  able   to  shape  public  opinion  through  rational  discourse  where  opinions  and  identities  are   expressed   free   from   coercion.   The   public   sphere,   according   to   Habermas   (1989),   exists   in-between   the   private   sphere,   and   the   sphere   of   public   authority,   or   ruling   class.   The   private   sphere,   in   this   case,   refers   to   personal   privacy   such   as   the   home,   whereas   the   public   sphere   of   authority   refers   to   positions   of   power   such   as   government,  judges,  and  police.  Also  under  the  sphere  of  authority  is  what  Habermas   describes  as  the  "ruling  class";  this  is  understood  to  consist  of  the  corporate  world  and   other  positions  of  wealth.  The  basic  normative  concept  of  the  public  sphere,  according   to   Gimmler   (2001)   is   "uncoerced   communication   of   equal   participation   with   equal   access  and  equal  rights  to  intervene  or  propose  themes"  (p.  21).        However,   the   era   of   the   public   sphere   as   posited   by   Habermas   was   short   lived.  

The  rise  of  information  access,  technology,  and  the  emergent  press  quickly  led  to  the   demise   of   the   public   sphere   (Van   Dijk,   2012).   Manipulation   of   information   in   the   media,   advertising   and   the   political   realm   coupled   with   an   increase   in   the   legal   regulation   of   private   life,   has   eroded   what   was   originally   an   open   public   place   for   political   discourse   (Van   Dijk,   2012).   Mass   media,   once   an   integral   component   of   the  

  

8  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

public  sphere,  became  increasingly  "biased  by  both  economic  pressures  and  political   preferences   to   the   point   where   it   is   now   a   regulated   forum   of   communication"(Gerhards,  Shafer,  2010:  p  145).  Privileging  powerful  institutions  that   feed   politics   and   the   economy,   while   excluding   civil   society,   hinders   open   public   debate  and  can  result  in  only  certain  voices  being  heard  (Habermas,  1991).          Kohn   (2004)   further   argues,   public   life   is   being   undermined   by   the   growing  

private   industry   and   is   limiting   the   opportunities   for   free   speech.   Like   Habermas'   conceptual   view   of   the   public   sphere,   Kohn   (2004)   argues   that   public   space   is   essential   to   the   maintenance   of   democracy   in   making   it   possible   to   publicize   resistance,  recognize  the  needs  of  others,  and  organize  grassroots  campaigns.  Without   an   open   and   public   environment   for   public   issues   to   be   debated   and   discussed   free   from  coercion,  free  speech  could  become  vulnerable  to  new  media  regulations.  Public   spaces   like   shopping   malls,   outdoor   parks   and   even   communities   are   becoming   increasingly   privatized   (Kohn,   2004).   The   disappearance   of   public   space   is   changing   the   social   environment   and   with   the   introduction   of   the   Internet,   an   entirely   new   public   space   has   been   created   that   has   yet   to   be   fully   explored   (Kohn,   2004).   The   information   era   widened   the   scope   of   the   critical   public   sphere   and   many   scholars   believed   new   media   communication   would   allow   the   public   sphere   to   once   again   flourish  (Stein,  2008;  Habermas,  1991).        The   rise   of   the   Internet   as   a   popular   platform   with   a   range   of   new  

communication   methods   has   changed   the   media   landscape   substantially.   Some  

  

9  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

scholars  (Dalgren,  2001b;  Gerhards  &  Shafer,  2010)  believe  that  this  new  medium  has   the  potential  to  drastically  change  societal  communications  and  may  even  constitute  a   "stronger   public   sphere   than   what   was   previously   believed   of   traditional   forms   of   media"  (Gerhards  &  Shafer,  2010:  p.  145).  New  media  communication  is  less  regulated   by   gatekeeping   journalists   and   other   institutions,   and   therefore   permits   a   greater   dissemination   of   information   that   the   public   and   smaller   institutions   may   not   have   had   access   to   previously   (Gerhards   &   Shafer,   2010).   It   was   suggested   by   Dahlgren   (2001b)   that   the   Internet   might   democratize   the   public   sphere,   leading   to   greater   political   interest   and   participation   among   citizens.   Dahlgren's   prediction   was   borne   out   over   time.   Dueze   (2008)   describes   major   changes   to   the   media   landscape   that   have   helped   democratize   the   public   sphere   with   the   rise   of   user-generated   content,   participative  journalism  and  the  "proliferation  of  personalized  news  delivered  online   and  on  mobile  devices"(p.  13).        Although  new  media  communication  platforms  like  Facebook  and  Twitter  may  

meet   the   criteria   for   a   new   public   sphere,   the   number   of   outlets   for   public   debate   available  online  has  drastically  increased  from  previous  outlets  for  discussion  in  the   traditional   public   sphere,   leading   to   the   development   of   the   concept   of   `multiple   publics'.   This   notion   of   multiple   publics   is   prevalent   in   the   literature   on   the   public   sphere  (Asen  &  Brouer,  2001;  Dahlgren,  2001b).  Dahlgren  (2001b)  further  describes   these   publics   as   "issue   publics"   that   are   created   based   on   discussion   of   specific   issues.   An  example  of  Dahlgren's  issue  publics  can  be  seen  with  my  data  set  of  comments  in  

  

10  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

an   online   news   forum.   The   discussion   is   on   one   particular   issue   at   any   given   time,   while  a  plethora  of  similar  discussions  could  be  occurring  in  other  forums.        Comments   provided   by   readers   of   an   online   newspaper   can   be   seen   to   fulfill  

the  criteria  of  an  online  public  sphere,  as  proposed  by  Gimmler  (2001).  Online  readers   of   the   Guardian   have   equal   access   and   equal   opportunity   to   participate   in   the   commenting   form   free   from   coercion.   As   such,   discussion   on   political   issues   can   be   expressed   within   the   online   public   sphere   and   what   these   readers   express   provides   some   insight   into   public   perspectives   of   free   speech   within   a   computer-mediated   setting.          New  Media  Communication:      As  previously  noted,  the  Internet  has  provided  many  new  avenues  for  people  

to  communicate.  There  now  exists  a  variety  of  new  ways  to  produce,  reproduce,  send   and  receive  information  through  computer-mediated  technology  (Cooke,  2006).  Web   2.0   applications   such   as   blogs,   Twitter,   Facebook,   and   wikis   offer   the   potential   for   individuals   to   become   curators   and   to   promote   their   own   message   on   a   global   scale   (Cook,   2006).   Because   the   web   remains   the   least   regulated   compared   to   earlier   forms   of   mass   media   like   magazines   and   newspapers,   it   has   become   a   potential   tool   for   democracy   as   it   offers   more   possibilities   for   interaction   and   debate   (Castells,   2001).   This   is   perhaps   the   most   important   effect   created   by   the   Internet,   and   as   noted   by  

  

11  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Basque,   "it   brings   people   together   and   facilitates   discussion   that   would   not   have   been   otherwise  possible  through  traditional  forms  of  communication"  (1995,  p.16).        However,   the   freedom   afforded   by   the   Internet   created   a   new   wave   of   dangers  

that   were   only   a   `mouse   click'   away.   Dangers   like   child   pornography   and   terrorism   prompted   regulatory   measures.   Easy   access   to   information,   particularly   `unacceptable'   information   "created   legal   liability   concerns   for   Internet   service   providers   (ISP),   public   access   providers,   and   network   administrators"   (Cooke,   2006:   p.   363).      Such   fears   coupled   with   the   media's   tendency   to   correlate   instances   of   pornography   with   the   Internet   led   to   the   implementation   of   a   variety   of   non- legislative   control   techniques.   Cooke   (2006)   describes   popular   methods   of   control   which  include:     Filtering,  monitoring  and  ratings  technologies;  metadata  schemes  for   describing  and  organizing  Internet  resources;  Acceptable  Use  Policies  (AUPs)   and  Codes  of  Conduct  governing  network  use  within  institutions  and   organizations;  user  education  to  promote  appropriate  use  of  facilities;  and   requirements  for  users  to  sign  disclaimers  limiting  the  legal  liabilities  of  access   providers.  (p.  363)         The   regulations   already   in   place   have   critics   arguing   that   such   regulatory  

measures   infringe   on   free   speech   and   expression   as   warranted   by   the   First   Amendment.  Lasica  (1997)  argues  against  regulatory  measures  like  filtering  because   there   is   no   guarantee   that   criminal   and   `unacceptable'   data   are   the   only   elements   subject   to   filtering.   He   also   argues   that   filtering   is   too   subjective   and   "constitutes   a   threat   to   freedom   of   speech"(p.   56).   Filtering   is   conducted   through   meta-data   and  

  

12  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

labeling   schemes   that   aid   in   deciphering   which   information   should   be   excluded.   Labeling  is  a  coding  system  that  allows  files  to  be  identified  without  actually  opening   them,   and   according   to   Lessig   (2006),   can   be   particularly   dangerous.   He   suggests   that   labeling   can   lead   to   `upstream'   filtering   and   lack   of   transparency   in   restrictions   of   information   access.   This   lack   of   transparency   is   typical   of   what   Lessig   has   termed   `indirect   regulation',   where   government   uses   regulatory   measures   to   modify   other   modes   of   regulation.   Encryption   allows   individuals   to   make   their   conversations   and   data   exchanges   untranslatable,   which   prevents   government   and   other   parties   from   accessing  information  exchanged.  In  order  to  access  information  and  gain  control  over   encryption,   the   government   sought   to   encourage   encryption   technologies   that   left   a   back   door   open   for   the   government   (Lessig   2006).   While   the   encryption   codes   caused   some   controversy,   by   making   certain   encryption   technologies   cheaper,   the   government   is   allowing   the   marketplace   to   do   the   regulation   for   the   government,   and   thereby  regulate  encryption  indirectly.        Indirect   regulation   as   described   by   Lessig   (2006)   masks   the   true   source   of  

power  and  makes  government  less  accountable  for  their  actions.  Because  technology   is   complex,   people   are   unaware   of   the   controls   operating   through   technological   architecture   (Lessig,   2006).   The   NSA   surveillance   practices   takes   filtering   and   other   regulatory   measures   to   the   next   level.   Not   only   is   the   government   tapping   into   web   users'  content,  they  are  doing  so  in  secrecy  and  as  a  result  are  indirectly  regulating  the  

  

13  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Internet's  ability  to  function  as  an  open  and  free  space  for  public  discourse,  potentially   inhibiting  free  speech  and  expression.        Chilling  Effects  of  Surveillance      While   the   Internet   is   celebrated   for   its   democratization   potential,   these  

freedoms   can   be   susceptible   to   censorship   and   regulatory   measures.      As   previously   noted,   there   is   an   abundance   of   research   from   early   theorists   such   as   Locke   (1688/1996)   and   Mill   (1859/1993)   on   the   importance   of   free   speech   within   democratic   societies.   I   will   outline   some   key   elements   discussed   by   more   recent   notable   democratic   theorists   such   as   Barber   and   Habermas,   who   propose   that   communication   processes   are   essential   to   a   flourishing   democracy.   These   scholars   understood  that  democracy  is  the  best  method  for  reaching  social  decisions;  however,   it  falls  on  the  public  to  recognize  and  take  action  for  and  show  interest  in  the  greater   social  good.  Habermas  (1989)  argues  these  social  decisions  can  be  achieved  through   various  forms  of  communication.  Barber  (1984)  believes  that  communication  allows   people  to  share  experiences  and  perspectives,  identify  the  common  good,  and  govern   themselves.   Furthermore,   democratic   states   have   a   responsibility   to   protect   and   promote   these   rights   because   public   discourse   is   the   "foundation   of   democracy"   (Stein,  2006:  p.  4).          While  countries  like  the  U.S.  are  described  as  democratic,  the  recently  unveiled  

NSA   surveillance   practices   appear   to   be   an   attempt   by   government   officials   to  

  

14  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

circumvent  the  moral  dilemma  of  protecting  the  right  to  privacy  and  expression  and   safeguarding   domestic   security.   While   the   Internet   provides   opportunity   for   public   inquiry   and   expression,   the   architecture   of   the   Internet   and   interactive   media   make   it   "considerably   easier   to   monitor   and   collect   data   on   individuals'   usage   compared   to   traditional  forms  of  media"  (Baruh,  2007  p.  188).  The  surveillance  practices  executed   by   the   NSA   were   implemented   under   the   U.S.   Patriot   Act   of   2001   as   a   means   to   intercept   and   obstruct   terrorism.   While   the   goal   is   to   protect   U.S.   citizens,   Internet   users  are  subject  to  government  scrutiny  and  intrusion  comparable  to  what  occurred   during   the   Cold   War   (Baruh,   2007).   More   recently,   Athan   Theorharis   (2011)   argues   that   the   abusive   surveillance   policies   of   the   Cold   War   years   were   repeated   in   the   government's   responses   to   the   September   11   attacks   and   new   information   technologies,   such   as   Prism,   are   making   the   collection   of   user   data   even   easier.   The   commitment  to  secrecy,  wiretapping,  and  counterintelligence  was  established  during   the  Cold  War  and  used  by  administrations  in  power  as  a  hedge  against  the  spread  of   Communism   (Goodall,   2008).   Now   the   same   secrecy   has   been   exposed   by   Edward   Snowden  as  an  attempt  to  defeat  not  communism,  but  terrorism.      Moreover,  scholars  such  as  Lessig  and  Kang  suggest  that  intrusions  of  privacy  

not  only  infringe  on  human  dignity  but  also  `chill'  the  public's  ability  to  exercise  such   liberties   as   speaking   and   associating   with   others   (Kang,   1998;   Lessig,   1999).   Accordingly,   individuals   faced   with   extensive   surveillance   may   be   less   likely   to   participate  in  open  discussion  on  controversial  issues  out  of  fear  of  being  scrutinized  

  

15  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

(Schwartz,   1999).   Such   fears   extend   even   to   the   workplace,   as   companies   are   increasingly   turning   to   the   Internet   in   search   of   employable   candidates.   Schwartz   (1999)   not   only   argues   that   new   media   communication   is   susceptible   to   chilling   effects,   he   further   suggests   that   cyberspace   is   more   prone   to   these   effects   than   physical  space  and  face-to-face  communication.    This  concept  is  further  supported  by   Baruh  (2007)  who  adds:  "because  our  actions  in  cyberspace  leave  finely  grained  trails,   the  perceived  risks  associated  with  digitally  accessing  a  subversive  text,  whether  it  is   erotic   movies   recorded   on   a   PVR,   or   a   website   on   making   bombs,   is   much   higher   than   consuming  the  same  content  in  real  space"  (p.  190).      The   literature   suggests   that   democratic   societies   rely   on   open,   uncoerced  

communication  in  order  to  form  new  opinions,  share  information  and  engage  in  public   debate   (Stein,   2006;   Gimmler,   2001;   Stone,   2008).   New   media   communication,   as   afforded   by   Web   2.0's   ability   to   create   new   arenas   for   public   discourse,   could   allow   the   public   sphere,   as   described   by   Habermas   (1991),   to   flourish   once   again.   However,   the  NSA  surveillance  practices  that  were  recently  revealed,  could  pose  a  threat  to  the   Internet's  ability  to  function  as  an  open  space  for  communication.  The  chilling  effect  of   surveillance   as   described   by   Lessig   (1999),   could   change   the   communication   landscape   of   the   Internet,   if   the   public   fears   the   repercussions   associated   with   `speaking   out'   about   controversial   issues.   The   inability   to   speak   without   fear   of   sanction   in   new   media   communication--free   from   government   intrusion--endangers   First  Amendment  guarantees  and  the  democratic  ideals  of  the  public  sphere.  

  

16  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE        

  

  

The   questions   my   research   aims   to   address   are:   What   beliefs   about  

government  surveillance  of  new  media  communication  in  public  spaces  were  revealed   by   the   NSA   surveillance   leak   as   perceived   by   those   who   commented   on   the   article?   How   do   those   who   wrote   comments   articulate   their   understanding   of   free   speech   in   a   news   commenting   forum?   How   do   people   conceptualize   government   monitoring   of   the  online  public  sphere,  as  revealed  through  online  news  comments?                                                 

  

17  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

METHOD            To  analyze  the  data  I  performed  a  grounded  qualitative  content  analysis  

(Hseih   &   Shannon,   2005)   to   explore   my   research   questions.      Qualitative   content   analysis   methods   are   commonly   used   to   interpret   meaning   from   content   of   textual   data   "through   the   systematic   classification   process   of   coding   and   identifying   themes   and   patterns"(Hseih   &   Shannon,   2005:   p.   1278).      As   previously   mentioned,   this   research   project   is   a   case   study   with   a   limited   data   set.   The   methodology   explained   in   this  section  may  be  applicable  to  more  comprehensive  studies  on  public  perceptions   of  free  speech  within  a  democratic  society.        A  grounded,  qualitative  content  analysis  was  chosen  for  a  number  of  reasons.  

First,  given  that  I  am  working  with  a  limited  data  set,  content  analyses  provide  a  rich   source  of  information  "infused  with  history,  idiomatic  speech  and  cultural  logics  of  the   people  who  created  them"  (Lindolf  &  Taylor,  2011:  p.235).  Second,  the  content  used   for  the  analysis  was  readily  available,  nonreactive  and  because  no  consent  was  needed   to   obtain   the   data,   ethical   concerns   are   avoided   (Lindolf   &   Taylor,   2011).   Lastly,   qualitative  analysis,  as  an  interpretive  tradition,  permits  the  examination  of  individual   interpretations   expressed   through   textual   communication   that   would   not   have   been   otherwise  possible  through  quantitative  methods.          

  

18  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE      Research  Site     

  

  

While   The   Guardian's   readership   is   mostly   citizens   in   the   UK,   they   have   a  

strong  American  readership  as  well,  most  of  which  are  highly  affluent  (The  Guardian,   2012).   Readers   of   The   Guardian   are   well   educated   with   about   57%   of   readers   possessing  a  degree  or  doctorate  (The  Guardian,  2012).  Furthermore,  As  of  June  2012,   online   readership   for   The   Guardian   was   "30.4   million,   with   the   U.S.   accounting   for   around  one-third  of  total  readership,  making  it  the  world's  third  most  read  newspaper   website"(The  Guardian,  June  2012).        It   should   also   be   noted   that   in   2010,   The  Guardian   collaborated   with   Wikileaks  

and   therefore   has   recently   established   itself   as   a   news   source   on   free   speech   and   security  activism.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  Edward  Snowden  allegedly  leaked  the   NSA  surveillance  information  to  Glenn  Greenwald,  columnist  at   The  Guardian,  UK,  and   also   the   writer   behind   the   June   7th   report   used   in   my   data   set.   It   should   further   be   noted   that   Greenwald's   focus   as   a   columnist   is   on   civil   liberties   and   U.S.   national   security  issues.          Data  Collection        

In   order   to   gauge   public   perception   of   free   speech   in   a   democratic   society   in  

relation   to   computer-mediated   communication,   I   examined   comments   to   an   online   news   article,   "NSA   Prism   program   taps   into   user   data   of   Apple,   Google,   and   others",   written   by   Glen   Greenwald   and   Ewen   MacAskill,   and   published   June   7,   2013   in   The  

  

19  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Guardian,   one   day   after   they   broke   the   story   about   the   NSA   surveillance   leak   in   the   same  publication.  The  article  is  a  1700-word  news  piece  featured  in  the  World  News   section  of  The  Guardian,  and  is  a  factual  objective  report  that  provides  a  breakdown  of   the   NSA   surveillance   program,   Prism.   For   the   analysis,   a   total   of   50   news   comments   were  selected  from   The  Guardian,  UK,  (www.guardian.co.uk)  which  first  received  and   published   the   story   on   the   NSA   surveillance   Prism   program   from   Edward   Snowden,   former  computer  specialist  who  worked  on  contract  for  the  CIA  and  NSA.          Although   the   NSA   surveillance   revelations   specifically   affect   the   U.S.  

population,   the   news   source   chosen   for   this   analysis   was   from   the   UK.   There   are   legitimate   reasons   for   selecting   The   Guardian.   First,   I   chose   the   June   7th   article   specifically   because   it   provided   a   clear   and   detailed   description   of   the   NSA   surveillance   Prism   program,   with   visual   examples   of   the   confidential   document   included   within   the   article.   Secondly,   The   Guardian   received   the   leak   from   Edward   Snowden  and  was  the  first  to  publish  the  article,  which  may  have  attracted  a  greater   variety  of  readers  interested  in  the  issue  than  other  publications.        There  were  a  total  of  2935  comments  on  the  news  story  made  between  June  6th  

and  8th.  Because  the  article  garnered  such  a  large  number  of  comments,  it  was  outside   of   the   scope   of   my   research   to   examine   each   of   them.   Instead,   I   chose   the   top   50   comments   by   selecting   the   "most   recommended"   comments   from   the   available   drop   down  key  to  avoid  trolling  and  other  off-topic  comments.  Although  this  sample  may  be   missing   important   information,   like   comments   that   were   deleted   or   censored   by   a  

  

20  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

moderator   from   The   Guardian,   the   sampling   is   intended   to   offer   popular   views   and   opinions   of   free   speech   in   a   computer-mediated   setting.      By   selecting   the   top   50   comments   I   gain   access   to   the   most   popular   sentiment   based   on   recommendations   from   both   commenters   and   users   participating   in   online   discussion.   As   a   data   set,   online   news   comments   offer   a   rich   source   for   studying   social   structures   and   perspectives   (Eysenback   &   Till,   2001)   and   can   provide   information   on   public   perceptions   of   free   speech   based   on   readers'   reactions   to   the   NSA   surveillance   practices  unveiled  a  week  prior.      Data  analysis        

A   grounded   theory   analysis   is   a   popular   method   used   among   researchers   in  

which   the   data   is   grouped   and   defined   as   a   last   step.   Allowing   the   trends   to   emerge   naturally   lets   the   data   speak   for   itself   rather   than   searching   the   data   for   predefined   categories   (Lindolf   &   Taylor,   2011).         I   used   a   grounded   qualitative   content   analysis   (Lindolf   &   Taylor,   2011),   through   news   story   commentary   on   the   NSA   surveillance   practices,   to   develop   a   precise   language   to   describe,   interpret,   and   explain   how   the   public   conceptualizes   its   understanding   of   free   speech   and   online   censorship   within   online  news  comments.        The  analysis  was  divided  into  three  phases.  The  first  was  a  general  sentiment  

analysis   of   comments   divided   by   whether   or   not   they   were   `supportive'   `critical',   or   `pessimistic'   to   government   surveillance   of   computer-mediated   communication.  

  

21  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Comments   that   were   neither   supportive   nor   clearly   critical   of   the   NSA   surveillance   practices  were  classified  as  pessimistic  such  as  this  post  by  "ehaines":  "Why  am  I  not   the  least  bit  surprised."  Supportive  comments  in  this  case  study  referred  to  comments   that  were  in  favour  of  the  NSA  surveillance  practices  and  can  be  seen  in  this  comment   by   "holdingonfortomorrow":   "Great,   it   should   be   possible   to   pin   point   potential   troublemakers,   and   neutralize   them."   Commenters   that   were   opposed   the   revealed   surveillance  practices  were  classified  as  critical,  as  seen  in  "mooncrooks"'s  post:  "  This   is  highly  illegal.  They  are  flagrantly  violating  the  Constitution.  Anybody  who  partook   in  this  program  or  knew  of  its  existence  has  broken  the  law."      Sentiment   analyses   are   subjective   and   focus   on   identifying   positive   and  

negative   opinions   and   emotions   expressed   in   language   (Wilson,   Wiebe,   &   Hoffmann,   2009).   A   sentiment   analysis   can   be   useful   for   research   on   public   perceptions   and   provides   insight   into   the   user's   emotional   stance   on   a   particular   topic   or   problem   (Padmaja  &  Fatima,  2013).  Furthermore,  the  use  of  Web  2.0  platforms  like  Facebook   and   Twitter   for   public   debate   has   created   important   research   grounds   for   gauging   public  opinions  (Ruiz  et  al.,  2011).     Phase  I:  Sentiment  Analysis      As   explained   above,   a   general   sentiment   analysis   was   conducted   on   the   50  

"most   recommended"   comments   from   The   Guardian   by   categorizing   comments   as   "critical",   "pessimistic",   or   "supportive"   of   the   revealed   NSA   surveillance   practices.   Commenters  who  were  critical  of  the  NSA's  surveillance  practices  provided  numerous  

  

22  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

reasons  for  their  disapproval,  and  used  quite  uncompromising  language,  such  as  this   one   posted   by   `JoeB666':   "I   believe   this   behaviour   should   be   considered   a   crime   against  humanity.  It  is  a  violation  of  basic  human  decency.  Americans  should  be  in  the   streets   for   this   highly   immoral   and   secretive   global   surveillance.   Many   heads   should   roll!"   Other   commenters   like   "Jopestron"   feel   the   surveillance   practices   are   a   legal   matter,   which   is   seen   with   this   comment:   "   It's   highly   illegal.   They   are   flagrantly   violating   the   Constitution.   Anybody   who   partook   in   this   program   or   know   of   its   existence   has   broken   the   law."   Commenters   in   favour   of   the   revealed   surveillance   practices   also   provided   various   reasons   for   their   support.   "Bob   Blawblaw"   posted:   "People  should  quit  worrying  about  their  privacy  and  be  thankful  someone  is  looking   out  for  their  safety."  This  sentiment  is  further  expressed  by  "georgemichaelroll"  who   wrote:  "What's  the  problem?  If  America  gets  hit  by  terrorists  again,  then  the  security   agencies   will   be   accused   of   nothing   doing   enough   to   prevent   attacks."   Commenters   within  the  pessimistic  category  were  cynical  of  government  surveillance,  but  were  not   outright   for   or   against   it   and   posted   comments   such   as   this   one   by   "Timecop":   "Get   used  to  it.  This  apparently  is  how  the  world  works  today."        Overall,   26   out   of   50   (52%)   commenters   were   critical   of   the   revealed   NSA  

surveillance  practices,  more  than  twice  the  number  of  comments  that  supported  the   surveillance  practices  (See  Table  1  below).        

  

23  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE        

  

  

Table  1:  Commenter  stance  on  NSA  surveillance  practices              Supportive   Critical   Pessimistic      8  (16%)               26  (52%)      16  (32%)  

   Total      50  (100%)  

The   sentiment   analysis   revealed   that   while   the   majority   of   commenters  

criticized   the   NSA   surveillance   techniques,   16   out   of   50   (32%)   commenters   were   pessimistic   of   the   NSA   surveillance   practices.   These   varying   opinions   led   to   further   development   of   recurrent   themes   that   may   be   useful   for   understanding   their   perceptions   of   free   speech   and   expression   within   a   democratic   society   in   a   computer- mediated  setting.     Phase  II:  Thematic  Analysis        The   second   phase   was   an   emergent   thematic   analysis   in   which   I   examined  

recurrent   themes   within   the   content   of   the   data.   A   thematic   analysis   is   a   method   of   identifying,  analyzing  and  reporting  patterns  and  themes  within  data  (Braun  &  Clarke,   2006).  A  thematic  analysis  is  a  flexible  and  useful  research  tool  that  can  provide  rich,   detailed,   and   complex   accounts   for   the   data   analysis   (Braun   &   Clarke,   2006).      Themes   capture   something   important   in   relation   to   the   research   questions   and   represent   some   level   of   "patterned   response   or   meaning   within   the   data   set"   (Braun   &   Clarke,   2006:  p.  82).      It  should  be  noted  that  because  I  was  the  sole  researcher  to  analyze  the   data,  it  is  possible  that  another  researcher  could  find  different  themes  and  patterns.    

  

24  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE        

  

  

  Themes  and  patterns  were  identified  by  manually  noting  any  word  repetition  

and  synonyms  that  occurred.  Repeated  words  and  phrases  indicated  that  these  ideas   or   beliefs   were   common   within   the   commenting   forum.   Six   main   themes   were   extracted   from   the   data   (see   Table   2   below).   Once   the   themes   were   identified,   I   counted   the   number   of   times   each   theme   occurred   within   the   comments   in   order   to   gauge   which   themes   were   most   prominent.   Some   comments   had   multiple   themes,   while  others  had  only  one.  For  example,  some  commenters  believed  the  surveillance   practices   were   a   violation   of   their   civil   rights,   but   also   believed   it   was   an   abuse   of   power   and   felt   betrayed   because   they   were   lied   to,   placing   the   comments   in   three   thematic   categories.   After   my   themes   were   developed   I   was   able   to   look   for   similarities  and  trends.  The  result  of  coding  and  recoding  the  data  resulted  in  several   defined  themes.   Table  2:  Emergent  Themes   Extracted  Themes   Violation  of  Civil  Liberty   Abuse  of  Power   Transparency     Fear  of  Scrutiny   Hopelessness   Public  Safety            Definition   Government   is   violating   their   rights   as   citizens  by  implementing  Prism   Government   is   taking   advantage   of   its   power   over   citizens   by   implementing   Prism   Governments   should   be   open   with   the   public  about  their  surveillance  practices   The   Prism   programs   makes   the   public   vulnerable   Stopping  the  program  is  a  hopeless  cause   Government   surveillance   is   needed   to   ensure  public  safety  

  

25  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Phase  III:  Making  Connections         For   the   final   part   of   the   analysis   I   divided   the   emergent   themes   across   the   sentiment   categories.   In   doing   so   I   was   able   to   see   common   trends   across   the   sentiments,   which   helped   describe   the   commenters'   reasons   for   their   support,   criticism,  and  pessimism  of  the  NSA  surveillance  practices.  Table  3  (below)  provides  a   breakdown   of   the   themes   across   the   sentiment   categories   with   examples   from   the   data  for  each  theme  for  further  clarification.     Table  3:  Emergent  Themes  and  Exemplars   Sentiment   Themes  and  Exemplars   Critical   Violation  of  Civil  Liberty:     "They  are  flagrantly  violating  the  Constitution."      Abuse  of  Power:   "This  is  the  stuff  Stalin  would  drool  over  being  able  to  do.  No   government  should  have  this  capability.  This  is  horrific."      Transparency:   "Every  globally  concerned  citizen  should  be  writing  to  their   government,  imploring  them  to  complain  for  this  immoral  and   secretive  global  surveillance"        Fear  of  Scrutiny:   "There's  no  more  hiding  from  governments;  they  will  read  your   emails,  watch  your  personal  videos,  they  will  find  you  and  you  will   be  arrested"      Hopelessness:   "So  very  sad-but  seriously,  what  can  we  do  about  it??"      Public  Safety:   "Great  it  will  make  a  safer  world  for  all  of  us."           

Pessimistic  

Supportive  

  

  

  

26  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

FINDINGS  AND  DISCUSSION            Within   the   categories   of   the   sentiment   analysis   (Supportive,   critical,   and  

pessimistic),   a   number   of   salient   themes   were   uncovered   from   the   commenters'   stance   of   the   revealed   NSA   surveillance   practices.   As   mentioned   earlier,   the   themes   were  identified  by  manually  noting  recurrent  phrases  and  synonyms  within  the  data   until   every   comment   belonged   to   a   theme.   I   then   tallied   the   number   of   times   each   theme  occurred  (See  Table  4).        Table  4:  Emergent  Themes  with  Occurrences   Sentiment   Theme   Critical   Violation  of  Civil  Liberty   Abuse  of  Power   Transparency   Pessimistic   Hopelessness   Fear  of  Scrutiny   Supportive      Public  Safety     

Occurrences   20   15   13   13   12   8  

Critical  
   Out   of   the   52%   (26   out   of   50)   opposed   to   the   NSA   surveillance   practices,   the  

most   frequently   occurring   theme   was   violation   of   civil   liberty,   which   accounted   for   77%   (20   out   of   26)   of   critical   comments.   Commenters   in   this   theme   consented   that  

  

27  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

the   NSA   Prism   program   abridges   their   civil   rights   to   freedom   from   government   intrusion.   This   concern   is   voiced   by   "IronCurtain"   in   this   post:   "In   a   free   society   the   people  should  not  be  subject  to  the  arbitrary  scrutiny  of  the  state,  we  should  be  able   to  go  about  our  business  free  from  government  interference."  Some  believed  that  the   NSA   Prism   program   was   a   legal   issue   and   those   responsible   for   implementing   the   program  should  face  legal  sanction.  This  can  be  seen  in  "Jopestron"'s  post:  "The  NSA   and  Obama  administration  have  broken  the  law!  They  have  violated  the  Constitution   and   should   be   thrown   in   jail."   Other   commenters   believed   the   Prism   program   was   a   free  speech  issue   and  felt  that   free  speech  and  expression  would  be  diminished  with   government  intrusion,  which  can  be  seen  in  this  comment  by  "Russian":  "  Freedom  of   Speech   would   seem   diminished   by   being   forced   to   share   every   single   word   with   governments..."   These   comments   illustrate   that   the   commenters   believe   that   their   right  to  speak  freely  is  an  inherent  right  that  should  never  be  suppressed  under  any   circumstance--particularly  if  it  is  against  government  actions.        What   is   revealed   in   the   above   comments   support   Stein's   (2006)   research   on  

normative   views   of   speech   rights.   The   commenters   in   this   category   believe   that   freedom   exists   in   public   spaces   where   "individuals   find   opportunities   to   speak   free   from  both  government  and  non-government  intrusion"(Stein,  2006:  p  4).  Commenters   believe   their   rights   are   being   violated,   and   are   opposed   to   any   government   intervention.   As   the   most   common   theme   among   commenters,   their   beliefs   line   up   with   Friedman's   (1962)   assertion   that   people   have   inherent   rights   like   free   speech  

  

28  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

and   the   only   government   involvement   should   be   to   protect   those   inherent   rights.   What   is   depicted   through   the   comments   demonstrate   the   important   value   commenters  place  on  their  right  to  speak  freely  in  new  media  communication.  While   the  online  news  article  was  published  in  The  Guardian,  UK,  approximately  one  third  of   their  readership  is  American  (The  Guardian,  June  2012),  which  could  explain  the  legal   reference  to  the  U.S  Constitution.        Another   overarching   theme   among   the   commenters   critical   of   the   NSA  

surveillance   was   their   belief   that   government   was   abusing   their   power   by   implementing   the   Prism   program.   The   theme,   abuse   of   power,   emerged   15   times   within  the  26  critical  comments.  Commenters  commonly  described  that  government   interests   are   in   private   industry   instead   of   protection   of   citizens   from   crime   and   terrorism.  "Macktan894"  illustrates  this  point  with  this  comment:  "They  aren't  doing   it   to   protect   the   people.   They   are   protecting   an   Economy--corporations   &   profits."   This   commenter   is   suggesting   that   the   government   is   working   with   private   organizations   like   Google,   Facebook   and   others,   simply   for   a   profit.   Commenters,   such   as      "ROFLMFAO,"   add   that   the   Prism   program   is   just   another   way   for   those   in   positions   of   power   to   control   the   population.   "Nobody   knows   what's   around   the   corner,   what   we   do   however   know   is   that   the   people   who   run   the   show   have   more   control  over  our  existence  now  than  ever  before"        Interestingly   enough,   this   theme   was   oftentimes   paired   with   the   first   theme,  

violation   of   civil   liberty.   "Splat64"   provides   an   example   of   this   connection   between  

  

29  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

power   and   civil   rights   with   this   post:   "As   George   Carlin   tried   to   point   out   to   America...if  you  think  you  have  rights...you  don't...You  have  no  rights...only  temporary   privileges   that   can   be,   and   are,   revoked   whenever   power   requires   it."   Similarly,   "MarkyMark  T.O"  adds:  "Bush,  Obama  et  al  have  used  post  9/11  measures  to  entrench   the  totalitarian  Patriot  Act  and  treats  its  populous  [sic]   as  criminals  first  and  normal   citizens  second."  These  points  illustrate  the  belief  that  not  only  is  the  NSA  `spying'  on   American  citizens;  the  agency  is  protecting  the  interests  of  corporations  as  opposed  to   the   rights   of   individuals.   This   power   struggle   is   identified   by   Habermas   (1991)   who   asserts   that   powerful   institutions   that   feed   politics   and   the   economy   are   privileged   over   the   average   citizen   and   further   warns   that   this   privileging   could   lead   to   only   having  certain  voices  heard,  while  others  remain  in  the  shadows.        Communications  theorists  (Gorman  &  Mclean,  2009)  argue  that  new  media  is  

liberating  by  empowering  citizens,  promoting  egalitarianism  and  tolerance  as  well  as   taking   back   power   from   large   corporations   and   "returning   conversations   to   the   people"  (p.  257).  While  it  is  believed  that  new  media  communication  is  democratizing,   the   commenters   in   this   theme   believe   government   is   taking   advantage   of   their   powerful  position  by  implementing  the  Prism  program  and  taking  away  their  right  to   converse  free  from  government  coercion.          Another   argument   that   often   surfaced   within   the   comments   was   the   belief   that  

a   free   democratic   society   should   have   a   transparent   government.   This   theme   surfaced   13   times   within   the   26   critical   comments,   with   many   of   the   commenters   in   this  

  

30  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

category   using   more   uncompromising   language   against   the   NSA.   We   can   see   this   strong   language   through   "JoeB666"   who   wrote:   "This   is   a   level   of   government   surveillance   unseen   in   the   history   of   humanity...Americans   should   be   in   the   streets...for   this   highly   immoral   and   secretive   global   surveillance."   Another   user,   "Kells"   expressed   a   similar   opinion:   "That   the   government   [is]   prepared   to   put   their   entire   population   and   the   rest   of   the   world   under   such   scrutiny   is   a   testament   to   how   far   the   modern   US   has   strayed   from   19th   C   concepts   of   liberty."   Commenters   like   "Kells"   strongly   believe   in   concepts   of   free   speech   as   described   by   early   theorists     (Locke,   1688/1996;   Mill,   1859/1993)   that   government   should   leave   the   people   to   themselves.        It   can   be   seen   within   this   theme   that   commenters   believe   that   government  

should   be   open   with   the   public   about   their   decisions.   The   fact   that   the   NSA   Prism   program   was   implemented   without   public   consent   has   caused   the   commenters   to   question   the   transparency   of   their   government.      Democratic   transparency   is   seen   to   be   integral   to   the   commenters,   and   a   significant   reason   for   their   criticisms   against   the   NSA  surveillance  Prism  program.  This  theme  supports  previous  research  (Beatson  &   Cripps,   2000)   that   transparency   is   an   important   element   in   the   commenters'   conceptualization  of  free  speech  and  expression.        While   the   commenters   in   this   theme   were   not   directly   concerned   about   free  

speech,   they   were   concerned   with   the   secrecy   of   the   Prism   program.      According   to   these   commenters,   a   transparent   government   is   essential   to   a   democracy.   As  

  

31  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

previously  outlined  in  the  literature,  legal  definitions  of  freedom  of  speech  extend  to   include  freedom  of  expressions  and  inquiry.  Freedom  of  inquiry  permits  the  public   to   access   government   information   that   concerns   public   interests.   Withholding   information  pertaining  to  the  NSA  surveillance  program  has  caused  the  commenters   to  criticize  the  NSA  Prism  program.  This  link  between  transparency  and  free  speech  is   supported   by   scholars   (Emerson,   1976;   Mill,   1964)   who   declare   that   seeking   information  is  integral  for  the  public  to  uncover  the  truth,  and  is  essential  to  collective   decision-making   in   a   democratic   society.   More   specifically,   Mill   (1964)   believed   that   free   speech   should   be   understood   as   a   multi-faceted   right   that   includes   the   right   to   express  information  and  ideas,  the  right  to  seek  information  and  ideas,  and  the  right   to  impart  information  and  ideas.  This  statement  shows  a  clear  connection  between  the   commenters'  critical  stance  against  the  NSA  surveillance,  and  their  conceptualization   of  free  speech.    

Pessimistic  
   The   second   major   contending   category,   which   accounted   for   32%   of   the   total  

50   comments,   was   pessimistic.   As   previously   discussed,   this   sentiment   contained   commenters   that   were   neither   for   nor   against   the   NSA   surveillance   Prism   program.   Commenters   in   this   category   were   cynical,   but   not   clearly   against   the   surveillance.   Two   prominent   themes   emerged   within   this   category.   The   first   salient   theme   was   hopelessness.   Commenters   in   this   theme,   which   surfaced   13   times   within   the   26   comments   of   the   pessimistic   category,   felt   that   preventing   the   NSA   surveillance   Prism  

  

32  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

program  was  a  hopeless  cause.  This  sentiment  is  displayed  by  "tosin1107"'s  post:  "So   very  sad  ­  but  seriously,  what  can  we  do  about  it??  We  are  doomed."  Commenters  in   this  theme  were  concerned  about  the  NSA  surveillance  Prism  program,  but  felt  there   was  nothing  they  could  do  about  it.    Further  to  this,  some  suggested  that  government   surveillance  of  user  data  is  old  news;  it  has  been  going  on  for  years.  This  can  be  seen   with  this  comment  posted  by  "Here's  a  thought...":  "...and  yet  people  are  flipping  out   about   it   NOW?   Geeze,   guys,   it's   been   going   on   for   over   ten   years.   Isn't   the   news   supposed   to   be,   you   know,   NEW?"      The   only   answer   to   this   debate,   according   to   commenters  in  this  theme,  is  simply  to  get  used  to  the  surveillance.  Either  they  have   already  accepted  it,  or  eventually  will  as  it  becomes  increasingly  normal.        Other  commenters  demonstrated  hopelessness  by  asserting  that  no  one  cares  

or   will   do   anything   about   it.   "Zeezi"   provides   an   excellent   example   of   this   sentiment   with   this   post:   "The   only   thing   more   worrying   than   this   is   the   fact   that   there'll   be   a   little   moaning   and   groaning   but   nobody   will   do   anything!!!"   These   commenters   are   worried   about   the   NSA   surveillance   practices,   but   believe   no   one   will   speak   out   against   it.      Public   opinions   as   described   by   Locke   are   attitudes   people   can   express   without   running   the   danger   of   isolating   themselves   (1881/1991).   Locke's   argument   that   public   opinion   is   an   integral   component   to   free   speech   can   help   explain   the   hopelessness   displayed   by   the   commenters.      Commenters,   who   felt   they   could   do   nothing   to   prevent   the   surveillance,   did   not   believe   that   citizen   backlash   would   accomplish   anything.   By   keeping   quiet   and   allowing   surveillance   to   continue,   the  

  

33  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

commenters   are   unable   to   express   public   opinions   without   being   isolated.   Elizabeth   Noelle-Neumann  (1993)  agrees  with  Locke's  (1881/1991)  concepts  of  public  opinion   but  further  adds  that  morally  loaded  topics  that  are  strongly  controversial  make  the   public  particularly  vulnerable  to  isolation  and  can  lead  to  the  public  withholding  their   opinions.    This  fear  of  isolation  is  the  engine  that  drives  the  "spiral  of  silence"  (p.  372)   as  described  by  Noelle-Neumann  (1993),  which  is  the  increasing  pressure  felt  by  the   public  to  conceal  their  views  when  they  feel  they  are  a  minority.        The   second   salient   theme   among   the   commenters   in   this   category   was   their  

fear   of   being   scrutinized   by   the   government   for   their   actions   in   new-media   communication.   This   theme   occurred   12   times   within   the   16   comments   in   the   pessimistic  sentiment  category.  Reflecting  back  to  the  literature,  Dewey  (1927/1954)   asserts   that   free   speech   is   critical   to   the   public's   ability   to   form   opinions   and   hold   meaningful   discussions,   and   new   media   communication   has   allowed   new   arenas   for   these  discussions  to  develop.    Commenters  in  this  theme  displayed  a  desire  to  avoid   using   new   media   communication   like   Facebook,   Twitter,   or   even   the   commenting   forum   they   were   participating   in.   This   can   be   seen   in   this   post   by   "Scopeys":   "Avoid   using   all   technology   and   go   back   to   talking   face   to   face."   Similarly   "Erazers"   added:   "Leave   your   phones   at   home.   Meet   in   pubs   just   as   we   have   for   centuries."   The   commenters   believed   the   answer   to   avoiding   strict   government   surveillance   was   to   eliminate   their   chances   of   being   surveyed   by   boycotting   computer-mediated   communication.   This   illustrates   the   `chilling   effect'   previously   described   by   Kang  

  

34  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

(1998)   and   Lessig   (1999).   Schwartz   (1999)   warned   that   the   chilling   effect   of   surveillance   could   suppress   the   public's   ability   to   engage   in   public   discourses   out   of   fear   of   being   scrutinized.   Furthermore,   by   avoiding   the   use   of   new   media   communication  commenters  are  removing  the  Internet's  ability  to  act  as  an  important   democratic   tool   for   public   debate   as   described   by   communication   theorists   Castells   (2001)  and  Basque  (1995).        This   is   an   important   finding   because   new   media   communication   has   been  

widely   adopted   by   Americans.   As   previously   mentioned,   an   astounding   67%   of   American  adults  over  the  age  of  18  use  social  networking  sites  like  Facebook,  Twitter,   and   Google+   (Pew   Research   Center,   2012).   The   widespread   use   of   these   social   networking  platforms  to  hold  public  discussions  have  permitted  the  public  sphere,  as   described   by   Habermas   (1991),   to   emerge   once   again   (Dueze,   2008;   Gerhards   &   Shafer,   2010).   However,   commenters   suggest   that   because   the   revelation   of   the   Prism   program,  they  will  stop  using  these  platforms.  The  findings  reveal  the  potential  impact   on  free  expression  of  the  Prism  program,  because  the  commenters  fear  their  actions   could  be  incriminating.  This  finding  is  evidenced  by  this  post  by  "Peterroe":  There's  no   more  hiding  from  the  government;  they  will  read  all  your  emails  and  watch  all  your   videos,  they  will  find  you  and  you  will  be  arrested."        

     

  

35  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Supportive  
   Only   16%   of   the   total   comments   (8   out   of   50)   were   supportive   of   the   NSA  

surveillance   Prism   program.   Their   reason   for   supporting   government   surveillance   was   their   understanding   that   the   Prism   program   would   ensure   public   safety.   The   theme,   public  safety,   emerged   a   in   every   comment   within   the   supportive   category.      All   of   the   commenters   who   supported   the   NSA   surveillance   practices   voiced   that   public   safety   was   the   only   reason   for   their   support.   These   commenters   believed   that   heightened   surveillance   techniques   used   by   the   NSA   would   provide   safety   from   various   criminals.   These   ranged   from   terrorists   to   child   pornographers   and   other   dangerous  criminals.  For  example,  "nomad"  posted:  "If  they  [sic]  were  no  surveillance,   how  would  you  know  who  are  the  terrorists  or  law  breaker?  It  is  comforting  to  know   that  someone  is  looking  after  my  security."  Readers  like  "P.  Hardie"  went  so  far  as  to   say:  "If  you  want  to  be  safe,  there  is  a  price  to  pay."  What  is  implicit  about  comments   such  as  these  is  their  assumption  that  in  order  to  have  national  security,  the  public  has   to  be  willing  to  give  up  certain  liberties.        The   commenters   in   this   category   support   research   conducted   by   Creech  

(2007),   who   concludes   that   some   kinds   of   free   speech   lose   First   Amendment   rights   when   there   is   a   threat   to   public   safety.   The   perceived   need   for   government   surveillance   is   the   users'   belief   that   the   government   needs   greater   access   to   information   online   in   order   to   better   protect   the   American   people.   Other   commenters   expressed   their   gratitude   toward   the   government   and   took   comfort   in   the   fact   that  

  

36  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

government   was   taking   an   interest   in   public   safety.   This   can   be   seen   with   "Bob   Blawblaw"'s   comment:   "People   should   quit   worrying   about   their   privacy   and   be   thankful   someone   is   looking   out   for   their   safety."   It   is   apparent   in   this   category   that   those   in   favour   of   public   safety   are   willing   to   put   civil   liberties   like   free   speech   on   the   back  burner.        Based  on  the  above  analysis  it  is  apparent  within  the  comments  that  there  are  

several   competing   views   of   free   speech   and   expression.   The   rationale   for   those   in   favour  was  the  assumption  that  the  NSA  Prism  program  would  help  ensure  national   security   by   removing   or   intercepting   potential   threats   to   public   safety.   On   the   other   hand,   the   prevailing   perspective   of   commenters   opposed   to   the   Prism   program,   was   that   they   highly   valued   their   right   to   speak   free   from   government   intrusion   in   new   media   communication.   However,   some   commenters   were   willing   to   abstain   from   using  computer-mediated  communication  altogether  to  avoid  scrutiny.        The   findings   also   suggest   that   commenters   believe   the   Prism   program   takes  

away  the  their  ability  to  know  when  they  are  incriminating  themselves,  and  the  result   can   be   `silence'   on   any   subject   one   could   reasonably   believe   those   in   power   at   a   given   time  may  find  objectionable.  The  results  show  that  because  the  public  is  unaware  of   the   potential   consequences   of   their   actions   in   new   media   communication,   there   is   a   desire   to   avoid   certain   technologies,   like   Facebook,   Google,   and   even   news   commenting  forums  such  as  The  Guardian,  that  are  vulnerable  to  scrutiny.       

  

37  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

CONCLUSION         This  research  study  has  argued  that  open  and  uncoerced  communication  is  an  

important  element  of  the  public's  conceptualization  of  free  speech  in  new  media   communication.  A  thorough  examination  popular  online  news  comments  through  a   sentiment  and  thematic  analysis  indicate  that  there  are  several  differences  in  the   public's  understanding  of  free  speech  in  a  computer-mediated  setting.  These  differing   conceptualizations  of  free  speech  were  revealed  within  the  overarching  and  salient   themes  exposed  within  the  data.        It   was   revealed   that   16   %   (8   our   of   50)   of   commenters   supported   the   NSA  

surveillance   practices.   These   commenters   valued   their   personal   safety   more   than   their  right  to  free  speech,  and  were  content  to  give  up  a  measure  of  their  freedom  for   national  security.  The  perceived  need  for  security  is  fueled  by  the  government's  war   on  terror  post  9/11,  and  the  measures  used  to  achieve  such  security  are  comparable   to   those   employed   during   the   Cold   War.   Commenters   were   comforted   by   the   fact   that   government  was  taking  an  interest  in  public  safety  and  believed  a  level  of  government   interference  was  necessary  to  maintain  national  security.  These  commenters  believe   that   certain   freedoms   can   be   sacrificed   when   public   safety   is   threatened,   which   support   Creech's   (2007)   notions   that   free   speech   rights   can   take   a   back   seat   when   public  safety  is  at  stake.    

  

38  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE        

  

  

While  those  who  support  the  NSA  surveillance  practices  feel  they  are  necessary  

to  prevent  future  disasters  like  9/11,  the  overwhelming  majority  disagrees  with  any   kind   of   government   surveillance.   Of   the   50   comments   selected   for   this   case   study,   52%   were   opposed   to   government   surveillance,   with   the   majority   (20   out   of   26)   defending  their  inherent  right  to  express  themselves  free  from  government  coercion.   Their   articulation   of   free   speech   within   The   Guardian   news   commenting   forum   was   generally   from   a   legal   stance.   Some   commenters   cited   the   First   Amendment,   while   others   cited   the   Constitution.   While   thinkers   like   Basque   (1995)   believed   the   Internet   would   bring   people   together   to   facilitate   discussions   that   may   not   have   otherwise   been   possible   through   other   forms   of   communication,   the   findings   showed   that   applying   real   world   laws   like   the   First   Amendment   to   the   U.S.   Constitution   can   be   problematic   when   applied   to   new   media   communication,   particularly   because   the   Prism   program   not   only   infiltrates   U.S.   user   data,   but   those   across   the   globe,   where   American  constitutional  rights  are  no  longer  applicable.     The   aim   of   this   study   was   not   to   discuss   the   legal   nature   of   the   NSA   surveillance   Prism   program,   but   to   examine   how   the   commenters   conceptualize   the   meaning   of   free   speech   in   light   of   the   revealed   NSA   surveillance   practices.   The   results   from   this   study   indicate   that   many   individuals   value   their   rights   to   free   speech   and   expression  in  new  media  communication.  The  public  places  their  civil  right  to  speak   freely  from  government  coercion  at  the  center  of  their  democratic  ideals.  The  inability   to  hold  discussions  free  from  intrusion  hinders  public  debate,  which  is  the  backbone  

  

39  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

of  any  democracy  (Dahlgren,  2001b).  This  research  study  supports  notions  of  earlier   theorists'  (Locke,  1688/1996;  Mill,  1859/1993)  views  that  government  should  never   frustrate  free  expression  in  the  public  sphere  under  any  circumstances.       This   research   study   has   also   investigated   and   explored   the   central   importance   of   online   public   spaces   as   forums   where   individuals   can   express   ideas   and   concerns   free  from  government  intrusion.  Out  of  the  50  comments  32%  of  all  commenters  were   pessimistic  about  the  NSA  surveillance  practices.  These  commenters  were  skeptical  of   the  surveillance  Prism  program,  but  not  clearly  for  or  against  it.  The  majority  (13  out   of   16)   of   the   commenters   in   this   category   felt   that   preventing   the   Prism   program   was   a   hopeless   cause.   Commenters   were   worried   about   their   right   to   speak   and   express   themselves  outside  of  government  intrusion,  but  believed  little  could  be  done  to  stop   the  Prism  program.   Furthermore,  as  suggested  in  the  literature,  online  public  spaces  are  integral  to   a   strong   democracy   and   act   as   an   arena   for   public   debate,   particularly   on   issues   against   government   actions.   However,   an   important   finding   was   that   Prism   takes   away   the   public's   ability   to   know   when   they   are   incriminating   themselves   in   new   media   communication,   and   the   result   can   be   `silence'   on   any   subject   one   could   reasonably   believe   those   in   power   may   find   objectionable.   Because   the   public   is   unaware  of  the  potential  consequences  of  their  actions  in  new  media  communication,   there   is   a   desire   to   avoid   certain   technologies   vulnerable   to   scrutiny   like   Facebook,   Google,   and   even   news   commenting   forums   such   as   The   Guardian.   This   public  

  

40  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

`silencing'  can  suppress  the  democratic  potential  of  the  online  public  sphere,  and  can   lead  to  only  certain  voices  being  heard,  while  those  of  average  citizens  remain  in  the   shadows.  For  Americans  the  right  to  silence  is  guaranteed  by  the  U.S  Constitution  in   order   to   prevent   the   public   from   incriminating   themselves,   and   for   good   reason,   because  anything  you  say  or  "type"  can  be  used  against  you.  Commenters  who  avoid   using   new   media   communication   out   of   fear   of   being   scrutinized   contradict   notions   presented   by   theorists   Castells   (2001)   and   Basque   (1995)   who   thought   the   Internet   would  allow  the  public  sphere  to  flourish  and  become  an  important  democratic  tool.          The   methods   used   in   this   study   may   be   applied   to   future   communication  

studies   of   other   online   forums   to   determine   whether   or   not   the   perception   patterns   are  duplicated  elsewhere.  It  is  critically  important  to  any  democracy  to  investigate  the   implications  of  limiting  opportunities  for  free  speech  in  new  media  communication.  As   new   media   communication   becomes   widely   adopted,   it   will   become   increasingly   important   to   understanding   democratic   ideals   of   free   speech   within   these   channels   of   communication.   This   examination   can   help   foster   further   research   on   public   perceptions  of  free  speech  in  computer-mediated  communication.      This  study  shows   one   possible   direction   for   future   studies   on   the   implications   of   government   surveillance   of   the   online   public   sphere,   particularly   as   new   media   communication   becomes  even  more  widely  adopted.        

  

41  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

REFERENCES      Asen,  R.,  &  Brouwer,  D.  (Eds.).  (2001).  Counterpublics  and  the  state.  New  York:      State  University  of  New  York.  

Barber,  B.  (1984)  Strong  Democracy:  Participatory  Politics  for  a  New  Age.      Berkeley:  University  of  California  Press.  

Baruh,  L.  (2007).  Read  at  your  own  risk:  shrinkage  of  privacy  and  interactive    media.      New  Media  and  Society,  9(2).  187-211  

Baiocchi,  G.  (2003).  Emergent  public  spheres:  talking  politics  in  participatory      governance.  American  Sociological  Review,  68,  52-74  

Basque,  G.  (1995).  "Introduction  to  the  Internet"  in  MacKaay  E,  Poulin,  D  &  Trudel,         P.(eds)[1995]  The  electronic  superhighway:  the  shape  of  technology  and   law  to  come,  Kluwer  Law  International,  the  Hague,  7-19.  

Beatson,  J.,  Cripps,  Y.  (2000)  Freedom  of  expression  and  freedom  of  information:      Essays  in  honour  of  sir.  A.  Mason.  Oxford  University  Press:  Oxford.    

Braun,  V.,  Clark,  V.  (2006).  Using  thematic  analysis  in  psychology.  Qualitative  Research      In  Psychology,  3,  77-101.  

Constitution  of  the  United  States  of  America  (1791/1979)  House  Document  No.  96­    143,  United  States  Government  Printing  Office.  

Cooke,  L.  (2007).  Controlling  the  net:  European  approaches  to  content  and  access      regulations.  Journal  of  Information  Science,  33(2),  360-376.  

  

42  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Creech,  K.  C.  (2007).  Electronic  media  law  and  regulation.  Burlington,  MA:  Focal      Press.  

Calhoun,  C.  (1992).  Habermas  and  the  Public  sphere.  Cambridge,  Massachusetts:  The      MIT  Press.  

Castells  M.  (2001).  Internet  Galaxy:  Reflections  on  the  Internet,  Business  and  Society.      New  York:  Oxford  University  Press.    

Dahlgren,  P.  (2001b).  "The  public  sphere  and  the  net:  Structure,  space,  and            communication."  In  W.  L.  Bennett  &  R.  M.  Entman  (Eds.),  Mediated  politics,   communications  in  the  future  of  democracy  (pp.  33­55).  Cambridge:   Cambridge  University  Press.  

Deuze,  M.  (2008).  Understanding  journalism  as  network:  How  it  changes  and    how  it         remains  the  same.  Westminster  Papers  in  Communication  and  Culture,  5(2),  4- 23.  

Dewey,  J.  (1927/1954)  The  Public  and  its  Problems.  Chicago:  Swallow  Press.  (Original      work  published  1927).  

Dinev,  T.,  Hart,  P.,  Mullen,  M.  (2008)  Internet  privacy  concerns  and  beliefs  about         government  surveillance:  An  empirical  investigation.  Journal  of  Strategic   Information  Systems,  17,  214-233.  

Eysenback,  G.,  Till,  J.E.(2001).    Ethical  issues  in  qualitative  research  on  Internet      communities.  British  Medical  Journal,  323(7321),  1103-05.  

  

43  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Fish,  E.  (2009).  Is  Internet  Censorship  Compatible  With  Democracy:  Legal         Restrictions  of  Online  Speech  in  South  Korea.  Asia-Pacific  Journal  on  Human   Rights  and  the  Law,  2,  43-96.  

Friedman,  M.  (1962)  Capitalism  and  Freedom.  Chicago,  IL:  University  of  Chicago      Press.  

Gerhards,  J.,  Schafer,  M.  (2009)  Is  the  internet  a  better  public  sphere?  Comparing  old      and  new  media  in  the  US  and  Germany.  New  media  and  Society,  1-18  

Gimmler,  A.  (2001).  Deliberative  Democracy:  The  public  sphere  and  the  Internet.      Philosophy  and  Social  Criticism,  27(4).  21-39  

Goodall,  H.L.  Jr  (2008)  Twice  Betrayed  by  the  Truth:  A  Narrative  About  the  Cultural         Similarities  Between  the  Cold  War  and  the  Global  War  on  Terror,  Cultural   Studies  ­  Critical  Methodologies  8(3),  353-368  

Green,  T.  (1881/1991)  `Liberal  Legislation  and  Freedom  of  Contract',  pp.  21­32  in   D.  Miller  (ed.)  Liberty.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press.   Greenwald,  G.  &  MacAskill,  E.(2013,  June  7).  NSA  surveillance  program  Prism  taps  into         user  data  of  Apple,  Google  and  others.  The  Guardian.  Retrieved  from   http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-giants-nsa-data  

Habermas,  J.  (1991).  The  public  Sphere.  In  Mukerji,  C.  &  Schudson,  M.  (Ed.),      Rethinking  Popular  Culture.  Berkeley,  CA:  University  of  California  Press.  

Habermas,  J.  (1989).  The  Structural  Transformation  of  the  Public  Sphere,      Cambridge:  MIT  Press.  (Originally  published  in  German  in  1962.)  

  

44  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Habermas,  J.  (1984).  The  Theory  of  Communicate  Action,  Volume  One:  Reason  and      the  Rationalization  of  Society.  Boston:  Beacon  Press.  

Habermas,  J.  (1987).  The  Theory  of  Communicate  Action,  Volume  Two:  The  Critique  of      Functionalist  Reason.  Boston:  Beacon  Press.  

Hsieh,  H.,  Shannon,  S  (2005).  Three  approaches  to  qualitative  content  analysis.      Qualitative  Health  Research,  15(9),  1277-88.  

Henry,  J.(2009).  Beyond  free  speech:  novel  approached  to  hate  on  the  Internet         in  the     United  States.  Information  &  Communications  Technology  Law,  18(2),   17.  

Hill,  G.,  Hill,  K.  (2009)  Nolo's  Plain  Law  English  Dictionary.  California   Kang,  J.  (1998)  `Information  Privacy  in  Cyberspace  Transactions',  Stanford  Law      Review  50(4),  1193­294.  

Kish,  j.,  Turns,  T.(1995)  International  Law  and  Espionage.  The  Netherlands:  Kluwer      Law  International.  

Kohn,  M.(2004).  Brave  New  Neighbourhoods:  The  Privatization  of  Public  Space.      Great  Britain:  Routeledge  

Lasica,  J.D  (1997).  Censorship  devices  on  the  Internet,  American  Journalism  Review      19(7),  56.  

Lessig,  L.  (1999).  Code:  And  Other  Laws  That  Govern  Cyber  Space.  New  York,    NY:      Basic  Books.    

  

45  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Lessig,  L.  (2006).  Code:  version  2.0.    New  York:  Basic  Books   Lewis,  P.(2013,  August  22).  Review  of  U.S  surveillance  programs  to  be  led  by  panel  of            intelligence  insiders.  The  Guardian.  Retrieved  from   http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/22/nsa-surveillance-review   panel-insiders.    

Lindlof,  T.  &  Taylor,  B.  (2002).  Qualitative  Communication  Research  Methods.      Thousand  Oaks,  CA:  Sage  

Locke,  J.  (1688/1996)  `Second  Treatise  on  Government',  pp.  243­79  in  M.  Cohen  and         N.  Fermon  (eds)  Princeton  Readings  in  Political  Thought.  Princeton,  NJ:   Princeton  University  Press.  

Lyon,  D.  (2003).  Surveillance  after  September  11.  Cambridge:  Polity  Press   Lyon,  D.  (2001).  Surveillance  Society:  Monitoring  Everyday  Life.  Open  University      Press,    Buckingham,  Philadelphia  

Marsoof,  A.  (2011).  Social  Networking  and  the  right  to  privacy:  The  conflicting         right  of  expression  and  privacy.  International  Journal  of  Law  and   Information  Technology,  19(2),  110-133.  

McCarthy,  Thomas  A.  (1979).  The  critical  theory  of  Jurgen  Habermas.  Cambridge:      M.I.T.  Press.  

Mill,  J.    S.  (1859/1993)  On  Liberty.  New  York:  Bantam  Books.  

  

46  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Noelle-Neumann,  E.  (1993).  The  Spiral  of  Silence.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press   Nozick,  R.  (1974)  Anarchy,  State  and  Utopia.  New  York:  Basic  Books.   Obama  touts  NSA  privacy  safeguards  at  press  conference  (2013,  August  9)  The         Guardian  http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/09/obama-nsa- surveillance-   reforms-press-conference  

Obama  vows  NSA  reforms  amid  surveillance  concerns  (2013,  August  9).  CBC      http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/story/2013/08/09/obama-alqaeda decimated.html    

Padmaja,  Fatima  (2013).  Opinion  Mining  and  Sentiment  Analysis  -  An     Assessment  of         Peoples'  Belief:  A  Survey.  International  Journal  of  Ad  Hoc,  Sensor  &  Ubiquitous   Computing,  4(1),  21-33.  

Pew  Research  Center  (2012).  Trend  Data  (Adults).  Retrieved  from         http://www.pewinternet.org/Static-Pages/Trend-Data-(Adults)/OnlineActivites-Total.aspx  

Schwartz,  P.M.  (1999)  `Privacy  and  Democracy  in  Cyberspace',  Vanderbilt  Law      Review  52(6),  1609­702.  

Shade,  R.S.  (2008).  Reconsidering  the  right  to  privacy  in  Canada.  Bulletin  of  Science,      Technology  and  Society.  28(1),  89-91.  

Stein,  L.  (2006),  Speech  rights  in  America:  The  First  Amendment,  democracy,    and  the      media.  Chicago:  University  of  Illinois  Press.  

  

47  

RIGHT  TO  SILENCE     

  

  

Stein,  L.  (2008).  Speech  without  Rights:  the  status  of  public  space  on  the  Internet.      The  Communication  Review,  11,  1­23  

Stone,  R.  (2008)  Civil  Liberties  and  Human  Rights,  7th  ed.,  Oxford:  Oxford  University      Press  

The  Guardian  is  now  the  world's  third  most  read  newspaper  website,  (June,  2012),      The  Guardian,  http://www.guardian.co.uk/gnm-press-office/8    

Theoharis,  A.  (2011)  Abuse  of  power:  how  cold  war  surveillance  and  secrecy  policy      shaped  the  response  of  9/11.  Philadelphia:  Temple  University  Press  

Van  Dijk,  J.(2012).  Facebook  as  a  tool  for  sociality  and  connectivity.  Television  and  New      Media,13(2),  160-176.  

Wilson,  T.,  Wiebe,  J.,  Hoffmann,  P.(2009).  Recognizing  Contextual  Polarity:            An  exploration  of  features  for  phrase-level  sentiment  analysis.  Computational   Linguistics  35(3),  399-433.  

  

48  


