Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2008

Co-synthesis of multiple processor embedded systems for real time applications
Anika Awwal
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons Recommended Citation
Awwal, Anika, "Co-synthesis of multiple processor embedded systems for real time applications" (2008). Theses and dissertations. Paper 167.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

CO-SYNTHESIS OF MULTIPLE PROCESSOR EMBEDDED SYSTEMS FOR REAL TIME APPLICATIONS

AnikaAwwal BASe, University of Toronto, 2004

A thesis presented to Ryerson University in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of

Masterfof Applied Science ,

Graduate Program in Electrical and Computer Engineering Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008 @Anika Awwal 2008

PROPERN OF RYERSON ur~IViR&iTY lIBRARV

Declaration

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

I further authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions or individuals for the purpose of scholarly research.

AnikaAwwal

ii

Abstract

Co-synthesis of Multiple Processor Embedded Systems for Real Time Applications Masters of Applied Science, 2008 AnikaAwwal Electrical and Computer Engineering Ryerson University

This thesis presents the methods for automating the synthesis of multiprocessor realtime embedded systems. It describes an evolutionary technique of finding an affordable architecture for a multi-mode multi-task system while meeting the real-time constraints imposed by designers. First the synthesis problem is introduced and previous co-synthesis approaches to handle this problem are discussed. Then the description of the proposed co-synthesis framework foe real time systems is presented. The co-synthesis framework consists of

III

four main steps, namely processing element allocation, process assignment, scheduling and evaluation. The method determines a set of feasible solutions with optimized partitioning and real-time schedules for processes and data communication. The framework is capable of producing acceptable solutions for critical systems with hard real-time deadlines by employing process level prioritization and by meeting the process level deadlines. Moreover, the proposed scheduling methodology achieves better PE utilization as compared to the conventional non-preemptive scheduling technique. The co-synthesis method is demonstrated by applying it to examples from the literature and to industrial benchmarks, such as auto industry, telecommunication, networking and office automation.

iv

Acknowledgements

First, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Gul N. Khan, for his close supervision on all the work presented in this thesis. He is methodical, imaginative and an excellent research advisor. I would like to thank NSERC and Ryerson University for providing financial support. The equipments provided by the Canadian Microelectronics Corporation were valuable and important for implementing the proposed algorithm. Finally, I would like to thank Robert P. Dick (Northwestern University) for discussions on E3S benchmarks implementation.

v


