      MPC  MAJOR  RESEARCH  PAPER               Intuitive  Versus  Theoretical  Approaches  to  Visual  Communication   to  Facilitate  Knowledge  Transfer               Dianne  Nubla      500127841         Dr.  Janice  Fung           The  Major  Research  Paper  is  submitted   in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of   Master  of  Professional  Communication            Ryerson  University     Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada     

September  14,  2011                                      

MPC  MRP  Author's  Declaration  Page  
      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  Major  Research  Paper.      I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.         Signature  _______________________________      I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by   other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for   the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.         Signature__________________________________                                                                                      

  

ii  

Abstract  
During  the  start  of  the  2002-2003  Ontario  youth  hockey  season,  Hockey  Canada   lowered  the  age  of  allowable  bodychecking  from  12-13  years  of  age  to  9.  Dr.  Michael   Cusimano,  a  neurosurgeon  from  St.  Michael's  hospital,  investigated  the  neurological   impact  of  this  rule  change  on  youth  players  in  an  effort  to  educate  hockey  parents   on  the  dangers  of  bodychecking.  Using  Dr.  Cuismano's  research  data,  the   investigator  created  three  information  graphics  through  three  different  design   approaches:  intuitive,  theoretical  and  content-theoretical.  Through  a  5-Step   practical-based  methodology,  the  investigator  sought  to  understand  whether   Dondis'  basic  elements  of  design  and  Gestalt  theory  would  guide  the  design  process   to  create  a  visual  solutions  geared  towards  educating  hockey  parents.        The  theoretical  checklist  played  played  an  important  role  in  the  creation  of  the   theoretical  and  content-theoretical  designs.  Furthermore,  the  process  determined   that  richness  of  data  generated  a  more  robust  design  solution.  When  comparing  the   three  designs,  it  is  evident  that  there  is  a  continual  evolution,  with  each  new  design   extracting  strong  graphical  elements  and  colour  schemes  from  its  predecessor.  A   blind  test  was  conducted  on  Dr.  Cusimano  to  determine  the  success  of  the  visual   solutions  for  the  intended  target  audience.  Selected  designs  included  the  intuitive   and  content-theoretical  solutions,  which  Dr.  Cusimano  felt  best  represented  his   research  and  effectively  captured  the  attention  of  hockey  parents.       This  experimental  design  provides  a  solid  foundation,  which  can  be  taken  further;   the  three  recommendations  made  by  the  investigator  are  to  experiment  with  data- driven  parameters,  examine  the  impact  of  culture  on  the  information  design  process   or  hold  a  focus  group  with  hockey  parents  to  test  the  impact  of  the  three   information  graphics  created.                                                          

  

iii  

Dedication  and  Acknowledgements       
I  would  like  to  dedicate  this  MRP  to  my  mother,  Bernardita  Nubla.  She  has  instilled   in  me  the  positive  values  and  unquenchable  appetite  for  knowledge,  which  have   allowed  me  to  become  the  person  I  am  today.      Dr.  Janice  Fung  has  been  the  ideal  thesis  supervisor;  her  insightful  comments,   creative  perspective  and  persistent  motivation  has  only  helped  better  my  MRP  in   every  way.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  Gillian  Mothersill  for  her  continual  support  and   keen  eye  for  detail.  I  extend  my  genuine  gratitude  to  the  department  of  Professional   Communication  and  Dr.  Michael  Cusimano.      Finally,  I  would  like  to  especially  thank  my  partner,  Brandon  Segmiller,  for  his   unwavering  support  and  encouragement.  His  enthusiasm  and  loving  nature  made  a   normally  bumpy  process  much  smoother.    

                                                                             
  

iv  

Table  of  Contents  
MCP  MRP  Author's  Declaration  Page                  Abstract                              Dedication  and  Acknowledgements                     Chapter  1  Introduction                        1.1  Research  Background                     1.2  Why  an  Information  Graphic?                        1.2.1  Target  Audience  and  MRP's  Goals              Chapter  2  Literature  Review                     2.1  Visual  Communication                     2.2  Effective  Execution  of  Visual  Communication               2.2.1  Dondis'  Design  Elements  in  Effective  Communication      2.2.2  Perception  in  Visual  Communication  Through                                                      Gestalt  Lenses   2.3  Planning  Production                     2.4  Information  Graphics  Examined               2.5  Psychological  Considerations                  Chapter  3  Methodology                           3.1  Design  Tools                              3.1.1  Design  Journal                        3.2  Creating  a  Step-by-Step  Experimental  Design               3.3  Keeping  the  Research  Question  in  Mind               3.4  STEP  ONE:  Analysis  and  Interpretation                  3.4.1  Why  These  Documents?               3.5  Grounded  Theory  Analysis                        3.5.1  Summary  of  Grounded  Theory  Analysis  of  Both                              Documents   3.6  STEP  TWO:  Design  Process                     3.6.1  Prior  Software  Experience                  3.6.2  Intuitive  Design                     3.6.3  Theoretical  Design      3.6.4  Content-Theoretical  Design               3.7  STEP  THREE:  Conducting  a  Blind-Test  Interview            3.7  STEPS  FOUR  AND  FIVE:  Post-Interview  Work  and  Analysis      Chapter  4  Analysis  of  Intuitive  Design                     4.1  Intuitive  Design  (Design  #1)  Elements  Breakdown               4.1.1  Notable  Observations                  Chapter  5  Analysis  of  Theoretical  Design                  5.1  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #2)  Elements  Breakdown            5.1.1  Notable  Observations                  Chapter  6  Analysis  of  Second  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)         6.1  Problem-Solving:  An  Emergence  of  New  Design            6.2  Conceptual-Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)  Breakdown            6.2.1  Notable  Observations                  ii   iii   iv   1   1   2   2   3   4   5   5   7     9   10   12   14   14   15   17   19   19   19   20   20   22   22   22   25   26   27   28   28   30   31   31   34   35   35   36   40     

  

  

v  

Chapter  7  Findings                              7.1  Considering  the  Importance  of  Raw  Data               7.2  Comparison  of  Design  Processes                     7.2.1  Intuitive  Versus  Theoretical  Design  Processes            7.2.2  Intuitive  Versus  Content-Theoretical  Design                            Processes         7.2.3  Theoretical  Versus  Content-Theoretical  Design                              Processes      7.3  Investigator's  Reflection                       7.4  Dr.  Cusimano's  Interview  and  Investigator  Observations         7.5  Dr.  Cusimano's  Top  Selection(s)                     7.5.1  An  Area  That  Can  Be  Improved  Upon:  Communication   Chapter  8  Conclusion                           8.1  Post  Evaluation  of  Experimental  Design               8.2  Concluding  Thoughts                     Chapter  9  Works  Cited                                                                                                                        vi  

41   41   42   42   42   44   45   46   48   51   51   51   52   54  

  

List  of  Tables   Table  #1:  Dondis'  (974)  Visual  Elements  of  Design   Table  #2:  Gestalt  Elements  of  Design   Table  #3:  Summary  of  Findings   Table  #4:  Design  Elements  Choices  for  Intuitive  Design   Table  #5:  Design  Elements  Choices  for  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #2)   Table  #6:  Design  Elements  Choices  for  Conceptual-Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)   Table  #7:  Similarities  and  Differences  Between  the  Intuitive  and  Theoretical  Design                 Processes   Table  #8:  Similarities  and  Differences  Between  the  Intuitive  and  Content- Theoretical  Design  Processes   Table  #9:  Similarities  and  Differences  Between  the  First  and  Second  Theoretical                 Design  Processes   Table  #10:  Summary  of  Dr.  Cusimano's  Comments  of  the  Three  Respective  Designs                     During  Our  Interview   Table  #11:  Dr.  Cusimano's  Top  Pick(s)  and  Rational  for  Decisions      List  of  Figures   Figure  #1:  Markus/Maver  Map  of  Generalized  Design  Process  (Lawson,  2006)   Figure  #2:  Jane  Darke's  Design  Process  Map  (Lawson,  2006)   Figure  #3:  Table  #3,  Found  in  Dr.  Cusimano's  Results  Section  of  His  Online  X.IV                     Article  (Cusimano  et  al,  2011)   Figure  #4:  Thumbnail  of  Intuitive  Design  (Design  #1)   Figure  #5:  Thumbnail  of  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #2)   Figure  #6:  Thumbnail  of  Content-Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)   Figure  #7:  Evolution  of  Designs      List  of  Charts   Chart  #1:  Dondis'  Basic  Elements  of  Design  Checklist  ( ) Chart  #2:  Gestalt  Principles  of  Design  Checklist  ( )      List  of  Appendices   Appendix  #1:  Intuitive  Design  (Design  #1)   Appendix  #2:  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #2)   Appendix  #3:  Content-Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)     Appendix  #4:  Operationalized  Concepts  for  Open  Medicine  Article  &  St.  Michael's     Press  Release    

  

vii  

Intuitive  Versus  Theoretical  Approaches  to  Visual   Communication  to  Facilitate  Knowledge  Transfer      Introduction  
North  American  culture  moves  in  a  fast-paced  environment  and  its   information  exchange  is  no  exception.  The  instantaneous  availability  of  information   is  a  convenience;  however,  its  rapid  nature  can  be  overwhelming  to  absorb.    The   interpretation  of  information  is  handled  in  a  simultaneous,  tentative  and  fast- processing  fashion  (Pettersson,  1989).  A  human  being's  memory  is  circuited   through  modes  of  visualization;  information  presented  via  a  picture-word   combination  is  superior  to  words  or  pictures  alone  (Pettersson,  1989).  Visual   experiences  are  subject  to  an  individual's  interpretation  and  even  simplistic  pictures   can  cause  different  associations;  however,  once  amalgamated  with  text,  which  often   hold  definite  definitions,  messages  are  strengthened  to  create  optimal  conditions  for   presenting  information  in  a  memorable  and  comprehensive  manner.    

Research  Background  
   In  hockey,  violence  is  a  norm.  During  the  start  of  the  2002-2003  season,  

  

Hockey  Canada  lowered  the  age  of  bodychecking  from  12-13  years  of  age  to  9   (Marchie  et  Cusimano,  2003).  Though  this  policy  was  reversed  in  May  2003,  four   major  Canadian  hockey  leagues  still  allow  bodychecking  at  9  years  of  age  on  an   "experimental"  basis  (Marchie  et  Cusimano,  2003).  Dr.  Cusimano,  a  neurosurgeon   for  St.  Michael's  hospital,  has  conducted  research  connecting  serious  neurological   damage  to  bodychecking,  especially  at  such  a  young  age.    

  

1  

For  the  purposes  of  this  MRP,  the  investigator's  non-expert  knowledge  in  the   field  of  neurology  will  provide  an  unbiased  approach  to  Dr.  Cuismano's  work.  The   investigator  completed  the  design  three  information  graphics:  one  intuitively  and   two  theoretically  designed,  directed  towards  hockey  parents.  Through  these   designs,  complex  information  was  simplified  by  appealing  to  an  individual's  visual   senses.  The  creation  process  also  helps  emphasize  the  effectiveness  and  usability  of   Dondis's  basic  elements  of  design  and  Gestalt  theory.          Why  an  Information  Graphic?   An  information  graphic  uses  design  elements,  such  as  lines,  shapes,  and   colours,  integrated  to  produce  a  visual  narrative  (George-Palilonis,  2006).    This   project,  it  will  simplify  scientific  language  and  bypass  pages  of  complex  data  to   instantaneously  provide  the  viewer  the  information  they  desire.  During  our  initial,   informal  interview,  Dr.  Cuimano  had  indicated  that  he  wanted  a  deliverable  that  is   simplistic,  friendly,  and  easy-to-understand.  These  end-goals  have  been  kept  in   mind  during  the  investigator's  design  process.      Target  Audience  and  MRP's  Goals      Hockey  parents  are  the  chosen  target  audience  because  their  children  face   the  risks  associated  with  the  sport.  In  heightening  parents'  awareness  and   knowledge,  they  will  have  the  power  to  collectively  petition  to  change  the  policies   surrounding  Ontario's  current,  minimum  age  for  body  checking  in  children's  hockey.   Overall,  this  project  aims  to  understand  the  knowledge  translation  process  of   information  graphics  through  the  use  of  visual  communication  theories.  The      2  

investigator  seeks  to  further  its  collection  of  academic  "dialogue"  in  this  relatively   new  field.  The  investigator's  methodology  will  not  only  add  to  her  preexisting   design  portfolio,  but  also  honour  the  "theory  to  practice"  foundations  of  the  Master   of  Professional  Communication  program.  In  this  experimental  design  project,  the   investigator  will  follow  a  linear  practice-based  methodology  to  answer:  How  will   Dondis's  basic  elements  of  design  and  Gestalt  theory  guide  the  design  process  and  will   the  outcome  of  a  theory-based  visual  solution  address  the  target  audience's  needs   better  than  the"  driver"  approach?       

Literature  Review    
      The  aspiration  to  bridge  the  gap  between  science  and  the  public  through  

clear  lines  of  communication  is  only  a  recent  phenomenon.  In  Science  in  Public:   Communication,  Culture  and  Credibility  the  public  reception  and  understanding  of   science  is  examined.  Traditionally,  scientists  were  isolated  in  laboratories  with  an   understanding  of  that  was  their  designated  location  of  work.  However,  new   generations  of  young  researchers  are  equipped  with  the  knowledge  and  training  to   intelligently,  and  consciously,  communicate  the  results  of  their  work  to  the  public,   straying  from  scientific  jargon  and  highly  technical  language  with  the  outside  world   (Gregory  et  Miller,  2000).  The  lines  of  communication  have  been  opened  between   these  two  groups  of  individuals  with  expanded  individual  effects  in  commerce,   culture  and  democracy  (Gregory  et  Miller,  2000).     The  Committee  on  the  Public  Understanding  of  Science  (COPUS)  is  a  network   dedicated  to  connecting  individuals  passionate  about  advancing  the  public  

  

3  

understanding  of  science,  stated,  "many  personal  decisions...would  be  helped  by   some  understanding  of  the  underlying  science"  (Gregory  et  Miller,  2000).  By   providing  citizens  with  a  clearer  understanding  of  science,  they  become   knowledgeable  of  matters  that  affect  themselves,  their  friends  and  family  members.   Empowered  by  access  to  information  encourages  the  public  to  seek  additional   scientific  information  more  frequently.  For  example,  learning  more  about  chronic  or   inherited  diseases  assist  individuals  to  make  informed  decisions  that  can  lead  to   improved  results  and  benefits  to  their  daily  lives.   Bauer  (2008)  investigates  the  dissemination  of  information  for  the  purposes   of  public  education,  exploring  the  transformation  of  science's  formerly  well- established  theoretical  models  into  practical,  relatable  experiences.  Within  the   multidisciplinary  field  of  science  communication,  Bauer  (2008)  highlights  how  there   are  growing  pressure  to  commercialize  scientific  research  and  its  findings  to  the   public.  He  explores  the  hazards  of  science  communication  leading  away  from   science  writing  and  journalism  and  into  the  realm  of  public  relations;  thus   increasing  the  risk  for  fraud.  Alternatively,  the  paradigm  for  science  communication   welcomes  a  skeptical  public  as  it  promotes  public  scientific  literacy  and  a  positive   image  of  science;  whereas  knowledge  consumers  are  able  to  think  beyond  the   information  simply  provided  to  them.           

Visual  Communication  
Visual  graphics  have  desirable  attributes  in  enhancing  the  understanding  of  

risk  with  quantitative  support.  Through  the  visual  layout  of  information,  graphics  

  

4  

reveal  a  data  pattern  that  may  otherwise  go  undetected  when  interwoven  into   written  text.  Examples  of  excellent  graphical  representations  are  line  graphs  in   conveying  data  trends  and  pie  charts  and  divided  bar  graphs  for  depicting   proportions.  These  graphics  are  an  example  of  an  information  graphics  (Lipkus  &   Hollands,  1999).  Weinstein  and  Sandman  (1993)  note  that  the  criteria  for  evaluating   risk  messages  that  can  be  considered  require  extra  precaution  are:  
(1) Comprehension  (Does  the  audience  understand  the  content  of  the   communication?);   (2) Agreement  (Does  the  audience  agree  with  the  recommendation  or   interpretation  contained  in  the  message?);   (3) Dose-response  consistency  (Do  people  facing  a  higher  dose  of  a  hazard   perceive  the  risk  as  greater  and/or  show  a  greater  readiness  to  take   action  than  people  exposed  to  a  lower  dose  of  this  hazard)?   (4) Hazard-Response  consistency  (Do  people  facing  a  hazard  that  is  higher   in  risk  perceive  the  risk  as  greater  and/or  show  a  greater  readiness  to   take  action  than  people  exposed  to  a  hazard  that  is  lower  in  risk?);   (5) Uniformity  (do  audience  members  exposed  to  the  same  level  of  risk  tend   to  have  the  same  responses  to  this  risk?);   (6) Audience-Evaluation  (Does  the  audience  judge  the  message  to  have  been   helpful,  accurate,  clear,  etc.?);  and   (7) Types  of  Communication  Failures  (When  different  types  of  failures  are   possible,  are  the  failures  that  occur  generally  of  the  more  acceptable   variety?).     (Weinstein  and  Sandman,  1993,  pg.103)    

  

   Effective  Execution  of  Visual  Communication  
Dondis'  Design  Elements  in  Effective  Communication         Dondis  (1974)  claims  that  composition  is  the  most  crucial  step  involved  in   visual  problem  solving  and  the  results  of  the  compositional  decisions  carry  strong   implications  for  the  impact  of  message  the  viewer  receives.  Composition  is  the  stage   of  the  design  process  where  the  designer  can  exercise  the  strongest  control  over  the   communication  of  the  message  and  presents  the  greatest  opportunity  in  setting  the   tone  conveyed.  In  visual  composition,  there  are  no  absolute  rules;  however,  there  is   a  great  understanding  involved  in  terms  of  creating  certain  arrangements  towards  

  

5  

organizing  and  orchestrating  visual  meanings.  A  composition  is  a  result  of  a   designer's  input  and  design  decision.  The  basic  elements  of  design  communication,   outlined  in  Table  #1,  act  as  a  means  for  knowledge  and  expression.  Visual  elements   such  as  the  line,  colour,  shape,  direction,  texture,  scale,  dimension  and  motion   comprise  of  the  raw  materials  of  visual  information  that  designers  draw  upon  for   the  development  of  visual  communication  (Dondis,  1974).     Line      · · · · Dots  close  to  one  another;  they  cannot  be  individually   recognized.   Fluid,  restless  that  articulates  form  ­  "a  dot  in  motion"   (44).     Essential  for  previsualization.   Can  express  different  moods,  such  as  loose  and   undisciplined  (sketch  illustrations)  or  mechanical  and   linear.   Clearly  expresses  the  intention  of  the  designer  ­   his/her  personal  feelings,  emotions  and  vision.     Coordination  of  tone  with  added  components  of   chroma;  considered  the  most  emotional  and   expressive  visual  element.   Has  three  dimensions  that  can  be  defined  and   measured:  hue,  saturation  and  brightness.     "Lines  describe  shape"  (44).   There  are  three  basic  shapes:  circle,  square  and  an   equilateral  triangle  ­  each  containing  a  unique   character  and  characteristic  to  attach  meaning,   associations  and  the  viewer's  own  psychological  and   physiological  perceptions.    

· Colour      ·

· Shape         · ·

Direction                          

                                        · Thrust  of  movement  incorporating  and  reflecting  the   character  of  basic  shapes:  "...the  square,  the   horizontal  and  vertical  (3.18);  the  triangle,  diagonal   (3.19);  the  circle,  the  curve  (3.20)"  (46).   · The  visual  directions  are  perceptually  associated  with   a  meaning  and  act  as  a  valuable  tool  in  making  visual   messages.   · "All  directional  forces  have  great  importance  to   6  

                           Texture            Scale  

compositional  intention  toward  final  effect  and   meaning"  (47).                      

·

·

· · ·

Dimension     Movement  

· · ·

Optical  or  tactile:  surface  characteristics  that  serves   as  a  "...stand-in  for  the  qualities  of  another  sense,   touching"  (55).     Adds  substance  through  minute  variations  of  surface   material  ­  serves  as  a  sensitive  and  enriching   experience  for  the  viewer.     Capacity  of  visual  elements  to  modify  or  define  one   another.     Established  by  relative  size  of  visual  clues  and   relationships  to  the  field  of  environment.   Visual  results  are  fluid  and  absolute  as  they  are   subject  to  many  variables  of  modification.     Representation  of  dimension  also  dependent  on   illusion:  can  be  felt  and  seen.     Both  implied  and  expressed.   Can  be  used  "...to  describe  compositional  tensions   and  rhythms  in  visual  data  when  what  is  being  seen  is   fixed  and  unmoving"  (64).    

   Table  #1:  Dondis'  (1974)  Visual  Elements  of  Design         Perception  in  Visual  Communication  Through  Gestalt  Lenses      Dondis  (1974)  attributes  Gestalt  psychology  to  contributing  valuable  

research  and  experimentation  in  areas  of  perception,  data  collection  and  searching   for  significance  in  visual  patterns,  as  well  as  aiding  in  the  search  for  how  the  human   organism  sees  and  organizes  visual  input  and  articulates  visual  output.  Gestalt   theory  is  rooted  in  examining  an  individual's  subconscious  tendency  to  organize  bits   of  information  into  "wholes"  and  Smith  (2005)  argues  that  the  basic  laws  of  Gestalt  

  

7  

are  rooted  in  striving  towards  the  simplest,  most  regular,  symmetrical  structure   perceived  in  a  given  situation.  The  Gestalt  theory  outlines  an  integrated,  articulated   structure  where  constituent  parts  are  in  dynamic  interrelationships  with  one   another  and  as  a  whole  (King  &  Wertheimer,  2007).  The  principles  of  Gestalt  theory   are  organized  with  distinct  characteristic  cases,  detailed  in  Table  #2.        Similarity   Law  of  "Similarity"   Perceiving  objects  similar  to  one  another  as  belonging   together  if  similar  in  features,  such  as  shape,  colour  or   texture.     Law  of  "Proximity  or  Nearness"   Group  items  together  in  accordance  to  their  nearness  or   proximity  to  one  another.   Law  of  "Good  Continuation:   Items  are  grouped  together  on  the  basis  of  "...their   continuity  in  following  a  consistent,  lawful  direction,   items  that  are  natural  successors  in  a  series  will  be  seen   as  belong  to  that  series"  (155).   Law  of  "Closure"   "Tendency  to  perceive  a  complete  or  incomplete  part  or   whole  so  as  to  attain  maximum  stability,  balance,  or   symmetry  in  the  entire  configuration"  (155).   Figure  serves  as  the  focal  point,  the  stimuli,  of  the  visual   piece,  which  attracts  the  viewer's  spontaneous   concentration.     Ground  helps  define  the  figure  and  give  it  meaning.     Symmetry  improves  grouping  as  ambiguous  design   elements  can  be  seen  as  "good"  or  "interesting"  when   presented  in  a  balanced  and  harmonious  manner.  

· ·

   Proximity      Continuation        

· ·

· ·

   Closure  

· ·

      Figure-Ground  

·

Symmetry  

· ·

   Table  #2:  Gestalt  Elements  of  Design     Graphic  Source:  Spokane  Falls  Graphic  Design  Education,  2011   Content  Source:  King  &  Wertheimer,  2007     

  

  

8  

Planning  Production  
   As  previously  examined,  perception  is  always  organized;  therefore,  humans  

perceptually  construct  relationships,  grouping,  objects,  events,  words,  and  people   naturally.  Pettersson  (1995)  states  that  when  informative  visuals  are  produced,  it  is   always  a  good  idea  to  attempt  to  "visualize"  information  in  an  effort  to  materialize   the  effective  synthesis  of  words  and  pictures.  The  author  further  explains  that   visualization  is  a  composite  task  and  that  there  are  four  distinct  stages  in  production   of  information  graphic  materials  from  visualization  to  finished  products:      1. Visualization   a. Synopsis:  Defining  the  message   b. Idea  Conception   c. Integration   d. Graphical  Design   2. Creating  the  Original   a. Text   b. Drawing   c. Photography  (if  needed)   3. Creating  the  "Master"   a. Text   b. Drawings   c. Photography   d. Master   4. Run   a. Copies   O'Grady  &  O'Grady  (2006)  provides  a  design  approach  more  academically-  

  

and  commercially-geared  as  they  strongly  incorporate  elements  of  research,  in   addition  to  internal  resources  when  discussing  the  designer  and  client  design   process.      DESIGNER   · First  Steps:    

  

9  

        

o A  Brief   o Ask  the  right  questions   o Investigate  why   o Define  problem   · Research:   o Research  needs   o Focus  on  the  user/audience   o Observe  user/audience  behavior   · Planning:   o Account  for  internal  resources,  people  and  information   · Communication:   o Relationship  needs  to  be  a  two-way  street  between  both   parties   o Predetermine  review  stages   o Ensure  all  parties  are  on  board   · Implementation:   o Stay  involved   o Establish  project  assessment  procedures   CLIENT   "The  Design  Process"  as  explained  by  the  Design  Council   (O'Grady  &  O'Grady,  2006,  p.76)  

Information  Graphics  Examined  
The  root  of  the  word  "information"  derives  from  the  Latin  noun   "information",  meaning  "conception"  or  "idea,"  therefore,  it  has  been  long   synonymous  with  "data",  "details"  and  "facts"  (Pettersson,  1995).  Though  the  term   "information"  varies  in  its  definition,  it  is  an  important  concept  covering  and  often   overlapping  through  a  number  of  disciplines,  such  as  the  field  of  communications   technology  or  areas  of  linguistic  dimensions  (Pettersson,  1995).     In  George-Palilonis  (2006),  the  important  skills  and  theoretical  foundations   needed  to  strategically  create  information  graphics,  ranging  from  diagrams,  charts   to  maps  are  detailed.  George-Palilonis  (2006)  outlines  the  essential  roles  of  research  

  

10  

and  writing  skills  in  graphics  reporting,  which  traditionally  falls  into  the  field  of   journalism.  Utilizing  a  broader  perspective,  Hembree  (2006)  examines  the  role  of  a   graphic  designer  and  how  their  client's  needs/desires  can  sometimes  overpower   their  vision,  whereas  information  graphics  (a  subset  of  graphic  design)  primarily   focuses  on  providing  the  best  representation  for  a  batch  of  information;  often   sourced  from  quantitative  data  supported  by  evidenced  research  (Hembree,  2006).      Information  design  is  both  the  art  and  science  of  preparing  information  in  a  

way  that  can  be  utilized  by  individuals  with  efficiency  and  effectiveness  (Horn,   2000).  Information  design  increased  in  popularity  during  the  1990s  as  an  umbrella   term  to  describe  the  creation  of  "...communication  by  words,  pictures,  charts,   graphs,  maps,  pictograms,  and  cartoons,  whether  by  conventional  or  electronic   means"  (Passini,  2000,  p.84).  According  to  Passini  (2000),  Graphic  design  is   traditionally  associated  with  the  design  of  information,  prioritizing  aesthetical   appearance,  whereas  the  field  of  information  design  values  content  as  well  as  form.        Raskin  (2000)  argues  that  "information  design"  does  not  exist  and  that  the  

title  is  a  misnomer,  as  information  itself  cannot  be  designed;  instead  it  is  in  its   modes  of  transfer  and  its  representations  that  can  be  shaped.  Information  overload   is  stressful,  as  the  mind  doesn't  know  how  to  organize  and  categorize  the  wealth  of   verbal,  written  and  visual  information  received  on  a  daily  basis.  Hansen  (2000)   states  that  accessing,  reflecting  and  storing  information  in  a  way  that  can  easily   retrieved  and  applied  to  everyday  problems  can  be  a  time-consuming  and   frustrating  process.  Information  design  provides  an  escape  from  the  complexity,   disorder  and  information  overload  occuring  from  the  traditional  linear,  sequential  

  

11  

thought  processes  often  provided  through  verbal  and  written  communication   (Hansen,  2000).  Thus,  the  field  of  information  design  requires  the  holistic  and   systematic  conceptualization  to  allow  graphics  to  transform  the  viewer's   understanding  of  an  issue  and  to  an  extent,  free  them  from  the  narrow  translations   of  word,  label  and  classification  systems  (Hansen,  2000).  It  is  human  nature  for   humans  to  need  to  understand  complexity,  thereby  apparent  disorder  makes  it   important  for  an  individual  to  extend  their  ability  to  think  both  visually  and   systematically  as  a  means  of  envisioning  information  presented  to  them  as  a  whole   (Hansen,  2000).     Information  graphics  are  often  presented  to  the  public  readers  through  a   variety  of  media,  such  as  newspapers,  magazines,  online  publications  and  other   media  portals.  George-Palilonis  (2006)  stresses  the  need  for  the  designer  to  note  the   textual  and  visual  references  of  their  sources.  Though  artistic  abilities  can  be  an   added  asset,  it  is  the  ability  to  spot  good  visual  references  and  replicate  them  into   the  design  that  makes  the  information  graphic  effective  and  easily  understood.   George-Palilonis  (2006)  further  notes  that  one  of  the  biggest  mistakes  made  by   inexperienced  graphic  reporters  is  simply  not  using  their  sources  to  their  potential.   Therefore,  it  is  essential  to  understand  the  possibility  of  each  source  and  properly   use  them  in  accordance  to  the  context  of  the  intended  visual  narrative.       

Psychological  Considerations    
   In  Exploring  the  Elements  of  Design,  Evans  and  Thomas  (2008)  explore  the  

relationship  between  psychological  foundations  and  visual  communication  ­  

  

12  

specifically  how  they  are  used  and  understood  by  designers  to  communicate  to  their   intended  audience(s).  Psychological  foundations  "...include  how  people  behave,  how   they  think,  how  they  feel  and  how  they  interact  with  one  another  (Evan  and   Thomas,  2008,  p.  194).  This  reinforces  the  point  that  although  designers  are   primarily  interested  in  visual  perception,  a  viewer's  five  senses  are  triggered  when   experiencing  visual  communication.  American  neuroscientists  Antonio  Damasio  and   Joseph  LeDoux  discovered  evidence  of  "feeling-based"  of  human  response  systems   of  unconscious  cognitive  processing  and  emotion  as  integral  to  good  decision- making  (Newton,  2005).  Information,  as  processed  by  our  eyes  ­  through  vision  ­   has  a  major  influence  over  an  individual's  decision-making  process  and  for   determining  how  to  act,  or  react,  to  stimuli  (Newton,  2005).  Visual  communication   can  act  as  a  primary  way  of  knowing,  allowing  visual  intelligence  to  cultivate   sophisticated  understanding  of  how  images  and  graphics  affect  our  daily  lives   (Newton,  2005).     Information  graphics  have  the  ability  to  directly  appeal  to  an  individual's   cognitive  senses  by  appealing  to  their  analytical  reasoning  processes.  Styhre  (2008)   outlines  humans'  sensual  relationship  with  their  perception  of  the  outside  world   and  the  role  of  visual  organization  in  enhancing  their  cogitative  capacities.  Linear   communication  and  perceptive  differences  are  encountered  when  coding  text   versus  images;  texts  are  abstractions  of  images,  interpreted  to  explain  their  ideas   through  linear  communication  (Styhre,  2008).  Images  are  representations  of  the   world  and  and  Vilém  Flusser's  theory  of  "idolatry"  where  "human  beings  `cease  to   decode  images  and  instead  project  them,  still  encoded  into  the  world  `out  there'"  are  

  

13  

examined  (Styhre,  2008,  p.  216).  Thus,  it  can  be  argued  that  images  act  as  maps  to   knowledge  transfer.  Altogether,  information  graphics  combines  the  conceptual   thinking  provided  through  texts  with  the  creative  potential  of  images  to  create  a   dynamic  relationship  to  both  obscure  and  clarify  social  reality  (Styhre,  2008).     In  1988,  IFRA  Institute  in  Darmstadt,  West  Germany  organized  an   "infographics"  workshop  with  twenty  journalists,  artists  and  graphic  designers  from   different  newspaper  companies.  The  participants  were  divided  into  eight  working   groups,  with  two  to  three  persons  in  each;  computer  equipment  was  provided,  in   addition  to  a  common  theme.  The  workshop  concluded  with  an  evaluation  of  the   information  graphics  provided  and  each  graphic  was  assessed  from  a  criteria  of  ten   and  a  combined  five  grade  numeric  and  verbal  scale,  from  "1  =  not  satisfactory"  to  "5   =  very  good".  "The  ten  criteria  were:  1  =  legibility  of  text,  2  =  legibility  of  image,  3  =   foreground  (should  be  clear  and  distinct),  4  =  background  (should  not  be   disturbing),  5  =  text-image    (should  be  clear),  6  =  location  of  places  and/or  events,  7   =  documentation  of  facts  and/or  explanations,  8  =  presentation  of  statistics,  9  =   editorial  comment/s,  and  10  =  overall  aesthetic  value"  (Pettersson,  1995,  p.81).  The   results  proved  that  the  criteria  were  assessed  subjectively,  concluding  that  subjects   have  different  opinions  about  the  effectiveness  of  respective  information  graphics   and  one  design  cannot  be  expected  to  please  all  viewers  (Pettersson,  1995).    

   Methodology  
Design  Tools  
   For  the  purposes  of  this  experimental  design  process,  the  investigator  chose  

to  use  Adobe  Illustrator  as  the  fundamental  software  to  create  the  information      14  

graphics.  True  to  its  name,  Illustrator  incorporates  a  number  of  drawing  tools  that   accommodate  artistic  spontaneity  to  create  detailed  designs  as  it  allow  for  the   precise  control  of  colour,  text  and  artwork  in  the  creation  of  dynamic  illustrations   (Smith  et  al.,  2010).  Adobe  Photoshop  was  also  used  to  change  file  formats  of   graphical  elements,  primarily  the  hockey  players,  to  increase  their  overall  print   resolution.  The  main  benefit  of  using  Adobe  Creative  Suite  is  the  ease  of  integration   between  individual  applications;  therefore,  the  investigator  can  easily  transport  files   from  Photoshop  into  Illustrator  and  vice  versa  (Smith  et  al.,  2010).  The  design  tools   and  content  include  the  following:      · · Raw  Data  (Dr.  Cusimano's  Open  Source  article  with  the  integration  of  my   grounded  theory  analysis)   Design  Journal   o Incorporates  sketches  of  design  ideas  and  jotted  notes  of  my  thought   process     Adobe  Illustrator  CS5   Adobe  Photoshop  CS5   Theoretical  Design  Checklist  (See  Charts  #1  &  2)*  

*Only  used  for  second  and  third  (two  theoretical)  designs.    

· · ·

   Design  Journal      Prior  to  and  during  the  creation  of  the  three  designs,  preliminary  sketches  

and  written  notes  were  recorded  in  a  journal  by  the  investigator  in  an  effort  to   record  her  cognitive  process  throughout  the  design  experiment.  This  was  later  used   to  provide  an  accurate  analysis  of  her  creative  visual  process.  Pages  of  transcribed   thoughts  provided  an  instantaneous  documentation  of  the  rationale  for  the  design   decisions  and  were  later  referred  to  during  the  analysis  stage  of  the  experiment.    

  

15  

The  challenge  for  any  designer  is  to  draft  a  description  of  their  design  so  that   the  target  audience  will  understand  its  intention.  This  is  especially  true  when   creating  information  graphics,  as  a  wealth  of  data  and  description  are  involved  (de   Ridder,  2007).  A  design  journal  helps  ease  this  process  by  acting  as  an  organization   vehicle.  Recording  initial  thoughts  allowed  the  investigator  to  remain  accountable   for  her  decisions  and  justified  the  relevancy  of  visuals  and  content  used  in  the   information  graphic,  creating  purposeful  decision-making  in  the  design  process.   Visual  note  taking,  such  as  sketches  complemented  with  brief  descriptions,   visualized  and  annotated  the  basic  thought  behind  the  action  and  insight  to   decision-making  based  on  intuition.  Fraser  and  Henmi  (1994)  state  that  sketches   provide  a  visual  dialogue  that  enrich  the  creation  process  as  it  multiplies  an   individual's  thought  to  lead  to  new  ways  of  seeing  and  understanding  by  creating  a   chain  of  associations.  The  authors  claim:    
Just  as  an  author  inserts  his  or  her  conceptual  presence  into  a  drawing  through  a   mode  of  seeing,  interpreting,  and  changing  a  scene,  drawing  tools  impose  a   material  influence.  Drawing  thus  intervenes  between  an  author  and  these  ideas   being  considered,  becoming  an  effect  a  third  presence.  In  this  presence,  drawing  is   not  a  transparent  translation  of  thought  into  form,  but  rather  a  medium  which   influences  though  just  as  thought  influences  drawing.     (Fraser  &  Henmi,  1994,  pg.  viii)  

   This  further  emphasizes  the  usability  of  using  design  tools,  such  as  a  hand- drawn  sketches  or  constantly  evolving  designs  on  computer  illustration   programs  to  arrive  at  visual  language  solutions  using  quantitative  and   qualitative  data.    

           
   16  

Creating  a  Step-by-Step  Experimental  Design  
      The  Markus/Maver  Map  is  composed  of  three  planning  functions:  analysis,  

synthesis  and  evaluation,  illustrated  in  Figure  #1.  This  design  process  is  prevalent  in   the  fields  of  engineering,  architecture  and  design  (Lawson,  2006).  Eva  Jiricna,  a   renowned  architect,  claims  that  her  design  process  begins  with  outlining  the  details   of  the  project,  then  she  creates  a  layout  from  the  generated  ideas  of  the   brainstorming  session  (Lawson,  2006).  The  accuracy  of  the  Markus/Maver  map  is   tested  on  a  subjective  basis,  which  varies  from  designer  to  designer  and  from   project  to  project.  What  may  seem  like  a  fundamental  decision  for  one  project  may   simply  be  considered  a  minor  detail  for  another.  Therefore,  Figure  #1  is  a  dynamic   process  that  can  be  adapted  and  altered  ­  it  is  not  a  firm  route  through  the   beginning  and  end  of  a  whole  process  but  serves  as  a  navigational  guide.  The   designer  has  agency  to  take  the  map  and  mold  it  to  his/her  own.  

                                           Figure  #  1:  Markus/Maver  Map  of  a  Generalized  Design  Process  (Lawson,  2006)         In  contrast  to  the  Markus/Maver  Map,  Jane  Darke's  Map  (seen  in  Figure  #2)   consists  of  a  model  of  generator-conjecture-analysis.  This  methodology  allows  the   designer  to  first  decide  what  they  believe  are  the  important  aspects  of  the  design-

  

17  

problem,  develop  a  rough  design  on  this  basis  and  then  examine  it  to  assess  if  the   design  achieved  its  overall  goals.  The  first  step  consists  of  the  primary  generators  or   organizing  principles,  which  can  be  stretched  throughout  the  whole  design  process.   However,  designers  can  gradually  achieve  an  understanding  of  their  design  problem   and  therefore  have  the  ability  to  not  cling  to  major  design  ideas  and  themes   (Lawson,  2006).  The  conjecture  and  analysis  processes  allows  for  the  continual   examination  of  the  evolving  designs  in  terms  of  their  ability  to  achieve  the  overall   design  goal.  As  previously  mentioned,  it  is  important  that  the  investigator   remember  that  pre-existing  and  tailor-made  step-by-step  methodologies/maps   should  not  be  read  too  literally  as  any  visual  diagram  only  serves  to  simplify  the   highly  complex  mental  process  where  flexibility  in  design  must  be  accommodated.       

   Figure  #2:  Jane  Darke's  Design  Process  Map  (Lawson,  2006)     

  

Using  a  combination  of  the  Markus/Maver  and  Darke  Maps,  the  investigator   was  able  to  chart  her  design  process  from  beginning  to  end;  "mapping"  a  creation   process  consists  of  designating  a  sequence  of  distinct  and  identifiable  activities   occurring  in  a  predictable  logical  order  (Lawson,  2006).  Thus,  a  linear,  practical- based  methodology  was  used  for  efficient  results  and  to  prevent  overlap  and/or   gaps  in  planning  and  final  outcome.  On  the  whole,  utilizing  a  step-by-step  

  

18  

experimental  design  approach  allowed  for  sequential  design  solutions  and  the   experiment  progressed.    

   Keeping  the  Research  Question  in  Mind  
      This  MRP's  practice-based  methodology  is  outlined  below  and  seeks  to  

answer  the  investigator's  main  research  question:  How  will  Dondis's  basic  elements   of  design  and  Gestalt  theory  guide  the  design  process  and  will  the  outcome  of  a  theory- based  visual  solution  address  the  target  audience's  needs  better  than  the  driver   approach?  The  experimental  research  approach  is  broken  down  into  the  five  steps   below  for  the  collection  of  primary  and  secondary  data.  Each  step  will  need  to  be   completed  before  proceeding  to  the  next.  This  ensures  that  the  previous  section  will   be  able  to  relate  and  build  to  the  next.              

STEP  ONE:  Analysis  and  Interpretation  

STEP  #1:  
Grounded  Theory  

         The  two  documents  that  were  be  analyzed  were:   · Dr.  Cusimano  and  his  team's  article  entitled,  "Effect  of  bodychecking  on  rate   of  injuries  among  minor  hockey  players"  published  in  the  April  2011  edition   of  Open  Medicine  Journal;   · a  press  release  issued  from  St.  Michael's  hospital.      Why  These  Documents?   The  Open  Medicine  article  is  designated  as  a  media  deliverable  for  St.  Michael's   Hospital  as  the  raw  data  for  the  design  of  the  information  graphic.  Understanding  

  

19  

the  use  of  medical  language  and  tone  allowed  for  the  investigator  to  determine  how   to  best  represent  the  medical  research  in  visual  format.  Furthermore,  the  press   release  targeted  the  same  audience  as  the  information  graphic,  hockey  parents  of   youth  hockey  players,  placing  further  importance  on  the  document  analysis.  

  
  

Grounded  Theory  Analysis  
The  grounded  theory  analysis  used  operationalized  concepts  (Appendix  #4).  

The  investigator  was  able  to  assess  the  use  of  nouns,  which  allowed  for  medical   research  findings  to  become  facts,  as  well  as  the  use  of  "team-based"  pronouns,   which  provided  the  reader  with  confidence  in  knowing  that  the  study  was   conducted  in  a  multi-disciplinary  environment.        Summary  of  Grounded  Theory  Analysis  of  Both  Documents      As  a  whole,  the  press  release  places  the  article's  findings  as  the  first  noun  of  

its  sentences;  thus,  still  aligning  to  the  original  article's  language  formatting.   Similarities  between  the  construction  of  the  press  release  and  the  article's   interpretation  section  can  be  clearly  seen  through  the  presence  of   evaluative/judgmental  statements  in  later  portions  of  the  section.  In  both   documents,  research  findings  were  heavily  presented  beforehand  to  "set  the  stage"   before  personal  opinions  were  incorporated.  However,  unlike  the  Open  Medicine   article,  the  press  release  uses  Dr.  Cusimano,  the  lead  supervisor  of  the  study  and  a   prominent  figure  in  the  hospital,  as  the  voice  of  these  statements.  His  credibility  and   authority  emphasizes  the  message.    

  

20  

Open  Medicine  Article   - Layout  fits  into  scientific  report   genre.   - Little  jargon  used.   Results  Section   - All  six  paragraphs  contained   sentences  that  used  research   findings/information  nouns.   o Complemented  by  passive   verbs,  implies  that  because   they  have  already  occurred,   facts  are  being  presented.   - "We"  coded  three  times.   o Highlights  team-based   approach.   Interpretation  Section   - Heavy  use  of  additional  research.   o Short  lit-review  presented.   o Presented  early  in   preparation  for   evaluative/judgmental   statements  ­  which  appear   in  the  later  paragraphs.     - Belittling  language  used  when   describing  Hockey  Canada  and  their   actions.           Table  #3:  Summary  of  Findings        

St.  Michael's  Press  Release   - Used  many  pronouns  to   describe  Dr.  Cusimano  and  his   team  as  opposed  to  featuring   the  research  findings  as  the   first  noun  in  its  sentences.   o Meant  to  shine  the   "limelight"  on  St.   Michael's.   - Targets  lay  audience  as  its   primary  audience.   o Evident  through  lack  of   jargon  and  mention  of   celebrity  hockey  players   who  have  recently  been   injured  due  to   bodychecking.   - Uses  Dr.  Cusimano  as  lead   supervisor  of  the  study,  a   prominent  figure  in  the   hospital.   o His  credibility  and   authority  furthers  the   research  message.    

                 

  

21  

STEP  TWO:  Design  Process  
  

STEP  #2:  
                                                                                                         1                                                                                                1      Intuitive-Based                                    Theoretically-Based   Information  Graphics                  Information  Graphics   Actual  Designs                                       1                                                                                                1                                                                                                      1              Intuitive-Based                                    Theoretically-Based              Content-Theoretically-Based             Information  Graphics                  Information  Graphics                            Information  Graphics        Prior  Software  Experience   The  investigator's  graphic  design  experience  allowed  her  to  comfortably   utilize  the  design  elements.  Tentative  sketches  kept  in  the  design  journal  were   essential  building  block  later  incorporated  into  the  digital  design.  This     Linear  approach  allowed  for  an  easy  transition  of  visual  elements  established  on   paper  to  computer  graphical  elements  later  finalized  on  screen  utilizing  an  intuitive   decision-making  process  for  the  composition.        Intuitive  Design         The  Intuitive  Design  process  began  with  a  careful  examination  of  the  raw   data,  Dr.  Cusimano's  Open  Medicine  article.  The  grounded  theory  analysis  served  as   a  tentative  framework  to  determine  the  content  and  shape  the  "tone"  of  the  design.   Anticipated  Designs  

  

22  

Once  the  content  (important  statistics  and  information)  was  extracted  from   Dr.Cusimano's  printed  article,  the  investigator  began  to  create  possible  designs  for   the  intuitive  design  solutions  through  sketches.  The  importance  of  the  information   was  based  on  its  "marketability",  towards  keeping  the  hockey  parents  as  the  lay   target  audience  focusing  on  the  types  of  statistics  that  would  interest  them  the  most.   The  investigator  opted  for  a  tentative  drawing  that  created  the  shape  of  the  design,   which  could  later  be  easily  reconfigured  utilizing  the  computer  graphic  software.   This  allowed  for  a  better  understanding  of  how  separate  design  elements  would   come  together  as  a  whole  leaving  room  for  flexibility  and  inspiration  throughout  the   decision-making  process.  Nonetheless,  initial  sketches  and  the  maintenance  of  a  list   of  important  aspects  incorporated  by  the  design  provided  documentation  of  the   process  and  a  focus  for  the  investigator  in  order  to  create  the  best  representation  of   the  data.          Similar  to  the  purpose  of  a  design  journal,  design  sketches  became  a  medium  

for  dialogue  throughout  the  design  process  by  acting  as  a  physical  manifestation  of   the  designer's  way  of  thinking;  versatile  in  its  use  from  the  inception  of  a  project  to   final  detailing  and  evaluation  (Smith,  2008).  Sketches  convey  intention  and  meaning   and  can  be  compared  to  "...theories  of  play,  memory,  imagination,  and  fantasy"   (Smith,  2008,  pg.  2).  Overall,  the  journal  sketches  served  a  recording  of  the   investigator's  initial  design  intention  ­  only  one  to  two  hand-drawn  sketches  of  each   of  the  three  designs  were  created,  as  the  investigator  was  comfortable  transferring   and  detailing  elements  using  graphic  software.  Constant  alteration  of  the  design  

  

23  

layout  on  screen  can  also  be  considered  design  sketches  that  evolve  through  their   transformations.     As  designs  molded  from  one  form  to  another,  the  investigator  continued  to   take  notes  of  strategic  design  changes  and  their  relations  to  the  overall  design   concept.  The  flexibility  of  the  each  software's  tools,  especially  Adobe  Illustrator,   enabled  the  investigator  to  confidently  mold  her  designs  as  needed.  Flexibility  and   creating  a  piece  that  "feels  right"  is  a  major  benefit  of  the  intuitive  design  process  ­   it  is  natural  and  a  sense  of  freedom  is  felt  as  the  information  has  precedence  on   visual  forms.      Theoretical  Design   Following  a  linear,  practice-based  methodology,  the  creation  of  the   theoretical  design  proved  to  be  a  systematic  approach  that  followed  after  and  used   aspects  from  Intuitive  Design  in  conjunction  with  a  theoretical  "checklist"  drawn   from  Dondis'  and  Gestalt  psychology.  These  checklists  can  be  seen  in  Charts  #1  and   #2  below.      Line      Colour      Shape      Direction      Texture      Scale      Dimension      Motion      Complexity      Symmetry      Chart  #1:      Dondis'  Basic  Elements  of                     Design  Checklist  ( )                                                                                 Figure  and  Ground   Similarity   Proximity  or  Contiguity   Continuity   Closure   Symmetry                  Chart  #2:   Gestalt  Principles  of  Design      Check-List  ( )  

     

  

24  

Content-Theoretical  Design      The  creation  of  the  (Content-Theoretical)  design  was  primarily  based  on  the  

incorporation  of  additional  data  later  retrieved  from  the  article,  seen  in  Figure  #3.   The  design  goal  was  to  emphasize  the  comparison  of  the  "before"  and  "after"   numerical  statistics  of  bodychecking  injuries  after  rule  changes  by  Hockey  Canada.   The  increase  in  data  contributed  to  a  more  informative,  robust  design  where   elements  from  previous  iterations  were  incorporated  and  improved  upon.       

                                   Figure  #3:  Table  #3,  Found  in  Dr.  Cusimano's  Results  Section  of  His  Online  Article   (Cusimano  et  al.,  2011)  

              

  

25  

STEP  THREE:  Conducting  a  Blind-Test  Interview  
  

STEP  #3:  
Interview  with  Dr.  Cusimano                                                                                                                                Blind  Test            As  seen  above,  STEP  #2  consisted  of  designing  three  information  graphics,   which  was  followed  by  Step  #3,  where  the  designs  were  then  presented  to  Dr.   Cusimano  in  a  "Blind  Test"  during  STEP  #3.  The  questions  that  were  discussed   informally  during  the  interview  in  order  to  determine  which  design  Dr.  Cusimano   would  choose  from  a  professional  perspective  are  shown  below.        Anticipated  Interview  Questions:      Please  take  some  time  to  look  at  the  two  information  graphics  in   front  of  you.     Let's  examine  the  first  information  graphic  (intuitive  design).     o What  do  you  think  of  it  in  terms  of  the  information   hierarchy?   o What  do  you  think  of  it  in  terms  of  the  visuals?     o Does  it  highlight  your  research  well?  Why  or  why  not?   o What  are  its  strengths?   o It's  weaknesses?   o What  are  its  possibilities?   o What  are  its  threats?     Let's  move  onto  the  second  information  graphic  (theoretically   designed).   o What  do  you  think  of  it  in  terms  of  the  information   hierarchy?   o What  do  you  think  of  it  in  terms  of  the  visuals?     o Does  it  highlight  your  research  well?  Why  or  why  not?   o What  are  its  strengths?   o It's  weaknesses?  

· ·

·

  

26  

·   

o What  are  its  possibilities?   o What  are  its  threats?     When  placed  side-by-side,  which  design  do  you  think  will  be  the   most  understandable/attractive  to  hockey  parents?   o Why?  

         STEPS  FOUR  AND  FIVE:  Post-Interview  Work  and  Analysis  
     

   STEP  #4:     
         Revise  Dr.  Cusimano's  chosen  information  graphics.  

   STEP  #5:  
Analyze  my  design  process.               After  the  interview  process  with  Dr.  Cusimano,  the  investigator  carried  out   recommended  changes  to  the  chosen  design(s).  In  order  for  the  revised  design(s)  to   be  used  as  promotional  material  for  St.  Michael's  Hospital  and  to  media  they  must   adhere  to  the  hospital's  branding  standards.  The  ongoing  investigator's  journal  was   used  to  engage  in  Step  #5  of  the  linear  practice-based  method  provided  valuable   insights  behind  decision-making  throughout  the  design  process  for  all  three  visual   solutions  (See  Appendix  #1-3).              27  

Analysis  of  Intuitive  Design  
Intuitive  Design  (Design  #1)  Elements  Breakdown  
   The  creation  of  the  Intuitive  Design  was  driven  and  inspired  by  the  

designer's  instinctual  sense  of  layout.  Through  a  Grounded  Theory  Analysis,   prominent  information  was  highlighted.  Dr.  Cusimano's  Open  Medicine  article   contained  a  mix  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  information.  Quantitative  statistics   provided  an  immediate  impact  while  qualitative  research  provides  the  support  to   leverage  the  research  informing  the  target  audience  ­  hockey  parents.  Numerical   data  is  easier  to  visually  represent;  thus,  the  Intuitive  Design's  shading  and   graphical  elements,  such  as  arrows,  accommodated  this  representation  and  the   integration  of  specific  sentences  from  Dr.  Cusimano's  added  support  to  reinforce  the   visual  communication.  Overall,  three  sets  of  information,  seen  in  Figure  #4,  were   selected  based  on  their  ability  to  best  represent  Dr.  Cusimano's  research  findings   and  visual  "mold-ability".                                                                                                                                             Figure  #4:  Thumbnail  of  Intuitive  Design  (Design  #1)  

  

28  

St.  Michael's  Hospital's  branding  elements  heavily  influenced  the  colour   scheme  and  font  choices  of  the  Intuitive  Design.  The  synthesis  of  the  design   concepts,  outlined  in  Table  #4  below,  are  mainly  focused  upon  the  hockey  player   graphic,  blue  shading,  use  of  the  rectangle  shape  and  arrows  to  attract  the  reader's   attention  and  encourage  them  to  thoroughly  assess  the  graphics.     Design  Element  Choices   Colour  Scheme:  Light   Blue,  White  and  Black   Rationale   · Light  blue  is  part  of  St.  Michael's  Hospital  colour   palette.   o Light  blue  meant  to  lead  the  eyes:  starting   from  the  big  chunk  at  the  bottom  (hockey   player  graphic  and  quote),  lead  by  the   arrows  to  the  research  information  above.     o Simplicity  with  a  clean,  crisp  design  was  one   of  the  design  goals.    Black  text  is  the  easiest  to  read.    White  background  provided  contrast   to  facilitate  reader-friendliness.   · The  default  font  used  by  St.  Michael's  Hospital  to   brand  the  corporate  deliverables.   · Statistic  (52.5%)  was  set  as  the  biggest  text  and   hierarchically  placed  at  the  top  (instituting  most   important)  as  it  contained  the  main  impactful   information  in  the  infographic.   · Text  font  size  kept  relatively  small  to  add  to  simple   feel  of  the  design.  The  small  size  also  allowed  for   more  research  information  to  fit  proportionally  (in   comparison  to  the  arrows  and  hockey  player   graphics).   o Body  quality  facilitated  reader-friendliness   in  creating  easy-to-read  text.   · Instant  recognizable  image  to  encapsulate  whom   the  research  is  representing.   · Black  and  white  hue  of  the  graphic  matched  the   colour  scheme  of  the  design  and  allowed  the  blue   colouring  to  "pop".   · Outline  quality  of  image  accommodates  different   sizes  (can  easily  be  made  smaller  or  bigger)  without   affecting  web/print  resolution.     · Strategically  placed  behind  the  text.   o Acts  a  "pathway"  to  lead  the  reader's  eyes  to  

Ariel  Font    

Youth  Hockey  Player   Graphic  

Arrows  (Going  Up)  

  

29  

the  research  text.     "Paneling"   · Acts  as  a  separation  ­  prevents  overcrowding  of   graphics  and  text  to  provide  a  smooth,  gradual   transition  to  encourage  the  reader  to  process  the   information  slowly  in  small  chunks  as  opposed  to   an  overwhelming  portion.   Portrait  Alignment   · The  height  of  the  youth  hockey  player  graphic   determined  the  orientation  of  the  design  ­  allowed   information  to  flow  logically.     Rectangle     · Enclosed  the  graphics  in  a  compact  manner.   · Allowed  the  graphical  elements  to  flow  easily  and   emphasis  how  they  are  individual  parts  belonging   to  one,  large  design.        Table  #4:  Design  Elements  Choices  for  Intuitive  Design           Notable  Observations      The  main  change  incorporated  into  the  computer-illustrated  design  was  a   rectangular  border  to  enclose  the  graphics  ­  this  addition  was  made  by  the   investigator  unknowingly  to  provide  "closure"  to  the  information  graphics.   Furthermore,  the  investigator's  prior  internship  with  St.  Michael's  Public  Relations   department  allowed  her  to  select  the  Arial  font  and  use  a  specific  blue  shade  that   will  easily  pass  the  organization's  branding  criteria.  The  usage  of  a  bold  font  was   important  as  it  allowed  Dr.  Cusimano's  research  to  become  a  prominent  element  of   the  design  as  opposed  to  simply  blending  into  the  background.    The  creation  of   panels  through  shading  the  lower  portion  of  the  graphic  created  a  separation  to   allow  the  division  of  the  information  to  accommodate  reader-friendliness.    This   prevented  the  creation  of  clusters  of  information  that  could  overwhelm  and  visually   irritate  the  reader.  The  position  of  the  graphic  instantly  captured  the  reader's   attention  and  the  arrows  allowed  the  reader's  eyes  to  more  upwards,  a  technique  

  

30  

that  the  investigator  unknowingly  created  to  add  a  "build-up"  of  anticipation  to   encourage  the  viewer  to  read  further.     The  Intuitive  Design's  portrait  alignment  created  a  "compact"  feel  as  it  was   chosen  to  contain  the  graphical  elements;  its  width  was  determined  by  the  size  of   the  hockey  graphic.  Because  of  this  adjustment,  the  textual  elements  were   incorporated  above  and  below  the  hockey  player  to  create  a  smooth  placement   within  the  information  graphic's  encompassing  borders.  Overall,  the  goal  of  the   Intuitive  Design  was  to  enhance  Dr.  Cusimano's  extracted  research  data  through  a   clear,  clean  and  simple  graphical  representation.  

   Analysis  of  Theoretical  Design  
  

  

Theoretical  Design  (Design  #2)  Elements  Breakdown  
Prior  to  the  start  of  the  experimental  project,  the  investigator  anticipated  the   incorporation  of  theoretical  aspects  of  design  to  be  a  forceful  process  ­  one  that   would  hinder  the  organic-feel  of  design  creation.  However,  as  the  investigator  began   to  create  her  Theoretical  Design  utilizing  checklists,  the  design  process  was   systemized  and  formed  easily  based  on  the  set  guidelines.  The  investigator  focused   on  adding  elements  lacking  from  the  initial  Intuitive  Design.   The  Theoretical  Design  is  creatively  spearheaded  by  Dondis's  elements  of   design  and  Gestalt  theory  checklists,  seen  in  Charts  #1  and  #2  of  the  Methodology   section.  As  the  prior  Intuitive  Design  contained  important  information  from  Dr.   Cusimano's  published  article,  in  addition  to  the  same  design  elements,  such  as   shapes,  font  type  and  size,  and  colour  scheme,  they  were  simply  extracted  and  used   within  the  Theoretical  Design.  The  main  difference  was  the  incorporation  of  a      31  

second  youth  hockey  player  graphic  to  showcase  a  theoretical  element  overlapped   in  both  the  Dondis  and  Gestalt  theory's  checklists:  symmetry.  Shading  created  a   distinct  separation  in  the  vertical  alignment  of  the  landscape  layout.  The  separation   also  created  a  slight  complexity  to  the  design  and  captured  the  reader's  attention.   The  hockey  player  graphic  illustration  added  a  dimension  of  fluidity  and  motion;  the   addition  of  a  second  one  beside  the  original  (used  in  the  Intuitive  Design)  served  to   enhance  the  "recharge"  of  the  statistic  quality  of  the  textual  information.       

                                            
  

   Figure  #5:  Thumbnail  of  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #2)  

  

Dondis's  Basic   Elements  of  Design    

Theoretical   Elements   Shape  

Impact  on  Design   · Rectangle  Shapes   o Left  Rectangle  (white)   o Right  Rectangle  (blue)   o Creates  strong  division  ­   the  split  in  the  middle   creates  a  graphical   representation  of  the   "52.5%"  statistic.   Arrows   o Located  in  left  rectangle.   o Emphasizes  the  bottom  left- hand  size  information  block;   speaks  of  the  odds  rising.    

  

Direction    

·

  

32  

·

  

Texture  

·

  

Complexity    

·

Dondis's  Basic   Elements  of  Design  &   Gestalt  Principles  of   Design    

Scale,   Similarity  and   Proximity    

·

  

Dimension  &   Motion  and   Continuity  

·

  

Symmetry    

·

Gestalt  Principles  of   Design  

Figure  and   Ground  

·

·

  Eyes  meant  to  follow  a  "Z"  pattern:   start  with  the  top  left-hand  corner   (with  impactful  statistic),  move   towards  quote  (top  right-hand   corner)  then  progress  towards  the   bottom  right-hand  corner.   o The  arrows  allow  the  reader   to  restart  this  cycle.   Hockey  Player  Graphics   o An  optical  texture  of  black- and-white  features  creates   interest  and  encourages  the   viewer  to  investigate  the   design  further.   Text  and  Graphic  Interplay   o Coming  together  to  visually   communicate  a  complex   image  simplified.   (Similar)  Scale,  Similarity  and   (Close)  Proximity  and  Similarity   of  Hockey  Player  Graphics   o Highlighted  the  connection   between  the  two  sides   though  they  were  in   different  colours  ­   emphasized  that  they  were   part  of  a  whole  (design).   Hockey  Player  Graphics   Featured  "Gliding"     o Allows  the  viewer  to  feel   that  the  design  elements  are   seen  in  "mid-action"  ­  giving   the  feeling  of  activity  and   movement.   Division:  White  and  Blue   Rectangles    (containing  a   respective  hockey  player   graphic)   o Provides  balance  and   harmony  to  the  design.   Figure:  Information  (text)     o Acts  as  the  stimuli  in  the   design.   Ground:  Hockey  Player  Graphic   o Acts  as  an  interesting  

  

33  

  

Closure  

·

background  to  capture  the   reader's  attention.   Large,  Encapsulating  Rectangle   o Brings  the  graphical   elements  together  to  create   one,  cohesive  design.   o Outlined  with  3pt.  border  to   contrast  white  and  blue   backgrounds  to  provide  a   crisp  and  clean  look.  

  

Table  #5:  Design  Elements  Choices  for  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #2)         Notable  Observations         Charting  the  design  elements  in  Table  #5  above  showcases  the  distinct   theoretical  overlap  of  Dondis'  and  Gestalt  graphic  elements  of:   scale,  similarity  and  proximity;   dimension  &  motion  and  continuity;   symmetry.      The  hockey  player  graphics,  in  their  similar  sizes,  close  proximity  and  organic  lines   · · · that  denote  movement  and  motion  are  a  focal  point  in  the  Theoretical  Design.   Furthermore  the  graphics,  complemented  with  the  use  of  colour,  which  can  be   considered  as  shading  if  printed  in  black  and  white  due  to  its  transparent  nature,   helps  reinforce  symmetry  into  the  information  graphics  to  provide  balance  and   harmony  that  calms  the  reader's  eyes.  Thereby,  the  reader  is  encouraged  to  visually   explore  the  graphical  elements  of  Theoretical  Design.  

              
   34  

Analysis  of  a  Second  Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)  
Problem-Solving:  An  Emergence  of  a  New  Design  
   A  few  days  prior  to  the  investigator's  scheduled  interview  with  Dr.  Cusimano,   she  revisited  his  original  article  posted  on  the  Open  Medicine  website  to  ensure  that   all  relevant  information  were  accounted  for  in  the  two  designs.  Upon  further   investigation,  the  investigator  noticed  attached  tables  that  were  meant  to   complement  the  article's  Results  section.  Dr.  Cusimano's  published  article  was  the   basis  of  the  Grounded  Theory  Analysis  and  the  newly  discovered  tables  were  not   printed  in  the  body  of  paper.  Thus,  they  were  not  considered  during  the  creation  of   the  Intuitive  and  Theoretical  designs.     Upon  further  investigation  of  the  Tables,  one  entitled  "Table  3:  Comparison   of  bodychecking  injuries,  by  minor  hockey  league  division,  before  and  after  the  rule   change  allowing  bodychecking  in  the  Atom  division"  (as  seen  in  Figure  #6)  proved   to  be  specifically  interesting  as  was  highly  relevant  to  the  topic  of  the  two  prior   information  graphics.  According  to  the  investigator,  Table  3  contained  the  relative,   comparative  information  the  previous  designs  were  lacking.  The  experimental   design's  Methodology  served  as  a  step-by-step  process,  which  allowed  the  creation   of  the  Intuitive  Design  to  be  free  from  bias.  Redesigning  the  two  prior  designs  after   the  discovery  of  new  design  information  was  not  an  option.  The  lack  of  substantial   information  was  a  barrier  to  creating  a  more  complex  (and  intricate)  design  during   the  initial  sketch  and  computer  illustration  process.  On  the  whole,  the  emergence  of   new  information  is  an  opportunity  the  investigator  took  to  create  a  third  design   using  one  of  the  strongest  attributes  of  an  information  graphics  to  create  a  design  

  

35  

solution  characteristically  responding  to  the  complex,  multi-dimension  challenge  of   selecting  visuals  that  will  best  represent  the  data  (Lawson,  2006).    

   Figure  #6:  Thumbnail  of  Content-Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)  

   Content-Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)  Breakdown  
      The  Content-Theoretical  Design  is  driven  by  its  large,  quantitative  raw  data  

set.  After  assessing  the  new  information  to  visually  communicate,  the  investigator   decided  that  Dondis  and  Gestalt's  theoretical  element  of  scale  would  become  a   strong  determinant  in  shaping  the  information  design.  Visually  depicting  numerical   systems  is  a  dynamic  process  as  they  impose  rules  on  how  the  numbers  work  as  we   move  along  the  scale  (Lawson,  2006).  The  two  different,  but  similar  hockey  player   graphics  (previously  used  in  the  first  Theoretical  Design)  were  isolated  and   multiplied  in  their  respective  panels  to  visually  illustrate  ratio  differences  of  the   compare-and-contrast  nature  of  the  raw  data  in  an  effort  to  spark  the  reader's   imagination.  Using  the  two  hockey  player  graphics  accommodates  "jointing,"  which   creates  simplicity  fewer  graphical  elements  are  used,  the  stronger  their  relative  

  

36  

connections  (Lawson,  2006).  Table  #6  below  highlights  theoretical  design  elements   used  in  connection  to  their  overall  impact  on  the  Content-Theoretical  Design.        Dondis's  Basic   Elements  of  Design     Theoretical   Elements   Colour   Impact  on  Design   Light  Blue   o A  part  of  St.  Michael's   Hospital  branding.   Contrasts  well  with  the   bold,  black  text  and  white   background.   · Yellow   o Considered  one  of  St.   Michael's  "side-colours"   allowed  for  branding   projects.   · Black  and  White   o Black  Bold  Text:  easier  to   read.   o Black  Regular  Text   (numerical  data):  allowed   the  information  to  be   different  and  stand  out   (the  only  non-bold  text  in   the  design).   o White  background:   simply  and  clean  (looks   good  printed  black  &   white  or  in  colour).   · Linear  and  Straight   o Clean,  crisp  lines  to  lead  the   reader's  eyes  from  left  to   right  side  of  the  page  easily.     · Organic  and  Fluid   o Online  of  the  hockey   players:  adds  to  their   "movement"  and  fluidity.     · Rectangle  Shapes   o Long  rectangle  to  allow   the  reader's  eyes  to  easily   transition  through   respective  progression  of   data  set.     · Rounded-Rectangle   ·

  

Lines  

  

Shape  

  

37  

  

Direction    

·

  

Texture  

·

  

Complexity    

·

Dondis's  Basic   Elements  of  Design  &   Gestalt  Principles  of   Design    

Scale,   Similarity  and   Proximity    

·

(Containing  Before/After   Titles)   o Rounded  feature  stands   out  from  the  straight  and   linear  orientation  of  the   horizontal  lines  of  the   page  ­  attracts  the   reader's  eyes.     Large  Arrow  (Left  Hand  Side)   o Provide  a  natural  transition   from  "before"  to  "after"   panel.     Hockey  Player  Graphics   o Optical  texture  of  black-and- white  features  create   interest  and  encourages  the   viewer  to  investigate  the   design  further.   Interplay  Between  Text  and   Graphic   o Simplifying  a  complex  table   (seen  in  Figure  #6)  into  a   dynamic  graphical   representation.     o Upon  first  glance,  the   different  sizes  of  the  hockey   players,  accommodating   statistical  numbers  and   labels  come  together  to   present  a  wealth  of   information.     (Similar)  Scale,  Similarity  and   (Close)  Proximity  of  Hockey   Player  Graphics   o Scale  visually  depicts  their   graphical  representation  of   the  data  ­  out  of  the  three   designs;  scale  is  the  most   meaningful  in  the  third   design.     o Similarity  and  proximity  of   the  hockey  player  graphics   in  their  respective  panels   showcases  how  the   individual  figures/statistics  

  

38  

  

Dimension  &   Motion  and   Continuity  

·

  

Symmetry    

·

Gestalt  Principles  of   Design  

Figure  and   Ground  

·

·

  

Similarity    

·

  

Proximity  or   Contiguity  

·

  

Closure  

·

are  connected  to  illustrating   a  trend  in  the  data  set.   Hockey  Player  Graphics   Featured  "Gliding"     o Allows  the  viewer  to  feel   that  the  design  elements  are   seen  in  "mid-action"  ­  giving   the  feeling  of  activity  and   movement.   o Statistic  position  on  the  top   left-hand  corner  of  each   hockey  player  graphic  allow   the  reader  to  feel  like  the   information  is  "gliding"  with   the  graphic.   Division:  White  and  Blue   Rectangles    (containing  a   respective  hockey  player   graphic)   o Provides  balance  and   harmony  to  the  design.   Figure:  Hockey  Player   o Is  the  centre-point   (different  sizes  draws  the   reader's  attention).   Ground:  Information   o Compliments  the  hockey   player  graphics  and  allows   it  to  "flow"  with  the  layout.   Panel  Designs:  Before  and  After   o Similar  with  the  exception   of  colour  and  hockey  player   graphic:  slight  differences   allowed  reader  to  connect   that  the  two  panels  were   related  but  contained   different  information.   Proximity  of  the  Hockey  Player   Graphics  Relative  to  One   Another  (In  Their  Respective   Panels)   o Highlights  their  connection   (illustrates  the  same  similar   sets  of  data).   Large  Rectangle  

  

39  

o Large,  encapsulating   rectangle  to  enclose   different  panels  to  become   one,  unified  design.   o Outlined  in  a  3pt.  line  to   provide  a  clean  and   noticeable  border.      Table  #6:  Design  Elements  Choices  for  Content-Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)      Notable  Observations      Table  #6  above  features  several  graphical  elements  and  the  similar  visual  

impacts  to  the  two  previous  information  graphics.  As  previously  mentioned,  scale   had  an  influential  role  in  visually  communicating  the  quantitative  data  set.  Another   strong  design  element  was  the  utilization  of  rules  to  clearly  create  a  straight  path  for   the  viewer's  eyes  to  seamlessly  assess  the  scale-based  evolution  of  the  data  from  left   to  right.  The  use  of  organic  lines,  primarily  found  in  the  youth  hockey  player   graphics,  easily  capture  the  reader's  attention  as  they  provide  contrast  to  the   design's  long  horizontal  frames.    This  is  important  because  magnetizing  the  reader's   eyes  to  the  hockey  graphic  allows  them  to  look  at  the  numerical,  statistical  value,   located  on  its  top  left-hand  corner.  According  to  Dondis  (1974),  this  positioning  is   the  least  stressful  to  the  reader's  eyes  ­  naturally  gravitating  to  the  hockey  player   graphic,  paired  with  an  instant  reaction  to  look  at  the  statistical  data.  The  reader   then  actively  analyzes  the  data  sets  from  the  "before"  and  "after"  columns,  the   results  after  the  implementation  of  Hockey  Canada's  bodychecking  rule  are  made   visible.          

  

40  

Findings  
Considering  the  Importance  of  Raw  Data  
The  raw  information  selected  for  each  of  the  three  designs  highly  influenced   the  complexity  of  their  text  and  graphic  interplay.  The  strength  of  an  information   graphic  is  driven  in  the  organization  of  data  and  the  creation  process  of  the  third   Content-Theoretical  Design  demonstrated  that  a  certain  amount  of  content  is   needed  to  create  a  robust,  intricate  design.  When  compared,  the  simplicity  of  the   initial  two  designs,  which  showcased  more  in-depth  results  than  the  former,   differed  greatly  from  the  complexity  of  the  third  Content-Theoretical  Design.   Overall,  quantitative  data  is  easier  to  visually  represent  because  there  are  pre- existing  design  "templates,"  which  can  be  used  to  organize  the  data,  such  as  the   creation  of  graphs,  charts,  tables,  etc.  However,  the  textual  explanations  embedded   in  the  design  allowed  qualitative  data  to  be  made  visible,  which  leaves  little  to  no   room  for  the  reader's  subjectivity  to  fill  in  the  "missing  gaps."   There  were  six  tables  available  within  Dr.  Cusimano's  online  Open  Medicine   article.  However,  the  investigator  only  chose  one  that  best  communicated  the   intended  message  ­  to  inform  hockey  parents  of  the  harmful  effects  of  Hockey   Canada's  rule  change.  Working  with  more  than  one  table  would  over  complicate  the   process,  as  there  would  be  "information  overload."  This  conscious  decision  by  the   investigator  indicates  the  significance  in  obtaining  adequate  information  that  can  be   used  to  visually  convey  a  message;  too  little  information  will  leave  gaps  in  the   interpretation  and  too  much  information  will  cause  confusion  and  overwhelm  the   audience.    

  

41  

Comparison  of  Design  Processes  
Intuitive  Versus  Theoretical  Design  Processes  

  
As  previously  mentioned  in  the  Analysis  of  the  Theoretical  Design  section,  the   main  design  elements,  in  terms  of  colour  schemes,  graphics,  font,  and  raw  data   (qualitative  and  quantitative  information)  were  extracted  from  the  Intuitive  Design;   acting  as  a  draft  in  the  creation  of  the  Theoretical  Design.  Creatively,  there  was  little   altered,  with  the  exception  of  layout  design.  Hence,  the  visual  appearance  of  the   Intuitive  Design  heavily  determined  the  design  of  the  Theoretical  information   graphics.  Additional  similarities  and  differences  of  both  processes  are  outlined  in   Table  #7  below.     Similarities   Differences   · Layout  was  determined  by   · Intuitive  design  acted  as  the   "playing"  with  the  graphical   foundational  "creative  guide"  in   elements  on  Adobe  Illustrator   the  creation  of  the  theoretical   CS5.   design.   · Incorporated  the  same  graphical   · Theory  checklists  helped   elements,  colours  and   streamline  the  creation  of  design   information.     #2  in  an  efficient  manner.     · There  was  more  "second- guessing"  of  design/layout   decisions  in  the  intuitive  design;   thereby,  a  more  analytical   approach  was  taken  in  its   creation.        Table  #7:  Similarities  and  Differences  Between  the  Intuitive  and  Theoretical  Design   Processes         Intuitive  Versus  Content-Theoretical  Design  Processes      The  similarities  between  the  Intuitive  and  Content-Theoretical  (i.e.  the   second  theoretical)  design  processes  outweighed  their  differences.  This  was  mostly   due  to  the  fact  that  both  can  be  considered  more  experimental  in  their  design  

  

42  

approaches  as  the  first  was  primarily  based  upon  intuition  and  "gut-reaction"  and   the  second  being  a  reaction  to  the  first  with  the  use  of  theoretical  visual  design   knowledge.  In  comparison,  the  creation  of  the  Content-Theoretical  design  is  based   upon  instinctive  and  theoretical  foundations,  which  guided  the  overall  process  to   ease  in  creation.  Visual  language  theory  and  principles  improved  upon  the  intuitive   layout  and  allowed  for  more  detailed  content  to  emerge  in  the  design.  Table  #8   below  further  summarizes  the  main  similarities  and  differences  found  in  the   Intuitive  and  Content-Theoretical  design  processes.     Similarities   Differences   · Initial  sketches  did  not  resemble   · Theoretical  checklist  to  serve  as   the  final  design  concept  on  Adobe   a  foundation  of  what  elements  to   Illustrator  CS5.     incorporate.     o The  refinement  of  layout   · The  ability  to  use  the  prior  two   was  highly  dependent  on   designs  as  "drafts"  to  extract   the  quantity  of   their  strengths  and  incorporate   information  (especially  for   them  into  the  third  design.     Design  #2)  as  it  is  the  raw   · Content-Theoretical  design  was   data  that  needs  to  be   driven  by  heavy  quantitative   visually  accommodated.     data,  which  was  needed  to   · Major  graphical  elements   illustrated  the  comparisons  of   (youth  hockey  players)  used   two  distinct  data  sets:  "before  and   served  as  the  focal  point  to  attract   after".     the  reader's  attention.  Their      purpose  was  to  capture  the   viewer's  interest  and  entice  them   to  "visually  browse"  through  each   design's  concrete  information   (statistics  and  facts).        Table  #8:  Similarities  and  Differences  Between  the  Intuitive  and  Content-Theoretical   Design  Processes                    

  

43  

Theoretical  Versus  Content-Theoretical  Design  Processes      The  most  significant  difference  between  the  Theoretical/Second  and   Content-Theoretical/Third  Design  was  their  use  of  the  Dondis  and  Gestalt's   theoretical  checklists.  In  the  creation  of  the  Theoretical  Design,  the  checklists  were   used  prior  to  creation  to  assess  the  missing  theoretical  elements  of  the  Intuitive   Design,  which  acted  as  a  primary  draft.  Thus,  the  checklists  were  influential  in   determining  the  Theoretical  Design's  overall  creative  look  and  concept.    In   comparison,  the  Content-Theoretical  Design's  raw  data  heavily  determined  the  look   of  its  visual  aesthetics.  The  checklists  were  used  after  creation  to  help  find  areas  that   can  be  "touched-up"  and  theoretically  strengthened.  A  summary  of  the  main   similarities  and  differences  of  the  two  theoretical  designs  can  be  seen  below.     Similarities   Differences   · Ease  of  design:  pre-existing   · Use  of  the  theoretical  checklist.   graphical  elements  and  creative   o Theoretical  Design:  used   processes  were  extracted  from  its   before  its  creation.   previous  designs  (didn't  have  to   o Content-Theoretical   "start  from  scratch").     Design:  used  as  a  guide  to   · Majority  of  design  decisions  were   "touch  up"  after  its   made  when  creating  computer- creation.   illustrated  design.     · Theoretical  Design  heavily  relied   · Landscape  orientation.   on  the  Intuitive  Design  for   creative  inspiration.   · Raw  data:  Content-Theoretical   was  driven  by  quantitative   numbers  whereas  Theoretical   had  a  balance  of  both  quantitative   and  qualitative.        Table  #9:  Similarities  and  Differences  Between  the  First  and  Second  Theoretical   Design  Processes              

  

44  

Investigator's  Reflection  
   When  the  three  designs  are  placed  side-by-side,  it  is  evident  that  the  Content-

Theoretical  Design  (Design  #3)  features  an  evolved,  complex  graphic.  The   quantitative  richness  of  the  data  and  graphics  allows  for  Design  #3  to  emphasize  the   importance  of  obtaining  quality  content  in  order  to  create  a  robust  design,  which   can  clear  and  concisely  visually  communicate  a  range  of  quantitative  data.  The   comparison  between  the  previous  designs  also  highlights  how  each  act  as  an   "extension"  from  one  to  the  other  by  extracting  stronger  graphical  elements  and   colour  schemes  from  prior  "draft."  Figure  #7  below  illustrates  how  each  design   becomes  an  inspiration  for  the  next.      Design  #1   Intuitive  Design   Draft  #1     

     

Design  #2   Theoretical  Design   Draft  #2        

     

Design  #3   Content-Theoretical  Design   (with  new,  additional  info.)   Draft  #3     

Figure  #7:  Evolution  of  Designs      As  Design  #3  captures  the  strengths  of  the  two  previous  designs,  the   investigator  felt  that  it  served  as  the  best  representation  of  Dr.  Cusimano's  research   and  empirical  evidence.  The  information  graphic  features  hard  statistical   information  to  inform  hockey  parents  of  youth  bodychecking  by  "showing"  as   opposed  to  "telling."  Therefore,  the  later  addition  of  more  detailed  and  specific  data   allowed  for  an  improved  and  more  informative  design  altogether.  It  created  a   complex  interplay  between  the  graphical  and  textual  elements  in  an  effort  to   leverage  the  strengths  of  an  information  graphic  as  a  communication  device.  

  

45  

Overall,  the  experimental  design  methodology  and  execution  successfully  completed   the  intended  goal  of  applying  Dondis  and  Gestalt  theoretical  elements  to  create  a   comprehensive  and  finalized  information  graphic  encapsulating  Dr.  Cusimano's   research  through  the  creation  of  the  Content-Theoretical  Design.     

Dr.  Cusimano's  Interview  and  Investigator  Observations  
   For  the  purposes  of  this  experimental  research  project,  Dr.  Cusimano  acted  

as  client  for  the  design  process.  The,  the  investigator  decided  to  steer  from  my   question-heavy  interview  agenda  to  allow  for  more  casual  conversion  that   encouraged  him  to  freely  express  his  feelings  and  thoughts  of  each  design.  In   addition  to  being  a  neurosurgeon  at  St.  Michael's  Hospital,  Dr.  Cusimano  is  also  a   professor  for  the  Department  of  Surgery  for  the  University  of  Toronto.  His  teaching   background  was  strongly  evident  in  his  critiques  of  the  design;  he  identified  and   clearly  discussed  the  strengths,  weakness  and  possible  improvements  through  a   natural  progression  with  only  a  few  questions  of  clarification  from  the  investigator.     The  designs  were  presented  to  Dr.  Cusimano  one-by-one,  starting  from   Design  #1  to  Design  #3.  Before  commenting  on  each,  Dr.  Cusimano  took  a  few   minutes  to  allow  his  eye  to  wander  around  respective  design  elements.  The   investigator  felt  that  this  was  effective  in  allow  him  to  clearly  articulate  his  initial   reactions  before  providing  his  critiques.  His  comments  in  regards  to  each  of  the   designs  can  be  seen  in  the  chart  below.   Design  #1:     Intuitive  Design   Comments   · · The  first  design  presented  to  him.   He  claims  to  "like  it"  and  it  "grabs  the   information...adds  to  the  written  content".  

  

46  

(Design  found  in   Appendix  #1)     

·

· ·

Design  #2:     Theoretical  Design   Comments   (Design  found  in   Appendix  #2)     

· ·

· · · ·

·

Design  #3:     Content-Theoretical   Design  Comments   (Design  found  in   Appendix  #3)     

· ·

· ·

He's  concerned  about  the  placement  of  the  52.5%   graphics  as  it  might  be  misrepresenting  the   information  (eludes  to  the  percentage  raising  due  to   the  arrows).   o However,  his  concerns  subsided  when  he   read  the  supplementary  information  found   below  the  percentage  text.     Approves  of  the  graphics  chosen  (hockey  player)   and  choice  of  information.   Likes  that  there  is  a  clear  direction  for  the  eye  to   follow  (start  from  the  bottom,  anchored  by  the   youth  hockey  player  graphic,  then  guided  by  the   arrows  to  the  relevant  information  above  leading  to   the  impactful  statistic,  situated  at  the  top).   The  first  design  was  taken  away  and  the  second   design  was  presented  to  him.   With  the  realization  that  the  second  design   contained  the  same  information  with  one  added   (youth  hockey-player)  graphic,  there  seem  to  be  less   of  an  impact/surprise.   He  claims  that  the  "visual  capture  the  eye  as  well".   Likes  that  it  contained  the  same  important,  relevant   information  as  the  first  design.     Concerned  about  the  orientation  of  the  design  ­  feels   that  the  horizontal  orientation  is  miscued.     Compares  the  two  design  and  felt  that  #1  was  more   "clear  and  concise"  as  it  "flowed  a  lot  better"  ­  the   viewer's  eyes  were  allowed  to  make  their  natural   progression  through  the  graphic  (from  bottom  to   top).  Claims  that  #2  was  "more  confusing  than  the   first  one".   Was  concerned  about  the  positioning  of  the  arrows,   felt  that  they  (negatively)  influenced  where  the   viewer's  eyes  were  attracted  to  and  there  is  no   smooth  progression  to  them  to  easily  glide  through   the  design's  information.   The  second  design  was  taken  away  and  the  third   design  was  presented  to  him.   As  he  glazed  at  the  graphic  longer  than  the  previous   designs,  looked  more  impressed  and  initially   responded  with  "interesting".   He  described  it  as  "novel"  and  "  chalk-full  of  data"  by   the  illustration  of  increasing  injuries.   One  aspect  that  he  was  concerned  about  was  the   presentation  of  the  odds  ratio  of  the  data.  

  

47  

·

o He  feels  that  the  information  can  be   incorporated;  it  would  need  to  be  further   tailored  to  be  used  for  a  scientific  audience  ­   but  can  be  used  during  one  of  his   presentations,  as  long  as  he  is  present  for   further  clarification.     o From  a  scientific  perspective,  the  graphic  can   be  considered  "not  accurate",  additional   information  is  required  to  demonstrate   relevance.     o Thought  that  the  table  (found  in  his  article     However,  overall,  he  feels  that  a  lay  audience  can   "understand  it  quite  well".    

   Table  #10:  Summary  of  Dr.  Cusimano's  Comments  of  the  Three  Respective  Designs   During  Our  Interview        

Dr.  Cusimano's  Top  Selection(s)  
   Once  Dr.  Cusimano  was  finished  critiquing  the  third  design,  all  three  graphics  

were  laid  out  in  front  of  him  and  he  was  asked  to  choose  one  design  which  best   represented  his  work.  Table  #11  outlines  his  top  selection(s).      Design  #1:     Intuitive  Design     (Found  in  Appendix  #1)      Rationale:   · Made  an  impact  visually.   · Graphical  elements  were  compact  (contained   inside  rectangle).   · There  was  a  clear  direction  for  the  eyes  to   follow  (from  bottom,  starting  from  the  hockey   player,  led  by  the  arrows  to  the  top  where  the   important  information  was  found),   · Gets  the  point  across  well  ­  good  for  press   release  meant  for  the  general  public.   · Contains  overarching  data  that  encompasses   research  well.   · Vertical  layout  makes  it  neat  and  compact.   · Can  be  easily  understood  by  lay  audience.   Design  #3:     Rationale:   Content-Theoretical  Design     · Contains  lots  of  information.   (Found  in  Appendix  #3)   · Interesting  to  look  at  ­  makes  information      come  to  life,  encourages  the  viewer  to  stop  and      48  

·

·

   Table  #11:  Dr.  Cusimano's  Top  Pick(s)  and  Rational  for  Decisions         Dr.  Cusimano's  Intuitive  Design  surprised  the  investigator,  as  it  was  "Draft   #1"  of  the  three  designs.  However,  the  rationale  behind  his  decision  was  logical  after   closer  inspection  of  the  Intuitive  Design's  flow  of  information.  The  hockey  player   graphic  pulls  the  reader  to  start  from  the  bottom  of  the  portrait-oriented   information  graphics,  the  arrows  then  leads  them  to  important  clusters  of   information  near  the  top  then  eventually  highest  point  to  the  design's  main  statistic   (52.5%),  which  seeks  to  generate  an  immediate  impact.  When  evaluating  the   designs  prior  to  Dr.  Cusimano's  interview,  the  investigator  lost  sight  of  the   Theoretical  Design's  weakness  due  to  ease  of  creation.  The  theoretical  checklists   provided  a  premature  feeling  of  "security",  as  the  thoughts  of  incorporating   theoretical  design  elements  into  the  design  were  though  to  instantly  make  the   graphic  "visually  work."  Thus,  the  investigator  was  unable  to  fully  analyze  the   reader-friendliness  of  its  graphical  layout  from  a  practical  perspective.     Dr.  Cusimano's  choice  of  the  Intuitive  Design  also  emphasized  the   importance  of  simplicity  when  delivering  information  to  a  lay  audience.  He   mentioned  a  significant  attribute  of  information  graphics  that  the  investigator  did  

·

look/read  further.     "More  elaborate"  compared  to  the  two  other   designs,  viewer  needs  more  time  to  digest  the   information.   Cannot  standalone  with  a  scientific  audience,   good  to  use  in  a  lecture  (incorporated  into  a   Powerpoint  presentation)  where  an   explanation  can  be  provided  to  support   conclusions.   Can  be  easily  understood  by  lay  audience.  

  

49  

not  personally  consider  prior  to  their  interview  time.  Information  graphics,   especially  the  Content-Theoretical  Design,  contain  a  wealth  of  information  ­  their   complexity  may  take  the  designer  longer  to  design  and  subsequently  take  the  reader   longer  to  digest.  Visual  literacy  does  speed  the  "digestion"  process  as  it  displays   important  concepts  and  content  through  a  visual  narrative.  However,  information   design  alone  does  not  take  away  from  the  complexity  of  the  raw  data  and  readers   still  need  to  spend  time  with  the  graphic  to  appropriately  comprehend  its  intended   message.   Following  the  interview,  the  investigator  asked,  "Which  design  best   represents  your  research  to  a  lay  audience,  specifically  hockey  parents?"     Dr.  Cusimano  gave  rationale  to  his  top  two  choices  being  the  Intuitive  (Design  #1)   and  Content-Theoretical  (Design  #3)  were  both  reader-friendly  from  a  lay  audience   perspective  and  emphasized  that  his  research  was  clearly  communicated  in  an  easy- to-understand  manner.  Hypothetically,  hockey  parents  who  come  across  these   information  graphics,  if/when  released  by  Dr.  Cusimano,  will  naturally  be  interested   in  research  relating  to  potential  risk  in  their  own  child(ren)'s  health.  Therefore,   working  to  gain  parents'  understanding  of  the  research  and  creating  an  impact  as   opposed  to  attracting  their  attention  should  be  the  primarily  focus.  According  to     Dr.  Cusimano,  both  the  Intuitive  and  Content-Theoretical  Designs  (Designs  #1  &  #3)   were  able  to  achieve  this  goal.             

  

50  

An  Area  That  Can  Be  Improved  Upon:  Communication      Ironically,  there  was  little  communication  between  the  investigator  and  

(design)  client  during  the  experimental  process  with  the  exception  of  the  initial   meeting  and  blind-testing  interview.  The  investigator  was  simply  given  Dr.   Cusimano's  research  paper,  left  to  find  the  important  information  through  a   grounded  theory  analysis.  During  their  interview,  Dr.  Cusimano  had  mentioned   areas  where  information  was  lacking  and/or  alternative  research  could  be   incorporated.  If  Dr.  Cusimano  had  provided  the  investigator  with  the  specific   information  he  felt  should  be  incorporated  prior  to  the  designs,  she  would  be  able  to   focus  her  immediate  attention  to  creating  its  visual  representation  as  opposed  to   "trying"  to  find  this  dataset.  Thus,  clearer  lines  of  communications  between  the  two   parties  provide  the  designer  a  strong  direction  to  follow  to  efficiently  creating  a   design  that  best  suits  the  purposes  of  the  information  graphic.          

Conclusion  
Post  Evaluation  of  Experimental  Design  
   Though  the  experimental  design  successfully  incorporated  theoretical  best  

practices  into  its  design  processes,  its  foundational  work  can  be  expanded  upon.  The   investigator  suggests  three  different  directions  of  interest  this  project  can  be  tested   to  further  its  analysis  and  findings.  The  first  is  to  experiment  with  data-driven   parameters,  creating  another  three  information  graphics  through:   1. quantitative  and  qualitative  datasets  (combination);   2. quantitative  (only)  datasets;   3. and  qualitative  (only)  datasets.  

     

51  

This  will  further  investigate  the  type  of  information  that  best  utilizes  the   information  graphics  medium.  The  investigator's  second  suggestion  is  to  analyze  the   design  considerations  needed  when  disseminating  information  graphics  to  different   cultures.  This  research  will  explore  the  layout  configurations  needed  to  suit  diverse   cultures  whilst  attempting  to  convey  the  same  message.  Finally,  her  third  suggestion   is  to  assemble  a  focus  group,  composed  of  the  target  audience  (hockey  parents)  and   present  them  with  the  three  information  graphic  designs.  This  will  allow  the   investigator  to  gain  first-hand  knowledge  of  their  immediate  (and  transparent)   impact  of  the  information  graphics.  A  focus  group  facilitates  idea  generation  where   questions  regarding  the  designs'  strengths,  weaknesses  and  possible  areas  of   improvements  can  be  asked  through  synchronous  communication  and  face-to-face   conversations.       

Concluding  Thoughts  
In  this  paper,  an  investigation  of  the  design  of  information  graphics  was   conducted  in  order  to  deliver  medical  research  to  a  non-expert  audience,  namely   parents  of  children  who  play  hockey. The  use  of  information  graphics  may  be   considered  a  relatively  new  field  and  draws  underlying  principles  from  visual   language  theory  and  Gestalt  psychology;  however,  it  draws  its  underlying  principles   from  a  number  of  disciplines,  emphasizing  the  versatile  use  of  the  medium.  Using  a   linear,  practice-based  methodology,  the  investigator  successfully  completed  and   tested  three  information  graphic  compositions,  whereby  intuitive  decision-making   and  theoretical  principles  came  into  play.  Design  based  on  intuition  encapsulated  

  

52  

the  initial  design  phase  and  created  a  preliminary  "mock-up"  of  the  design  where   elements  were  then  transferred  to  the  theoretical  compositions.  With  additional   information  gleaned  from  the  medical  article,  a  more  robust  and  complete  design   evolved  to  form  the  final  information  graphic  most  appropriate  for  the  selected   target  audience.  It  was  observed  that  skills  required  by  a  successful  designer   included  adaptable  conceptualization  of  ideas;  use  of  a  variety  of  visual  elements;   flexible  problem-solving  approaches.   Overall,  the  purpose  of  an  information  graphic  is  to  organize  a  considerable   amount  of  information  in  a  visually  appetizing  manner;  thus,  its  execution  needs  to   be  carried  out  in  an  equally  strategic  approach.  This  experimental  design   highlighted  the  importance  of  intuition  in  spearheading  the  creation  of  a  design  and   the  use  of  theoretical  concepts  to  amplify  clear  message  delivery  and  impact.  The   intuitive  and  theoretically  design  processes  are  interwoven,  their  borders  often   overlap  and  one  only  strengthens  the  other.  Through  this  MRP,  the  use  of  visual   language  theory,  such  as  Dondis  and  Gestalt  psychology,  was  explored  and  evidence   gleaned  from  the  research  demonstrated  that  by  utilizing  best  practice  theory   designers  could  improve  or  stimulate  intuitive  creativity.  The  balance  between   intuition  and  application  of  theory  is  often  left  to  the  designer,  but  as  the   investigator  learnt  throughout  this  experimental  design,  incorporating  both   approaches  can  result  in  more  comprehensive  visual  solutions  and  strategically   speak  to  specific  target  audiences.           

  

53  

Works  Cited  
   "The  Gestalt  Principles."  SFCC  Graphic  Design.  Web.  21  July  2011.     <http://graphicdesign.spokanefalls.edu/tutorials/process/gestaltprinciples/   gestaltprinc.htm>.   Bennett,  Audrey.  Design  Studies:  Theory  and  Research  in  Graphic  Design.  New  York:     Princeton  Architectural,  2006.  Print.   Cheng,  Donghong.  Communicating  Science  in  Social  Contexts:  New  Models,  New     Practices.  [Dordrecht]:  Springer,  2008.  Print.   Crowe,  Norman,  and  Paul  Laseau.  Visual  Notes  for  Architects  and  Designers.  New     York:  Wiley  &  Sons,  1984.  Print.   Cusimano,  Michael  D.,  et  al.  "Effect  of  Bodychecking  on  Rate  Injuries  among  Minor     Hockey  Players."  Open  Medicine  5.1  (2011):  57-63.  Print.   Dorst,  Kees.  Understanding  Design:  [175  Reflections  on  Being  a  Desinger].     Amsterdam:  BIS,  2006.  Print.   Evans,  Poppy,  and  Mark  Thomas.  Exploring  the  Elements  of  Design.  Clifton  Park,  NY:     Thomson/Delmar  Learning,  2008.  Print.   Fahnestock,  Jeanne.  "Accommodating  Science:  The  Rhetorical  Life  of  Scientific     Facts."  Written  Communication  1986  3.3:  275-96.     Frascara,  Jorge.  Designing  Effective  Communications:  Creating  Contexts  for  Clarity     and  Meaning.  New  York:  Allworth,  2006.  Print.   Fraser,  Iain,  and  Rod  Henmi.  Envisioning  Architecture:  an  Analysis  of  Drawing.  New     York:  Wiley,  1994.  Print.   George-Palilonis,  Jennifer.  A  Practical  Guide  to  Graphics  Reporting:  Information    

  

54  

Graphics  for  Print,  Web  &  Broadcast.  Oxford:  Elsevier/Focal,  2006.  Print.   Gregory,  Jane,  and  Steve  Miller.  Science  in  Public:  Communication,  Culture,  and       Credibility.  Cambridge,  MA:  Perseus  Pub.,  2000.  Print.   Hansen,  Yvonne  M.  "Graphic  Tools  for  Thinking,  Planning,  and  Problem  Solving."     Information  Design.  Massachusetts:  MIT,  2000.  193-220.  Print.   Hembree,  Ryan.  The  Complete  Graphic  Designer:  a  Guide  to  Understanding  Graphics     and  Visual  Communication.  Gloucester,  MA:  Rockport,  2006.  Print.   Horn,  Robert  E.  "Information  Design:  The  Emergence  of  a  New  Profession."     Information  Design.  Massachusetts:  MIT,  2000.  15-34.  Print.   King,  D.  Brett.,  and  Michael  Wertheimer.  Max  Wertheimer  and  Gestalt  Theory.  New     Brunswick:  Transaction,  2007.  Print.   Lawson,  Bryan.  How  Designers  Think:  the  Design  Process  Demystified.  Oxford:     Elsevier/Architectural,  2006.  Print.   Lester,  Paul  Martin.  Visual  Communication:  Images  With  Messages.  California:     Thomson  Learning,  2000.  Print.   Newton,  Julianne  H.  "Visual  Ethics  Theory."  Handbook  of  Visual  Communication:     Theory,  Methods,  and  Media.  New  Jersey:  Lawrence  Erlbaum,  2005.  429-44.     Print.   Passini,  Romedi.  "Sign-Posting  Information  Design."  Information  Design.     Massachusetts:  MIT,  2000.  83-98.  Print.   Pettersson,  Rune.  Visual  Information.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Educational  Technology     Publications,  1993.  Print.   Ridder,  Jeroen  De.  Reconstructing  Design,  Explaining  Artifacts.  Nederland:  Delft    

  

55  

University,  2007.  Print.   Smith,  Jennifer,  and  AGI  Creative  Team.  Adobe  Illustrator  CS5.  Hoboken,  NJ:  Wiley,     2010.  Print.   Smith,  Kendra  Schank.  Architects'  Sketches:  Dialogue  and  Design.  Amsterdam:     Architectural/Elsevier,  2008.  Print.   St.  Michael's  Hospital.  Public  Relations.  Brain  Injuries  Rise  Sharply  in  Minor  Hockey     after  Bodychecking  Rules  Relaxed:  Study.  What's  New.  15  Mar.  2011.  Web.     <http://www.stmichaelshospital.com/media/detail.php?source=media_rele   ases/2011/20110315_mr>.   Tizon,  Natalia.  Art  of  Sketching.  New  York,  NY:  Sterling  Pub.,  2007.  Print.   Ware,  Colin.  Information  Visualization:  Perception  for  Design.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier,     2009.  Print.   Weinstein,  Neil  D.,  and  Peter  M.  Sandman.  "Some  Criteria  for  Evaluating  Risk     Messages."  Risk  Analysis  13.1  (1993):  103-14.  Print.                                                     

  

56  

Appendix  #1  
Intuitive  Design   (Design  #1)           

                                                                                                                                                 

  

  

57  

Appendix  #2  
Theoretical  Design   (Design  #2)                 

              
   58  

  

Appendix  #3  
Content-Theoretical  Design   (Design  #3)                                                                                                                          

     
  

59  

Appendix  #4  
Operationalized  Concepts  for  Open  Medicine  Article  &  St.  Michael's  Press  Release     
Concept   Noun   To  streamline  the  coding   process,  only  the  first  noun  of   each  sentence  will  be   analyzed.     Type  &  Example   Using  the  primary  /secondary  research   findings  as  the  noun.      Examples:   "The  remaining  8552  hockey-related  injuries   represented..."   "Manual  coding  of  10%  random  sample  of   hockey  related  injuries  (n=855)  revealed..."   (Open  Medicine  Article)   Plural  pronouns  to  represent  Dr.  Cusimano  and   his  team.      Examples:   "We  excluded..."   "We  could  not  determine..."   (Open  Medicine  Article)   "The  team  examined..."   (Press  Release)   Drawing  upon  additional,  related  academic   work  that  have  conducted  similar  studies.      Examples:   "In  a  previous  study..."   "The  authors  of  another  study  found..."   "Willer  and  colleagues  found..."   (Open  Medicine  Article)   The  use  of  pejorative  language  to  persuade  the   reader  of  their  stance.      Examples:   "From  these  studies,  it  is  clear  that  learning  to   bodycheck  at  a  younger  age  does  not  reduce  a   player's  odds  of  injury..."   "Such  traumatic  brain  injuries  should  be   priority  concern  for..."     (Open  Medicine  Article)   The  use  of  known  or  relatable   examples/prominent  figures  to  connect  the   reader  with  the  information  presented.      Example:   "...Pittsburgh  Penquins  captain  Sidney  Crosby   and  Montreal  Canadiens'  Max  Pacioretty   suffered  serious  concussions..."   (Press  Release)   Code   Highlighted  

  

Highlighted  

  

Underlined  

Evaluative/Judgmental   Language  

Highlighted  

Relatable  Association  

Highlighted     

  

60  


