                  SEARCHING  FOR  SCHREINER:   A  DETAILED  INVESTIGATION  OF  THE  SCHREINER  JEWELRY  COMPANY     (1932-1975)         by      Eve  Townsend   B.A.  Art  and  Art  History,  University  of  Saskatchewan,  Saskatoon,  Saskatchewan,   Canada,  2006         A  Major  Research  Project      presented  to  Ryerson  University         in  partial  fulfillment  of  the      requirements  for  the  degree  of      Master  of  Arts      in  the  Program  of      Fashion            Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada,  2014      ©Eve  Townsend  2014           

AUTHOR'S  DECLARATION  FOR  ELECTRONIC  SUBMISSION  OF  A  MRP      I  hereby  declare  that  I  am  the  sole  author  of  this  MRP.  This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  MRP,   including  any  required  final  revisions.   I  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  lend  this  MRP  to  other  institutions  or  individuals   for  the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  further  authorize  Ryerson  University  to  reproduce  this  MRP  by  photocopying  or  by   other  means,  in  total  or  in  part,  at  the  request  of  other  institutions  or  individuals  for   the  purpose  of  scholarly  research.   I  understand  that  my  MRP  may  be  made  electronically  available  to  the  public.        

  

ii  

ABSTRACT         SEARCHING  FOR  SCHREINER:  A  DETAILED  INVESTIGATION  OF  THE  SCHREINER   JEWELRY  COMPANY  (1932-1975)      Master  of  Arts,  2014   Eve  Townsend     Fashion,  Ryerson  University         Today   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company   is   relatively   unknown.   However,   it   was   arguably   one   of   the   most   important   designers   and   producers   of   costume   jewelry   during   the   twentieth-century.   This   MRP   positions   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company   within  the  framework  of  the  production  and  consumption  of  women's  fashions  from   the   1930s   through   to   the   1970s.   In   doing   so,   it   offers   insight   into   both   the  historical   and  material  importance  of  this  business  and  its  products,  many  of  which  are  extant   and   held   in   costume   jewelry   collections   today.   Archival   research,   literary   sources,   artifacts,   and   excerpts   from   personal   interviews   have   been   used   to   provide   a   full   picture  of  this  business.  This  research  project  validates  the  importance  of  studying   costume   jewelry   through   an   academic   lens   and   further   establishes   the   need   for   increased  research  capacity  in  this  area.            

  

iii  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS         First   and   foremost   I   would   like   to   extend   my   overwhelming   gratitude   to   Terry   Schreiner   Albert   and   her   son   Stephen,   who   generously   welcomed   me   into   their   home,   sharing   in-depth   knowledge   about   the   Schreiner   company   and   so   patiently   answering   all   of   my   questions.   Without   them,   this   project   would   not   have   been   possible.   I   am   indebted   to   Carole   Tanenbaum   whose   vast   collection   of   Schreiner   jewelry  left  me  wanting  to  find  out  everything  I  could  about  this   company.   I  likely   would  not  have  pursued  a  degree  in  fashion,  nor  would  I  have  chosen  this  project,   had  I  not  spent  time  working  for  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection.     Sincere   thanks   to   my   graduate   supervisor,   Kimberly   Wahl,   who   carefully   guided   me   through   this   process   and   approached   this   project   with   genuine   enthusiasm.     I   would   like   to   thank   Chris   Curreri,   Greg   Sullivan,   and   Rob   Townsend   for   their  diverse  expertise  in  photography,  law,  and  finance.     I  also  thank  my  parents,  Beverly  and  Hugh  Townsend,  who  have  provided  me   with  constant  support,  guidance,  and  even  thoughtful  edits.     And   finally   thank   you   to   my   partner,   Curtis   Amisich,   who   now   knows   more   about  Schreiner  jewelry  than  he  ever  thought  possible.               

  

iv  

CONTENTS         Abstract                                 Acknowledgements                              List  of  Illustrations                                 Introduction                                 Chapter  1:   The  Early  Years--Henry  Schreiner's  Parlay  into  Costume  Jewelry      Chapter  2:   A  Dynamic  Duo--Theresa  and  Ambros  Join  the  Company         Chapter  3:   Production  to  Perfection--How  a  Schreiner  Piece  is  Made         Conclusion                                 Illustrations                                 Bibliography                                   

iii   iv   vi   1   9   37   63   75   78   130  

  

v  

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS           1.1:  Portrait  of  Henry  Schreiner,  oil  on  canvas,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,      New  York.  9.      1.2:  567  East  22nd  Street,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  digital  image,  online  real  estate  listing,      http://www.loopnet.com/Listing/16714300/567-E-22nd-Street-Brooklyn-    NY/.  12.      1.3:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  MS  (Mathilda  Schreiner)  Initial  Brooch,  1930,  silver  and      marcasite,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  14.      1.4:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Marcasite  Pendant,  1930,  silver  and  marcasite,  Courtesy  of      the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  14.      1.5:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Millefiori  Button,  1930,  wood,  metal,  and  glass,  Courtesy  of      the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  14.      1.6:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Belt  Buckle  with  Clear  Rhinestone  Accents,  1930,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  15.      1.7:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Oval  Belt  Buckle  with  Metallic  Stones,  1930,  metal,  Courtesy  of      the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  15.      1.8:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Belt  Buckle  with  Copper  Colored  Metallic  Stones,  1930,  metal,      Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  15.      1.9:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Silver  Toned  Belt  Buckle  with  Large  Purple  Cabochons,  1930,      metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  15.      1.10:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Gold  Toned  Belt  Buckle  with  Large  Red  Speckled  Cabochons,      1930,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  15.      1.11:  Life,  September  8,  1952,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the      Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  22.      1.12:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pauline  Trigère  Grey  Pearl  Bib  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  23.      1.13:  Adele  Simpson  Advertisement,  1954,  photograph  of  original  advertisement,      Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  25.      1.14:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Rhinestone  and  Grey  Pearl  Wire  Brooch,  1940,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  26.         vi  

1.15:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  and  Emerald  Colored  Rhinestone  Brooch,  1940,  metal      and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  26.      1.16:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  and  Aqua  Colored  Rhinestone  Brooch  with  Pearl      Accents,  1940-50,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New      York.  26.      1.17:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pearl  and  Clear  Rhinestone  Poodle  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  26.      1.18:  I.  Magnin  &  Co.,  Originala  Coat  with  Schreiner  Poodle  Brooch,  September  15,      1956,  photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner      collection,  New  York.  26.      1.19:  Norman  Norell,  Evening  Ensemble  with  Built-in  Jewels,  1968,  Silk,  fur,  glass,  and      metal,  Collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York,  NY,  U.S.A.  Gift      of  Mrs.  Lyn  Revson,  Accession  number:  1975,  1975.53.54  a,  b.  32.         1.20:  French  Import,  Blue,  Green,  and  Clear  Rhinestone  Necklace,  1945-50,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  33.      1.21:  French  Import,  Pearl,  Clear  and  Red  Rhinestone  Necklace,  1945-50,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  33.      1.22:  French  Import,  Clear  and  Red  Rhinestone  Brooch,  1945-50,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  33,  44.      1.23:  French  Import,  Back  of  Clear  and  Red  Rhinestone  Brooch,  1945-50,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  33.      1.24:  Christian  Dior,  Dior  Holiday  Advertisement  featuring  Jewelry  made  by  Schreiner,      1950s,  photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner      collection,  New  York.  34.      1.25:  Vogue,  June  1952,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner      collection,  New  York.  35.      1.26:  Vogue,  September  1965,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the      Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  35.      1.27:  Glamour,  November  1962,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the      Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  35.      1.28:  Vogue,  May  19,  1952,  photograph  of  original  editorial,  Courtesy  of  the      Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  35.         vii  

1.29:  Harper's  Bazaar,  November  1,  1954,  photograph  of  original  editorial,  Courtesy      of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  35.      2.1:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Collection  of  Figural  Brooches,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  39.      2.2:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Collection  of  Flower  Brooches,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  39.      2.3:  Bonwit  Teller,  Schreiner  Jewelry  featured  in  Bonwit  Teller  Advertisement,  1950-    60,  photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner      collection,  New  York.  39,  49.      2.4:  Schreiner  Family  Home,  2012,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  family,  New  York.  40.      2.5:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Purple,  Pearl,  and  Turquoise  Colored  Brooch,  1960,  glass,      porcelain,  and  metal,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,      Toronto.  44.      2.6:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Aqua  and  Jonquil  Colored  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44.      2.7:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Amber  Colored  Bracelet,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of      the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44.      2.8:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Cognac  and  Turquoise  Colored  Bracelet,  1960,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44,  57.      2.9:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  Crystal  Earrings,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the      Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44.      2.10:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  Crystal  Hoop  Earrings,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy      of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44,  57.      2.11:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Multi  Colored  Bib  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy      of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44,  57,  74.      2.12:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pearl,  Clear  Crystal,  and  Pink  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44.      2.13:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Lucite  Bubble  Brooches,  1970,  metal,  glass,  and  Lucite,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  44.      2.14:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Jadeite  and  Coral  Colored  Ruffle  Pin,  1950-60,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  45.         viii  

2.15:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Cognac  and  Speckled  Turquoise  Colored  Ruffle  Pin,  1950-60,      metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,      Toronto.  45.      2.16:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Multi  Colored  Comma  Shadow  Box  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  45.      2.17:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Jadeite,  Jonquil,  and  Coral  Colored  Shadow  Box  Brooch,  1950,      metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,      Toronto.  45.      2.18:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Lapis  and  Fuchsia  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of      the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  45.      2.19:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Green  and  Jonquil  Brooch,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  45.      2.20:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Profile  of  Green  and  Jonquil  Brooch,  1950-60,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  45.      2.21:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Carnelian,  Coral,  and  Jonquil  Brooch,  1950-60,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  45.      2.22:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Back  of  Lapis  and  Fuchsia  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  45.      2.23:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pink  Wire  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the      Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  46.      2.24:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Multi  Colored  Bib  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy      of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  46.      2.25:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Brooches  featuring  Large  Transparent  Stones,  1960,  metal      and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  49.      2.26:  Editorial  featuring  Pastel  Brooch  and  Earrings  by  Schreiner,  1960s,  photograph      of  original  editorial,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  50.      2.27:  Sakowitz,  Schreiner  Jewelry  featured  in  Sakowitz  Advertisement,  1950-60,      photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,        New  York.  49,  51.      2.28:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  "I  Like  Ike"  Heart  Brooch,  1956,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of      the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  52,  57.     

  

ix  

2.29:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  "I  Like  Ike"  Oval  Shadow  Box  Brooch,  1956,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  52.      2.30:  Thank  you  note  from  Mrs.  Eisenhower,  October  22,  1956,  paper  and  ink,      Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  52.      2.31:  Envelope  from  Mrs.  Eisenhower,  October  22,  1956,  paper  and  ink,  Courtesy  of      the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  52.      2.32:  Stanziola,  Mrs.  Eisenhower  Wearing  Schreiner  "I  Like  Ike"  Heart  Brooch,  1956-    57,  photograph  of  original  newspaper  clipping,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner      collection,  New  York.  52.      2.33:  I.Miller,  Advertisement  featuring  Schreiner  Shoe  Embellishments,  1950-60,      photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,      New  York.  49,  53.      2.34:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Jeweled  Belt  with  Extension,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy      of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  54.      2.35:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Lucite  Bubble  Necklace,  1970,  metal  and  Lucite,  Courtesy  of      the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  58.      2.36:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Stretch  Belt  with  Purple  Cabochon  Buckle,  1970,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  59.      2.37:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Stretch  Belt  with  Multi  Colored  Buckle,  1970,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  59.      3.1:  Ambros  Reading  the  Paper  beside  Soldering  Torch,  1959,  photograph  of  original      black  and  white  photograph,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      65.      3.2:  Men  at  Work  Soldering,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white      photograph,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  65.      3.3:  Virginia  Moshy  Seated  at  Her  Desk,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white      photograph,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  65.      3.4:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Factory  Sample,  1950-60,  metal,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner      collection,  New  York.  65.      3.5:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Factory  Sample  filled  with  Nickel,  1950-60,  metal,  Courtesy  of      the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  65.     

  

x  

3.6:  Setting  Block,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white  photograph,      Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  66.      3.7:  Plating  Room,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white  photograph,      Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  68.      3.8:  Women  Setting  Stones,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white      photograph,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  69.      3.9:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Small  Ruffle  Brooches,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the      Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  70.      3.10:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Aqua  and  Blue  Brooch  with  Inverted  Stones,  1960,  metal  and      glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  71.      3.11:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Hook-and-eye  Construction  and  Pendant  Hook,  1950-60,      metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,      Toronto.  72.      3.12:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Crimped  Setting,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the      Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  73.      3.13:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Brooch  with  Dogtooth  Prongs,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  73.      3.14:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  Donut  Earring  Back  with  Schreiner  Signature,  1950-60,      metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,      Toronto.  73-74.        3.15:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  1940-50  Schreiner  Cartouche,  1940-50,  metal,  Courtesy  of      the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  74.      3.16:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  1950-70  Schreiner  Cartouche,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  74.      3.17:  Schreiner  Jewelry,  1950-70  Schreiner  Cartouche,  1950,  metal  and  glass,      Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  74.      3.18:  Dita  Von  Teese  wearing  Schreiner  Earrings  at  the  Launch  of  My  Cointreau  Travel      Essentials  in  Milan,  October  11,  2011,  http://www.justjared.com/photo-g    gallery/2588801/dita-von-teese-cointreau-launch-milan-10/.  76.        3.19:  Gabor  Jurina,  Fashion,  Jessica  Paré  wearing  Schreiner  Earrings,  March  2014,      173.  76.      3.20:  Getty  Images,  Michelle  Obama  wearing  Schreiner  Brooch,  2010.  76.          xi  

3.21:  Louis  Vuitton,  Ruffle  Pin,  Harper's  Bazaar,  2008,      http://www.harpersbazaar.com/fashion/fashionarticles/hbz0108fp026#sli    e-8.  76.      3.22:  Jarin  Kasi,  Ruffle  Pin,  2000s,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  Eve  Townsend,      Toronto.  76.  

  

xii  

INTRODUCTION         To  serious  collectors  and  dealers  of  vintage  costume  jewelry,  the  name  Schreiner  is   synonymous   with   high   quality   materials,   exceptional   design,   and   unusual   color   combinations.   Pieces   produced   by   this   company   epitomize   the   essence   of   great   costume   jewelry   as   fashionable   accessories--bold,   inventive,   colorful,   and   often   oversized  in  scale.  However,  to  the  general  public,  including  the  fashion  conscious,   the  Schreiner  Jewelry  Company  is  relatively  unknown.  While  it  was  arguably  one  of   the   most   important   designers   and   producers   of   costume   jewelry   during   the   twentieth-century,  today  little  information  exists  about  this  business.     For  more  than  forty  years  this  small,  family  run  company  created  thousands   of   pieces   of   handmade   costume   jewelry   and   accessories,   which   were   available   for   purchase   across   the   United   States.   Originally,   Schreiner   designs   were   sold   exclusively   to   the   fine   coat   companies   and   high-end   ready-to-wear   designers   who   wished   to   accessorize   both   their   runway   looks   and   in   store   collections   with   rhinestone   embellishments.   However,   after   the   Second   World   War,   Schreiner   pieces   began   to   be   sold   in   various   specialty   shops   and   department   stores.   This   in   turn   made   the   accessibility   of   Schreiner   jewelry   far   more   democratic.   While   women   of   modest   means   would   certainly   not   have   been   able   to   afford   a   designer   gown   with   accompanying   Schreiner   bracelets,   they   could   have   obtained   a   small   Schreiner   brooch   from   the   accessories   counter   at   one   of   the   large   American   department   stores.   As   such,   Schreiner   jewelry   had   the   ability   to   influence   both   designer   and   mainstream  fashions.    

  

1  

Opened  by  founder  Henry  Schreiner  in  1932,  the  company  flourished  during   the   early   1940s,   mirroring   the   success   of   the   American   high-end   ready-to-wear   designers.   During   the   1950s,   the   company   rose   to   new   heights   when   Henry's   daughter,  Theresa  (Terry)  and  her  husband  Ambros  Albert  took  over  the  business.   During   this   time,   the   company's   unusual   color   combinations,   handmade   settings,   and   use   of   custom-made   stones   set   them   apart   from   their   contemporaries,   leaving   behind   a   legacy   for   jewelry   experts   and   admirers   to   study,   covet,   and   enjoy.   Yet   a   crucial  question  remains  of  the  Schreiner  legacy:  how  did  a  company,  whose  jewelry   embellished   designer   garments   for   decades,   was   sold   in   the   country's   most   well   known   stores,   was   featured   on   the   covers   and   in   the   editorials   of   the   most   celebrated   fashion   magazines,   earn   such   prominence   and   then   fade   from   view?   By   positioning   the   Schreiner  Jewelry   Company  within  the  framework  of  the  production   and  consumption  of  women's  fashions  (during  the  1930s  through  to  the  1970s),  this   paper   offers   insight   into   both   the   historical   and   material   importance   of   this   business.   Through   this   major   research   project,   I   will   investigate   how   this   business   began,   the   client   base,   the   advertising   strategies   employed,   as   well   as   the   overall   production   of   the   jewelry.   In   addition,   an   explanation   will   be   provided   for   the   closure   of   the   Schreiner   business   after   successfully   creating   jewelry   for   over   forty   years.         Searching   for   Schreiner   is   divided   into   three   main   chapters.   The   first   two   chapters  offer  historical  overviews  of  the  Schreiner  company  while  the  third  chapter   focuses  on  the  material  culture  produced  by  the  company.  Chapter  one,  "The  Early   Years--Henry   Schreiner's   Parlay   into   Costume   Jewelry,"   explores   the   story   of  

  

2  

founder,   Henry   Schreiner,   tracing   his   immigration   to   America   and   detailing   his   eventual   success   at   the   helm   of   the   Schreiner   company.   Chapter   two,   "A   Dynamic   Duo--Theresa   and   Ambros   Join   the   Company,"   examines   the   individual   roles   and   contributions   of   Terry   Schreiner   Albert   and   her   husband   Ambros,   who   continued   the  company  for  twenty-one  years  following  the  death  of  Henry  Schreiner  in  1954.   The   third   chapter   is   titled   "Production   to   Perfection--How   a   Schreiner   Piece   is   Made."   This   section   is   purposely   presented   as   a   separate   narrative   from   the   historical  overviews  provided  in  earlier  chapters.  It  offers  a  step-by-step  account  of   what  was  required  in  the  production  of  Schreiner  jewelry.  In  addition,  it  explores  a   number   of   common   characteristics   employed   in   the   construction   of   their   designs,   which  can  aid  collectors  in  the  task  of  identifying  unsigned  Schreiner  jewelry.  As  a   result,   this   project   examines   not   only   the   cultural   context   and   significance   of   Schreiner  jewelry  but  also  offers  object-based  analyses  and  archival  documentation   of   various   Schreiner   pieces.   This   information   will   contribute   to   the   body   of   knowledge   necessary   for   future   curatorial   and/or   connoisseurial   research   and   projects.               My   personal   interest   in   Schreiner   jewelry   began   approximately   four   years   ago,   while   working   for   the   Carole   Tanenbaum   Vintage   Collection.   Carole's   collection   of   over   one   thousand   Schreiner   pieces   inspired   me   to   find   out   more   about   the   company   that   had   produced   this   jewelry.   Perplexed   by   how   little   information   was   available,  the  first  step  I  took  was  to  contact  the  New  York  County  Clerk's  office  in  an   attempt   to   locate   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company's   business   records.   These   documents  contained  the  company's  certificates  of  business  and  incorporation  and  

  

3  

listed   the   partners   and   shareholders.   They   also   contained   a   number   of   addresses,   both   personal   and   professional,   dating   from   1942   to   1974.   An   outdated   P.O.   box   from  1974  finally  led  me  to  a  property  title  from  the  same  year.  In  June  2012,  with   the   address   in   hand,   I   travelled   to   Upstate   New   York   to   see   where   it   may   lead.   Upon   arrival,  I  was  astounded  to  find  Terry,  daughter  of  founder  Henry,  still  living  in  the   home.   Terry   and   her   son   Stephen   were   both   incredibly   gracious   with   their   time   and   shared   in-depth   information   about   the   Schreiner   business   and   the   Schreiner   family.   In   October   of   2013,   I   returned   to   their   home   for   a   follow   up   interview.   During   my   visit,   I   was   permitted   access   to   the   family's   personal   archive,   a   rich   and   rare   resource   containing   vintage   photographs,   magazine   covers,   editorials,   newspaper   advertisements,   and   examples   of   pieces   created   by   both   Henry   and   Ambros.   The   examination  of  this  archive  has  greatly  informed  this  work.     Much   of   my   research   focuses   on   primary   sources.   Excerpts   from   personal   interviews   with   Terry   and   Stephen,   archival   documents   including   the   company's   business   records,   photographs   of   the   factory,   mid-twentieth   century   newspaper   advertisements   and   magazines,   as   well   as   the   analysis   of   numerous   pieces   of   Schreiner  jewelry,  have  all  been  used  to  provide  a  full  picture  of  this  company.   The   textual   analysis   and   object   analysis   methods   have   been   of   significant   importance   to   this   research.   As   such,   I   have   approached   this   project   from   a   social   history   perspective   where   I   contextualize   Schreiner   jewelry   within   the   cultural   circumstances  in  which  these  objects  were  made.  Textual  analysis  has  been  used  in   the   examination   of   original   documents   and   secondary   literary   sources.   Due   to   an   unfortunate   electrical   fire,   much   of   the   Schreiner's   personal   business   documents  

  

4  

and   records   were   destroyed.   As   a   result,   I   have   relied   heavily   on   both   Terry   and   Stephen's   memories   to   fill   in   the   blanks.   While   oral   ethnographies   are   known   to   relay  partial  or  biased  information,  where  possible,  secondary  information  has  been   referenced   to   back   up   statements.   All   interviews   were   recorded   and   carefully   transcribed   to   insure   the   accuracy   of   given   statements   and   to   provide   relevant   context.   It   should   be   noted   that   these   interviews   provide   an   inside   look   at   the   Schreiner  company  and  therefore  present  a  unique  perspective,  one  that  has  been  of   crucial  importance  to  this  research.       The  object  analysis  method  has  been  employed  in  the  inspection  of  Schreiner   jewelry.  As  a  result  of  my  visits  to  the  Schreiner  home  and  my  former  position  at  the   Carole   Tanenbaum   Vintage   Collection,   I   have   handled   more   than   one   thousand   extant  examples  of  Schreiner  jewelry.  These  collections  have  allowed  me  to  examine   individual   pieces,   becoming   familiar   with   the   Schreiner   company's   production   techniques  as  well  as  their  characteristics,  materials,  and  preferred  styles.     By   using   the   object   analysis   method,   one   is   able   to   trace   social   histories   through  artifacts.  In  doing  so,  one  can  often  gain  access  to  new  information  and  as   such,  this  process  has  become  a  key  component  of  my  research.  This  is  an  essential   aspect   of   the   material   culture   approach   utilized   by   various   historians   working   within   the   discipline   of   fashion.   In   her   book   Couture   and   Commerce:   The   Transatlantic   Fashion   Trade   in   the   1950s,   author   Alexandra   Palmer   references   the   work   of   anthropologist   Igor   Kopytoff,   suggesting   "that   just   as   people   have   many   biographies,  so  too  do  objects."1  Palmer  goes  on  to  state  that  Kopytoff  "suggests  that                                                                                                                   
1  Palmer,  Dior,  8.  

  

5  

if   one   focuses   on   the   object   as   a   key   to   investigation   and   identifies   its   various   biographies,  the  artifact  itself  can  redirect  research  into  areas  that  might  otherwise   be   left   unexplored."2  In   the   example   of   Schreiner   jewelry,   by   paying   particularly   close  attention  to  both  the  materials  used  as  well  as  the  themes  explored,  one  begins   to  recognize  how  closely  these  objects  reflect  the  eras  in  which  they  were  made.       During   the   last   twenty-five   years   many   books   have   been   published   on   the   subject   of   vintage   costume   jewelry.   However,   the   vast   majority   are   identification   and   value   guides   with   little   academic   standing.   To   date,   the   most   extensive   work   on   Schreiner   is   a   four-page   summary   of   the   business,   which   was   based   on   an   interview   that   author   and   costume   jewelry   specialist,   Harrice   Simons   Miller   conducted   with   Terry   in   the   early   1990s.   It   appears   in   Miller's   book   titled   Costume   Jewelry:   Identification   and   Price   Guide.   However,   it   reads   as   a   checklist   of   the   stores   and   designers   that   the   company   worked   with   as   well   as   the   types   of   pieces   they   produced   with   little   elaboration.   Similarly,   author   Nancy   N.   Schiffer   also   met   with   Terry   in   the   1990s.   Her   book,   titled   Rhinestones!   includes   numerous   photographs   of   Schreiner   jewelry   but   contains   limited   text.   As   well,   many   of   the   dates   listed   by   Schiffer   are   inaccurate.   Other   authors   have   mentioned   Schreiner   in   their   books,   often   paraphrasing   information   from   Miller's   interview.   Jewels  of  Fantasy:  Costume   Jewelry  of  the  20th  Century  (1991)  edited  by  jewelry  and  art  historian  Deanna  Farneti   Cera,   Fabulous   Fakes:   A   Passion   for   Vintage   Costume   Jewelry   (2006)   by   vintage   costume   jewelry   collector   and   connoisseur   Carole   Tanenbaum,   and   Costume  Jewelry   (2010)  by  antique  specialist  and  appraiser  Judith  Miller,  all  exhibit  wonderful  visual                                                                                                                   
2  Ibid.  

  

6  

examples  of  Schreiner  jewelry  but  contain  very  little  text.  Despite  having  access  to   limited  information,  all  three  authors  nevertheless  chose  to  include  Schreiner  within   their  books.  To  me,  this  confirms  the  significance  placed  by  experts  and  by  collectors   upon   the   pieces   created   by   this   company.   This   is   why   an   in-depth   study   of   the   Schreiner  Jewelry  Company  is  so  important.       Writings   about   the   designers   for   whom   Schreiner   produced   jewelry   have   been   helpful   in   determining   the   individual   positions   and   prominence   of   these   businesses  within  the  fashion  industry.  Bernadine  Morris  and  Eleni  Sakes  Epstein's   chapters   "Norell"   and   "Trigère,"   in   American   Fashion,   Beryl   Williams   Epstein's   chapter   "Norman   Norell,"   from   her   book   Fashion   is   our   Business,   and   Alexandra   Palmer's   book   Dior:   A   New   Look,   A   New   Enterprise   (1947-57),   all   offer   fascinating   insights  into  these  companies  by  illustrating  each  designer's  style  and  rise  to  fame.   Other   writings   have   been   particularly   useful   in   understanding   the   social   and   political   circumstances   that   existed   during   the   decades   that   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company   was   operational   and   how   these   events   impacted   the   Schreiner   business.   These   writings   include   Caroline   Rennolds   Milbank's   book   New   York   Fashion:   The   Evolution  of  American  Style,  Valerie  Steele's   Fifty  Years  of  Fashion:  New  Look  to  Now,   and  Alexandra  Palmer's   Couture  and  Commerce:  The  Transatlantic  Fashion  Trade  in   the  1950s.   Therefore,   by   using   a   social   history   approach,   aided   by   the   use   of   the   interview,   visual   and   textual   analysis   methods,   I   will   uncover   a   detailed   history   of   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company   and   will   lay   the   groundwork   for   a   significant  

  

7  

contribution   to   the   advancement   of   knowledge   in   the   area   of   vintage   costume   jewelry.     

  

8  

CHAPTER  1:   THE  EARLY  YEARS--HENRY  SCHREINER'S  PARLAY  INTO  COSTUME  JEWELRY           Henry   Schreiner,   the   respected   twentieth-century   designer   of   high-end   costume   jewelry,  entered  the  American  fashion  industry  by  coincidence  rather  than  by  intent.   Unlike   many   of   the   American   fashion   designers   with   whom   he   would   eventually   collaborate,   Henry   did   not   grow   up   analyzing   women's   fashions   nor   did   he   sketch   designs   or   apprentice   under   an   established   designer.   While   he   was   both   an   admirer   and  supporter  of  the  arts,  attending  the  opera  and  symphony  regularly,  it  is  doubtful   that   he   would   have   described   himself   as   an   artist.   The   young,   middle-class   Bavarian   learned   a   trade   that   he   hoped   would   provide   him   with   a   good   livelihood   and   immigrated  to  the  United  States.  Like  many  other  immigrants  in  the  early  part  of  the   twentieth-century,   he   wanted   to   make   a   new   life   for   himself   and   in   his   particular   case   to   escape   from   the   political   unrest   and   economic   hardships   that   existed   in   Germany  after  the  First  World  War.       Heinrich    (Henry)  Schreiner  was  born  in  1898  (Figure  1.1).  He  grew  up  in  the   small  German  town  of  Premich,  which  is  located  in  the  district  of  Bad  Kissingen  in   the  state  of  Bavaria.  As  a  teen,  he  was  drafted  into  the  German  army,  fighting  in  WWI   as  part  of  a  crew  on  a  small  submarine.  Following  the  war,  he  studied  to  become  a   blacksmith,   a   career   he   had   intended   to   continue   once   immigrating   to   America.   However,  once  Henry  arrived  in  New  York  City  in  1923,  it  became  clear  that  electric   streetcars   and   to   a   lesser   extent   private   automobiles   were   quickly   becoming   the   new   modes   of   city   transportation.   Consequently,   it   became   necessary   to   follow   an   alternative  career  path.  Over  the  next  couple  of  years,  Henry  would  work  for  various  

  

9  

companies  and  establishments  including  the  gas  and  electric  company  Con  Edison,  a   carousal  company,  which  ran  the  merry-go-round  on  Coney  Island,  and  a  bakery.3     In   1925,   Henry's   future   wife   Mathilda   arrived   in   the   United   States.   She   had   also   grown   up   in   the   town   of   Premich   but   was   seven   years   younger   than   Henry.   Despite  attending  school  at  different  times  and  travelling  in  different  social  circles,   the   two   had   occasionally   met.   Unlike   Henry,   Mathilda   initially   settled   in   Philadelphia.   An   aunt   who   had   been   living   there   since   the   late   1800s   kindly   sponsored  her  immigration.  In  1926,  Henry  attended  the  world's  fair  in  Philadelphia   and   reconnected   with   Mathilda   during   his   visit   to   her   aunt.   A   romance   began   and   the  two  were  married  in  the  following  year.  Mathilda  was  a  petite,  energetic  woman   who  loved  the  culinary  arts.  She  was  also  a  talented  needle  worker  and  took  great   pride   in   caring   for   the   family   home.   In   1928,   Henry   and   Mathilda   welcomed   their   first   child,   a   daughter   they   named   Theresa   (Terry)   Schreiner.   In   the   coming   years,   they  would  have  two  more  daughters,  Mary  and  Mathilda.4       Around   1927,   Henry   went   to   work   for   the   Better   brothers,   who   were   three   brothers   that   owned   and   operated   a   shoe   buckle   company.   Unfortunately,   there   is   little   known   today   about   this   business,   including   the   name   that   this   company   operated  under  or  the  first  names  of  the  brothers  who  ran  it.  During  the  twenties,   the   production   of   women's   shoe   buckles   became   a   lucrative   business.   Women's   rising   hemlines   mimicked   the   Dow   Jones   and   more   importantly   visually   displayed  

                                                                                                                
4  Ibid.  

3  Terry  Schreiner  Albert,  interview  with  Eve  Townsend,  June  24,  2012.  

  

10  

their  changing  roles  within  modern  society.5  Having  proven  their  competence  in  the   workplace  during  the  war  effort  and  officially  gaining  the  right  to  vote,  women  were   enjoying   their   newfound   freedom,   which   was   reflected   in   their   clothing   and   accessory   choices.   Thus   with   shoes   in   plain   view,   shoe   buckles   became   a   popular   embellishment.     In  the  late  1920s,  the  Better  brothers'  business  was  thriving  and  Henry  was   able   to   put   his   metalworking   skills   to   good   use   while   also   earning   a   competitive   salary.6  The   design   and   production   of   shoe   buckles   gave   him   the   opportunity   to   solder  and  to  set  stones.  It  also  introduced  him  to  the  fashion  industry,  as  many  of   the  buckles  were  designed  for  the  couture  and  ready-to-wear  businesses.  However,   the   Better   brothers   were   known   for   their   vices   and   all   three   spent   frivolously   on   women   and   alcohol.   As   a   result,   when   the   stock   market   crashed   in   1929,   their   business   suffered   and   the   partnership   dissolved.   However,   Henry   proceeded   to   work  for  the  one  brother  who  continued  to  produce  shoe  buckles  for  the  high-end   fashion   industry.   While   the   market   for   fancy   shoe   buckles   was   limited,   a   good   percentage   of   the   couture   and   ready-to-wear   designers   were   still   able   to   place   orders.   Unfortunately,   Mr.   Better   was   not   an   astute   businessman   and   was   often   unable   to   pay   Henry   his   monthly   salary.   Finally,   unable   to   come   up   with   the   adequate  funds,  Henry  was  given  the  company  in  exchange  for  his  back  pay.7     Henry  gradually  shifted  away  from  creating  shoe  buckles  to  concentrate  on   buttons,  belt  buckles,  and  jewelry.  In  1932  he  officially  began  to  produce  these  items                                                                                                                   
5  Elizabeth  Semmelhack  discusses  how  shoes  were  brought  into  greater  focus  during  the   1920s  as  the  result  of  women's  hemlines  rising  in  Roger  Vivier,  8.     6  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   7  Ibid.  

  

11  

under  the  Schreiner  name,  with  his  place  of  business  located  on  the  third  floor  of  a   walk-up  building  at  480  7th  Avenue,  New  York.8  The  business  appears  to  have  done   well  from  the  beginning  as  Henry  purchased  an  apartment  building  in  Brooklyn  just   months   after   taking   over   from   Mr.   Better.   While   he   had   intended   to   buy   an   apartment  suitable  for  two  families,  on  the  recommendation  of  his  real   estate  agent,   he  purchased  a  building  that  could  accommodate  sixteen  families.  The  building  was   located  at  567  East  22nd  Street,  Brooklyn,  New  York  (Figure  1.2).9  Although  the  place   was   half-empty   when   they   moved   in,   it   proved   to   be   a   good   investment   and   the   Schreiners  lived  there  as  a  family  until  buying  a  private  house  in  the  early  1940s.     More   than   a   decade   passed   before   Henry   officially   registered   his   business.   This   may   have   been   due   to   a   legal   requirement   of   the   time.   In   any   case,   on   September   16,   1943,   Henry   was   certified   as   the   sole   person   conducting   and   transacting   business   under   the   name   "Schreiner   Jewelry   Company."   His   business   remained   listed   at   480   7th   Avenue   and   his   home   at   567   East   22nd   Street.10  Nearly   three   years   later   on   July   23,   1946,   Henry   incorporated   his   business   under   the   name   "Schreiner   Jewelry   Co.   Inc."11  Upon   incorporation,   the   company   had   500   shares   outstanding   at   the   price   of   $100   per   share,   for   a   total   market   value   of   $50   000.   Listed   alongside   Henry   are   two   additional   gentlemen,   who   are   also   named   as   directors:   Gustav   Weinberg   and   Peter   Pruce.  12     The   Certificate   of   Incorporation   indicates   that   each   director   owned   one   share   in   the   company.   It   is   interesting   to                                                                                                                   
8  Ibid.   9  Henry  Schreiner,  Certificate  of  Conducting  Business  dated  September  16,  1943,  filed   September  18,  1943,  60  Centre  St,  New  York,  NY,  10007,  County  Clerk,  New  York  County.   10  Ibid.   11  Henry  Schreiner,  Gustav  Weinberg,  and  Peter  Pruce,  Certificate  of  Incorporation  dated  July   23,  1946,  filed  August  15,  1946,  60  Centre  St.,  New  York,  NY,  10007,  County  Clerk,  New  York  County.   12  Ibid.    

  

12  

note   that   living   members   of   the   Schreiner   family   are   unaware   of   who   Weinberg   and   Pruce  were.  Perhaps  they  were  friendly  acquaintances,  willing  to  invest  in  Henry's   venture   or   maybe   they   were   employees   of   the   law   firm   Henry   hired,   taking   the   appropriate   steps   required   to   legally   incorporate   the   business.   Regardless   of   who   Weinberg   and   Pruce   were,   they   were   not   involved   in   the   day-to-day   operations   of   the   Schreiner   company.13  Perhaps   the   most   intriguing   information   revealed   in   this   document  is  the  stated  "purpose"  of  the  company,  which  reads:      To  design,  manufacture,  purchase  or  otherwise  acquire,  repair,  engrave,  cut,   stamp,   set,   and   generally   work   with   and   upon,   and   to   sell,   let   and   deal   in   jewelry,  gems,  precious  and  semi-precious  stones,  imitations,  reproductions   and   facsimiles   of   same,   cameos;   gold,   silver,   platinum   and   other   wares,   plate,   utensils,   ornaments,   and   articles,   time   pieces;   pocket   books,   hand   bags,   leather   novelties,   of   any   kind;   umbrellas,   parasols,   canes,   personal   furnishings,   travelers   supplies,   and   equipment,   china,   glass   and   porcelain   wares,  novelties  of  all  kind,  optical  goods  and  supplies,  and  generally  to  do  all   things   and   to   carry   on   all   lines   of   trade   common   to   the   jewelry   business,   wholesale,   retail,   or   manufacturing.   To   do   all   the   foregoing   as   principal   or   agent,  on  commission  or  otherwise.  To  transact  all  such  business  either  on  its   own  account  or  as  agent  for  other  persons,  firms  or  corporations,  and  to  take   over  property,  assets,  contracts  of  firms  engaged  in  similar  business.  14          Whether  Henry  did  indeed  produce/repair  all  of  these  items  is  unlikely  but   the  fact  that  they  are  listed  is  interesting  as  it  illustrates  the  company's  tendency  to   experiment  with  items  outside  of  the  realm  of  jewelry.  This  is  a  characteristic  that   continued  throughout  the  company's  history  and  greatly  contributed  to  their  overall   success.     The   jewelry   that   was   produced   by   Schreiner   during   the   1930s   was   vastly   different   from   the   large-scale   three-dimensional   colorful   pieces   that   dealers   and                                                                                                                   
13  Theresa  Schreiner  Albert,  interview  with  Eve  Townsend,  New  York,  September  28,  2013.   14  H.  Schreiner,  Certificate  of  Incorporation,  New  York  County.  

  

13  

collectors   of   costume   jewelry   commonly   associate   with   Schreiner   today.   Sterling   silver   and   marcasite   monogram/initial   pins   and   small   pendants   were   some   of   the   earliest   pieces   produced   by   Schreiner   (Figure   1.3   and   1.4).   Other   designs   featured   geometric   forms   inspired   by   the   Art   Deco   aesthetic.   Also   made   of   sterling   silver   and   marcasite,   these   pieces   often   incorporated   carnelian,   lapis,   and   chrysoprase   accents.15  Jewelry   designs   created   from   castings   were   also   produced   during   this   time.   These   pieces   required   the   stones   to   be   glued   in,   as   the   castings   did   not   have   prongs.   During   the   early   1930s,   the   Schreiner   business   remained   small.   Henry   worked   six   days   a   week,   taking   Sundays   off,   as   he   was   a   devout   Catholic.   He   employed   two   men   part   time   that   came   in   on   Saturdays   to   help   him   set   the   marcasite   pins.   Terry   remembers   them   fondly   by   their   first   names--Peter   and   Paolosino.   She   recalled   that   the   three   gentlemen   would   sing   loudly   along   with   the   opera  (often  off  key),16  which  demonstrates  the  positive  working  environment  that   Henry  fostered.     It   is   important   to   note   that   throughout   the   years   of   the   great   depression,   jewelry  was  not  the  focus  of  the  Schreiner  business.  During  this  period,  the  ready- to-wear  designers  and  the  fine  coat  companies  were  responsible  for  all  of  the  orders   placed.17  They   were   interested   in   purchasing   buttons   and   belt   buckles   to   accent   their   designs.   Jeweled   and   decorative   buttons   were   made   by   the   thousands   and   were   available   in   all   different   sizes   (Figure   1.5).   Belt   buckles   were   made   from   various   materials   including   rhinestones,   marcasite,   and   colorful   swirled   and                                                                                                                   
16  Ibid.   17  Ibid.  

15  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

14  

speckled   glass   cabochons   (Figures   1.6   to   1.10).   The   metalwork   was   equally   interesting.   Early   Schreiner   belt   buckles   often   incorporate   intricate   filigree   work   and   leaf   and   floral   designs   in   gold   toned   and   silver   toned   metal.   The   Schreiner   business   did   particularly   well   with   belt   buckles   throughout   the   1930s   as   women's   fashions  were  often  belted  at  the  time.     The   economic   hardships   brought   about   by   the   Great   Depression   led   to   extensive  joblessness  throughout  North  America  and  created  an  environment  where   even  the  very  wealthy  were  spending  more  cautiously.  During  this  period,  Parisian   couture  suffered,  as  American  private  clients  were  travelling  less  and  less  to  Paris.   In   1931   Monsieur   Gerber,   president   of   the   Chambre   Syndicale   de   la   Couture   Parisienne,   reported   that   dress   imports   fell   more   than   40%   from   1926   to   1930.18   However,   a   diminished   interest   in   French   couture   led   to   an   increased   interest   in   American   fashions,   which   did   not   require   custom   fittings   in   Paris   or   have   costly   import   duties. 19   While   there   remained   a   market   for   American   made-to-order   designs,   the   true   focus   of   the   American   fashion   industry   was   ready-to-wear   garments,  which  were  designed  to  fit  various  sizes  and  could  be  purchased  directly   off   the   rack.   It   is,   however,   important   to   note   that   the   majority   of   these   designs   continued   to   draw   their   inspiration   from   French   couture.   As   Alexandra   Palmer   notes,   "The   American   garment   industry   was   an   enormous   machine,   but   it   still   relied   on   Paris   for   design   direction."20  American   fashions   were   made   using   a   variety   of   fabrics   and   production   techniques,   which   yielded   a   range   in   quality.   Therefore,                                                                                                                   
19  Palmer,  Dior,  13.   20  Ibid.  

18  Milbank,  New  York  Fashion,  98.  

  

15  

these  items  could  be  purchased  at  almost  every  price  point.  It  was  during  the  1930s   that   Henry   solidified   his   relationship   with   the  high-end   ready-to-wear   designers,   an   affiliation  that  continued  to  benefit  his  company  until  its  eventual  closure.     Manufacturing  accessories  for  the  ready-to-wear  designers,  including  the  fine   coat   companies   was   always   a   collaborative   effort.   Fabric   swatches   were   provided,   while  appropriate  materials  and  designs  were  discussed.  Up  until  the  beginning  of   the   Second   World   War   it   was   customary   for   American   designers   to   travel   to   Europe   in   order   to   view   the   spring   and   fall   collections.   This   was   done   in   an   attempt   to   observe  the  current  Parisian  trends  but  also  to  purchase  a  selection  of  items.21  The   American   designers   were   interested   in   understanding   the   cut,   construction,   and   quality   of   the   couture   designs.   Therefore,   the   selected   items   were   often   disassembled,   with   each   section   carefully   examined.22  The   purpose   was   often   not   to   directly   copy   or   reproduce   the   couture   designs   (although   this   also   happened),   as   Bernadine  Morris  aptly  notes:  "A  "good"  Paris  style  could  yield  a  collar  for  one  dress,   a   sleeve   for   another,   a   pocket   idea   for   a   third."23  Therefore,   the   intension   of   the   American   designers   was   to   draw   inspiration   from   the   French   designs   in   an   effort   to   adapt  them  for  an  American  clientele.24   Similarly,  the  ready-to-wear  designers  also  drew  inspiration  from  the  jewelry   and   accessories   that   accompanied   the   couture   clothing   as   well   as   those   sold   in   French   shops.   Once   returning   home   to   New   York,   the   designers   would   meet   with                                                                                                                   
21  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   22  Bernadine  Morris  discusses  how  designer  Norman  Norell  would  pull  apart  hundreds  of   Parisian  designs  in  order  to  fully  understand  the  construction  and  quality  of  couture  garments  in   "Norell,"  320.   23  Ibid.,  324.   24  Ibid.,  320.  

  

16  

Henry   to   discuss   what   they   had   seen   in   Europe,   what   they   liked,   and   what   they   hoped   he   could   produce.25  The   relationship   between   Henry   and   the   high-end   ready- to-wear   designers   was   beneficial   to   both   parties.   The   designers   provided   Henry   with  information  regarding  new  processes  and  materials  that  they  had  witnessed  in   Paris  and  in  return  Henry  was  able  to  figure  out  how  to  best  design  and  produce  the   pieces  they  requested.  Since  the  designers  were  determined  to  acquire  these  pieces   at   the   right   price,   they   relied   heavily   on   Henry's   ability   to   troubleshoot   various   designs   and   techniques.26  Throughout   his   career,   collaborating   with   the   fashion   designers  remained  Henry's  top  priority.  He  enjoyed  working  with  highly  creative,   like-minded   people   and   recognized   that   his   business   and   designs   benefited   from   their   input.   One   of   the   most   profound   changes   in   the   production   of   Schreiner   jewelry  occurred  when  the  company  adopted  the  use  of  jewelry  settings  as  opposed   to   jewelry   castings.   Settings   are   much   lighter   than   castings   as   metal   is   used   more   sparingly.   This   appealed   to   the   designers   as   larger   brooches   could   be   pinned   onto   garments   without   pulling   or   weighing   down   the   fabric.   As   a   result,   by   the   early   1940s,  the  Schreiner  company  no  longer  produced  any  jewelry  from  castings.27     In   1939,   Henry   urgently   needed   to   return   to   Europe.   He   had   not   been   back   since  emigrating  from  Germany  in  1923  and  had  received  word  that  his  father  was   dying.   While   abroad   he   also   attended   to   some   business,   organizing   a   meeting   with   a   stone  dealer.  By  the  late  1930s,  Henry's  business  was  proving  to  be  quite  profitable.   He   now   employed   six   stone   setters   and   six   solderers   and   he   knew   that   the   top                                                                                                                   
26  Ibid.   27  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

25  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

17  

quality   glass   stones   came   from   the   area   then   known   as   Czechoslovakia,28  where   there  was  a  long  history  of  glassmaking.  Mr.  Feix  was  the  name  of  the  stone  dealer   with   whom   Henry   met.   Feix   had   a   rather   remarkable   inventory   of   stones,   which   came   in   all   different   shapes,   colors,   and   sizes.   He   was   also   able   to   have   additional   stones  produced  to  Henry's  specifications,  which  is  how  the  Schreiner  company  was   able  to  accumulate  so  many  custom  stones  that  were  exclusive  to  their  designs.29   However,  Henry's  visit  was  rather  unsettling.    Within  Germany,  the  Nazis  had   maintained   political   power   since   January   30,   1933,   with   Adolf   Hitler   sworn   in   as   chancellor.30  By   1934,   the   German   Gestapo   regularly   acted   above   the   law,   often   imprisoning   individuals   who   had   previously   been   acquitted   by   the   courts.31  In   the   spring   of   1938,   Hitler   began   his   pursuit   to   occupy   Czechoslovakia32  and   by   the   beginning   of   1939,   rumors   about   an   impending   war   ran   rampant.   As   such,   Henry   was  anxious  to  return  to  New  York  City.  Aware  of  the  possibility  of  a  metal  shortage,   he   stocked   up   on   jewelry   settings,   brass,   and   silver   before   returning   to   the   United   States.33  While  the  metal  supplies  made  it  back  to  New  York,  the  custom  stones  did   not.   Unfortunately,   by   the   time   the   stone   order   was   filled   it   was   unable   to   be   shipped   to   the   United   States.   As   a   result,   Henry   had   it   delivered   to   a   family   member   living  in  Germany,  who  kept  it  in  his  barn  until  the  end  of  World  War  II.34       The   onset   of   World   War   II   greatly   impacted   the   international   fashion   industry.  The  Nazi  Occupation  of  Paris  began  in  June  of  1940  and  the  city  struggled                                                                                                                   
28  Ibid.   29  Ibid.   30  Bendersky,  A  Concise  History  of  Nazi  Germany,  xi.   31  Ibid.,  103.   32  Ibid.,  160-161.   33  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   34  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

18  

to  retain  its  position  as  the  fashion  capital.  One  of  the  Chambre  Syndicale's  greatest   obstacles   occurred   when   the   Germans   announced   their   intended   plan   to   move   the   couture   industry   to   Berlin   and   Vienna.35  As   various   fashion   historians   have   noted,   it   was   due   to   the   extreme   efforts   of   couturier   Lucien   Lelong,   then   president   of   the   Chambre  Syndicale,  who  travelled  to  Berlin  and  helped  to  successfully  convince  the   Germans  of  the  importance  of  keeping  the  couture  industry  in  Paris.36   However,  on  December  7,  1941,  the  Empire  of  Japan  attacked  Pearl  Harbor,   bringing   the   United   States   into   the   war   and   effectively   cutting   off   the   American   fashion   industry   from   Paris.   While   some   questioned   whether   or   not   the   American   fashion   industry   could   indeed   survive   without   the   influence   of   Parisian   couture,   others  saw  it  as  an  opportunity  for  the  advancement  of  American  fashion.37  Caroline   Milbank  points  out  that  during  this  time,  "New  York  was  mentioned  most  often  as   the  city  most  capable  of  becoming  the  style  center  of  the  world."38  This  is  a  rather   interesting   statement   as   the   1940s   are   often   cited   as   a   time   when   fashions   were   stagnant   and   people's   minds   were   focused   solely   on   the   war,   a   narrative   that   effectively  writes  out  this  important  chapter  in  the  history  of  American  fashion.     It   was   actually   during   the   war   years   that   the   American   fashion   industry   started  to  focus  its  attention  on  what  was  being  produced  at  home,  and  as  a  result   began   to   both   promote   and   celebrate   the   diversity   and   strength   of   their   own   designers.   However,   an   increased   interest   in   American   fashion   did   not   mean   a   change   of   focus.   Custom   designs   could   be   purchased   from   fashion   houses   such   as                                                                                                                   
35  Palmer,  Dior,  16-17,  Steele,  Fifty  Years  of  Fashion,  5.   36  Ibid.   38  Ibid.   37  Milbank,  New  York  Fashion,  130.  

  

19  

Mainbocher,  Valentina,  and  Hattie  Carnegie,  as  well  as  through  many  of  the  high-end   department   stores.   These   stores   employed   in-house   designers   specializing   in   custom-made   garments,   including   Sophie   of   Saks   Fifth   Avenue,   Fira   Benenson   of   Bonwit   Teller,   and   Leslie   Morris   and   Bernard   Newman   of   Bergdorf   Goodman.39   Regardless,   the   main   focus   of   American   fashion   remained   heavily   on   the   ready-to- wear   industry.   As   Milbank   notes,   "More   well   known   than   the   American   couturiers   were   the   top-of-the-line   ready-to-wear   designers,   since   their   clothes   were   advertised   and   sold   by   name   all   over   the   country   rather   than   just   in   their   own   salons   and   showrooms."40  Included   in   this   group   of   top-of-the-line   ready-to-wear   designers  were  many  of  the  Schreiner  company's  clients  including  Maurice  Rentner,   Adele  Simpson,  Omar  Kaim,  Pauline  Trigère,  and  Norman  Norell.     Of   this   list   of   designers,   it   is   Pauline   Trigère   and   Norman   Norell   that   the   Schreiner   family   discusses   most   frequently.   Both   Trigère   and   Norell   worked   as   designers   for   the   prominent   Hattie   Carnegie   fashion   corporation,   before   venturing   out   on   their   own.   As   such,   they   learned   the   essentials   of   good   design,   paying   particularly   close   attention   to   the   details   of   a   garment.   While   not   a   designer   herself,   Miss  Carnegie  knew  what  she  liked  and  was  known  to  be  rather  domineering  and  an   utter   perfectionist,   often   requesting   that   sleeves   and   buttons   be   ripped   out   and   adjusted  numerous  times  before  claiming  to  be  satisfied.41  While  Norell  worked  for   Miss   Carnegie   directly,   Trigère   assisted   another   well-regarded   designer   at   the   company,  Travis  Banton.  Banton  quickly  recognized  Trigère's  talent,  considering  her                                                                                                                   
39  Ibid.,  132.   40  Ibid.   41  Morris,  "Norell,"  343.  

  

20  

to  be  both  clever  and  kind.42  Upon  leaving  Hattie  Carnegie,  both  Trigère  and  Norell   experienced  widespread  success  with  the  production  of  garments  under  their  own   names.   Each   went   on   to   win   three   of   the   prestigious   Coty   Awards,   which   honored   excellence   in   American   fashion   design.   Both   designers   would   eventually   have   businesses   located   in   the   most   exclusive   building   in   the   garment   district--550   Seventh  Avenue,  whose  wall  directory  as  Beryl  Williams  Epstein  noted  in  1945,  read     "like  a  list  of  advertisers  in   Vogue."43  Today  the  building  houses  such  businesses  as   Ralph  Lauren,  Bagley  Mischka,  Jill  Stuart,  and  Oscar  de  la  Renta.     In   1941,   Norell   partnered   with   well-known   clothing   manufacturer   Anthony   Traina.   This   business   arrangement   proved   to   be   most   successful   with   Traina   managing   the   financials   and   Norell   designing   the   garments.   The   first   collection   produced   under   the   Traina-Norell   label   was   met   with   high   praise,   a   reaction   that   continued   with   later   collections.   As   Morris   states,   "For   years,   women   spoke   of   the   "Trainas"   with   the   same   reverence   they   gave   to   their   "Chanels"   or   their   "Balenciagas."44  Norell   quickly   became   famous   for   his   tailored   silhouettes,   which   were  produced  from  the  highest  quality  fabrics  he  could  afford.  Elegant  suit  jackets   were  often  lined  in  the  same  fabric  as  the  blouse  or  dress  worn  beneath.  While  he   favored   particular   styles,   such   as   wool   jersey   dresses   or   blouses   belted   at   the   waist,   paired  with  dark  solid  pencil  skirts,  his  collections  were  rarely  boring.  Sequins  and   spangles   embellished   many   of   Norell's   most   successful   evening   designs.   The   Schreiner   company's   early   rhinestone   pieces   fit   perfectly   with   Norell's   fashion                                                                                                                   
44  Morris,  "Norell,"  324.  

42  Eleni  Saks  Epstein,  "Trigère,"  413.       43  Beryl  Williams  Epstein,  Fashion  is  our  Business,  7.  

  

21  

sensibility.   Norell   was   known   to   carefully   consider   each   individual   aspect   of   a   design,  stating,  "It  always  surprises  me,  [...]  to  see  how  little  attention  most  women   pay  to  the  ensemble  effect  of  their  clothes  [...]  Every  item  a  woman  wears  must  be   considered  in  its  relation  to  every  other  item,  and  that's  why  we  show  our  models  as   we  do--complete  to  every  accessory."45  Figure  1.11,  features  the  cover  image  from   LIFE   magazine's   September   8,   1952   issue.   Model   Suzy   Parker   is   photographed   wearing   a   red   floor-length   sequined   gown   by   Traina-Norell,   which   at   the   time   retailed  for  $1000.46  A  diamante  necklace  by  Schreiner  accents  the  dress  and  is  an   accurate   representation   of   the   types   of   pieces   Norell   commissioned   the   Schreiner   company  to  produce.  Terry  stated  that  he  primarily  purchased  pieces  crafted  from   clear  crystals  or  faux  emeralds,  adding,  "he  felt  diamonds  were  right  anytime,  day  or   night."47  After   Traina's   retirement   in   1960,   Norell   began   to   receive   financial   backing   from  the  Revson  family,  who  founded  the  immensely  successful  cosmetic  company,   Revlon.48  Norell  garments  often  appeared  in  Revlon  advertisements.  One  particular   ad  featured  the  Schreiner  company's  "Fire  and  Ice"  bib  necklace  (aptly  named  after   the  Revlon  campaign),  which  consisted  of  graduated  strands  of  faux  ruby  and  clear   rhinestones  that  formed  a  "V"  shaped  design.  It  was  available  for  purchase  through   Neiman  Marcus  and  retailed  for  $100.49     Like  Norell,  Trigère's  designs  were  equally  well  received.  Following  the  debut   of  her  first  collection  in  1942,  she  was  immediately  identified  as  a  skillful  designer,                                                                                                                   
45  B.W.  Epstein,  Fashion  is  our  Business,  107.   46  LIFE,  September  8,  1952,  27.   47  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   48  Ibid.,  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   49  Ibid.  

  

22  

who   had   the   ability   to   provide   clients   with   couture-like   garments.   Her   signature   look  was  simple,  elegant,  and  impeccably  tailored,  as  Eleni  Saks  Epstein  notes,  "the   key   is   always   her   spectacular   skill   with   scissors.   Like   Vionnet,   Chanel   and   Balenciaga,   Trigère   cuts   directly   into   the   fabric   without   toile   or   paper   pattern."50   Lucie   Porges,   who   worked   as   Trigère's   longtime   assistant,   and   whose   mother   and   father   had   both   worked  for   the   Schreiner's   once  stated:   "No   one   can   fit   like   Pauline.   When  Pauline  puts  her  fingers  on  the  fabric,  puts  a  few  pins  in,  suddenly  a  dress  is   there."51  Her  taste  in  jewelry  was  less  conservative  than  that  of  Norell's.  One  of  her   favorite   stones   was   a   one-inch   flat   circular   jet-black   stone   with   a   single   diamante   accent  in  the  middle.  This  stone  was  only  available  from  the  Schreiner  company  and   Trigère   considered   it   to   be   both   chic   and   incredibly   modern.   Of   the   ready-to-wear   designers,   Trigère   was   the   only   one   interested   in   selling   individual   pieces   of   Schreiner   jewelry   (void   of   any   garment)   under   her   own   name.   Such   designs   were   made   during   the   1960s   and   were   sold   with   a   paper   hangtag   that   read   Pauline   Trigère.   From   a   design   perspective,   they   were   very   much   inline   with   the   types   of   pieces  that  the  Schreiner  company  produced  for  the  stores.  Figure  1.12,  features  a   bib  necklace  accented  by  grey  pearls.  This  design  was  sold  under  the  Trigère  name   at  Lord  and  Taylor.52     During  the  war,  the  vast  majority  of  ready-to-wear  garments  were  produced   using  American  fabrics.  Additionally,  such  garments  were  designed,  produced,  and   consumed   by   Americans,   thus   giving   a   boost   to   the   economy   but   also   to   moral.                                                                                                                   
51  Ibid.,  457.   52  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

50  E.S.  Epstein,  "Trigère,"  420.    

  

23  

While   fabric   restrictions,   known   as   Limitations   Order   L-85   were   imposed   on   the   fashion   industry   beginning   in   1943,53  many   designers   felt   that   they   were   easy   to   abide   by.   As   Milbank   points   out,   "with   everyone   limited   in   the   same   way,   competition   to   solve   problems   resulted   in   excellent   design."54  This   is   reiterated   by   Norell  himself,  who  stated,  "We  all  made  pretty  good  clothes  during  the  war."55   During   the   early   1940s,   elegant   fashion   shows   began   to   be   organized   to   showcase  the  new  American  styles,  alleviating  some  of  the  focus  off  the  drudgeries   of   war.   In   1943,   New   York   publicist   and   staunch   supporter   of   American   fashion,   Eleanor   Lambert   organized   a   week   of   New   York   fashion   shows,   which   showcased   the   work   of   fifty-three   American   designers.56  Presenting   garments   on   the   runway   required  the  mannequins  (live  models)  to  be  dressed  from  head  to  toe  and  jewelry   was  an  important  part  of  the  equation.  By  this  point,  Henry  had  established  himself   as  one  of  the  go-to  jewelry  manufacturers  for  custom  designs  and  was  well  liked  and   highly  regarded  within  the  fashion  industry.  Even  with  a  heavy  German  accent  in  an   industry  filled  with  Jewish  designers  and  manufacturers,  he  was  never  overlooked   or   ostracized.   As   Terry   explained,   "It   was   a   different   time,   people   judged   you   on   the   type  of  person  you  were  and  my  father  was  a  very  good  man."57  Being  involved  with   the  spring  and  fall  showings  was  a  very  good  business  for  the  Schreiner  company.   Not  only  did  they  design  the  jewelry  but  buttons,  buckles,  and  other  miscellaneous   items  were  additionally  requested.                                                                                                                       
53  See  B.W.  Epstein,  Fashion  is  our  Business,  104-105,  Milbank,  New  York  Fashion,  133-136,   Morris,  "Norell,"  350.     54  Milbank,  New  York  Fashion,  133.   55  Morris,  "Norell,"  350.   56  Erin  Skarda,  "A  Brief  History  of  New  York  Fashion  Week,"  TIME,  February  9,  2012,   http://newsfeed.time.com/2012/02/09/a-brief-history-of-new-york-fashion-week/.   57T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

24  

The   continued   success   of   the   ready-to-wear   industry   during   the   war   years   enabled  the  Schreiner  company  to  prosper  and  as  a  result,  the  business  continued  to   grow.   Henry   now   employed   between   thirty-five   and   forty   people.   However,   it   was   never   his   intension   to   become   a   large   commercial   outlet.   He   always   said,   "If   you   stand   at   the   back   of   your   factory   and   can't   see   what's   going   on,   your   place   is   too   big   and  you're  not  managing  it  correctly."58  As  a  result,  the  company  never  grew  beyond   more   than   forty   employees.   During   the   war,   the   Schreiner   company   continued   to   manufacture  belt  buckles  and  buttons.  However,  the  production  of  jewelry  became   far  more  important  during  the  1940s  than  it  had  been  in  the  previous  decade.     While  it  is  frequently  assumed  that  the  most  elaborate  Schreiner  pieces  were   created  for  the  designers,  to  either  appear  on  the  runway  or  to  be  sold  along  with   their  garments,  this  was  not  the  case.  The  most  extravagant  Schreiner  jewels  were   the  stand-alone  pieces,  which  were  created  after  the  war  for  the  specialty  shops  and   the   couture   sections   of   department   stores.   In   the   opinion   of   the   designer,   the   garment  was  the  most  important  part  of  the  look  and  the  purpose  of  the  jewelry  was   to  accent  the  design  but  not  to  distract  from  it.  Norell  was  particularly  attuned  to  the   notion   that   elements   within   any   given   ensemble   should   not   compete.   In   an   interview   with   B.W.   Epstein   dating   from   the   mid-1940s   he   stated,   "In   my   opinion   [...]   there   should   be   just   one   important   thing   in   each   ensemble   [...]   The   eye   must   have  something  to  fasten  on,  and  all  other  parts  of  the  costume  should  lead  the  eye   to   that   one   thing."59  As   a   result,   jewelry   created   for   the   ready-to-wear   collections   was   generally   quite   conservative   (Figure   1.13).   During   the   early   1940s,   Schreiner                                                                                                                   
58  Ibid.   59  B.W.  Epstein,  Fashion  is  our  Business,  107.  

  

25  

jewelry   was   primarily   crafted   from   smaller   rhinestones,   which   were   most   often   clear   and   prong-set   in   gold   and   silver   toned   metal.   While   jewel   toned   stones   simulating  sapphire,  emerald,  ruby,  and  aquamarine  were  also  used  (Figure  1.14  to   1.16),  the  unusual  color  formats  that  the  Schreiner  company  is  well  known  for  today   were   not   incorporated   into   their   designs   until   the   mid-1940s   (and   are   far   more   prevalent  in  pieces  that  date  to  the  mid-1950s  and  60s).  As  Terry  explained,  "Color   came  in  after  the  war  because  the  stores  wanted  to  have  variety."60       However,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  during  the  1940s  and  into  the  1950s,   pieces  such  as  those  featured  in  Figures  1.14  to  1.16,  were  the  most  elaborate  pieces   that  Henry  had  ever  created.  While  some  of  the  jewelry  produced  for  the  ready-to- wear   designers   was   commissioned   for   the   sole   purpose   of   accessorizing   their   runway   shows,   often   being   used   multiple   times   to   embellish   various   collections,   other  pieces  were  designed  to  accompany  a  specific  garment.  In  this  circumstance,   both  the  garment  and  the  jewelry  were  sold  together  as  an  ensemble.  For  example,   the   famous   Standard   Poodle   brooch   was   originally   designed   for   a   coat   that   was   manufactured   by   Originala   (Figure   1.17   and   1.18).   There   were   over   two   thousand   coats   produced   and   therefore   more   than   two   thousand   poodle   pins   were   also   made.61     The  selling  of  garments  with  Schreiner  embellishments  became  problematic   when   an   employee   at   Maurice   Rentner   informed   Henry   that   women   were   stealing   brooches   right   off   the   garments   while   trying   them   on   in   the   fitting   rooms.62  Soon                                                                                                                   
62  Ibid.  

60  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   61  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

26  

after,   brooches   began   to   be   sewn   directly   onto   the   garments,   which   successfully   reduced   in-store   left.   Such   pieces   were   still   manufactured   with   a   pin   back   and   could   have   been   easily   unstitched   from   the   garment   once   purchased,   allowing   the   customer  to  remove  the  accessory  for  garment  cleaning  and  to  additionally  wear  it   with   other   ensembles.   This   has   had   a   rather   negative   effect   in   terms   of   historical   research.   Throughout   my   investigation,   I   have   not   been   successful   in   identifying   a   single   Schreiner   brooch,   bracelet,   or   necklace   that   still   accompanies   the   original   garment.   While   historical   advertisements   and   Terry's   memory   have   aided   in   uncovering   this   aspect   of   the   Schreiner   history,   much   remains   unknown   in   terms   of   which   specific   pieces   were   produced   for   individual   designers.   Additionally,   the   practice   of   selling   jewelry   along   with   garments   has   left   various   Schreiner   pieces   unsigned  and  unattributed  as  jewelry  created  for  the  ready-to-wear  collections  was   never   marked   with   the   Schreiner   cartouche   (plaque).   Instead,   these   pieces   were   considered  to  be  part  of  the  garment  and  were  therefore  sold  under  the  name  of  the   designer.63  This   was   a   rather   common   practice   within   the   high-fashion   industries,   including   high-end   ready-to-wear   and   French   couture.   As   Alexandra   Palmer   explains,  "the  range  of  skills  required  to  produce  haute  couture  and  accessories  was   enormous  and  there  were  numerous  artisans  [...]  whose  individual  identities  were   usually  obscured  by  that  of  the  haute  couturier."64  In  regards  to  Schreiner  jewelry,   the  section  of  this  paper  dedicated  to  production  specifies  common  characteristics   of   Schreiner   jewelry,   which   can   aid   in   the   proper   identification   of   unmarked   Schreiner  jewelry.                                                                                                                     
64  Palmer,  Dior,  64.   63  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

27  

With   increased   exposure   on   the   runway,   attention   surrounding   Schreiner   jewelry   grew.   After   the   war,   buyers   from   the   specialty   shops   (and   later   the   department  stores)  became  interested  in  the  possibility  of  selling  Schreiner  jewelry   on  its  own.  Initially  the  stores  were  purchasing  the  jewelry  from  the  ready-to-wear   designers   at   quite   a   marked   up   price,   which   as   Terry   noted,   "was   good   extra   business   for   the   dress   manufacturers."65   However,   several   buyers   soon   became   aware   of   who   was   producing   the   jewelry   and   approached   Henry   directly.   In   the   beginning,   he   had   very   little   interest   in   selling   to   the   stores,   as   his   passion   was   creating  jewelry  for  the  designers.  However,  the  buyers  explained  that  they  were  no   longer   willing   to   pay   the   prices   commanded   by   the   designers   but   would   be   interested   in   placing   regular   orders   if   the   pieces   could   be   attained   at   wholesale   prices.   As   a   result,   Henry   began   to   provide   numerous   boutiques   and   specialty   shops   with   Schreiner   accessories,   most   notably   Martha's,   which   maintained   three   locations,  one  in  New  York  and  two  in  Florida.66  Shortly  thereafter,  Henry  began  to   supply   the   department   stores   with   Schreiner   pieces,   which   included   among   them   I.Magnin   (based   in   San   Francisco,   California),   Sakowitz   (based   in   Houston,   Texas),   Neiman   Marcus   (based   in   Dallas,   Texas),   Frederick   and   Nelson   (based   in   Seattle,   Washington),   Marshall   Field   (based   in   Chicago,   Illinois),   as   well   as   the   Manhattan- based  luxury  department  stores,  Bonwit  Teller,  Bergdorf  Goodman,  Bloomingdales,   Henri   Bendel,   and   Saks   Fifth   Avenue.67  Designing   for   the   stores   was   a   wise   business   decision.  Orders  poured  in  from  across  the  country  and  between  the  business  from                                                                                                                   
66  Ibid.   67  Ibid.  

65  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

28  

the   ready-to-wear   designers   and   the   stores,   Henry   was   able   to   employ   his   staff   twelve  months  of  the  year.     However,   the   store   buyers   were   not   the   only   individuals   to   approach   the   Schreiner   company   with   jewelry   related   requests.   Terry   recounted   how   a   representative  from  the  well-known  Canadian  costume  jewelry  company,  Sherman   visited  the  Schreiner's  showroom,  eager  to  have  pieces  produced  by  Schreiner  but   sold  under  the  Sherman  name.  However,  as  Terry  explained,  the  Schreiner  company   never   produced   pieces   for   any   other   jewelry   manufacturers.   Terry   noted,   "The   Sherman   fellow   was   very   nice   (he   was   a   small   man   with   dark   hair)   but   very   disappointed   that   we   weren't   interested   in   designing   for   them."68  Similarly,   the   Canadian   department   store   Simpsons   was   keen   to   purchase   prototypes   from   the   Schreiner  company,  with  the  intension  of  having  replicas  later  produced  in  Canada.   Again,  Terry  noted,  "We  never  did  that  [...]  We  had  a  limited  production  and  having   the  Schreiner  name  on  a  piece  was  sort  of  sacred."69     Within   many   of   the   department   stores,   Schreiner   jewelry   was   initially   displayed  exclusively  in  the  "French  Room,"  which  was  a  defined  section  of  the  store   dedicated   to   the   display   and   sale   of   Parisian   and   American   couture.   This   arrangement   worked   out   well   as   Henry's   color   palettes   were   often   derived   from   the   season's  couture  and  ready-to-wear  collections.  However,  in  an  attempt  to  reach  a   larger   audience,   Schreiner   accessories   were   later   additionally   displayed   in   the   jewelry   department,   which   in   turn   increased   the   parameters   of   the   Schreiner   Jewelry  Company's  demographic.  Costume  jewelry  has  historically  been  considered                                                                                                                   
68  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   69  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

29  

relatively   democratic,   with   no   social   pedigree   required   to   adorn   a   parure   of   sparkling   rhinestones.   In   1941,   an   article   on   costume   jewelry   appeared   in   the   publication   Nations   Business,   which   stated:   "Today   both   the   parlor   maid   and   the   debutante   wear   ornaments   which   may   be   classified   roughly   as   `attention-getters'   or   what  the  professional  buyers  call  `conversation  pieces,'  designed  to  bridge  the  first   awkward  seconds  in  a  momentous  encounter."70   In   comparison,   Schreiner   designs   were   initially   more   exclusive   than   those   mass-produced  by  other  costume  jewelry  manufacturers  such  as  Coro  or  Weiss.  This   is  because  they  were  only  available  to  those  who  had  the  means  of  acquiring  top-of- the-line  ready-to-wear  garments.  However,  once  these  pieces  became  available  for   individual   sale   within   the   jewelry   divisions   of   department   stores,   women   of   various   social  means  could  afford  a  sparkling  gem  by  Schreiner.  It  should  be  noted  that  this   of   course   does   not   mean   that   women   of   all   social   positions   consumed   equally,   as   Angela   McRobbie   importantly   points   out,   during   the   twentieth   century,   "On   both   sides  of  the  Atlantic  the  imagined  female  consumer  was  invariably  white  and  almost   always  middle  class."71  However,  the  market  for  Schreiner  jewelry  was  nevertheless   widened  as  a  result  of  being  sold  in  the  jewelry  divisions  of  department  stores.  As   such,   pieces   created   by   the   Schreiner   company   had   the   unique   ability   to   influence   fashions  that  catered  to  the  societal  elites  as  well  as  those  produced  for  the  working   class.         It   is   often   assumed   that   fashions   trickle   down   from   the   top,   beginning   with   haute   couture   and   ending   with   mass-produced   mainstream   fashions.   This   was                                                                                                                   
70  Gordon  and  Nerenberg,  "Everywoman's  Jewelry,"  633.   71  McRobbie,  "Bridging  the  Gap,"  74.  

  

30  

certainly  the  business  model  that  the  garment  district  on  Seventh  Avenue  abided  by.   Parisian   couture   influenced   American   ready-to-wear,   whose   designs   were   then   copied   and   produced   by   manufacturers   operating   in   a   lower   price   bracket,   who   in   turn,  had  their  designs  replicated  for  even  less.72  As  Morris  notes,  "To  a  large  extent,   the  clothes  available  for  the  American  shop  girl  and  secretary  were  watered-down   versions   of   what   had   appeared   in   the   Paris   salons."73  This   is   echoed   in   one   of   Trigère's   experiences.   In   1947,   a   manufacturer   from   Seventh   Avenue   approached   her   and   proclaimed,   "Last   year   we   did   such   a   season   with   your   coat,   this   season   I   didn't   find   one   as   good,"74  and   also   by   Originala   Coats,   whose   famous   advertising   line   read,   "There   will   be   a   number   of   unsuccessful   attempts   to   copy   this   coat."75   However,  it  is  important  to  realize  that  trends  also  bubbled  up  from  the  populace  to   the  privileged.  This  has  often  been  the  case  in  examples  of  costume  jewelry  where   items   comprised   of   rather   humble   materials,   including   plastic,   glass,   wood,   and   aluminum   are   eventually   adopted   into   the   wardrobes   of   the   very   wealthy.   In   the   case   of   Schreiner   jewelry,   it   was   the   stores   that   were   initially   interested   in   selling   colorful   costume   jewels,   while   the   high-fashion   designers   had   been   known   to   request   more   conventional   designs   fashioned   primarily   from   clear   crystals.   However,   likely   influenced   by   what   they   saw   in   the   stores   and   in   the   Schreiner's   showroom,   the   designers   eventually   adopted   colored   jewels   into   their   collections,   requesting   particular   color   combinations   to   accompany   their   designs.   In   fact,   in   1968  Norell  (who  had  been  producing  garments  under  the  label  "Norell"  and  later                                                                                                                   
72  Morris,  "Norell,"  324.   73  Ibid.   74  E.S.  Epstein,  "Trigère,"  493.   75  Vogue,  December  1,  1968,  9.  

  

31  

"Norman   Norell"   since   1960)   released   a   collection   of   gowns   that   featured   built-in   jewels.   Massive   Maltese   cross   pendants   and   graduated   strands   of   oversized   jewel- toned   crystals   were   paired   in   stark   contrast   with   light   colored   gowns,   including   ones   fashioned   from   nude   and   yellow   fabric   (Figure   1.19).   This   was   quite   a   departure  from  his  early  commissions,  which  featured  far  more  restrained  jewelry   designs.                   One   could   present   Schreiner   jewelry   as   evidence   that   highlights   the   weakness   of   class-based   theories   of   taste   including   theorist   Thorstein   Veblen's   notion   that   positions   inexpensive   as   unworthy.76  During   the   1940s   through   to   the   70s,   pieces   produced   by   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company   were   available   to   high- fashion   clients   and   working   class   customers   simultaneously.   Individuals   who   purchased   a   small   piece   of   Schreiner   jewelry   from   the   accessories   counter   at   a   department  store  were  not  supplied  with  an  inferior  imitation  of  Schreiner  jewelry,   a   "cheap   and   nasty"77  version   as   Veblen   puts   it,   but   instead   with   an   item   that   was   produced   using   an   identical   process   to   those   that   were   created   for   the   ready-to- wear  industry.                 A   noticeable   shift   occurred   in   the   business   when   the   company   began   designing   for   the   stores.   While   much   of   Schreiner   company's   inspiration   had   previously   come   from   the   ready-to-wear   designers,   the   stores   were   now   playing   a   far   more   active   role   in   communicating   fashion   trends.78  With   the   war   over,   buyers   resumed  their  trips  to  Paris,  occasionally  bringing  back  French  costume  jewelry,  to                                                                                                                   
77  Ibid.   78  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

76  Veblen  in  Barnard,  "Dress  as  an  Expression,"  340.  

  

32  

illustrate  the  types  of  pieces  they  were  interested  in  having  produced  (Figures  1.20   and   1.21).   While   the   Schreiner   company   never   replicated   the   European   designs,   Terry  noted,  "they  were  great  for  giving  us  ideas."79  The  influence  of  these  European   designs   is   obvious   when   looking   at   the   imported   brooch   in   Figures   1.22   and   1.23,   which   features   fancy   dogtooth   prongs,   crimped   settings,   and   hook-and-eye   construction,   all   of   which   are   techniques   that   are   regularly   employed   in   the   production   of   Schreiner   jewelry.   A   further   explanation   of   these   characteristics   is   provided  in  the  chapter  on  production.         Despite   working   with   the   stores,   the   ready-to-wear   clients   remained   an   essential  part  of  the  business  and  they  continued  to  provide  Henry  with  both  their   business   and   their   ideas.  In   the   mid-1940s,  Omar  Kaim,   who  was  the  name   designer   at   Ben   Reig,   introduced   Henry   to   gunmetal   plating.   The   pewter   colored   finish   was   the  result  of  a  process  developed  in  Europe  during  World  War  II  and  the  Schreiner   company   was   one   of   the   first   jewelry   manufactures   to   use   it   in   the   United   States.   Terry  noted,  "[Kaim]  did  a  wonderful  job  of  bringing  the  ideas  of  the  settings  back   with  him  from  Paris."80     In   the   late   1940s,   Francis   White,   an   accessories   buyer   from   Christian   Dior,   approached  Henry.  She  was  interested  in  hiring  the  Schreiner  Jewelry  Company  to   produce   costume   jewelry   under   the   Dior   name.   However,   Dior   requested   an   exclusive  contract,  which  would  prohibit  Henry  from  working  with  any  of  his  other   clients.81  This  was  not  an  unusual  request  from  the  House  of  Dior.  In  her  book  Roger                                                                                                                   
79  Ibid.   80  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   81  Ibid.,  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

33  

Vivier:  Process  to  Perfection,  Elizabeth  Semmelhack  states:  "In  order  to  secure  Vivier,   Dior   entered   into   a   five   year   contract   with   Delman   [a   shoe   company   that   had   a   preexisting  contract  with  Vivier]  in  January  of  1953  which  enabled  Vivier  to  make   shoes   exclusively   for   the   House   of   Dior."82  Henry,   however,   would   not   agree   to   an   exclusive   contract,   as   he   remained   loyal   to   the   individuals   who   had   provided   his   business   with   continued   support.   As   he   often   said,   "Money   isn't   everything,   it's   your   reputation."83  However,  despite  Henry's  unwillingness  to  agree  to  this  condition,  he   nevertheless   manufactured   at   least   one   design   for   Dior.   Figure   1.24   shows   a   Dior   Christmas   advertisement,   which   features   a   pair   of   earrings   and   matching   brooch   fashioned   from   fuchsia   rhinestones.   While   the   Schreiner   company   made   this   set,   Terry  noted  that  someone  else  perhaps  designed  it.84   During   the   more   than   forty   years   that   the   Schreiner   company   was   in   business,   their   jewelry   was   included   in   countless   newspaper   advertisements   and   fashion   editorials.   It   was   featured   on   the   covers   of   various   high-profile   magazines   including   Vogue,   Glamour,   Harper's  Bazaar,   and   Life   and   although   not   credited,   their   jewelry   also   appeared   in   advertisements   for   their   ready-to-wear   clients.   While   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company   never   paid   for   advertising,   they   certainly   received   an   ample   amount   of   free   publicity.   Terry   noted   that   her   father   believed   that   if   one   created  a  quality  product--sales  and  recognition  would  follow.85  It  appears  that  he   was   correct.   While   other   jewelry   manufacturers   employed   celebrities   to   endorse   their  designs,  including  Natalie  Wood  for  Vendome  and  Suzy  Parker  for  Monet  and                                                                                                                   
82  Semmelhack,  Roger  Vivier,  13.   83  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   84  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   85  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

34  

Trifari,  Schreiner  jewelry  appeared  on  actresses  including  Bette  Davis  and  Marilyn   Monroe  as  well  as  on  high-profile  models  including  Suzy  Parker,  Marisa  Berenson,   and  Dovima  as  a  result  of  the  jewelry  being  requested  by  either  the  magazines  or  by   the  designers  themselves  (Figures  1.25  to  1.29).           In  1948,  Henry's  wife,  Mathilda  was  anxious  to  return  to  Europe.    She  had  not   been   back   since   1933,   when   she   had   taken   her   two   daughters   Terry   and   Mary   to   visit   their   grandmother.   During   the   war,   correspondence   between   the   United   States   and  Germany  was  highly  censored  and  as  a  result  letters  between  Mathilda  and  her   mother   rarely   contained   more   than   twenty-five   legible   words.   With   allied   forces   now  running  Germany,  Mathilda  decided  that  it  was  a  good  time  to  return  home.86   While   Henry   was   unable   to   accompany   his   wife,   feeling   that   the   company   was   too   busy   with   orders,   Terry   joined   her   mother.   However,   the   trip   was   not   without   incident.   Mathilda   was   still   not   a   citizen   of   the   United   States   and   while   Henry   had   managed   to   secure   a   visa   for   her   departure,   she   had   trouble   gaining   re-entry   into   the  United  States  from  Stuttgart.  A  German  friend  was  supposed  to  provide  Mathilda   with  a  return  visa  but  the  paper  work  was  held  up  and  what  was  intended  to  be  a   three-week   vacation   turned   into   three   months.   However,   Mathilda's   visa   trouble   would  result  in  Terry  meeting  a  young  man  by  the  name  of  Ambros  Albert.   Ambros,   who   was   ten   years   older   than   Terry,   was   studying   to   become   an   electrical  engineer.  At  a  rather  young  age  he  had  been  drafted  into  the  German  army,   serving   for   seven   years   during   World   War   II.   When   he   met   Terry   he   had   been   planning   to   move   to   Switzerland,   as   he   was   fed   up   with   war   and   German   politics.                                                                                                                   
86  Ibid.  

  

35  

When  Terry  described  meeting  Ambros  she  stated,  "My  husband  was  very  charming   and   he   took   me   to   all   of   these   places   in   Germany."87  After   spending   three   months   together,  Ambros  decided  to  immigrate  to  the  United  States  and  informed  Terry  that   he   planned   to   marry   her.   At   hearing   this   news,   Terry   exclaimed,   "Marry   you?   I'm   going  to  be  a  career  woman,  I'm  not  getting  married."88  However,  Ambros  was  very   persistent.   He   learned   to   both   read   and   write   in   English   and   persuaded   Terry's   father,   Henry,   to   sponsor   his   immigration.   Terry   noted,   "before   I   knew   it   he   was   over  here  and  he  really  convinced  me."89  In  1951,  Terry  and  Ambros  were  married.   While  the  Schreiners  immediately  welcomed  Ambros  into  their  family,  recognizing   that   he   was   both   intelligent   and   kind,   the   vital   role   that   Ambros   Albert   would   assume  in  the  Schreiner  business  was  at  this  point  unknown.    

                                                                                                                
87  Ibid.   88  Ibid.   89  Ibid.  

  

36  

CHAPTER  2:   A  DYNAMIC  DUO--THERESA  AND  AMBROS  JOIN  THE  COMPANY         The  popularity  of  rhinestone  jewelry  flourished  throughout  the  1950s.  Base  metals,   which   had   previously   been   reserved   for   the   war   effort,   once   again   became   readily   available   and   jewelry   manufacturers   eagerly   resumed   production, 90   creating   rhinestone  accessories  by  the  thousands.  Opulent  faux  jewels  were  considered  more   than  simply   au  courant,  they  were  positioned  as  a  sign  of  optimism  and  prosperity.   However,   as   fashion   historian   Valarie   Steele   importantly   points   out,   numerous   political   uprisings   coexisted   during   the   1950s,   which   created   an   environment   of   conformity.91  World   War   II   had   been   quickly   succeeded   by   the   Cold   War,   which   included   the   Korean   and   Vietnam   Wars.   In   1949,   the   Soviet   Union   announced   its   possession   of   an   atomic   bomb,   which   was   quickly   followed   by   the   development   of   the  hydrogen  bomb  in  the  United  States.92  While  advancements  in  nuclear  warfare   resulted  in  a  national  sense  of  paranoia,  North  America  responded  by  perpetuating   an   idyllic   depiction   of   daily   life,   which   was   firmly   focused   on   family-oriented   activities.   During   this   period,   women's   roles   and   responsibilities   within   society   significantly   changed.   They   had   relinquished   their   World   War   II   duties,   which   had   included   such   positions   as   factory   workers,   bomb   builders,   riveters,   streetcar   drivers,  mail  sorters,  and  postal  deliverers  in  an  attempt  to  make  way  for  the  men   who  had  come  home  from  war.  As  a  result,  they  returned  to  the  confinements  of  the   home,  where  they  encountered  a  traditional  set  of  responsibilities.                                                                                                                     
92  Ibid.  

90  Weisberg,  "Prominence  of  Providence,"  381.   91  Steele,  Fifty  Years  of  Fashion,  17.  

  

37  

As   Betty   Friedan   points   out   in   her   controversial   book   from   1963,   The   Feminine  Mystique,  in  the  post  World  War  II  period,  "in  all  the  columns,  books  and   articles  by  experts  [women  were  told]  their  role  was  to  seek  fulfillment  as  wives  and   mothers.   Over   and   over   women   heard   in   voices   of   tradition   and   of   Freudian   sophistication   that   they   could   desire   no   greater   destiny   than   to   glory   in   their   own   femininity."93  This   sentiment   was   reflected   in   women's   fashions   of   the   time,   which   were   excessively   feminine,   to   the   point   of   exaggeration   and   often   appropriated   Christian   Dior's   1947   New   Look,   which   featured   soft   shoulders,   a   narrow   waist,   and   a  full  skirt.  The  1950s  shirtwaist  dress  was  an  adaptation  of  the  New  Look  and  soon   became   the   uniform   of   suburban   housewives.   This   was   in   large   part   due   to   the   notion   that   it   was   considered   an   appropriate   garment   choice   for   almost   every   engagement  both  private  and  social.   During   the   1950s,   people   once   again   had   the   time   and   the   money   to   entertain.   Cocktail   parties   became   a   popular   way   to   host   friends   and   business   acquaintances  as  larger  numbers  of  guests  could  be  accommodated.94  Participating   in  women's  clubs  and  organizations  became  a  familiar  role  of  middle  to  upper  class   American   women.   These   so-called   "invisible   careers"   were   thought   to   increase   a   family's   social   capital,95  whilst   providing   housewives   with   an   appropriate   way   to   apply  their  education  and  to  pass  the  time.  Such  occasions  required  both  the  hostess   and  female  guests  to  be  suitably  dressed  and  costume  jewelry  was  a  key  component   of   a   completed   look.   Throughout   the   1950s,   the   Schreiner   business   continued   to                                                                                                                   
93  Friedan,  Feminine  Mystique,  15.   94  Steele,  Fifty  Years  of  Fashion,  36.   95  Alexandra  Palmer  discusses  this  within  a  Canadian  context  in  Couture  and  Commerce,  8,  

69-70.  

  

38  

thrive  and  many  of  their  most  well  known  designs  were  first  produced  at  this  time,   including  numerous  novelty  pins.   During   the   previous   two   decades,   novelty   accessories   in   the   form   of   figural   brooches   (often   crafted   from   plastics   such   as   Bakelite   and   Lucite)   took   on   a   more   humorous  tone.  Women  could  accessorize  garments  with  brooches  that  looked  like   shiny  red  cherries,  a  fish  bowl,  a  Scottie  dog,  or  even  an   articulated  (has  moveable   parts)   postman.   Humor   can   be   a   powerful   tool   and   one   can   imagine   how   donning   cheerful   accessories   might   have   in   some   small   way   helped   to   alleviate   the   daily   hardships  of  depression  and  wartime  eras.     However,  during  the  1950s  and  60s,  rhinestone  figural  brooches  functioned   in   a   rather   different   manner.   Resembling   fruits,   vegetables,   birds,   butterflies,   and   flowers   (among   others),   these   accessories   contributed   to   the   explicitly   feminine   appearance   of   women   during   these   eras   (Figures   2.1   and   2.2).   By   adorning   items   that   often   directly   linked   them   to   either   the   home   or   the   garden,   women   conspicuously   displayed   their   role   as   homemaker,   an   image   that   they   were   encouraged  to  both  promote  and  conform  to  during  this  time.    An  ideal  example  of   this   is   a   newspaper   advertisement   that   dates   from   the   late   1950s   to   early   1960s,   which   promotes   Bonwit   Teller's   jewelry   department.   It   features   figural   pins   by   Schreiner,   including   a   starfish   for   $8.50,   a   sea   horse   for   $7.50   and   a   lobster   for   $5.50.  The  tagline  reads,  "Bonwit's  Bouillabaisse...  see-our-sea  jewelry"  (Figure  2.3).   By   associating   these   pins   with   the   traditional   French   stew,   bouillabaisse,   Bonwit's   cleverly  links  these  pieces  to  the  kitchen  while  simultaneously  connecting  them  to   French   cuisine   and   by   extension   to   French   fashion.   Therefore,   one   could   interpret  

  

39  

that  the  intended  message  of  this  ad  was  to  position  Schreiner  figurals  as  a  means   for   women   to   experience   French   living,   from   the   comfort   and   the   confinement   of   their  homes.     In   1954,   the   Schreiner   family   suffered   a   significant   personal   loss.   Henry   Schreiner   passed   away   at   the   age   of   fifty-five,   leaving   Terry   and   Ambros   with   the   difficult   decision   of   whether   or   not   to   carry   on   the   Schreiner   business.   Within   the   family,  they  were  certainly  the  obvious  and  perhaps  only  choice  to  run  the  company.   Terry's  sister,  Mary  now  lived  with  her  husband  in  Newport,  Rhode  Island  and  their   youngest   sister,   Mathilda   was   just   a   child   when   their   father   passed   away.   Furthermore,   both   Terry   and   Ambros   had   gained   experience   working   for   the   company  since  becoming  married  in  1951.  In  fact,  in  1952,  Terry  insisted  that  her   father,  mother,  and  sisters  take  a  European  vacation  to  visit  with  family  and  relax.   As  Terry  noted,  "My  father  had  never  had  a  real  vacation.  We  had  a  summer  home  in   Cortland,  NY  but  he  never  went  abroad  except  of  course  when  his  father  was  ill."96   Terry's   insistence   that   her   family   embark   on   a   European   excursion   reflects   how   family  oriented  the  Schreiners  were.    Terry  was  very  close  to  both  her  parents  and   lived   within   a   couple   of   minutes   of   them   throughout   their   lives.   In   Brooklyn   on   East   27th   Street,   Henry   and   Mathilda   occupied   house   number   1881   and   Terry   and   Ambros   lived   at   number   1826.97  Later   on,   when   Ambros   and   Terry   decided   to   move   outside  of  the  city,  they  purchased  a  plot  of  land  upstate  with  Terry's  mother,  which   contained  multiple  homes  (Figure  2.4).                                                                                                                     
97    Mathilda  Schreiner,  Theresa  Albert,  Ambros  Albert,  Certificate  of  Partnership  dated   November  27,  1956,  filed  December  11,  1956,  60  Centre  St,  New  York,  NY,  10007,  County  Clerk,  New   York  County.   96  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

40  

During   the   two-month   period   that   the   Schreiner   family   was   in   Europe,   Terry   and  Ambros  remained  in  New  York  to  run  the  business.  Although  Ambros  had  been   able   to   secure   work   in   the   engineering   field   and   was   in   the   process   of   becoming   licensed   in   the   United   States,   he   had   often   helped   out   his   father-in-law   during   the   evenings   and   on   Saturdays,   as   business   was   busier   than   ever.   As   a   result,   he   had   learned  the  various  steps  involved  in  manufacturing  Schreiner  jewelry.  Additionally,   Terry  was  well  versed  in  the  business  of  fashion.  Before  meeting  her  husband,  she   had   attended   the   Laboratory   Institute   of   Merchandising   (known   today   as   LIM   College),  where  she  earned  a  diploma  in  fashion  merchandising.98       Although   only   twenty-five   at   the   time   of   her   father's   death,   Terry   was   well   known  to  the  designers  as  she  had  been  attending  fashion  events  and  parties  with   her   father   since   her   teens.   As   Terry   explained,   "My   mother   was   a   tremendous   housekeeper,   cook   and   was   wonderful   with   children   but   she   did   not   like   going   to   fancy   dinners   and   socializing   with   business   clients.   So,   from   the   time   that   I   was   about   fourteen   or   fifteen   years   old   I   accompanied   my   father   to   these   functions."99   The   outpouring   of   support   from   the   fashion   community   after   Henry's   death   was   overwhelming.  Terry  received  numerous  cards  and  letters  with  caring  messages  of   sympathy.  Many  members  of  the  Orthodox  Jewish  community  attended  the  funeral,   waiting  outside  of  the  Catholic  Church  to  listen  to  the  entire  mass.  "That  meant  so   much   to   me," 100   Terry   said.   The   fashion   industry   was   eager   for   the   Schreiner   company   to   remain   operational.   One   designer   even   offered   to   lend   Terry   any                                                                                                                   
99  Ibid.   100  Ibid.  

98  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

41  

amount,   up   to   five   figures,   to   help   her   with   the   business.   However,   the   Schreiner   company  was  doing  well  and  the  family  was  not  in  need  of  a  loan.101   While   Terry   had   once   dreamed   of   becoming   a   career   woman,   that   desire   had   subsided  once  becoming  married.  Until  her  father's  death,  she  had  planned  to  stay  at   home   and   raise   a   family,   considering   her   time   working   for   Schreiner   jewelry   as   a   short-term  arrangement.  Similarly,  Ambros  had  thought  of  his  work  at  the  Schreiner   factory  as  a  courtesy  to  the  family,  an  extra  pair  of  hands  to  help  out  when  needed.   He   was   still   focused   on   working   as   an   electrical   engineer.   However,   after   much   contemplation,   Terry   and   Ambros   decided   that   they   would   continue   to   run   the   business,   as   it   seemed   unfortunate   to   dissolve   the   company   when   it   was   increasingly   successful.   With   the   decision   made   to   carry   on   the   business,   Terry   became  the  face  of  the  company,  working  in  the  showroom  and  acting  as  a  liaison   between   the   clients   and   their   factory   workers,   while   Ambros   managed   design   and   production.     On   November   27,   1956,   a   new   partnership   was   formed   between   the   immediate   members   of   the   Schreiner   family.   As   a   result,   the   Certificate   of   Incorporation   that   Henry   had   entered   into   with   Weinberg   and   Pruce   in   1946   was   dissolved.102  The   Certificate   of   Partnership   from   1956   lists   Mathilda,   Terry,   and   Ambros   as   General   Partners,   while   Terry's   sister   Mary   and   her   infant   sister,   Mathilda   (with   Terry's   mother   as   her   trustee)   are   listed   as   limited   partners.103   Limited   partners   were   required   to   contribute   an   initial   sum   of   $3000,   with   no                                                                                                                   
101  Ibid.   103  Ibid.   102  Schreiner  and  Albert,  Certificate  of  Partnership,  1956.  

  

42  

additional   contributions   needed   and   in   return   would   receive   10%   of   the   net   profits.   During  this  time,  the  business  operated  out  of  a  factory  space,  located  at  241  West   36th   Street. 104   Henry   had   moved   the   business   to   this   location   before   he   died.   However,  the  building  was  not  suitable  for  the  installation  of  air-conditioning  and  as   a   result   Terry   and   Ambros   soon   moved   the   company   to   its   third   location   at   39   West   37th   Street,   since   Terry   acknowledged   the   summers   were   far   too   hot   for   their   employees  to  work  without  air-conditioning.105     While  the  information  available  on  Schreiner  jewelry  has  up  until  this  point   been   extremely   limited,   earlier   publications   on   the   subject   of   vintage   costume   jewelry   do   reference   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company.   However,   their   focus   has   largely   remained   on   the   company's   founder,   Henry   Schreiner.   While   Terry   and   Ambros  are  at  times  mentioned,  their  individual  contributions  to  the  success  of  the   business   are   not   explored.   This   has   led   to   misconceptions   about   the   company   including   who   is   responsible   for   many   of   the   Schreiner   company's   designs.   As   it   turns   out,   it   was   Ambros   rather   than   Henry,   who   designed   the   vast   majority   of   pieces  known  to  collectors  today  as  `Schreiner'.     Shortly   after   taking   over   the   business,   Ambros   began   to   design.   This   came   as   a   surprise   to   Terry.   While   she   was   aware   that   her   husband   had   a   working   knowledge   of   jewelry   production,   she   was   in   disbelief   over   his   unusual   and   innovative  designs.  Terry  stated,  "He  amazed  me."106   One  of  the  first  things  Ambros   did   once   officially   joining   the   business,   was   to   organize   the   loose   stone   inventory.                                                                                                                   
104  Ibid.   106  Ibid.   105  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

43  

Through   this   process,   he   discovered   that   many   of   the   Czech   glass   stones,   which   had   been  purchased  by  Henry  in  1939,  had  not  been  used.  This  was  due  to  a  couple  of   factors.   Firstly,   they   had   sat   in   a   barn   for   the   duration   of   World   War   II   and   were   not   shipped   to   the   United   States   until   after   the   war.   Secondly,   they   did   not   fit   into   standardized   settings   and   therefore   required   custom,   handmade   settings.   Ambros'   ability   to   design   settings   to   accommodate   any   stone   size   and   shape   was   what   allowed  the  Schreiner  company  to  produce  pieces  that  looked  completely  different   from  the  jewelry  that  was  available  from  other  designers  at  the  time.       Jewelry  designed  by  Ambros  was  often  oversized,  with  brooches  measuring   on   average   between   2.5"   and   3"   but   reaching   up   to   5.5".   His   bracelets   generally   measure  between  1.5"  and  3"  wide  although  occasionally  they  extend  to  the  forearm   and   even   to   the   elbow.   The   earrings   range   from   designs   that   cover   the   lobe   to   dangly   earrings   that   nearly   touch   the   shoulder,   and   his   statement   bib   necklaces   commonly   cover   the   entire   décolletage   (Figures   2.5   to   2.12).   In   addition   to   being   large,   Ambros'   designs   were   often   three-dimensional,   a   trait   carried   on   from   Henry,   who   had   been   producing   three-dimensional   brooches   since   the   1940s.   This   may   have  been  inspired  by  the  French  design  in  Figure  1.22.  However,  jewelry  designed   by   Ambros   took   the   height   of   jewelry   to   a   new   level,   with   brooches   protruding   outward  of  up  to  1.5"  (Figure  2.13).  His  precise  placement  of  the  pin  back  insured   that   each   brooch   was   balanced   and   never   looked   odd   when   pinned   to   a   garment.   Although  Ambros  was  a  natural  designer,  his  engineering  background  greatly  aided   him   when   it   came   to   figuring   out   the   logistics   of   how   to   best   `build'   a   piece.   His   handmade  settings  allowed  his  creations  to  be  both  sturdy  and  perfectly  weighted.  

  

44  

Arguably,   his   most   famous   design   is   the   `ruffle'   pin.   First   created   in   1957,   in   all   different   colors   and   stone   types,   it   is   comprised   of   undulating   keystones,   which   surround   an   oversized   oval   center   and   initially   retailed   for   $7.50   (Figure   2.14   and   2.15).   Although   the   ruffle   pin   is   today   perhaps   his   most   famous   brooch   design,   Ambros   had   a   particular   affection   for   pins   with   an   openwork   metal   frame,   which   he   referred  to  as  `shadow  boxes'.    This  style  of  brooch  came  in  various  shapes  including   circular,  oval,  star,  and  comma  (Figures  2.16  and  2.17).     Ambros  had  a  knack  for  combining  various  stone  shapes  and  sizes  within  a   single   piece.   Some   of   the   most   spectacular   Schreiner   designs   pair   enormous   glass   stones  with  clusters  of  tiny  crystals  (Figure  2.18).  His  choice  in  stone  placement  is   equally  interesting  as  designs  are  considered  from  every  angle.  He  sometimes  chose   to   situate   beautifully   faceted   crystals   on   the   side   of   a   brooch,   where   they   are   only   visible   when   the   piece   is   viewed   in   profile   (Figures   2.19   and   2.20).   In   other   designs,   large  stones  are  recessed  and  partially  covered  by  the  stones  that  frame  it  (Figure   2.21).   To   fully   appreciate   the   complexity   of   these   designs,   one   must   flip   the   piece   over  and  view  it  from  the  back,  which  reveals  the  various  techniques  employed  to   produce  a  single  piece  (Figure  2.22).     When   examining   Ambros'   designs   it   becomes   obvious   that   he   was   highly   creative.  Not  unlike  his  father-in-law,  Henry,  Ambros  also  had  a  strong  admiration   for  music  and  the  fine  arts.  However,  he  too  had  never  received  any  formal  training   in  the  applied  arts.  Without  a  design  background  to  fall  back  on,  Ambros  gathered   inspiration   from   numerous   other   sources.   Like   Henry,   he   collaborated   with   the   designers   and   store   buyers,   adapting   his   designs   to   suit   their   needs.   Terry   noted,  

  

45  

"He  was  always  willing  to  listen  to  the  designers  [...]  they  might  want  an  extra  row   of   rhinestones   or   to   have   a   necklace   with   a   dog   collar   instead   of   a   regular   collar,   depending  on  the  dress  they  wanted  it  to  accessorize."107  As  well,  he  would  consult   earlier   jewelry   designs,   including   the   European   pieces   brought   back   from   Paris   by   the  stores.  Ambros  and  Terry's  son,  Stephen  remarked  that  he  felt  that  the  military   medals   awarded   during   WWI   and   WWII   influenced   many   of   his   father's   designs,   including   the   Maltese   crosses,   spoke   brooches,   and   ruffle   pins.108  However,   one   of   Ambros'  greatest  inspirations  was  an  encyclopedia  of  royal  jewels.  Terry  described   the   volume   as   a   massive   book   with   a   baby   blue   cover,   displaying   royal   jewelry   from   around  the  globe.  Again,  Ambros  never  copied  the  designs  verbatim  but  he  gathered   many   ideas   and   techniques. 109   This   is   a   rather   interesting   discovery   as   pieces   designed   by   Ambros   at   times   have   a   rather   imperial   flare.   His   sprawling   wire   brooches   are   reminiscent   of   Victorian   designs   (Figure   2.23)   and   many   of   his   bib   necklaces  have  a  decidedly  Middle  Eastern  influence  (Figure  2.24).           In  addition  to  his  aptitude  for  design,  Ambros  was  a  savvy  businessman  and   was   able   to   come   up   with   various   ways   to   increase   production   while   also   cutting   down   on   costs.   He   was   diligent   about   finding   ways   to   eliminate   waste   and   undue   spending  by  reworking  materials  that  the  company  had  already  purchased.  As  well   as   incorporating   older   stones   into   his   designs,   Ambros   would   deconstruct   earlier   jewelry  pieces  that  the  company  had  been  unable  to  sell.  For  example,  belt  buckles  

                                                                                                                
107  Ibid.   108  Stephen  Albert,  interview  with  Eve  Townsend,  September  28,  2013.   109  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

46  

produced   by   Henry   during   the   1930s   often   contained   filigree   work,   which   was   later   repurposed  for  hooks  and  prongs.110       Ambros   also   altered   the   way   the   company   managed   its   orders.   During   Henry's  time,  orders  were  filled  as  they  came  in,  completing  one  full  order  for  either   a   designer   or   store   before   moving   on   to   the   next.   Ambros   saw   this   as   inefficient,   choosing  instead  to  fill  all  of  the  orders  simultaneously;  this  enabled  the  solders  and   stone  setters  to  group  similar  designs  and  color  formats  together,  which  increased   the   speed   of   production   since   employees   did   not   have   to   move   so   frequently   between   different   designs.111  He   also   introduced   the   use   of   a   button   maker,   which   was   a   small   manual   machine   that   produced   various   styles   of   buttons   using   different   dies   (button   molds).   During   the   1930s   and   40s,   all   buttons   had   been   made   by   hand.   The   process   was   time   consuming,   keeping   production   down   and   the   cost   of   the   buttons   up.   Additionally,   since   older   buttons   used   traditional   settings   they   were   equipped   with   prongs,   which   often   caught   on   the   fabric   when   the   buttons   were   pushed  through  the  buttonholes.  By  comparison,  buttons  created  with  the  machine   were   easy   to   produce   and   used   bezel   settings   instead   of   prongs   and   therefore   did   not   catch   on   the   fabric.   However,   oversized   buttons   containing   large   stones   still   had   to   be   produced   by   hand   as   they   did   not   fit   into   the   machine.   Terry   noted   that   two   of   their   employees,   Tony   Rodriquez   and   a   woman   by   the   name   of   Grace   were   responsible  for  the  majority  of  buttons  made.112  

                                                                                                                
110  Ibid.   111  Ibid.   112  Ibid.  

  

47  

While   Ambros   managed   the   back   of   the   business,   working   in   the   factory,   Terry   managed   the   front,   working   in   the   showroom.   She   had   two   women   who   assisted   her,   Virginia   Moshy,   with   whom   she   had   attended   fashion   school   and   Ernestine   Green.   Within   the   showroom,   organization   was   paramount,   as   both   the   designers  and  the  stores  were  interested  in  obtaining  exclusive  designs.  Therefore,   it  was  important  to  remember  exactly  what  had  been  shown  to  each  client  to  avoid   duplications.   When   an   order   was   placed,   meticulous   notes   were   taken   to   describe   each  piece.  In  later  years,  Polaroid  pictures  were  taken  to  ensure  that  no  mistakes   were   made.113   These   records   were   essential   when   filling   backorders,   as   it   was   necessary   that   any   subsequent   orders   were   identical   to   what   had   been   initially   purchased.       By   the   mid-1950s,   the   focus   of   the   Schreiner   company   had   shifted.   During   this   time,   40%   of   the   business   was   dedicated   to   the   ready-to-wear   industry   while   60%   catered   to   the   stores.   Working   with   the   store   buyers   was   never   dull.   These   buyers  were  primarily  women  who  often  spent  their  entire  career  working  for  the   same   store.   They   were   full   of   ideas   and   requests   and   possessed   an   impressive   knowledge   of   their   client   base   and   could   therefore   accurately   predict   what   they   would   buy.   Terry   remembers   how   some   of   the   buyers'   demands   were   quite   unorthodox.   For   example,   a   buyer   from   Henri   Bendel   loved   the   look   of   unfinished   metal  settings  paired  with  older  stones.114     When   buyers   arrived   at   the   Schreiner's   showroom,   the   jewelry   was   neatly   laid  out,  so  that  each  piece  was  easy  to  see  and  touch.  Additionally,  brooches  were                                                                                                                   
113  Ibid.   114  Ibid.  

  

48  

often   displayed   on   fabric   swatches   as   the   Schreiner   company   often   used   unfoiled   stones   in   open   backed   settings   (Figure   2.25).   Placing   a   brooch   on   top   of   a   swatch   of   fabric   allowed   the   coloring   of   the   material   to   be   seen   through   the   transparent   stones,   providing   the   client   with   the   full   effect   of   each   piece.   Shortly   after   a   buyer   arrived,   a   teacart   would   be   rolled   into   the   room,   which   was   filled   with   donuts,   pastries,  coffee,  and  tea.115  Appointments  often  lasted  a  full  morning  or  afternoon  as   there  was  always  a  lot  to  view  and  discuss.       Unlike   the   designers   who   requested   the   jewelry   to   be   unsigned,   viewing   it   as   an   extension   of   their   garment,   the   stores   felt   rather   differently.   They   requested   that   the  pieces  be  signed  and  promoted  the  Schreiner  label  within  their  stores.  However,   the   Schreiner   name   is   often   oddly   excluded   from   the   department   stores'   newspaper   advertisements,   which   regularly   featured   Schreiner   accessories   (Figures   2.3,   2.27,   and   2.33).   This   may   have   contributed   to   the   company's   eventual   obscurity   as   customers   may   have   associated   their   purchase   of   Schreiner   jewelry   with   the   store   from   which   they   bought   it   as   opposed   to   the   manufacturer   who   produced   it,   regardless  of  the  fact  that  the  piece  was  signed.     Initially,   pieces   created   for   the   stores   were   based   on   designs   that   had   previously   been   produced   for   the   ready-to-wear   designers,   although   they   were   usually   created   in   different   color   formats.   As   Terry   stated,   "if   we   didn't   recycle   designs,   we   would   have   never   been   able   to   please   all   the   people   who   wanted   to   place   orders   with   us."116  However,   by   the   mid-1950s,   the   stores   began   to   request   pieces  that  were  far  more  elaborate  than  anything  they  had  ever  produced  for  the                                                                                                                   
115  S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   116  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

49  

designers.  It  is  during  this  time  that  the  Schreiner  company  began  to  produce  their   extravagant   bib   necklaces,   which   were   available   in   numerous   designs   and   color   formats   and   sold   particularly   well   at   Saks   Fifth   Avenue,   Lord   and   Taylor,   and   Martha's.117  Within  the  stores,  sizing  of  jewelry  became  an  issue,  as  pieces  produced   for   the   designers   were   only   ever   available   in   one   size.   In   comparison,   pieces   designed  for  the  department  stores  needed  to  fit  a  variety  of  body  types.  Bracelets   began  to  be  offered  in  various  sizes  and  necklaces  were  designed  with  an  extension   chain  that  allowed  for  easy  adjustments.         One   of   the   main   reasons   that   the   stores   became   the   focus   of   the   Schreiner   business   was   because   their   companies   were   interested   in   providing   customers   with   jewelry   that   was   appropriate   for   every   season   and   occasion.   Previously,   the   Schreiner   company   had   only   produced   jewelry   for   the   spring   and   fall   collections.   Fall  had  always  been  their  most  successful  time  as  heavier  garments  permitted  the   use   of   larger   accessories   and   also   required   buttons   and   belt   buckles   for   coats   and   suits.   However,   the   stores   became   interested   in   purchasing   jewelry   that   was   suitable   for   summer   and   daytime   wear.   This   required   pieces   to   be   lighter   in   both   style  and  color.  From  the  mid-1950s  through  to  the  1970s,  the  Schreiner  company   produced   thousands   of   pieces   in   summer-inspired   palettes,   which   often   incorporated   opaque   pastel   stones   (Figure   2.26).   In   addition   to   smaller   scale   necklaces   and   bracelets,   the   summer   collections   were   how   the   figural   brooches   were   first   introduced.   These   small   to   medium   sized   pins   resembled   daisies,   sunflowers,   geraniums,   bugs,   bees,   turtles,   owls,   peas   in   a   pod,   turnips,   carrots,                                                                                                                   
117  Ibid.  

  

50  

strawberries,  and  cherries  among  many  others,  and  could  have  been  purchased  for   around   $3.00   to   $8.50.   Terry   commented   on   the   figural   brooches   stating,   "We   always   had   a   big   garden   and   lots   of   flowers,"118  and   suggested   that   her   husband   gathered  inspiration  from  numerous  sources,  including  their  family  farm.  Sakowitz,   which  was  a  department  store  based  in  Houston,  Texas,  often  promoted  the  figural   collections   (Figure   2.27)   and   they   sold   particularly   well   at   Bonwit   Teller   in   New   York.     Appointments   with   the   designers,   including   Norell   and   Trigère,   worked   rather   differently   than   those   with   the   store   buyers.   Although   the   designers   would   initially   visit   the   showroom   to   bring   over   fabric   swatches   and   to   discuss   possible   designs  and  materials,  once  their  jewelry  samples  were  completed,  either  Terry  or   one   of   her   assistants   would   deliver   them   to   the   designer   directly.119   With   the   jewelry  placed  on  velvet-lined  trays,  the  designers  would  sort  through  their  racks  of   garments,   selecting   jewelry   that   appropriately   suited   their   designs   while   figuring   out   what   quantities   they   required.   Visiting   the   designers   was   known   as   `sampling'   and   it   was   a   rather   exclusive   experience.   While   sampling,   employees   from   the   Schreiner   company   were   able   to   view   the   ready-to-wear   collections   before   they   debuted  on  the  runway.120     On   numerous   occasions,   pieces   of   jewelry   that   Ambros   had   designed   specifically  for  Terry  would  catch  the  attention  of  a  designer  or  buyer.  Perhaps  the   most  famous  instance  of  this  occurred  during  a  meeting  with  the  accessories  buyer,                                                                                                                   
119  Ibid.     120  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

118  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

51  

Miss  Gordon  from  Elizabeth  Arden.  To  the  meeting,  Terry  had  worn  a  heart  shaped   brooch  fashioned  from  red  rhinestones,  with  "IKE"  written  in  the  center  of  the  heart   in   clear   baguette   crystals   (Figure   2.28).   The   pin   was   an   adaptation   of   the   "I   like   Ike"   campaign   slogan   for   President   Dwight   D.   Eisenhower.   When   Gordon   (who   was   coincidently   also   Arden's   niece)   saw   the   pin   she   exclaimed,   "Terry,   I   have   to   have   that  pin!"  to  which  Terry  responded,  "You  can  have  it,  I  know  where  to  get  more."121   Later   that   afternoon,   Terry   received   a   call   from   Gordon,   inquiring   about   the   purchase  of  one  hundred  Ike  pins.  As  it  turned  out,  Elizabeth  Arden  was  collecting   donations   on   behalf   of   the   Republican   Party   and   wanted   to   gift   a   pin   with   each   donation   of   $100   or   more.122  For   the   promotion,   Ambros   produced   an   additional   "Ike"  design,  a  shadow  box  pin,  which  was  oval  in  shape  and  contained  red  and  blue   rhinestones,   with   "I   LIKE   IKE"   written   in   clear   baguette   stones   (Figure   2.29).   The   brooch  designs  were  such  a  success  that  Terry  decided  to  mail  one  on  behalf  of  her   mother,   to   Mrs.   Eisenhower,   who   responded   with   a   heartfelt   thank   you   note   that   read,  "Your  lovely  gift  could  not  be  more  appropriate  for  me  [...]  I  am  delighted  with   your   special   thought.   The   little   heart   shaped   pin   [...]   will   enhance   many   of   my   costumes   this   fall   [...]   thank   you   for   brightening   my   spirits   so!"   (Figure   2.30   and   2.31)   Mrs.   Eisenhower   was   additionally   photographed   by   the   press   while   wearing   the  brooch  (Figure  2.32).         The   "I   Like   Ike"   brooch   designs   are   just   one   of   the   many   examples   that   illustrate   the   Schreiner   company's   ability   to   quickly   seize   new   business   opportunities.  While  their  company  had  focused  on  the  production  of  jewelry  since                                                                                                                   
121  Ibid.   122  Ibid.,  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

52  

the   1940s,   they   continued   to   create   miscellaneous   items   for   various   businesses.   Since   Ambros   had   the   ability   to   figure   out   almost   any   design,   they   seldom   turned   clients   away.   Terry   attributes   the   company's   success   to   their   willingness   to   experiment,  stating,  "We  tried  lots  of  different  things  and  that  was  really  the  answer   to   our   luck."123  During   the   1950s   and   60s,   hair   ornaments   were   made   for   upscale   salons,  including  the  one  at  Bergdorf  Goodman  and  also  for  Elizabeth  Arden's  ready- to-wear   collections.   Arden   was   particularly   fond   of   en   tremblant   designs,   which   employed   the   use   of   tiny   springs,   causing   the   piece   to   quiver   as   the   wearer   moved.124     Other   examples   of   the   company's   ability   to   find   new   market   opportunities   were   their   Christmas   themed   jewelry   and   tree   ornaments.   These   items   were   originally  designed  specifically  for  members  of  the  Schreiner  family  but  were  later   incorporated   into   the   company's   retail   line,   with   the   jewelry   sold   at   a   limited   number   of   department   stores   and   the   tree   ornaments   sold   at   Elizabeth   Arden's   boutique.  The  company  also  produced  rhinestone  shoe  embellishments,  which  were   equipped  with  an  elastic  strap  that  fit  comfortably  over  the  toes  and  were  sold  at  the   department  stores  including  I.  Miller  and  Neiman  Marcus  and  retailed  for  between   $3.00  and  $18.00.  Neimen  Marcus'  ad  read,  "Jewelry  is  news  from  tip  to  toe,"  while  I.   Miller's   states,   "fabulous   shoe   buckles   to   light   up   the   perfectionist   pump"   (Figure   2.33).  Another  successful  venture  was  the  design  of  belt  buckles  for  Midtown  Belts,   which   was   owned   by   the   well-known   belt   manufacturer   Ben   King.   Not   unlike   the   Schreiner   company,   he   too   sold   designs   to   the   high-end   ready-to-wear   designers,                                                                                                                   
123  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   124  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

53  

including  Norell  and  Trigère  and  also  to  the  department  stores.125  The  belt  buckles   that  were  produced  for  this  company  were  often  exact  replicas  of  Schreiner  brooch   designs   and   were   sold   by   Midtown   Belts   attached   to   leather   belt   straps.   Another   recognized  belt  manufacturer  was  Calderon  Belts.  They  commissioned  the  Schreiner   company   to   produce   jeweled   belts,   which   had   an   extension   of   links   (identical   to   a   necklace)   enabling   one   size   to   fit   numerous   customers   (Figure   2.34).126  Jeweled   belts   became   a   big   business   for   the   Schreiner   company   during   the   1950s   through   to   the  70s.  They  produced  exclusive  belt  designs  for  Norell,  Trigère,  and  George  Halley,   who   started   his   own   clothing   line   in   1966   with   his   wife   Claudia   Morgan,   who   had   previously  modeled  for  Norell.127   Costume   jewelry   produced   during   the   1940s,   50s,   and   60s   was   often   marketed   as   `junk   jewelry'   or   `throwaway   jewelry'   to   be   replaced   by   the   most   current  accessories  of  the  coming  season.  This  mentality  was  particularly  suited  to   the   1960s,   which   was   a   decade   dominated   by   mass-production   and   mass- consumption.   As   a   result,   manufacturers   catered   to   a   demographic   that   was   increasingly  interested  in  obtaining  a  disposable  lifestyle.  Within  the  United  States,   the  crowning  achievement  of  the  1960s  was  the  moon  landing  on  July  20,  1969.  The   lead  up  to  this  historic  event  caused  many  to  believe  that  lunar  living  would  one  day   be  a  viable  option.    In  1966,  Julian  Tomchin,  a  paper  fabric  designer  with  an  interest   in   disposable   apparel   stated,   "It's   right   for   our   age.   After   all   who   is   going   to   do  

                                                                                                                
125  Ibid.   126  Ibid.   127  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

54  

laundry  in  space?"128  Unlike  the  1930s,  40s  and  50s,  which  consciously  looked  to  the   past,   the   1960s   were   dedicated   to   the   future   and   disposable   clothing   and   accessories  played  a  key  role  in  disseminating  this  belief.  Designer  Betsy  Johnston's   boutique  Paraphernalia  opened  in  the  summer  of  1965  and  featured  clothing  made   from  disposable  and  ephemeral  materials.129  One  of  the  boutique's  designers,  Elisa   Stone  stated,  "I  loved  the  idea  that  my  clothes  were  not  going  to  last."130  Alexandra   Palmer   suggests   that   this   interest   in   obtaining   a   disposable   lifestyle   was   largely   connected   to   newly   liberated   attitudes   towards   sex.   As   a   result,   these   disposable   items  can  be  decoded  or  `reread'  as  indications  of  social  change.131       The  sexual  revolution  of  the  1960s  impacted  nearly  every  facet  of  the  fashion   industry,   resulting   in   far   more   daring   and   provocative   designs.   In   1964,   Rudi   Gernreich  introduced  his  topless  bathing  suit  while  during  the  same  period  British   designer   Mary   Quant   and   French   designer   André   Courrèges   raised   hemlines   to   unprecedented   heights.   The   appropriately   named   `miniskirt'   was   a   reflection   of   what   young   girls   were   wearing   on   the   streets   of   London,   which   had   become   the   epicenter  of  youth  fashion.132  Terry  remembers  the  shift  of  focus  to  British-designed   fashions   well,   since   several   designers   from   the   United   Kingdom   approached   the   Schreiner   business   during   this   time.   Terry   noted   that   it   was   not   a   seamless   transition.  The  Schreiner  Jewelry  Company  did  not  have  the  same  rapport  with  the  

                                                                                                                
128  Palmer,  "Paper  Clothes,"  94,  Walford,  Ready  to  Tear,  21.   129  Wollen,  "Plastics,"  145.     130  Ibid.   131  Palmer,  "Paper  Clothes,"  93.   132  Steele,  Fifty  Years  of  Fashion,  52-54.  

  

55  

British   designers   as   they   did   with   the   American   ones   and   Terry   stated   that   the   former  were  very  specific  and  harder  to  please.133   While   the   ideal   silhouette   in   the   1950s   exhibited   narrow   shoulders,   an   overtly   pronounced   bust,   and   tiny   waist,   the   1960s   beauty   ideal   was   waiflike   and   rather  underdeveloped.  The  focus  on  youth  was  obvious  and  it  was  proliferated  in   the   editorials   and   cover   images   of   women's   and   teens   magazines   by   models   like   Twiggy,   Jean   Shrimpton,   and   Peggy   Moffit.   While   the   1960s   youth   were   increasingly   vigilant   about   making   their   voices   heard,   it   was   as   a   result   of   severely   troubled   times.  As  Milbank  notes:      American   pride   in   its   accomplishment   at   landing   a   man   on   the   moon   was   tempered   by   the   lingering   shock   of   the   assassinations   of   John   F.   Kennedy,   Martin   Luther   King,   Jr.,   and   Robert   Kennedy.   Race   riots   had   shaken   the   country,   and   the   Vietnam   War   kept   escalating.   For   a   generation   that   had   started   kindergarten   in   schools   equipped   with   fallout   shelters   in   the   event   of   nuclear  attack,  the  violence  in  the  world  was  terrifying.134         However,  in  contrast  with  the  1950s,  which  was  led  by  a  generation  who  had   largely   chosen   to   paint   a   uniform   picture   of   perfection,   attitudes   in   the   1960s   drastically   changed.   Younger   generations   were   fed   up   with   the   state   of   the   world   and   became   determined   to   face   problems   and   intolerances   head   on.   Fashions   reflected   the   choices   made   by   these   young   Americans,   who   were   bold,   rebellious,   and   antiestablishment.   It   is   perhaps   of   little   surprise   then,   that   with   everything   going  on  in  the  1960s,  including  issues  surrounding  gender,  race,  sexuality,  and  war,  

                                                                                                                

133  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   134  Milbank,  New  York  Fashion,  200.  

  

56  

numerous   styles   coexisted   during   this   period.   While   not   all   styles   catered   to   the   use   of  costume  jewelry,  it  remained  an  essential  aspect  of  various  looks.     Many   of   the   Schreiner's   most   outrageous   styles   were   produced   during   the   1960s.  Enormous  bib  necklaces,  wide  bracelets,  and  chandelier  earrings  would  have   accented  sheath  dresses,  cocktail  dresses,  and  the  prevalent  high-waisted  baby-doll   dresses   (Figures   2.8,   2.10,   and   2.11).   The   rarest   Schreiner   design,   a   rhinestone   halter-top,  was  created  in  limited  production  during  the  1960s  and  was  available  for   purchase   through   Saks   Fifth   Ave.   Stephen   noted   that   a   client   from   Saks   had   commissioned   their   halter-top   in   a   custom   size,   only   to   reorder   the   exact   same   design  a  few  weeks  later  after  losing  the  first  one  at  a  party.135     It  is  important  to  note  that  the  positioning  of  costume  jewelry  as  `throwaway'   appears  to  be  flawed  when  considering  the  jewelry  included  in  this  research.  While   in   a   few   circumstances   the   disposability   of   Schreiner   jewelry   can   be   considered   due   to   obvious   wear   (including   repairs,   patinas   or   clouded   rhinestones),   in   the   vast   majority  of  these  pieces,  their  pristine  condition  negates  their  status  as  potentially   `disposable'.  Of  the  over  one  thousand  examples  of  Schreiner  jewelry  examined  for   this  project,  very  few  were  in  poor  condition.  Although  this  reflects  on  the  quality  of   the  materials  used,  it  also  suggests  that  the  wearers  valued  these  pieces;  the  number   of   extant   examples   suggests   that   the   original   owners   hung   onto   them   for   much   longer  than  a  single  season.   The   1970s   brought   about   great   change   in   the   esthetics   of   costume   jewelry.   Layered   chain   and   plain   metal   pieces   became   popular,   as   did   items   crafted   from                                                                                                                   

135  Stephen  Albert,  interview  with  Eve  Townsend,  June  24,  2012.  

  

57  

shell,   wood,   macramé   and   `ethnic'   inspired   beads.   The   hippie   movement   had   been   gaining   momentum   since   1967.   As   a   result,   the   ideals   of   disposable   apparel   soon   became  contested  as  an  ecological  concern,  with  groups  speaking  out  against  mass- pollution  and  waste.136  It  therefore  seems  appropriate  to  assume  that  the  marketing   of   costume   jewelry   as   `junk'   or   `throwaway'   contributed   to   its   downfall.   As   Carole   Tanenbaum   appropriately   notes   in   her   book   Fabulous  Fakes:  A  Passion  for  Vintage   Costume  Jewelry,   "Of   all   the   eras   so   far,   the   seventies   stands   out   as   being   the   least   focused  on  jewelry."137  However,  the  department  stores  and  specialty  shops  still  had   a   market   for   high-quality   costume   jewelry.   During   this   period,   the   Schreiner   company   experimented   with   Lucite,   a   transparent   thermoplastic,   which   was   purchased   in   Europe   and   had   a   surface   that   did   not   scratch.   Ambros   felt   that   the   Lucite  pieces  were  very  contemporary  looking.  Enormous  Lucite  cabochons,  which   Terry  referrers  to  as  "bubbles"  or  "eggs"  were  incorporated  into  many  of  their  later   designs, 138   including   belts,   necklaces   and   brooches   (Figure   2.35).   They   also   experimented   with   opaque   plastics,   which   came   in   black,   coral,   chalk   white,   and   turquoise.   Terry   noted   that   the   Lucite   and   plastic   pieces   sold   particularly   well   at   Bonwit  Teller.139     Also  during  this  period,  Mrs.  Jean  Eddy,  who  managed  the  Park  Avenue  Room   Collection  of  Saks  Fifth  Avenue,  approached  Terry  with  a  new  idea.  She  had  recently   returned   from   Europe,   where   she   had   bought   a   stretch   belt   and   was   interested   in  

                                                                                                                
136  Palmer,  "Paper  Clothes,"  102,  Walford,  Ready  to  Tear,  44.   137  Tanenbaum,  Fabulous  Fakes,  166.   139  Ibid.     138  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

58  

having   more   produced.140  Initial   designs   had   stones   incorporated   into   the   overall   design,   with   expandable   links   every   few   inches.   These   early   stretch   belts   were   available  in  small,  medium,  and  large.  However,  women  often  purchased  them  in  too   small   of   a   size,   which   caused   the   belts   to   overstretch   loosening   the   stones   and   causing   the   settings   to   distort.   Later   designs   were   constructed   out   of   single   and   double  strands  of  expandable  metal  chain,  which  easily  stretched  to  fit  a  variety  of   shapes  and  sizes.  Ambros  had  originally  purchased  the  expandable  metal  to  use  for   dog   collar   necklaces   but   when   worn   too   close   to   the   skin   the   material   pinched.141   However,   the   expandable   material   turned   out   to   be   the   perfect   solution   for   the   production   of   stretch   belts   (Figures   2.36   and   2.37).   This   style   of   belt   fastened   at   the   front   and   ranged   in   style   from   daytime   looks   comprised   of   turtle   and   butterfly   closures   to   extravagant   evening   designs   fashioned   from   crystals   and   pearls   that   measured  up  to  8"  in  length.  Mrs.  Eddy  arranged  for  the  belts  to  be  sold  at  Saks  Fifth   Avenue   under   the   Schreiner   name.   When   the   Schreiner   company   announced   its   intended  closure  in  1974,  Saks  placed  a  $100  000  purchase  order  for  these  belts  as   they   wanted   to   insure   that   they   had   a   full   inventory.142  Thousands   of   these   belts   were  produced  during  the  early  1970s  and  many  still  exist  today.     On  February  18,  1971,  Terry  and  Ambros  formed  another  partnership,  which   was   this   time   comprised   of   just   the   two   of   them.143  This   Business   Certificate   for   Partners  states  that  the  limited  partnership,  formed  in  1956  between  the  immediate                                                                                                                   
140  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.   141  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   142  Ibid.   143  Theresa  and  Ambros  Albert,  Business  Certificate  for  Partners,  dated  February  18,  1971,   filed  February  24,  1971,  60  Centre  St,  New  York,  NY,  10007,  County  Clerk,  New  York  County.  

  

59  

members  of  Schreiner  family,  was  dissolved  on  December  31,  1970.  On  December  8,   1972,   Terry   and   Ambros   reincorporated   the   company,   making   it   the   "Schreiner   Jewelry   Co.   Inc."   once   again.144  The   last   document   filed   at   the   New   York   County   Clerk's   office   was   signed   on   January   2,   1973,   which   was   a   Certificate   of   Discontinuance   of   Business   as   Partners.145   While   Terry   and   Ambros   had   legally   discontinued   their   business   partnership   dating   to   February   of   1971,   they   continued   to   produce   jewelry   under   their   Certificate   of   Incorporation   until   1974,   moving   the   business  to  its  fourth  and  final  location  at  417th  5th  Avenue.146   During  this  period,  women's  roles  were  once  again  transitioning.  The  1970s   witnessed  thousands  of  women  returning  to  the  workforce  and  taking  the  necessary   steps  to  obtain  higher  education.  The  women's  movement,  later  defined  as  second- wave   feminism,   had   been   gaining   ground   since   the   early   1960s   and   focused   on   a   number   of   national   issues   that   directly   impacted   women's   daily   lives   including   gender  inequality,  sex  discrimination,  and  reproductive  rights.  While  women  living   below   the   poverty   line   had   continually   worked   out   of   necessity   to   provide   for   themselves   and   their   families,   during   the   seventies   women   from   various   socio- economic   positions   became   interested   in   having   a   life   that   existed   outside   of   the   home   and   beyond   the   grasp   of   domesticity.   While   youth   had   prevailed   in   the   1960s,   women   in   the   1970s   exhibited   a   decidedly   more   mature   look.   Suits   once   again   became   popular   as   they   fit   into   the   confinements   of   appropriate   office   dress.                                                                                                                   
144  Theresa  and  Ambros  Albert,  Certificate  of  Incorporation,  dated  December  8,  1972,  filed   February  28,  1972,  60  Centre  St,  New  York,  NY,  10007,  County  Clerk,  New  York  County.   145  Theresa  and  Ambros  Albert,  Certificate  of  Discontinuance  of  Business  as  Partners,  dated   January  2,  1973,  filed  February  27,  1973,  60  Centre  St,  New  York,  NY,  10007,  County  Clerk,  New  York   County.   146  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

60  

However,   now   they   were   available   with   pants   not   just   skirts.   Office   jewelry   was   rather  subdued  and  finer  in  scale.  Long  chains,  narrow  bangles,  pendant  necklaces,   and  stud  earrings  were  common  choices.  With  women  busy  in  the  workplace,  there   was  little  time  for  cocktail  parties,  women's  luncheons  or  charity  balls,  all  of  which   had  seemed  so  vital  in  the  previous  two  decades.  As  a  result,  interest  in  over-the-top   brazenly  fake  costume  jewelry  had  largely  diminished.     Terry   noted   that   during   this   time,   the   high-fashion   garment   industry,   of   which   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company   was   so   ingrained,   was   largely   considered   dead.147  This   was   as   a   result   of   being   labeled   elitist,   matronly,   and   out   of   touch   during   the   mid   to   late   1960s.   As   well,   with   the   influx   of   young   workers,   department   stores   were   letting   go   of   their   senior   level   staff,   including   many   of   their   longtime   buyers.   This   had   a   rather   negative   impact   on   the   Schreiner   company's   business.   Terry   noted   that   the   new   buyers   were   often   inexperienced   and   unaware   of   their   markets  and  demographics.  Many  orders  were  ill-received  as  a  result  of  buyers  not   accounting  for  changes  in  taste  and  therefore  purchasing  the  same  pieces  for  shops   in   Phoenix,   Arizona   as   they   did   for   shops   in   Seattle,   Washington.148  While   the   above   changes   contributed   at   least   in   some   small   part   to   the   eventual   closure   of   the   Schreiner   Jewelry   Company,   it   was   a   far   more   personal   reason   that   brought   the   business  to  an  end.         In   1974,   Ambros   Albert   passed   away.   As   a   result,   Terry   made   the   difficult   decision   to   close   the   business   and   retire,   finding   it   impossible   to   consider   running   the   company   without   her   husband   by   her   side.   She   noted,   "I  think  getting  out  of  the                                                                                                                   
148  Ibid.   147  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

61  

business  when  I  did  was  the  right  decision  [...]  I  could  never  have  continued.  I  would   have   liked   to   but   I   couldn't."149  There   is   little   doubt   that   with   Ambros   at   the   helm   of   production,   the   Schreiner   company   could   have   adapted   to   almost   any   change   in   fashion   (they   had   of   course   been   doing   it   for   decades).   However,   the   truth   of   the   matter   was   that   by   the   mid-1970s,   the   heyday   of   fabulous,   high-end   costume   jewelry   was   sadly   over.   Following   Ambros'   death,   Terry   continued   to   sell   pieces   from   the   company's   inventory,   seeing   no   point   in   keeping   one   hundred   examples   of   the   same   pin,   necklace,   or   bracelet.   However,   by   1975,   production   of   Schreiner   jewelry  had  stopped.150        

                                                                                                                
149  Ibid.   150  Ibid.  

  

62  

CHAPTER  3:   PRODUCTION  TO  PERFECTION--HOW  A  SCHREINER  PIECE  IS  MADE         When   it   comes   to   production,   the   Schreiner   company   was   prolific.   While   their   designs   were   never   mass-produced   and   most   often   finished   by   hand,   a   career   spanning   more   than   forty   years   yielded   an   impressive   amount   of   work.   Serious   collectors   of   Schreiner   jewelry   continually   come   across   designs   they   have   never   seen  before  and  these  are  just  the  pieces  that  have  survived  up  until  now.  Over  the   course   of   forty   years,   the   production   of   Schreiner   jewelry   was   a   process   that   involved   the   entire   family.   Henry's   wife,   Mathilda   helped   to   set   stones,   especially   during   peak   seasons   when   there   were   plenty   of   orders   to   fill.   Similarly,   Terry   learned   to   set   stones   by   the   age   of   twelve,   earning   extra   Christmas   money   by   helping  out  her  father.  However,  she  was  quick  to  note  that  when  it  came  to  setting   stones   into   castings   she   was   never   too   successful   as   the   glue   always   caused   her   fingers  to  stick  together.151   Once  Terry  and  Ambros  had  their  own  children,  Stephen,   Richard,  Michael,  and  Helen  would  happily  sit  in  front  of  the  television,  earning  their   allowance   by   making   adjustables   (circular   links   used   to   extend   the   length   of   necklaces)   as   well   as   hooks   and   other   findings.   Stephen   commented   on   how   their   father  would  pass  by,  singling  out  the  pieces  that  had  made  the  cut  while  instructing   which  ones  needed  to  be  redone.152   When   discussing   the   day-to-day   operations   of   the   Schreiner   business,   it   is   important  to  acknowledge  that  there  were  around  forty  individuals  responsible  for   the   organization   and   production   of   these   pieces.   While   Ambros   had   the   ability   to                                                                                                                   
151  Ibid.   152  S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

63  

design   custom   settings   and   Terry   had   the   connections   to   bring   in   good   business,   they   relied   heavily   on   their   qualified   staff   to   produce   the   appropriate   number   of   pieces  required  to  properly  fill  orders.  In  conversations  with  Terry,  she  spoke  with   genuine  admiration  for  her  staff,  attributing  the  success  of  her  family's  company  to   their  loyal  employees  stating,  "We  had  such  good  help  [...]  many  of  the  people  who   worked  for  my  father  continued  to  work  for  me.  We  had  people  who  worked  for  us   for   over   twenty-five   years."153  While   the   company   never   had   a   union,   each   worker   was  provided  with  Blue  Cross,  life  insurance,  and  three  weeks  of  paid  vacation  per   year.   As   well,   during   the   holiday   season,   employees   were   encouraged   to   choose   (free   of   charge)   several   items   of   Schreiner   jewelry   to   gift   to   their   family   members   and  friends.154  Historically,  the  concept  of  factory  workers  being  permitted  to  adorn   their   own   bodies   with   pieces   they   produced   is   extremely   unusual.   In   most   circumstances,  workers  in  the  fashion  industry  would  never  have  had  the  means  to   acquire  the  items  they  spent  their  lifetime  making.       However,   working   within   the   factory   was   not   without   its   risks.   Metals   utilized   during   the   plating   process   were   comprised   of   toxic   ingredients   including   cyanide  while  the  setting  blocks  used  to  hold  jewelry  in  place  during  the  production   process   were   made   of   a   mixture   that   included   asbestos.155  While   the   extent   of   the   risks   associated   with   these   materials   was   largely   unknown   at   the   time,   a   certain   amount   of   danger   was   nevertheless   associated   with   these   tasks.   Typically,   male   employees   fulfilled   the   roles   of   soldering,   plating,   and   making   the   setting   blocks,                                                                                                                   
153  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   154  Ibid.   155  Ibid.,  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013,  S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012,  S.   Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.    

  

64  

while   female   employees   worked   either   in   the   showroom,   as   administrative   assistants,  or  with  the  stones  and  settings  (Figures  3.1  to  3.3).156       Having   experienced   staff   was   an   essential   component   of   the   production   process   since   there   were   several   steps   involved   in   constructing   a   Schreiner   piece.     While   the   majority   of   pieces   made   by   Ambros   involved   handmade   settings,   requiring   pieces   to   be   made   one   by   one,   other   designs   used   standardized   settings   (purchased   in   Providence   Rhode   Island)   and   were   replicated   using   factory   samples.157  The  initial  step  of  this  process  was  to  come  up  with  a  design  and  create   it   from   start   to   finish.   From   this   prototype,   two   or   three   factory   samples   could   be   composed  based  on  the  original  design.  Factory  samples  were  settings  that  had  all  of   their   prongs   clipped   (Figure   3.4).   This   was   done   to   insure   that   each   sample   produced  a  clean  imprint  into  the  setting  block,  which  was  used  to  hold  a  piece  in   place  during  the  soldering  process.  Nickel  was  poured  into  each  sample  to  provide   reinforcement  (Figure  3.5),  as  the  sample  was  pressed  into  the  setting  block  using   the   aid   of   a   drill   press.   Once   an   indent   was   made,   the   sample   was   removed   from   the   block,  pressed  into  an  inkpad,  and  then  stamped  into  the  indent.  The  setting  blocks   were  then  passed  on  to  the  female  employees  who  selected  the  appropriate  settings   for   each   individual   stone   by   following   the   ink   outline.      After   this   step   was   complete,   the  blocks  were  returned  to  the  male  employees,  who  at  this  point  could  solder  the   piece.158    

                                                                                                                
158  Ibid.  

156  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.   157  S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

65  

During   the   soldering   process,   the   settings   had   to   be   red   hot   in   order   to   properly  fuse  the  two  solders  together.  Stephen  noted  that  it  was  a  specific  red,  "a   light   cherry   red   not   a   brilliant   red."159   The   torches   used   by   the   solderers   had   pinpoint   accuracy   as   different   parts   of   the   jewelry   would   be   thicker   than   others   and   would   require   more   heat,   while   at   the   same   time   not   burning   the   thinner   areas.   When   the   setting   was   heated   up,   the   blocks   would   shrink,   which   prevented   the   solder   fluid   from   flowing   into   the   prongs   and   the   negative   space.   As   a   result,   the   blocks   could   only   be   used   once   before   having   to   be   grinded   down   and   refaced   (Figure  3.6).     The  Schreiner  company  primarily  used  hard  solder,  which  had  a  65%  silver   content,   resulting   in   a   higher   melting   rate   and   creating   a   more   durable   bond   than   that  of  soft  solder.  Soft  solder  was  comprised  of  a  mixture  of  lead  and  tin  and  was   used   for   earring   posts   and   earring   screw   backs,   which   were   two   of   the   company's   less   common   earring   closures.   It   was   also   used   for   the   springs   in   the   en  tremblant   pieces,  as  the  intensity  of  the  flame  used  during  the  hard  soldering  process  did  not   enable   the   springs   to   move.   Hard   solder   was   purchased   in   a   very   fine   four-grade   wire.   The   solderers   made   their   own   flux   tubes,   filling   them   with   flux,   which   purified   the   solder   and   prevented   oxidization.160  At   this   point   they   would   thread   the   wire   through  the  tube.  The  next  step  was  to  heat  up  the  jewelry,  one  section  at  a  time  and   tack  each  spot.  Stephen  noted  that  the  necklaces  in  particular  had  to  be  done  with  

                                                                                                                
159  Ibid.   160  Ibid.  

  

66  

great   precision   as   the   solder   points   had   to   be   inline   to   be   flexible,   stating,   "If   you   hit   the  wrong  tack  spot  the  whole  piece  would  have  to  be  thrown  away."161     When   the   soldering   process   was   finished   the   piece   had   become   carbonized   from  the  flame  and  stained  from  the  flux.  To  remove  these  residues,  the  piece  was   submerged   in   hydrochloric   acid,   which   would   roughen   up   the   metal   and   loosen   much  of  the  carbonization.  Then  the  piece  would  go  into  the  tumbler,  which  was  a   mechanical   instrument   that   opened   on   two   sides   and   filled   with   steel   shot   and   a   solution  of  caustic  soda  and  powerful  detergent.  Tumbling  times  varied  but  usually   lasted   between   ten   and   fifteen   minutes.   The   more   delicate   the   piece,   the   greater   chance   for   damage   to   occur   in   the   tumbler.   For   example,   for   every   hair   ornament   or   wire   brooch   sold   there   were   approximately   fifty   produced.   As   Stephen   noted,   "They   were   delicate   [...]   there   are   twenty   different   parts   that   could   potentially   break   off   and  if  even  one  did  than  the  piece  was  garbage."162  Although  Stephen  was  quick  to   note   that   with   sturdy   designs,   nearly   every   piece   made   it   through   the   tumbler   without  issue.  When  wire  designs  came  out  of  the  tumbler,  they  were  crumpled  into   a   ball   like   an   old   newspaper   and   would   have   to   be   straightened   out   again.   Terry   noted   that   one   of   their   employees,   Anna   Correa   was   particularly   good   at   working   with  these  designs,  "She  would  help  the  platters  sort  out  those  pieces,  getting  them   back   to   their   correct   shape   by   comparing   them   to   a   finished   sample."163  While   there   are   relatively   few   examples   of   wire   pins   and   hair   ornaments   on   the   market   today,   especially  the  larger  ones,  Stephen  confirmed  that  there  were  in  fact  many  made.  It                                                                                                                   
161  Ibid.   162  Ibid.   163  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013  

  

67  

seems  likely  that  their  fragility  contributed  to  their  rareness.  Stephen  remarked  that   two  of  their  employees,  Joey  and  Leon  were  responsible  for  the  majority  of  all  wire   pieces   made   as   both   men   had   excellent   hand-eye   coordination.   In   fact,   Leon   had   competed  as  a  marksman  in  the  1936  Winter  Olympics  in  Berlin,  Germany.164  This   was   a   particularly   amazing   feat   as   he   was   Jewish   and   Germany   was   at   that   time   under  Hitler's  rule.     Once  a  piece  was  removed  from  the  tumbler,  it  was  dried  in  course  sawdust   and  then  electroplated.  Electroplating  is  a  chemical  process,  which  evenly  deposits   dissolved  metal  (i.e.  gold,  rhodium,  silver)  onto  a  new  electrically  conductive  surface   (i.e.  brass)  through  the  use  of  an  electrical  current.  Initially,  the  Schreiner  company   outsourced  their  plating  work  but  eventually  they  installed  their  own  plating  room,   which  had  a  number  of  vats  containing  different  solutions,  including  rhodium,  gold,   silver,   copper,   and   gun   metal   (Figure   3.7).165  Pieces   were   submerged   into   the   vats   while   attached   to   copper   wire.   Five   or   six   brooches   could   be   immersed   on   the   same   line,   as   long   as   they   did   not   touch   the   bottom   of   the   vat.   The   voltage   of   the   electrical   current  was  carefully  monitored  and  timing  was  crucial  during  this  stage.  If  pieces   were   left   in   the   vats   too   long,   the   prongs   became   too   hard   and   the   women   were   unable  to  set  the  stones  as  the  prongs  would  become  brittle  and  break.  In  this  case   the  entire  batch  would  have  to  be  thrown  away.  As  Stephen  noted,  "there  was  a  lot   of   loss   but   because   the   base   metal   was   brass,   it   could   be   recycled."166  After   the   electroplating  was  complete,  the  piece  was  ready  to  be  set  with  stones.                                                                                                                       
166  Ibid.  

164  S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012   165  S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013.  

  

68  

Working   under   bright   desk   lamps,   the   stone   setters   meticulously   set   each   stone,   dividing   the   pieces   into   trays   according   to   the   order   forms   placed   by   the   designers   and   the   store   buyers   (Figure   3.8).   Stone   setting   was   the   last   step   in   the   production  process,  with  the  exception  of  soft  solders,  which  could  be  done  with  the   stones   set   as   the   temperature   used   during   this   soldering   practice   was   not   hot   enough  to  burn  the  stones.     This  lengthy  production  process  yielded  some  of  the  most  exquisite  pieces  of   costume   jewelry   from   the   twentieth-century   and   the   techniques   used   by   the   Schreiner  company  aid  collectors  in  properly  identifying  Schreiner  jewelry.  With  a   multitude   of   unsigned   Schreiner   pieces   still   in   existence,   the   following   sections   explore   the   signature   characteristics   used   by   the   company   and   allow   one   to   identify   unmarked  Schreiner  jewelry.     One   cannot   discuss   Schreiner   jewelry   without   mentioning   the   company's   use   of   inventive   color   combinations.   Introduced   after   the   Second   World   War,   at   the   request   of   the   stores,   their   unusual   color   formats   were   (and   continue   to   be)   the   defining   characteristic   of   Schreiner   jewelry.   Groupings   of   lime   green   and   lapis,   turquoise  and  purple,  jadeite  and  pearl,  coral  and  diamante  (to  describe  just  a  few)   were  vastly  different  than  the  simple  small-scale  pieces  crafted  from  textured  gold   or   silver   toned   metal   with   pearl   or   diamante   accents,   which   were   commonly   produced   by   companies   such   as   Trifari   and   Boucher   after   the   war.   When   discussing   the  company's  use  of  color,  Terry  noted,  "Ernestine  Green,  who  worked  for  us  was   really   great   with   color   combinations,   she   would   go   through   the   stone   inventory   and  

  

69  

find   what   looked   great   together."167  It   is   truly   remarkable   how   a   piece   changes   with   a  different  color  format.    One  can  look  at  four  pins  with  an  identical  construction  but   the   use   of   different   stones   in   different   color   combinations   makes   each   piece   distinctive   (Figure   3.9).   Furthermore,   utilizing   different   stone   and   color   combinations   within   identical   constructions   allowed   the   Schreiner   company   to   create  pieces  that  were  appropriate  for  daytime  or  evening  wear,  depending  on  the   stones  used.   The   Schreiner   company's   color   formats   were   greatly   aided   by   their   use   of   custom   and   rare   stones.   The   majority   of   their   stone   inventory   was   imported   from   Germany   and   what   was   formerly   Czechoslovakia,   where   quality   and   variety   were   available,   while   the   more   commercial   stones   came   from   Austria.168  The   company   never   dealt   with   much   competition   when   it   came   to   purchasing   stones   abroad.   Ambros   traveled   to   Europe   quite   frequently   since   he   still   had   family   there   and   liked   to   purchase   the   stones   in   person,   as   he   was   always   interested   in   seeing   the   latest   stock.  Occasionally  Terry  would  join  him  but  often  stayed  at  home  to  look  after  the   children   and   manage   the   company.   Ambros   continued   to   buy   from   the   Feix   company,   who   had   supplied   Henry   with   stones   in   1939.   The   company   had   been   taken  over  by  Feix's  son.  Terry  stated,  "we  had  known  the  stone  dealers  for  so  long   that   when   there   were   shortages   of   stones   we   still   got   our   order   filled."169  As   well,   in   the  early  years  of  the  business,  Henry  had  purchased  various  odd  lots  of  uncommon   stones   from   jewelry   manufacturers   in   Providence   Rhode   Island   who   were   closing                                                                                                                   
168  Ibid.   169  Ibid.  

167  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

70  

their   businesses.   Terry   noted   that   with   those   stones   "once   we   used   them   up,   they   were   gone,   we   often   couldn't   get   anymore."170  Glass   pearls   were   acquired   from   a   gentleman  in  New  York  City  named  Cleo,  who  was  originally  from  Europe  and  had   developed   his   own   recipe   for   creating   imitation   pearls.   He   also   produced   swirled   glass  drops  for  the  Schreiner  company.  When  Cleo  passed  away,  Terry  and  Ambros   bought   a   large   amount   of   his   inventory   from   his   wife,   who   shared   that   she   was   unable  to  carry  on  the  business  because  she  never  knew  the  recipe  for  the  pearls.  To   which   Terry   exclaimed,  "Isn't   that  something?"171  Terry  also  described  the  process   involved   in   creating   `veil   stones,'   which   were   large   crystals   covered   in   a   nylon   veiling.   While   their   clients   loved   the   look,   the   stones   were   extremely   time- consuming  to  produce.  This  was  because  the  stone  setters  were  unable  to  use  glue   to  hold  the  fabric  in  place,  as  it  would  have  shown  through  the  transparent  stones.   As   a   result,   they   were   quickly   discontinued.   As   Terry   pointed   out,   "We   always   experimented.  Some  ideas  worked  better  than  others."172   One   of   the   best-known   characteristics   of   Schreiner   jewelry   is   their   use   of   inverted  or  `upside  down'  set  stones.  The  Schreiner  company  intentionally  set  their   stones   with   the   point   up   to   optimize   sparkle   and   to   add   depth   and   dimension   to   their  pieces  (Figure  3.10).  The  idea  to  invert  the  stones  arose  after  Ambros  had  gone   through   the   company's   stone   inventory.   During   this   process   he   noticed   that   while   the   glass   of   the   old   crystals   was   in   excellent   shape,   the   foil   on   many   of   the   stones   had   begun   to   wear   away.   In   order   to   salvage   the   stones,   the   factory   workers                                                                                                                   
171  Ibid.   172  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

170  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013  

  

71  

scratched   the   remainder   of   the   foil   off   of   the   stones   and   saw   that   they   looked   interesting   with   the   point   up.173  The   company   went   on   to   use   unfoiled   stones   in   various   shapes   and   sizes   and   not   always   with   the   point   up.   When   placed   on   a   garment,   unfoiled   stones   allow   the   fabric   beneath   to   show   through,   creating   the   illusion  that  the  jewelry  is  an  extension  of  the  outfit.   Most  seasoned  collectors  of  costume  jewelry  will  state  that  examining  a  piece   of   jewelry   from   the   back   can   often   tell   you   as   much   as   the   front.   The   Schreiner   company  is  well  known  for  their  use  of  the  hook-and-eye  construction  (Figure  3.11).   Utilizing   this   method   allowed   them   to   produce   pieces   (particularly   brooches)   in   graduated   layers,   creating   three-dimensional   designs.   This   innovative   method   meant   that   they   did   not   have   to   fully   solder   separate   layers   together.   Instead   they   only  had  to  solder  the  hook-and-eye  mechanism,  which  could  be  retightened  in  the   event   that   it   became   loose.   As   a   result,   today   we   find   a   tremendous   amount   of   Schreiner   pieces   in   pristine   condition   because   they   have   not   fallen   victim   to   weak   soldering.  It  is  important  to  note  that  other  designers  such  as  Warner  and  Regency   also  produced  pieces  with  this  type  of  construction  so  the  presence  of  hook-and-eye   alone  does  not  necessarily  identify  a  piece  to  be  Schreiner.     An  additional  characteristic,  which  can  be  detected  by  analyzing  the  back  of  a   brooch,  is  the  inclusion  of  a  pendent  hook  (Figure  3.11).  This  enabled  a  brooch  to  be   worn  either  pinned  to  a  garment  or  as  a  pendent  on  a  necklace.  Terry  noted  that  this   was   her   idea.   She   stated,   "I   thought   that   many   of   the   pieces   looked   better   on   the  

                                                                                                                

173  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  September  28,  2013  

  

72  

neck   [...]   and   if   the   pin   back   fell   off,   you   still   had   a   pendant." 174   This   feature   prompted  the  stores  to  request  the  Schreiner  company  to  produce  chains  that  could   be   sold   in   the   case   lines   with   the   brooches.   They   were   available   in   gold,   silver,   copper,  and  gunmetal  and  were  therefore  perfectly  suited  to  any  design.       Another   well-known   Schreiner   characteristic   is   the   use   of   crimped   settings.   Known   to   collectors   as   `cupcake'   or   `piecrust'   due   to   their   indented   edges,   the   Schreiner   family   refers   to   this   setting   as   "Tiffany"   (Figure   3.12).   Again,   there   were   various   jewelry   manufacturers   who   incorporated   this   type   of   setting   into   their   designs.  So  the  presence  of  crimped  settings  alone  does  not  attribute  a  piece  to  be   Schreiner.   Crimped   settings   are   most   often   aided   by   the   use   of   `dogtooth'   prongs,   which   are   large   prongs   with   a   cutout   center   (Figure   3.13).   Utilizing   such   prongs   added  an  additional  design  element  to  a  piece.  Schreiner  stones  are  almost  always   prong-set   but   it   is   the   types   of   prongs   they   chose   to   use   which   set   the   Schreiner   Jewelry  Company  apart  from  the  rest.  Dogtooth  prongs,  Fleur  de  Lis  prongs,  scallop   edge  prongs  and  elaborate  leaf  shaped  prongs  are  all  used  within  Schreiner  designs.       When   trying   to   attribute   a   pair   of   earrings   to   Schreiner   the   key   is   to   examine   the  earring  back.  Although  Schreiner  is  known  for  using  a  few  types  of  earring  backs   (including   screw   backs   and   posts)   the   most   common   design   is   the   appropriately   named   `donut   hole,'   which   features   a   single   round   hole   at   the   top   of   the   clip   (Figure   3.14).  Terry  explained  that  this  was  supposed  to  be  the  most  comfortable  design.175     Schreiner   necklaces   can   often   be   identified   by   their   extension   chain,   which   features   five   circular   links   that   are   alternated   with   four   stones,   often   ending   in   a                                                                                                                   
175  Ibid.   174  T.S.  Albert,  interview,  June  24,  2012.  

  

73  

pear-shaped  stone  (Figure  2.11).  However,  not  all  Schreiner  necklaces  incorporate   extensions.  Pieces  made  for  the  ready-to-wear  designer  were  only  available  in  one   size.  While  the  stores  liked  to  provide  customers  with  an  adjustable  product,  even   some  of  their  designs  were  only  available  in  one  standard  size.     Signed   Schreiner   pieces   are   labeled   on   the   back   with   a   cartouche   (plaque).   Pieces   dating   to   the   1940s   and   early   50s   are   marked   "Schreiner   Jewelry   N.Y.C."   on   a   semi-circular   plaque,   while   later   pieces   are   marked   "Schreiner   Jewelry   New   York"   and  "Schreiner"  on  oval  plaques,  which  were  used  interchangeably  (Figures  3.15  to   3.17).  Earring  backs  are  often  signed  SCHREINER  in  capital  letters  (Figure  3.14).     In   addition   to   this   list   of   common   characteristics,   including   unusual   color   combinations,   unique   stones,   hook-and-eye   construction,   and   fancy   prongs,   the   best   way   to   familiarize   oneself   with   Schreiner   jewelry   is   to   physically   hold   the   pieces   within   one's   hands.   By   feeling   the   weight   of   the   piece,   examining   the   stones,   and   analyzing   the   construction,   one   begins   to   be   able   to   detect   and   identify   unmarked   Schreiner  jewelry.  Continued  exposure  and  familiarity  with  signed  Schreiner  pieces   will  increase  one's  ability  and  comfort  in  recognizing  unsigned  pieces.        

  

74  

CONCLUSION         The  Schreiner  Jewelry  Company  has  a  history  that  spanned  more  than  forty  years,   during   which   time,   their   jewelry   possessed   the   unique   ability   to   navigate   various   social   spaces.   It   was   available   for   purchase   at   varied   price-points,   from   establishments   ranging   from   high-end   fashion   houses   to   the   jewelry   divisions   of   large   department   stores.   As   such,   it   adorned   women   belonging   to   various   socio- economic  classes.  Whether  worn  by  a  woman  dressed  in  Norell  attending  a  women's   club  luncheon,  a  working-class  women  on  her  way  to  take  in  a  film,  or  by  a  Schreiner   employee   on   her   way   home   from   work,   these   pieces   were   valued   objects   that   speak   to   specific   moments   in   history.   From   the   somber   years   of   the   Great   Depression,   through   the   rise   of   the   American   ready-to-wear   industry,   the   optimistic   yet   conforming  1950s,  the  youthful  antiestablishment  of  the  1960s,  and  concluding  with   the  feminist  movement  of  the  1970s,  these  pieces  reflect  the  moods  and  the  mores   of  the  decades  in  which  they  were  made.  While  these  objects  are  connected  to  the   experiences  of  the  women  who  purchased  and  wore  them,  they  are  simultaneously   linked   to   the   lives   of   the   individuals   who   designed,   produced,   and   sold   them.   The   Schreiner  and  Albert  families  along  with  their  dedicated  staff  devoted  their  careers   to  producing  quality  costume  jewelry  that  was  built  to  last  much  longer  than  a  single   season.   Over   the   course   of   four   decades,   their   jewelry   went   through   various   transitions.   They   evolved   from   small   silver   and   marcasite   designs,   followed   by   heavy   castings   with   glued-in   rhinestones,   to   the   introduction   of   lighter   settings,   and   finally   to   colorful   oversized   designs   accented   by   custom   stones   made   from   glass,   plastic,  and  Lucite.        75  

In  recent  decades,  the  existence  of  thousands  of  Schreiner  accessories  has  led   to  a  renewed  interest  in  these  pieces.  Hundreds  of  dealers  and  collectors  of  costume   jewelry  scour  antique  markets  and  malls,  garage  sales,  and  online  forums  in  search   of  Schreiner  designs.  Today,  Schreiner  jewelry  continues  to  grace  the  glossy  pages  of   high-fashion   editorials,   imbued   with   the   caché   that   commonly   surrounds   vintage   garments  and  accessories.  Once  again,  Schreiner  jewelry  adorns  models,  film  stars,   and   even   the   First   Lady   of   the   United   States   (Figures   3.18   to   3.20).   This   reintroduction   of   Schreiner   jewelry   has   inspired   contemporary   jewelry   makers   to   take   their   creative   cues   from   earlier   Schreiner   designs.   Well-known   costume   jewelers   Larry   Vrba   and   Alan   Anderson   have   both   created   their   homages   to   the   Schreiner   ruffle   pin.   French   luxury   brand   Louis   Vuitton   and   the   California-based   company   Jarin   Kasi   have   done   more   than   take   inspiration   from   Schreiner   designs,   creating   nearly   identical   replicas   of   the   Schreiner   ruffle   pin   (Figures   3.21   and   3.22).   Having   their   designs   replicated   never   much   bothered   the   Schreiners   as   Terry   noted   that   her   father   used   to   say,   "If   they   stop   copying   you,   than   you've   really   lost   your   touch."  It  would  perhaps  amuse  Henry  to  know  that  in  the  sixty  years  following  his   death,   designers   would   continue   to   copy   designs   that   were   originally   produced   by   the  company  he  founded.       Through   the   completion   of   this   major   research   project,   I   have   laid   the   groundwork   for   future   research   and   possible   curated   exhibitions   of   Schreiner   jewelry.  Over  the  last  two  decades,  design  museums  around  the  world  have  started   to   build   collections   of   costume   jewelry   including:   the   Metropolitan   Museum   of   Art   and   the   Art   and   Design   Museum   in   New   York,   the   Victoria   and   Albert   Museum   in  

  

76  

London,   and   the   Royal   Ontario   Museum   in   Toronto.   These   undertakings   serve   to   validate   the   cultural   and   aesthetic   value   of   costume   jewelry   and   have   established   the   need   for   increased   expertise   and   research   capacity   in   this   area.   Such   knowledge   is   essential   if   we   are   to   insure   that   these   pieces   are   properly   identified,   authenticated,  and  protected.              

  

77  

ILLUSTRATIONS         Figure  1.1:  

   Portrait  of  Henry  Schreiner,  oil  on  canvas,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New   York.      Figure  1.2:     

   567  East  22nd  Street,  Brooklyn,  New  York,  digital  image,  online  real  estate  listing,   http://www.loopnet.com/Listing/16714300/567-E-22nd-Street-Brooklyn-NY/.    

  

78  

Figure  1.3:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  MS  (Mathilda  Schreiner)  Initial  Brooch,  1930,  silver  and   marcasite,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.4:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Marcasite  Pendant,  1930,  silver  and  marcasite,  Courtesy  of  the   Schreiner  collection,  New  York.               79  

Figure  1.5:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Millefiori  Button,  1930,  wood,  metal,  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.6:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Belt  Buckle  with  Clear  Rhinestone  Accents,  1930,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.               80  

Figure  1.7:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Oval  Belt  Buckle  with  Metallic  Stones,  1930,  metal,  Courtesy  of  the   Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.8:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Belt  Buckle  with  Copper  Colored  Metallic  Stones,  1930,  metal,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.        

  

81  

Figure  1.9:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Silver  Toned  Belt  Buckle  with  Large  Purple  Cabochons,  1930,  metal   and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.         Figure  1.10:  

Schreiner  Jewelry,  Gold  Toned  Belt  Buckle  with  Large  Red  Speckled  Cabochons,  1930,   metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.                     82  

  

Figure  1.11  

   Life,  September  8,  1952,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner   collection,  New  York.           Figure  1.12:  

      Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pauline  Trigère  Grey  Pearl  Bib  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.        83  

Figure  1.13:  

   Adele  Simpson  Advertisement,  1954,  photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy   of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.14:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Rhinestone  and  Grey  Pearl  Wire  Brooch,  1940,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  

  

84  

Figure  1.15:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  and  Emerald  Colored  Rhinestone  Brooch,  1940,  metal  and   glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.16:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  and  Aqua  Colored  Rhinestone  Brooch  with  Pearl  Accents,   1940-50,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  

  

85  

Figure  1.17:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pearl  and  Clear  Rhinestone  Poodle  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.18:  

   I.  Magnin  &  Co.,  Originala  Coat  with  Schreiner  Poodle  Brooch,  September  15,  1956,   photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New   York.      86  

Figure  1.19:  

   Norman  Norell,  Evening  Ensemble  with  Built-in  Jewels,  1968,  Silk,  fur,  glass,  and   metal,  Collection  of  the  Metropolitan  Museum  of  Art,  New  York,  NY,  U.S.A.  Gift  of   Mrs.  Lyn  Revson,  Accession  number:  1975,  1975.53.54  a,  b.                                                        

  

87  

Figure  1.20:  

   French  Import,  Blue,  Green,  and  Clear  Rhinestone  Necklace,  1945-50,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.21:  

   French  Import,  Pearl,  Clear  and  Red  Rhinestone  Necklace,  1945-50,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.  

  

88  

Figure  1.22:  

   French  Import,  Clear  and  Red  Rhinestone  Brooch,  1945-50,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy   of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.23:  

   French  Import,  Back  of  Clear  and  Red  Rhinestone  Brooch,  1945-50,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.         89  

Figure  1.24  

   Christian  Dior,  Dior  Holiday  Advertisement  featuring  Jewelry  made  by  Schreiner,   1950s,  photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,   New  York.      Figure  1.25:  

   Vogue,  June  1952,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,   New  York.  

  

90  

Figure  1.26:  

   Vogue,  September  1965,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner   collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.27:  

   Glamour,  November  1962,  photograph  of  original  cover,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner   collection,  New  York.  

  

91  

Figure  1.28:  

   Vogue,  May  19,  1952,  photograph  of  original  editorial,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner   collection,  New  York.      Figure  1.29:  

   Harper's  Bazaar,  November  1,  1954,  photograph  of  original  editorial,  Courtesy  of  the   Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      92  

Figure  2.1:  

Schreiner  Jewelry,  Collection  of  Figural  Brooches,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy   of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.        Figure  2.2:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Collection  of  Flower  Brooches,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy   of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      93  

Figure  2.3:  

   Bonwit  Teller,  Schreiner  Jewelry  featured  in  Bonwit  Teller  Advertisement,  1950-60,   photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New   York.        Figure  2.4:  

     Schreiner  Family  Home,  2012,  Courtesy  of  Schreiner  family,  New  York.        94  

Figure  2.5:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Purple,  Pearl,  and  Turquoise  Colored  Brooch,  1960,  glass,   porcelain,  and  metal,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         Figure  2.6:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Aqua  and  Jonquil  Colored  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy   of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      95  

Figure  2.7:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Amber  Colored  Bracelet,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         Figure  2.8:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Cognac  and  Turquoise  Colored  Bracelet,  1960,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      96  

Figure  2.9:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  Crystal  Earrings,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      Figure  2.10:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Clear  Crystal  Hoop  Earrings,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of   the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.            97  

Figure  2.11:    

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Multi  Colored  Bib  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         Figure  2.12:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pearl,  Clear  Crystal,  and  Pink  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      98  

   Figure  2.13:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Lucite  Bubble  Brooches,  1970,  metal,  glass,  and  Lucite,  Courtesy  of   the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                                                                       

  

99  

   Figure  2.14:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Jadeite  and  Coral  Colored  Ruffle  Pin,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      Figure  2.15:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Cognac  and  Speckled  Turquoise  Colored  Ruffle  Pin,  1950-60,  metal   and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                     100  

Figure  2.16:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Multi  Colored  Comma  Shadow  Box  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      Figure  2.17:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Jadeite,  Jonquil,  and  Coral  Colored  Shadow  Box  Brooch,  1950,   metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.     

  

101  

Figure  2.18:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Lapis  and  Fuchsia  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                                                                 

  

102  

Figure  2.19:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Green  and  Jonquil  Brooch,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of   the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         Figure  2.20:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Profile  of  Green  and  Jonquil  Brooch,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  

  

103  

Figure  2.21  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Carnelian,  Coral,  and  Jonquil  Brooch,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         Figure  2.22:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Back  of  Lapis  and  Fuchsia  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy   of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  

  

104  

Figure  2.23:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Pink  Wire  Brooch,  1950,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole   Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      Figure  2.24:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Multi  Colored  Bib  Necklace,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  

  

105  

Figure  2.25:  

Schreiner  Jewelry,  Brooches  featuring  Large  Transparent  Stones,  1960,  metal  and   glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                                                               106  

  

Figure  2.26  

   Editorial  featuring  Pastel  Brooch  and  Earrings  by  Schreiner,  1960s,  photograph  of   original  editorial,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  2.27  

   Sakowitz,  Schreiner  Jewelry  featured  in  Sakowitz  Advertisement,  1950-60,   photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New   York.        107  

Figure  2.28:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  "I  Like  Ike"  Heart  Brooch,  1956,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Schreiner  collection,  New  York.          Figure  2.29:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  "I  Like  Ike"  Oval  Shadow  Box  Brooch,  1956,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.                 108  

Figure  2.30:  

Thank  you  note  from  Mrs.  Eisenhower,  October  22,  1956,  paper  and  ink,  Courtesy  of   the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.                                              

  

  

109  

Figure  2.31:  

Envelope  from  Mrs.  Eisenhower,  October  22,  1956,  paper  and  ink,  Courtesy  of  the   Schreiner  collection,  New  York.                                                                    

  

  

110  

Figure  2.32:  

Stanziola,  Mrs.  Eisenhower  Wearing  Schreiner  "I  Like  Ike"  Heart  Brooch,  1956-57,   photograph  of  original  newspaper  clipping,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,   New  York.                                         

  

  

111  

Figure  2.33:  

I.Miller,  Advertisement  featuring  Schreiner  Shoe  Embellishments,  1950-60,   photograph  of  original  advertisement,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New   York.        Figure  2.34:  

  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Jeweled  Belt  with  Extension,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         112  

Figure  2.35:  

Schreiner  Jewelry,  Lucite  Bubble  Necklace,  1970,  metal  and  Lucite,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                                               

  

  

113  

Figure  2.36:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Stretch  Belt  with  Purple  Cabochon  Buckle,  1970,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         Figure  2.37:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Stretch  Belt  with  Multi  Colored  Buckle,  1970,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.     

  

114  

   Figure  3.1:  

   Ambros  Reading  the  Paper  beside  Soldering  Torch,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black   and  white  photograph,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  3.2:  

Men  at  Work  Soldering,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white  photograph,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.         115  

  

Figure  3.3:  

Virginia  Moshy  Seated  at  Her  Desk,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white   photograph,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.                                                                        116  

  

Figure  3.4  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Factory  Sample,  1950-60,  metal,  Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner   collection,  New  York.        Figure  3.5:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Factory  Sample  filled  with  Nickel,  1950-60,  metal,  Courtesy  of  the   Schreiner  collection,  New  York.           117  

Figure  3.6:  

   Setting  Block,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white  photograph,  Courtesy  of   the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      Figure  3.7:  

   Plating  Room,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white  photograph,  Courtesy  of   the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.      118  

Figure  3.8:  

Women  Setting  Stones,  1959,  photograph  of  original  black  and  white  photograph,   Courtesy  of  the  Schreiner  collection,  New  York.                                                                          

  

  

119  

Figure  3.9:  

Schreiner  Jewelry,  Small  Ruffle  Brooches,  1960,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                                                           

  

  

120  

Figure  3.10:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Aqua  and  Blue  Brooch  with  Inverted  Stones,  1960,  metal  and  glass,   Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                                                              

  

121  

Figure  3.11:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Hook-and-eye  Construction  and  Pendant  Hook,  1950-60,  metal   and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         Figure  3.12:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Crimped  Setting,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole   Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.         122  

Figure  3.13:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  Brooch  with  Dogtooth  Prongs,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy   of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.                                                                        123  

Figure  3.14:  

      Schreiner  Jewelry,  Donut  Earring  Back  with  Schreiner  Signature,  1950-60,  metal  and   glass,  Courtesy  of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.            Figure  3.15:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  1940-50  Schreiner  Cartouche,  1940-50,  metal,  Courtesy  of  the   Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.               124  

Figure  3.16:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  1950-70  Schreiner  Cartouche,  1950-60,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy   of  the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.      Figure  3.17:  

   Schreiner  Jewelry,  1950-70  Schreiner  Cartouche,  1950,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of   the  Carole  Tanenbaum  Vintage  Collection,  Toronto.  

  

125  

Figure  3.18:  

   Dita  Von  Teese  wearing  Schreiner  Earrings  at  the  Launch  of  My  Cointreau  Travel   Essentials  in  Milan,  October  11,  2011,  http://www.justjared.com/photo- gallery/2588801/dita-von-teese-cointreau-launch-milan-10/.                       

  

126  

Figure  3.19:  

   Gabor  Jurina,  Fashion,  Jessica  Paré  wearing  Schreiner  Earrings,  March  2014,  173.                   

  

127  

Figure  3.20:  

Getty  Images,  Michelle  Obama  wearing  Schreiner  Brooch,  2010.                           

  

  

128  

Figure  3.21:  

   Louis  Vuitton,  Ruffle  Pin,  Harper's  Bazaar,  2008,   http://www.harpersbazaar.com/fashion/fashion-articles/hbz0108fp026#slide-8.      Figure  3.22:  

   Jarin  Kasi,  Ruffle  Pin,  2000s,  metal  and  glass,  Courtesy  of  Eve  Townsend,  Toronto.             

  

129  

BIBLIOGRAPHY           Arnold,  Rebecca.  The  American  Look:  Fashion,  Sportswear  and  the  Image  of  Women  in      1930s  and  1940s  New  York.  New  York:  I.B.  Tauris  &  Co  Ltd.,  2009.      Bal,  Mieke.  "Telling  Objects:  A  Narrative  Perspective  on  Collecting."  In  The  Cultures      of  Collecting,  edited  by  John  Elsner  and  Roger  Cardinal.  Cambridge:  Harvard  U    University  Press,  1994.      Barnard,  Malcolm.  ed.,  Fashion  Theory  A  Reader.  New  York:  Routledge,  2007.        Becker,  Vivienne.  Fabulous  Fakes:  The  History  of  Fantasy  and  Fashion  Jewellery.      London:  Grafton,  1988.        Bendersky,  Joseph  W.  A  Concise  History  of  Nazi  Germany.  Plymouth:  Rowman  &      Littlefield  Publishers,  Inc.,  2014.      Blumer,  Herbert.  "Fashion:  From  class  differentiation  to  collective  selection."  In      Fashion  Theory  A  Reader,  edited  by  Malcolm  Barnard.  New  York:  Routledge,      2007.      Cunningham,  Patricia  A.  and  Susan  Voso  Lab.  ed.,  Dress  and  Popular  Culture.  Ohio:      Bowling  Green  State  University  Popular  Press,  1991.      Entwistle,  Joanne.  The  Fashioned  Body:  Fashion,  Dress  and  Modern  Social  Theory.      Cambridge:  Polity  Press,  2000.      Epstein,  Beryl  Williams.  Fashion  Is  Our  Business.  Philadelphia:  J.B.  Lippincott,  1945.      Epstein,  Eleni  Sakes.  "Trigère."  In  American  Fashion,  edited  by  Sarah  Tomerlin  Lee.      New    York:  Fashion  Institute  of  Technology,  1975.        Farneti,  Deanna  Cera.  ed.,  Jewels  of  Fantasy:  Costume  Jewelry  of  the  20th  Century.      New  York:  Harry  N.  Abrams,  Inc.,  1992.      Francis,  Mark,  and  Margery  King.  ed.,  The  Warhol  Look:  Glamour,  Style,  Fashion.  New      York:  Bulfinch  Press,  1998.        Friedan,  Betty.  The  Feminine  Mystique.  Toronto:  George  J.  McLeod  Ltd.,  1963.          Gordon,  Eleanor,  and  Jean  Nerenberg.  "Everywoman's  Jewelry:  Early  Plastics  and      Equality  in  Fashion."  Journal  of  Popular  Culture  13.4  (Spring  1980):  629-644.      Lee,  Sarah  Tomerlin.  ed.,  American  Fashion.  New  York:  Fashion  Institute  of      Technology,  1975.      130  

Life.  "Cover  Information."  September  8,  1952,  27.      McRobbie,  Angela.  "Bridging  the  Gap:  Feminism,  Fashion  and  Consumption."      Feminist  Review  (Spring  1997):  73-89.      Milbank,  Caroline  Rennolds.  New  York  Fashion:  The  Evolution  of  American  Style.  New      York:  Harry  N.  Abrams,  Inc.,  1989.      Miller,  Harrice  Simons.  Costume  Jewelry:  Identification  and  Price  Guide.  New  York:      Avon,  1994.      Morris,  Bernadine.  "Norell."  In  American  Fashion,  edited  by  Sarah  Tomerlin  Lee.  New      York:  Fashion  Institute  of  Technology,  1975.        Palmer,  Alexandra.  Couture  &  Commerce:  The  Transatlantic  Fashion  Trade  in  the        1950s.  Vancouver:  UBC  Press,  2001.        Palmer,  Alexandra.  Dior:  A  New  Look,  A  New  Enterprise  (1947-1957).  London:  V&A      Publishing,  2009.      Palmer,  Alexandra.  "Paper  Clothes:  Not  Just  a  Fad."  In  Dress  and  Popular  Culture,      edited  by  Patricia  A.  Cunningham  and  Susan  Voso  Lab.  Ohio:  Bowling  Green      State  University  Popular  Press,  1991.      Schiffer,  Nancy  N.  Rhinestones!  Pennsylvania:  Schiffer  Publishing,  2003.          Semmelhack,  Elizabeth.  Roger  Vivier:  Process  to  Perfection.  Toronto:  The  Bata  Shoe      Museum,  2012.      Skarda,  Erin.  "A  Brief  History  of  New  York  Fashion  Week,"  TIME,  Last  modified      February  9,  2012,  accessed  April  1,  2014.      http://newsfeed.time.com/2012/02/09/a-brief-history-of-new-york-fashion-    week/.        Steele,  Valerie.  Fifty  Years  of  Fashion:  From  New  Look  to  Now.  New  Haven:  Yale  UP,      2000.  Print.      Tanenbaum,  Carole.  Fabulous  Fakes:  A  Passion  for  Vintage  of  Costume  Jewelry.  New      York:  Artisan,  2006.        Veblen,  Thorstein.  "Dress  as  an  Expression  of  the  Pecuniary  Culture."  In  Fashion      Theory  A  Reader,  edited  by  Malcolm  Barnard.  New  York:  Routledge,  2007.      Vogue.  "Originala  Advertisement."  December  1,  1968,  9.       

  

131  

Walford,  Jonathan.  Ready  to  Tear:  Paper  Fashions  of  the  1960s.  Toronto:  Kickshaw      Productions,  2007.      Weisberg,  Alfred  M.  "The  Prominence  of  Providence,  Rhode  Island,  and  the      Contribution  of  Electroplating."  In  Jewels  of  Fantasy:  Costume  Jewelry  of  the      20th   Century."  Edited  by  Deanna  Farneti  Cera.  New  York:  Harry  N.  Abrams,      Inc.,  1992.      Wollen,  Peter.  "Plastics:  The  Magical  and  the  Prosaic."  In  The  Warhol  Look:  Glamour,      Style,  Fashion,  edited  by  Mark  Francis  and    Margery  King.  New  York:  Bulfinch      Press,  1998.          

  

132  


