                              Clothing,  Image,  and  Presence:  Women  in  the  Corporate  Workplace                     by         Colombe  Nadeau-O'Shea,  BA,  Wilfrid  Laurier  University,  2013                                    A  Major  Research  Paper   presented  to  Ryerson  University        in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of        Master  of  Arts   in  the  Program  of     Fashion                    

                                                                  A  fair  exterior  is  a  silent  recommendation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pubilius  Syrus,  circa  42  B.C.                                                                     2  

   Table  of  Contents        

1.  INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................ 4 2.  PREFACE ........................................................................................................................................ 8 3.  HISTORICAL  PERSPECTIVES  ON  WOMEN  IN  CORPORATE  SETTINGS ....................................... 13 3.1  FASHION  AND  EMPOWERMENT  IN  THE  WORKPLACE .......................................................................... 23 4.  GENDER  STEREOTYPES,  DISCRIMINATION  AND  HARASSMENT  IN  THE  WORKPLACE ............. 30 4.1  WHAT  IS  WORKPLACE  DISCRIMINATION? ........................................................................................ 34 4.2  WHAT  ARE  SEX  STEREOTYPES? ..................................................................................................... 37 5.  THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  CLOTHING  BEHAVIOURALLY  AND  COGNITIVELY .................................. 42 6.  THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  FIRST  IMPRESSIONS  AND  PROFESSIONAL  DRESS ................................. 50 7.  EXECUTIVE  PRESENCE  AND  ITS  IMPACT  ON  WOMEN  IN  BUSINESS .......................................... 55 7.1  PILLARS  OF  EXECUTIVE  PRESENCE ................................................................................................. 56 8.  CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................... 60 9.  WORKS  CITED ............................................................................................................................. 63

                       

   3  

1.   Introduction         Clothing,  appearance,  grooming,  and  presence  are  all  aspects  that  interact  to  create  an  individ- ual's  physical  and  psychological  identity  in  the  workplace,  and  can  all  either  serve  to  enhance   or  detract  from  a  person's  overall  career  success.  For  instance,  these  factors  serve  as  the   building  blocks  of  first  impressions.  They  also  help  to  determine  an  individual's  actions  within   a  corporate  setting,  and  help  to  establish  how  others  will  treat  the  individual  in  question.   Women,  in  particular,  must  be  sure  to  manage  these  aspects  effectively  and  efficiently  as  they   have  a  very  special  relationship  with  appearance,  as  well  as  the  corporate  world.  Throughout   history,  and  in  fact  more  so  in  contemporary  cultures,  women  have  been  valued  based  on   their  beauty  (Wolf  10),  as  opposed  to  men  who  have  been  traditionally  valued  for  their  intel- lect  and  physical  strength.  In  fact,  researchers  have  observed  that  while  boys  learn  to  view   their  bodies  as  a  means  of  achieving  mastery  over  their  environment,  girls  learn  that  a  main   function  of  their  bodies  is  to  attract  others  (Stephens,  Hill  and  Hanson  144).  Research  by  Jona- than  Gottschall  indicates  that  this  "beauty  myth"  is  not  bound  by  cultures  ­  it  is  in  fact  an  evo- lutionary  phenomenon.  He  states  that:  "...greater  emphasis  on  female  physical  attractiveness   will  be  the  rule  across  human  culture  areas"  (Gottschall  185).  Granted,  this  is  merely  one   study,  one  snapshot  of  the  field,  however  it  is  nonetheless  telling  and  worthy  of  further  exami- nation.     This  obsession  with  outward,  physical  beauty  is  problematic  for  a  number  of  reasons,   one  of  them  being  that  this  value  placed  on  appearance  serves  to  detract  from  women's  intel- lectual  value,  which  is  directly  applicable  to  their  presence  and  success  in  the  workplace.  De- spite  advances  in  this  regard,  young  women  continue  to  be  victims  of  this  beauty  obsession,  

   4  

which  is  effectively  harming  many  women  physically,  financially  and  emotionally  ("America's   Beauty  Obsession").  For  instance,  at  least  nine  out  of  ten  people  suffering  from  an  eating  dis- order  are  female  (Stephens,  Hill  and  Hanson  137).  According  to  Naomi  Wolf,  author  of  The   Beauty  Myth,  the  more  obstacles  women  have  surpassed,  the  more  strictly  and  intensely  im- ages  of  female  beauty  have  been  used  against  them  (Wolf  10).  Wolf  argues  that  these  images   of  idealized  beauty  are  in  fact  used  as  a  political  weapon  against  women's  advancements  (10).     A  prime  example  of  appearance  affecting  women's  success  in  the  workplace  was  demon- strated  in  a  study  conducted  by  Susan  Averett  and  Sanders  Korenman,  where  they  found  that   obese  women  have  a  lower  family  income  than  women  whose  weight-for-height  is  within  the   recommended  range  (304).  These  results  persisted  even  after  confounding  variables,  such  as   the  idea  that  perhaps  women  who  make  less  money  have  worse  diets,  were  controlled  for.   The  workplace  setting  is  a  complicated  world  to  navigate  for  women,  one  in  which  they  are   rarely  given  explicit  feedback  on  their  appearance,  as  doing  so  can  often  be  construed  as  inap- propriate.  This  lack  of  feedback  is  problematic  for  a  couple  of  reasons;  firstly,  this  territory  is   rife  with  double-standards,  and  secondly,  women  are  required  to  dress  in  gender-appropriate   ways  (ie:  `feminine'),  however  the  definition  of  gender-appropriate  and  feminine  clothing  is   not  well-defined.     If  there  is  one  environment  where  appearing  and  dressing  appropriately  is  of  the  ut- most  importance,  it  is  within  an  office  environment.  The  corporate  office  is  a  space  often   wrought  with  confusion  and  fear  when  it  comes  to  navigating  complex  gender  dynamics.  The   pressure  that  women  face  to  adhere  to  cultural  beauty  norms,  both  on  a  personal  level  and   professional  level,  and  often  despite  receiving  little  to  no  feedback,  is  compounded  by  the  rel- atively  "new"  relationship  that  women  have  with  the  corporate  world.  Traditionally  in  the      5  

West,  during  the  19th  and  early  20th  centuries,  men's  place  was  in  the  office,  and  women's  was   in  the  home  (Veblen  113  and  119;  Rhode  1164;  Davis  175),  especially  after  women  married,   even  up  until  the  1940s  (Goldin  7;  Rhode  1164).  However,  this  dynamic  is  changing  as  our  so- ciety  develops  and  grows,  and,  as  such,  we  are  beginning  to  see  more  women  enter  the  corpo- rate  world  and  sometimes  even  reaching  its  upper  echelons.    Yet,  a  huge  gender  gap  in  the   workforce  still  exists.  For  example,  in  Ontario,  women's  full-time  employment  rate  remained   at  57%  between  2010  and  2014.  This  indicates  that  proportionally,  essentially  none  of  the   full-time  jobs  created  during  this  time  period  went  to  women  (McInturff  12).  In  addition  to   their  relative  lack  of  presence  within  the  working  world,  women  often  earn  less  than  their   male  counterparts.  For  example,  in  Ontario,  women  who  work  full-time  earn  24%  less  than   their  male  counterparts  (McInturff  16).  It  is  therefore  clear  that  understanding  the  visual  and   how  women  present  themselves  is  of  the  utmost  importance  during  what  appears  to  be  a  tip- ping  point;  women's  issues  are  at  the  forefront,  and  many  are  fighting  for  gender  equality  in   corporate  settings.     The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  examine  in  detail  the  existing  literature  addressing  the   history  of  Western  women  in  the  workplace,    the  importance  of  first  impressions,  gender  dis- crimination  and  stereotypes  in  the  workplace,  and  the  cognitive  and  behavioural  effects  of   clothing  on  both  wearers  and  perceivers.  These  topics  will  be  analyzed  across  various  fields  of   study,  such  as  economics,  psychology,  sociology  and  gender  studies.  This  review  focuses  on   women  as  they  relate  to  appearance  and  professional  settings  because  many  of  the  issues   faced  by  women  in  professional  settings  are  unique.  It  would  not,  therefore,  be  appropriate  to   address  these  issues  as  they  relate  to  both  men  and  women  within  the  same  framework;  

   6  

women's  experiences  in  regards  to  these  notions  deserve  special  attention.  Once  these  theo- ries  are  explored  and  analyzed,  they  will  be  expanded  upon  using  ideas  of  executive  presence   and  how  it  affects  these  particular  areas  of  study,  as  well  as  how  it  can  be  used  by  women  to   overcome  many  of  these  issues.     The  term  "executive  presence"  will  be  used  in  this  paper  to  explore  themes  of  women   in  the  workplace,  professional  dress  and  first  impressions  further,  and  to  provide  a  frame- work  for  their  analysis.  Executive  presence  is  an  umbrella  term  that  encompasses  aspects   such  as  first  impressions,  communications  skills,  charisma  and  appearance.  The  term  has   been  a  buzzword  within  business  and  leadership  circles  since  the  early  2000's  and  even  ear- lier  (Kaufman  and  Fetter  1983),  and  has  served  as  an  undefined  characteristic  for  which  busi- ness  professionals  and  executives  alike  strive.  Recently  the  term  has  been  more  specifically   defined  and  has  been  appearing  in  academic  research  within  the  fields  of  business  and  medi- cine  (Shirey  2013;  Service  and  Reburn  2014;  Beeson  and  Valerio  2012),  and  is  further  being   explored  as  a  foundational  element  of  leadership  potential.  Sylvia  Ann  Hewlett,  an  American   economist,  founded  the  Center  for  Talent  Innovation  out  of  New  York,  a  global  think-tank  ded- icated  to  conducting  ground-breaking  research  surrounding  global  talent  management  across   gender,  geography  and  cultures.  One  of  the  major  research  projects  conducted  out  of  the  Cen- tre  for  Talent  Innovation  sought  to  define  exactly  what  executive  presence  means  and  what  it   consists  of  by  way  of  a  massive  study  conducted  in  2012  which  surveyed  nearly  4000  college- graduate  professionals  working  at  some  of  the  largest  corporations  across  America.  Through   this  large-scale  study,  she  and  her  team  were  able  to  show  that  executive  presence  is  com- prised  of  three  pillars:  gravitas,  communication  and  appearance  (Hewlett  et  al.  1-2).  Since  this   study  was  conducted,  academic  authors  and  researchers  have  begun  to  incorporate  the  term  

   7  

into  their  research,  and  now  see  it  as  a  measurable  tool  that  helps  to  indicate  leadership  po- tential,  among  other  factors  (Shirey  2013;  Service  and  Reburn  2014;  Beeson  and  Valerio   2012).  These  pillars  will  be  further  examined  and  analyzed  and  will  be  applied  to  various   themes  explored  throughout  this  paper,  as  will  ideas  about  how  executive  presence  can  be   used  specifically  by  women  in  the  workplace.  Notions  of  executive  presence  can  be  applied  to   anybody  no  matter  what  position  they  may  hold  within  their  workplace.  Executive  presence   training,  including  but  not  limited  to,  elements  of  appearance,  could  serve  as  an  educational   tool  to  help  women  at  any  level  in  business  manage  problematic  elements  within  the  work- place.  Therefore,  these  notions  will  be  problematized,  critiqued  and  analyzed  in  the  hope  of   understanding  why  these  gendered  problems  continue  to  exist,  and  to  possibly  seek  ways  to   remedy  them.        2.  Preface  

  
It  is  no  secret  that  first  impressions  are  important;  they  have  been  so  throughout  the   evolution  of  our  species.  As  we  were  evolving,  a  particular  defence  mechanism  developed  that   allowed  for  the  incredibly  quick  judgment  of  another  of  the  same  kind  (Ambady  and  Skowron- ski  16).  The  ability  to  quickly  judge  another  was  of  incredible  value,  especially  is  a  threat  was   detected  requiring  a  fight  or  flight  response.  This  phenomenon  has  been  studied  extensively   within  the  fields  of  anthropology  and  biology,  in  which  evaluations  have  been  made  regarding   the  importance  and  effects  of  first  impressions,  as  well  as  biases  that  occur  naturally.  These   unconscious  effects  have  both  positive  and  negative  consequences,  as  this  mechanism  serves  

   8  

to  save  humans  processing  time,  however  our  first  impressions  of  others  are  not  always  accu- rate.    Despite  the  fact  that  in  Western  societies,  we  no  longer  "hunt  and  gather" our  food  (in   the  primitive  sense  of  the  term)  and  our  linguistic  abilities  have  substantially  improved  so   that  we  may  converse  with  each  other  in  a  civilized  manner,  the  formation  of  first  impressions   based  on  visual  symbols  still  holds  its  purpose.  We  navigate  our  world  at  an  incredibly  fast- paced  speed,  and  the  ability  to  form  quick  judgments  allows  us  to  do  this  more  effectively.  In   fact,  the  power  of  the  image  has  never  been  more  pronounced  or  important  than  it  is  in  this   current  era  of  extreme  technological  advance.  As  Kim  Sawchuk  states:  "we  are  living  in  an  age   which  anticipates  an  image" (60),  suggesting  that  we  have  become  accustomed  to,  and  expect,   the  availability  of  images  and  pictures  to  guide  us.  From  architecture  to  art,  fashion  to  televi- sion,  literature  to  computer  screens,  we  rely  on  semiotics  and  visual  literacy  to  help  us  navi- gate  the  world  around  us.  In  his  renowned  work  For  a  Critique  of  the  Political  Economy  of  The   Sign,  Jean  Baudrillard  discusses  how,  in  this  era  of  postmodernity,  we  actually  consume  im- ages  and  not  things  (147).  Meanings,  therefore,  are  constructed  using  images  themselves.  Vis- ual  literacy,  which  can  be  defined  as  the  "ability  to  construct  meaning  from  visual  images" (Giorgis,  Johnson,  Bonomo,  Colbert  et  al.  146),  is  directly  applicable  to  the  formation  of  first   impressions.  There  are  a  number  of  visual  elements  we  (automatically)  perceive  and  process   when  we  first  look  at  another  person  which  guide  the  formation  of  our  first  impressions;   these  include  face  shape,  facial  features,  grooming,  body  language  and  clothing.      Women  have  a  special  connection  with  this  visual  world.  Case  in  point:  women's  fash-

ion  choices  appear  to  be  much  broader  in  scope  and  typically  more  elaborate  than  men's   (Lipovetsky  61),  as  men's  clothing  has  "resisted  the  dictates  of  fashion"  much  more  so  than   women's  (Davis  172).  In  the  late  eighteenth  and  early  nineteenth  centuries,  men's  dress  codes  

   9  

focused  on  work  and  sobriety,  while  women's  focused  on  attractiveness  and  dependency  (Da- vis  172).  Edward  Sapir,  an  influential  anthropologist  who  is  considered  one  of  the  most  im- portant  figures  in  the  discipline  of  linguistics,  gives  an  example  of  this  difference  in  his  chap- ter  Fashion:  "Fashions  for  women  show  greater  variability  than  fashions  for  men  in  contempo- rary  civilization.  Not  only  do  women's  fashions  change  more  rapidly  and  completely  but  the   total  gamut  of  allowed  forms  is  greater  for  women  than  men"  (Sapir  379).  Joanne  Entwistle,  a   leading  fashion  scholar,  seconds  this  notion  and  boldly  states  that  women  have  traditionally   been  seen  as  the  "subjects"  of  fashion  (Entwistle  321),  highlighting  women's  special  relation- ship  with  the  visual  world  through  fashion  and  clothing.  For  instance,  during  the  eighteenth   and  nineteenth  centuries  in  European  societies  women  engaged  primarily  with  fashion  to  dis- play  the  wealth  and  success  of  their  husbands  (Partington  149;  Veblen  119).  As  Edward  Sapir   states,  "She  is  the  one  who  pleases  by  being  what  she  is  and  looking  as  she  does  rather  than  by   doing  what  she  does"  (Sapir  379).  In  this  context,  clothing  was  used  by  women  as  a  method  of   communicating  their  husband's  wealth  to  the  outside  world.  However,  by  enticing  women  to   appear  attractive,  sexual  and  beautiful,  clothing  also  forced  them  to  adopt  a  certain  demean- our:  that  of  proper,  polite  and  in  place  (Eco  192).     In  terms  of  the  corporate  world  and  within  a  contemporary  context,  this  relationship   becomes  particularly  confusing.  As  Mary  Roach  and  Joanne  Eicher  state  in  their  chapter  The   Language  of  Personal  Adornment:  "In  America,  women's  dress  is  generally  more  ambiguous  in   its  symbolism  of  occupational  roles  than  is  men's"  (13).  The  authors  go  on  to  explain  that  be- cause  women's  roles  (such  as  homemaker)  were  traditionally  unpaid,  they  did  not  have  clear   positions  within  the  American  occupational  structure,  and  therefore  "no  form  of  dress  that   clearly  distinguishes  them  as  belonging  to  a  particular  occupational  category;  for  nineteenth-

   10  

century  society  developed  an  expectation  of  women  to  indulge  in  personal  display  through   dress,  contrasted  with  an  expectation  of  men  to  eschew  such  display  and  to  garb  themselves   in  somber  symbols  of  the  occupations  provided  by  an  industrializing  society"  (Roach  and  Ei- cher  14).  The  implications  of  this  statement  are  far-reaching:  because  women's  (appearance)   roles  in  the  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries  centered  on  outward  displays  of  a  "fashiona- ble"  appearance  to  reflect  the  success  of  their  husbands,  they  were  (and  are,  albeit  possibly   less  so)  ill-equipped  to  navigate  fashion  and  clothing  in  a  different  context  than  they  were  tra- ditionally  used  to.  This  fact,  coupled  with  the  much  broader  scope  of  clothing  and  fashion   available  to  women,  poses  an  issue  for  many  women  in  corporate  settings.  It  is  fairly  safe  to   say  that  some  type  of  suit  is  appropriate  for  men  to  wear  to  the  office,  but  it  is  far  less  clear   what  appropriate  attire  is  for  women.     Not  only  do  women  have  a  special  relationship  with  the  visual  and  with  their  engage- ment  with  the  world  of  clothing  and  fashion,  but  in  contemporary  society  they  are  also  judged   on  their  visual  appearance,  so  much  so  that  often  their  appearance  is  used  to  make  assump- tions  about  their  cognitive  abilities.  For  example,  middle-class,  Western  cultures  in  Europe   and  North-America  still  use  gendered  terms  and  relationships  drawn  from  biology  to  describe   other  phenomena  that  are  completely  non-biological,  like  politics,  morality  and  social  rela- tions  (Kwolek-Folland  9).    The  idea  is  that  inherent  gender  divisions,  male  versus  female,  and   the  stereotypes  that  accompany  them,  are  natural  because  they  "...grew  out  of  a  scientific  ex- planation  of  biological  sexuality"  (Kwolek-Folland  9).  This  notion  is  also  tied  to  the  fact  that   the  qualities  that  are  often  thought  of  as  physically  beautiful  in  women  are  simply  symbols  of   female  behaviour  that  a  culture  or  period  in  time  considers  desirable,  meaning  that  "beauty"   is  always  prescribing  behaviour,  and  not  appearance  (Wolf  10-11).  The  implications  of  this  

   11  

reasoning  are  significant:  connections  between  the  human  body,  gender,  words  and  acts  are   reinforced,  leading  to  gendered  bodies  being  judged  and  interpreted  on  "unequally  valued  du- alities:  good/bad,  matter/spirit,  male/female"  (Kwolek-Folland  10).  These  aspects  indicate   that  appearance,  gender  and  cognitive  abilities  have  been  intertwined  for  a  long  time.     How,  then,  do  women  manage  their  appearance  in  this  complicated  visual  world?  It  is   one  thing  for  women  to  manage  their  appearance  in  their  personal  lives  and  among  friends   and  family,  however  it  is  entirely  different  when  discussing  image  management  in  the  corpo- rate  workplace  among  colleagues  and  superiors,  especially  in  situations  where  the  gender  di- vide  is  often  clear.  Arguably,  there  has  yet  to  be  a  more  prominent  place  in  which  a  woman's   appearance  is  held  to  such  impeccably  high  standards  where  it  is  constantly  being  judged,   scrutinized  and  surveyed  (other  than,  of  course,  the  modeling  world  and  fashion  industry).  It   would  be  one  thing  if  the  importance  of  appearance  within  a  business  setting  existed  in  a   world  where  equality  could  be  found  in  the  workplace,  however  it  holds  an  entirely  different   meaning  in  the  seemingly  still-discriminatory  corporate  environment.  Despite  popular  belief,   we  have  not  yet  achieved  gender  equality,  and  evidence  of  this  divide  is  abundant  in  the  cor- porate  workplace.  In  fact,  women  are  often  perceived  as  not  ready  for  the  managerial  climb   (Kaufman  and  Fetters  203;  Rosen  and  Jerdee  512),  are  not  given  equal  opportunities  to  access   systems  that  would  help  them  reach  the  upper  echelons  (Epstein  969),  or  are  simply  per- ceived  as  an  "inappropriate"  choice  for  many  upper  level  positions  (Epstein  996).  Gender  dis- crimination  and  stereotyping  are  rampant  within  these  settings,  and  may  serve  to  undermine   and  challenge  women's  roles  in  the  workplace.  According  to  Raymond  Gregory,  author  of   Women  and  Workplace  Discrimination:  Overcoming  barriers  to  gender  equality,  "...discrimina- tion  against  women  remains  the  major  barrier  to  their  full  equality  in  the  workforce"  (2).  The  

   12  

analysis  of  gender  stereotyping  in  the  workplace  is  therefore  integral  in  order  to  adequately   propose  methods  of  addressing  this  discrimination.          3.  Historical  Perspectives  of  Women  in  Corporate  Settings      In  speaking  of  the  history  of  women  in  a  corporate  workplace  environment,  a  distinc- tion  must  be  made  among  cultures.  The  history  of  women  entering  the  corporate  world  differs   substantially  across  the  globe  and  deals  with  different  timelines,  motivations  and  outcomes.   This  paper  focuses  on  the  history  of  women  in  an  office  setting  from  a  Western  perspective   and  focuses  mostly  on  a  North-American  context.  The  ideal  would  be  to  look  at  this  history   from  a  purely  Canadian  perspective,  however  there  is  little  academic  research  done  from  this   viewpoint.  Thus,  mostly  American  histories  will  be  analyzed,  in  the  hopes  that  some  of  the   findings  are,  at  least  to  some  extent,  generalizable  across  the  border  and  into  Canada.  It  is  ar- guable  that  American  and  Canadian  cultures  and  values  are  similar  in  many  respects,  and  both   countries  are  developed,  in  close  proximity  to  each  other,  and  their  economies  possess  close   ties.  Studies  have  found  many  shared  cultural  values,  both  in  private,  such  as  similar  attitudes   towards  sexual  minorities,  explored  by  Morrison,  Morrison  and  Franklin  (2009),  and  public   spheres,  including  workplace  environments.  Furthermore,  when  examining  codes  of  conduct   in  businesses  between  Canadian,  American  and  Australian  companies,  the  focus  on  "Relations   with  consumers"  is  fairly  similar  between  America  (23.3%)  and  Canada  (33.3%),  but  quite  dif- ferent  in  Australia  (9.6%)  (Wood  289).  These  similarities  point  to  the  fact  that  both  Canada   and  the  United  States  have  had  a  shared  corporate  foreign  focus  for  much  longer.  In  addition,  

   13  

the  shared  Anglo-Saxon  nature  of  both  Canada  and  the  United  States  contributes  to  their  simi- larities.  As  opposed  to  Latin  North-American  countries,  these  countries  both  value  external   realities,  as  opposed  to  interpersonal  realities  (Albert  333)  and  competition  (Stewart  and   Bennett  105;  Albert  333).  These  studies  suggest  that  it  is  appropriate  to  use  the  United  States   as  a  reference  when  exploring  these  themes  and  their  applicability  in  Canada.   Many  people  would  likely  agree  that  women's  relationship  with  the  corporate  world  is   quite  different  from  men's.  The  main  reason  for  this  discrepancy  is  that  the  history  of  women   as  workers  within  corporate  settings  is  quite  different  than  that  of  men.  As  discussed  briefly   in  the  overview,  women's  place  was  traditionally  in  the  private  sphere,  and  men's  in  the  pub- lic.  Women  typically  worked  in  the  home;  they  raised  and  looked  after  the  children,  they   cooked  and  cleaned,  they  made  clothing,  and  perhaps  they  worked  on  the  farm  (Kwolek-Fol- land  44).  Men's  place,  on  the  other  hand,  was  customarily  in  the  working  world;  they  were  the   ones  who  "brought  home  the  bacon,"  so  to  speak.  In  the  nineteenth  and  early  to  mid-twentieth   centuries,  men  were  predominantly  considered  the  "workers"  and  the  heads  of  the  household   and  as  such,  for  a  long  time,  they  held  the  financial  power.  Despite  much  progress  having  been   made  in  the  twentieth  century  in  terms  of  women's  rights,  the  cultural  expectation  remained   that  middle  and  upper-class  women  should  not  work.  By  and  large,  men  were  valued  based  on   their  occupational  positions,  and  women  through  their  marital  status.  In  the  United  States  and   Canada,  being  married  was  often  the  sole  focus  of  a  woman's  young  adulthood.  In  fact,  in   1942,  a  federal  National  Selective  Service  program  was  put  in  place  to  recruit  women  into  the   industrial  labour  force  during  the  War,  due  to  the  severe  shortage  of  workers.  The  program,   however,  sought  only  to  register  single  women,  excluding  married  women  entirely  despite  the   severe  need  (Anderson).    

   14  

Marriage  was  such  an  integral  aspect  of  Western  culture  during  this  time  that  there   were  laws  in  place  that  barred  married  women  from  working  (Goldin  160).  In  fact,  it  is  esti- mated  that  during  the  first  third  of  the  twentieth  century,  90%  of  all  clerical  workers  were   single  (Boyer  217).  If,  by  chance,  a  woman  was  able  to  enter  an  office  in  a  clerical  position,  she   would  promptly  be  fired  the  minute  she  married.  These  laws  were  known  as  the  "marriage   bar"  and  were  in  place  for  two  reasons.  Firstly,  they  prevented  married  women  from  entering   the  workplace  to  begin  with,  often  referred  to  as  the  "hire  bar."  Secondly,  they  changed   women's  rights  in  the  workplace  once  they  were  married,  referred  to  as  the  "retain  bar."  The   former  is  fairly  self-explanatory,  in  the  sense  that  many  fields  that  typically  employed  women,   such  as  education,  insurance  or  banking  companies,  forbade  the  hiring  of  a  woman  if  she  was   married.  The  "retain"  bar,  on  the  other  hand,  was  slightly  more  complex.  This  law  typically  al- lowed  women  who  married  to  stay  in  their  position  as  part-time  workers,  as  substitute  teach- ers,  for  example,  who  could  be  dismissed  at  will,  with  no  warning  whatsoever  (Goldin  161).    It   is  no  coincidence,  then,  that  "office  marriages,"  both  official  and  companionate,  were  encour- aged  (Boyer  223;  Kwolek-Folland  66).  These  relationships  which  formed  in  the  office  (be- tween  a  receptionist  and  her  boss,  for  example)  assured  that  once  women  were  married,  they   would  no  longer  be  part  of  the  corporate  office  in  question,  and  the  men  could  get  back  to   business  as  usual.  These  attitudes  were  so  ingrained  that  even  when  these  laws  began  to   change,  the  notion  of  "marriage"  remained  an  important  one;  even  proponents  of  women  in   the  office  used  the  argument  that  office  life  would  prepare  women  to  be  better  wives,  by   teaching  them  organizational  skills  and  self-knowledge  (Boyer  222;  Kwolek-Folland  56).  Ac- cording  to  Kate  Boyer,  who  writes  from  a  Canadian  perspective,  "corporate  narratives  rein- forced  the  notion  that  women  employees  were  both  looking  for  a  marriage  partner,  and  ready  

   15  

to  leave  their  jobs  when  they  did"  (223).  This  theme  is  very  salient  when  looking  at  the  his- tory  of  women  in  corporate  settings,  as  it  exposes  not  only  the  discrimination  that  women   faced  within  the  office  by  creating  sex-based  power  structures,  but  it  speaks  to  wider  themes   of  gender  bias  and  discrimination  within  society  itself.     There  are  a  number  of  reasons  why  this  traditional  landscape  began  to  change.  Firstly,   the  rise  of  the  feminist  movement  in  the  late  eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries  in  both  Eu- rope  and  North  America  played  a  critical  part  in  the  entrance  of  women  into  the  corporate   world.  Although  today  there  are  various  forms  of  feminism,  the  aim  of  the  movement  in  its  in- fancy  was  to  fight  for  equal  rights  and  the  liberation  of  women  within  society  (Quast).  Women   began  to  recognize,  and  have  the  courage  to  speak  out  against,  their  subordinate  place  in  soci- ety;  they  saw  that  their  place  within  their  communities  was  not  valued  to  the  same  extent  that   men's  was,  and  they  began  to  actively  fight  back  against  discrimination.  These  women  took   part  in  many  protests,  traveling  across  their  countries  in  an  effort  to  spread  awareness,  and   they  effectively  managed  to  change  laws  and  influence  thousands,  if  not  millions,  of  people.   These  brave  women  set  the  groundwork  for  what  is  still  these  days  known  as  the  feminist   movement.  Despite  their  successes,  there  is  still  much  to  be  done  today  to  help  elevate   women's  status  within  our  society,  particularly  within  workplace  settings.     It  is  interesting  to  note  the  role  that  fashion  and  clothing  has  played  both  in  the  subor- dination  of  women  and  also  in  their  liberation,  including  the  feminist  movement,  particularly   in  the  United  States.  The  corset  and  the  high  heel  shoe  (Veblen  113)  are  repeatedly  mentioned   in  both  popular  and  academic  literature  as  tools  that  were  used  to  suppress  women  within  so- ciety;  they  often  had  adverse  health  effects,  such  as  organ  movements  with  the  corset,  and  de- formed  feet  in  with  the  high  heel,  and  rendered  their  wearers  unfit  for  work  (Veblen  114).  

   16  

Thorstein  Veblen,  an  American  economist  and  sociologist  and  pioneer  of  the  notion  of  con- spicuous  consumption,  argues  that  women  wore  these  items  as  a  way  to  show  their  pecuniary   standing  within  society,  since  these  items  dictated  that  their  wearers  did  not  need  to  work  be- cause  they  were  wealthy  enough  to  afford  not  to  (Veblen  119).  Their  husbands  made  enough   money  to  sustain  the  family,  and  therefore  they  could  afford  a  life  of  conspicuous  consump- tion  which,  one  could  argue,  included  spending  time  and  money  on  one's  appearance.  In  this   sense,  these  items  of  clothing  could  be  seen  as  empowering,  as  they  allowed  the  wearer  to  feel   wealthy,  powerful  and  unique  amongst  others.  However,  it  is  also  necessary  to  examine  these   kinds  of  items  from  another  perspective,  one  where  they  actively  prevented  these  women   from  working  any  type  of  job.  Many  elaborate  aspects  of  women's  dress  in  the  eighteenth,   nineteenth  and  even  into  the  twentieth  centuries,  including  the  corset  and  high  heel,  can  be   seen  as  items  that  could  prevent  a  woman  from  engaging  in  a  working  environment.    An  obvi- ous  example  is  the  hobble  skirt,  designed  by  Paul  Poiret.  Poiret,  one  of  the  pioneering  design- ers  of  the  early  twentieth  century  in  France,  was  said  to  have  "liberated  women"  by  abandon- ing  the  corset  in  his  designs  (Lipovetsky  60),  yet  he  subsequently  bound  the  knees  when  he   designed  the  hobble  skirt.  Constricting,  contorting  and  often  unhealthy,  these  types  of  gar- ments  would  render  their  wearers  unfit  for  any  type  of  physical  activity.     It  is  also  worth  noting  that  during  this  time  period,  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  North   America,  many  prominent  designers  of  these  garments  were  men.  In  fact,  according  to  The   Great  Fashion  Designers  by  Brenda  Polan  and  Roger  Tredre,  thirty-eight  of  the  top  fifty  design- ers  selected  as  the  best  between  the  late  nineteenth  century  and  the  late  twentieth  century   were  men.  Was  this  simply  a  coincidence,  or  was  there  perhaps  something  more  purposeful  

   17  

happening?  These  designers,  of  course,  did  not  dress  everyone;  they  were  the  elite  couture  de- signers  that  only  the  wealthy  could  afford.  However,  their  designs  were  often  the  ones  that   were  copied  and  sold  to  the  masses,  and  as  such  they  dictated  trends  and  taste  (Kawamura   65).  There  is  a  very  intimate  link  to  be  found  between  fashion  and  clothing  and  women's  place   within  society.  As  Elizabeth  Wilson  acutely  notes:  "Fashionable  dressing  is  commonly  as- sumed  to  have  been  restrictive  for  women  and  to  have  confined  them  to  the  status  of  the  or- namental  or  the  sexual  chattel"  (Wilson  13).  In  this  loaded  sentence,  Wilson  points  out  that   clothing  and  dress  not  only  rendered  women  unable  to  work,  using  words  like  "confined"  and   "restrictive,"  but  poignantly  notes  that  clothing  was  effectively  used  as  a  tool  to  sexualize   women  and  reduce  them  to  the  mere  "chattel"  of  their  husbands.   It  is  clear  that,  for  a  long  time,  fashion  could  be  seen  as  a  tool  that  kept  women  out  of  the   working  world  and  served  to  "reduce"  their  status  within  society.  This  was  most  obvious  in   Europe,  the  epicenter  of  fashion,  but  its  effects  could  also  be  seen  in  the  United  States.  Con- versely,  and  with  help  from  the  feminist  movement,  women  began  to  use  clothing  to  move   their  cause  along.  The  starkest  and  possibly  most  remarkable  example  of  this  was  the  way   members  of  the  NWP  (National  Women's  Party,  leader  of  the  women's  suffrage  movement  in   the  United  States),  re-appropriated  dress  that  was  used  to  bring  them  down,  turning  it  into  a   visual  symbol  of  their  political  movement,  an  action  which  helped  their  cause  substantially.   Katherine  Feo  Kelly,  in  her  paper  entitled  "Performing  Prison:  Dress,  Modernity,  and  the  Radi- cal  Suffrage  Body"  details  the  events  that  occurred  in  the  early  1900's,  when  members  of  the   NWP  were  arrested  and  become  political  prisoners.  Upon  their  arrival  at  the  prison,  clothing   (and  often,  a  lack  thereof)  was  used  to  create  `docile  bodies',  a  notion  put  forth  originally  by  

   18  

Foucault.  This  idea  focuses  on  the  fact  that  the  body  can  be  subjected  to  power,  and  can  subse- quently  be  transformed,  used  and  improved  (Foucault  136),  often  times  by  the  use  of  specific   clothing,  such  as  a  soldier's  uniform  (Foucault  181).  The  NWP  members  who  were  imprisoned   began  to  feel  like  criminals  based  on  their  apparel,  although  they  did  not  associate  themselves   with  crime  or  criminality.  The  clothing  they  were  forced  to  wear  began  affecting  their  behav- iours  and  attitudes  in  prison  and  the  members  indicated  a  preoccupation  with  how  the  body's   interior  might  be  affected  by  its  exterior  surroundings  (Feo  303).  When  these  women  were   finally  released,  as  well  as  throughout  their  imprisonment,  NWP  members  took  garments  that   were  very  similar  to  those  they  wore  in  prison  and  used  them  to  create  a  nonviolent  visual   rhetoric,  which  effectively  shifted  NWP  tactics  and  led  to  an  extremely  successful  national   tour  (Feo  300).  These  women  took  something  that  was  meant  to  demean  and  undermine   them  and  successfully  turned  it  into  something  positive  that  could  work  with  their  female   bodies  to  create  power  and  success.     Along  with  the  formation  and  rise  of  the  feminist  movement  between  the  eighteenth   and  twentieth  centuries,  the  effects  of  both  World  Wars,  particularly  World  War  Two,  are  sig- nificant  when  discussing  the  entrance  of  women  into  corporate  settings  (Boyer  216;  Quast).   Needless  to  say,  thousands  of  men  left  to  fight  in  the  war,  which  created  a  significant  gap  in   the  labour  force;  this  was  a  huge  opportunity  for  women  to  enter  the  corporate  working   world.  In  addition  to  affecting  change  in  the  labour  force  itself,  this  influx  of  women  workers   was  also  responsible  for  changing  societal  attitudes  towards  women  working  in  general,   where  now  it  was  acceptable  for  middle-class  women  to  work.  Perhaps  it  was  due  to  the  fact   that,  despite  "popular  belief"  (Rhode  1163)  women  could  in  fact  work,  marry  and  have  chil- dren,  or  perhaps  the  shift  was  simply  due  to  an  acknowledgement  that  women  entering  the  

   19  

workplace  was  a  necessary  change.  Many  women  also  entered  the  workforce  due  to  inevitable   economic  needs;  the  cost  of  living  was  rising  substantially  post-War,  hence  many  women   were  required  to  work  in  order  to  help  financially  support  their  families  (Quast).  By  the   1960's  and  1970's,  even  the  American  government  was  taking  note,  and  many  laws  were  in- stated  with  regards  to  equal  rights,  including  the  Equal  Pay  Act  of  1963  (Quast)  and  the  Equal   Employment  Opportunity  Act  in  1972  (Wolf  33).  It  is  therefore  clear  that  during  the  twentieth   century,  the  acknowledgement  and  subsequent  action  of  the  government  in  terms  of  women's   equal  rights  was  flourishing  and  changing  women's  positions  within  society.     Another  significant  reason  for  the  influx  of  women  into  the  labour  force  was  the  rise  of   the  service  sector  and  the  decline  of  the  manufacturing  sector  (Quast).  The  major  shift  from   manufacture  to  service  that  occurred  in  the  late  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  century  Amer- ican  business  world  resulted  in  the  rise  and  expansion  of  the  financial  industries,  particularly   banking  and  life  insurance  and  was  a  significant  reason  for  the  large  influx  of  women  into  the   corporate  world.  This  expansion  was  correlated  with  rising  numbers  of  women  entering  the   workforce,  especially  as  clerical  workers  and  typists  (Kwolek-Folland  30,  41),  which  was  also   the  case  in  Canada  (Boyer  212).  Although  many  Canadian  women  were  laid  off  after  the  War,   by  the  1920's  they  had  begun  to  re-establish  wartime  levels  of  employment  (Anderson).  Both   in  the  United  States  and  Canada,  the  fastest  growing  occupations  for  women  were  clerical  po- sitions.  The  financial  institutions  that  provided  these  clerical  jobs  reached  a  much  wider  audi- ence  with  the  help  of  eased  communication  as  well  as  advertising  and,  as  a  result,  a  host  of   specialized  positions  materialized  (Kwolek-Folland  23)  which  women  helped  to  fill.  In  fact,  by   1911  clerical  work  was  the  third  largest  source  of  employment  for  women  in  Montreal  (Boyer   212).  This  change,  however,  did  not  come  without  resistance.  Many  of  the  critics,  of  course,  

   20  

were  none  other  than  the  men  with  whom  these  women  were  beginning  to  work.  Not  only  did   the  increasing  presence  of  women  in  the  corporate  office  shatter  the  male  community  that   these  men  were  so  used  to,  but  also  it  served  as  a  visual  reminder  for  them  of  the  unwelcome   transitions  to  modern  office  work  (Kwolek-Folland  39).  In  addition  to  fearing  this  new  change   at  work,  some  male  workers  feared  the  "desexing"  of  women,  and  the  possibility  that  they   would  lose  interest  in  marriage  (Kwolek-Folland  56).  Considering  Western  society's  long  tra- dition  of  the  importance  and  significance  of  marriage  in  the  family  system,  and  the  importance   of  a  woman  becoming  a  wife,  this  was,  in  a  sense,  a  rational  fear  to  have.  The  fact  that  men  had   such  adverse  reactions  to  women  entering  "their"  sphere  could  be  seen  as  a  basis  in  and  of  it- self  for  the  substantial  amount  of  discrimination  that  still  exists  today.     As  briefly  mentioned,  it  was  strongly  believed  in  the  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth   centuries  that  women  could  not,  physically  and  mentally,  be  both  mothers  and  caregivers,  as   well  as  a  professional  in  the  workplace  (Rhode  1163;  Boyer  220).  Much  of  the  opposition   "stemmed  from  assumptions  about  [women's]  intellectual,  physical,  and  psychological  unfit- ness"  (Rhode  1166).  In  fact,  a  prominent  physician  in  the  late  nineteenth  century,  Dr.  Edward   Clarke,  suggested  that  women  who  redirected  their  "biological  reserves"  to  cognitive,  as  op- posed  to  reproductive  organs,  would  potentially  experience  a  host  of  negative  physical  side   effects,  such  as  permanent  sterility  (Rhode  1167).  It  is  necessary  here  to  contextualize  the   sheer  impact  that  statement  would  have  had,  coming  from  a  prominent  doctor  during  this  pe- riod  of  time.  American  doctors  during  the  late  nineteenth  century  often  enjoyed  what  we   would  call  today  "celebrity  status"  and  apart  from  helping  patients  heal  using  medical  science,   they  also  inspired  their  patients  with  hope  and  confidence  (Rothstein  10).  The  fact  that  physi- cians  during  this  time  could  have  such  significant  effects  on  their  patients  by  merely  inspiring  

   21  

them  is  testament  to  the  sheer  amount  of  faith  that  patients  placed  in  their  doctors.  Dr.  Clarke   himself  had  a  far  reach,  despite  his  generalizing  from  a  "handful  of  patients"  (Rhode  1167),   and  his  comments  had  substantial  influence.  Related  health  concerns  of  women  who  worked   included  the  idea  that  women  were  too  emotionally  unstable  for  "significant  vocational  stress"   (Rhode  1167);  it  was  believed  that  women  could  not  cope  with  stresses  of  the  world,  and   therefore  could  certainly  not  cope  with  stresses  related  to  the  office,  business  or  economics.   What  is  not  clear  through  this  analysis,  however,  is  why  women  were  seen  as  fit  for  the  gruel- ing  work  of  factories  and  field  labour.  One  could  potentially  view  this,  then,  as  a  distinct  and   significant  way  of  actively  keeping  women  out  of  the  office.  One  of  the  many  goals  of  the  femi- nist  movement  was  to,  of  course,  prove  that  women  could  physically  and  mentally  work  in  a   corporate  setting,  as  well  as  be  wives  and  mothers.     Despite  having  experienced  almost  radical  change  since  the  nineteenth  century,   women  have  seen  only  partial  success.  As  Deborah  Rhode  states  in  "Perspectives  on  Profes- sional  Women,"  "Although  women  have  been  moving  into  upper  level  professions  in  greater   numbers,  they  have  not  attained  the  positions  of  greatest  power,  prestige,  and  economic  re- ward"  (1163).  She  also  poignantly  states  that  although  formal  barriers  to  entry  have  disap- peared,  informal  ones  have  remained,  such  as  underlying  gender  stereotypes  (Rhode  1163).  It   is  arguable  that  these  "informal  barriers"  are  just  as  powerful  as  the  formal  ones.  The  fact  that   gender  stereotypes  still  exist  in  the  corporate  sphere  today  serves  to  actively  undermine   women's  roles  in  the  workplace,  both  from  a  personal  perspective  (that  of  the  women  work- ers  themselves)  but  also  from  a  wider,  more  general  viewpoint  concerning  office  politics  on  a   larger  scale.  It  is  worth  noting  that  participating  in  a  corporation's  office  politics  is  an  effective   way  of  entering  the  business  inner  circle  (Reardon  XVII).  Politics  has  often  been  seen  as  a  

   22  

man's  game  (Collier  89)  and  it  is  no  different  in  business  settings.  The  ever-present  gender   discrimination  and  stereotyping  within  the  corporate  world  serve  to  further  complicate   women's  participation  in  office  politics,  which  in  turn  serves  to  undermine  their  careers  in   general,  and  possibly  prevents  them  from  taking  steps  to  mitigate  this  discrimination,  thus   creating  a  negative  feedback  loop.      3.1  Fashion  and  Empowerment  in  the  Workplace      Alongside  the  rise  of  women  in  the  corporate  workplace  in  the  eighteenth,  nineteenth   and  twentieth  centuries,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  role  that  fashion  has  played  within   women's  successful  entrance  into  the  corporate  world.  Fashion  can  be  considered,  in  this  con- text  at  least,  as  a  tool  used  by  women  ­  and  against  women  ­  while  embarking  on  the  new   journey  into  the  corporate  office.  To  understand  its  role,  it  is  important  to  examine  women's   special  relationship  with  fashion  further.  One  theory  (Roach  and  Eicher  19)  is  that  during  the   nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries  American  society  generally  adopted  more  discretionary   controls  over  women's  time  than  men,  as  men  were  more  often  out  of  the  home  and  at  the  of- fice  working.  Essentially,  middle-to-upper  class  women,  as  well  as  the  social  elite,  often  had   more  time  on  their  hands  which  may  have  been  used  this  time  to  adorn  themselves  more  in- tricately;  it  might  have  been  considered  a  "hobby,"  or  a  method  of  personal  display  to  show   one's  status.  Consequently,  dressing  as  a  recreational  activity  became  more  characteristic  of   women  and  subsequently  the  "habit"  continued  as  women  entered  the  corporate  workplace.   Women  continued  to  use  clothing  to  create  favorable  first  impressions  of  themselves,  which   was  of  the  upmost  importance  during  this  time  filled  with  gendered  tension.  However,  this  

   23  

does  not  explain  why  women's  clothing  is  so  different  and  so  much  more  broad  in  scope  than   men's,  nor  does  it  speak  to  how  and  why  the  predominantly  male  designers  (Davis  175)  came   up  with  such  elaborate,  extravagant  items  for  their  female  customers  to  wear.  When  discuss- ing  the  difference  between  men's  and  women's  fashions,  one  cannot  ignore  The  Great  Mascu- line  Renunciation  in  the  early  twentieth  century,  when  male  dressers  abandoned  notions  of   beauty  in  favour  of  notions  of  usefulness  (Bourke  23).  Women  did  not  experience  renuncia- tion  in  the  same  manner,  and  while  men  began  to  put  cut  and  fit  above  everything  else,  their   female  counterparts  prioritized  ornament,  colour  and  display  (Wilson  29).     In  a  slightly  more  contemporary  context,  women  in  the  corporate  world  used  fashion   to  construct  themselves  as  respectable  career  women,  which  had  multiple  effects.  First,  it   brought  public  visibility  to  the  professional  career  woman;  second,  it  helped  to  show  the   broader  historical  developments  in  the  changing  nature  of  work  in  general;  third,  it  distin- guished  a  new  type  of  consumption  for  women  (Entwistle  312).  It  must  be  noted  that  women   had  something  to  prove  when  they  made  the  bold  move  to  enter  the  corporate  world.  While   fighting  the  norm,  and  fighting  extremely  strong  gender  stereotypes  and  discrimination,   women  were  also  facing  significant  competition  among  each  other.    Fashion  and  clothing  was   used  as  a  method  to  both  demand  respect  and  also  to  set  themselves  apart  from  their  col- leagues.  It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  fashion  was  also  used  against  many  women  during   this  period,  and  was  sometimes  even  used  as  an  excuse  for  their  termination.  For  instance,   Boyer  notes  that  in  the  early  twentieth  century  in  Montreal,  women  employees  in  banks  were   called  upon  to  carefully  manage  their  behaviours  and  appearance  in  order  to  avoid  arousing   male  colleagues  (220).  Failure  to  do  so  often  ended  in  the  female  employee's  termination,  de- spite  the  male  employee  having  been  the  distracted  one  (Boyer  219).    

   24  

As  a  consequence,  there  were  many  books  and  manuals  created  in  the  1970's  and   1980's  that  were  dedicated  to  teaching  women  how  dress  for  the  corporate  office,  the  most   famous  of  which  is  arguably  John  T.  Molloy's  Women:  Dress  for  Success.  Molloy,  a  researcher   who  studied  the  effects  of  clothing  on  others,  was  an  extremely  influential  figure  during  this   crucial  time  for  women.  His  "Dress  for  Success"  manual,  along  with  his  theories  on  dressing,   led  to  the  popular  term  `power  dressing.'  According  to  Entwistle,  "...'power  dressing'  offered   women  a  conception  of  power  located  at  the  level  of  the  body  and  rooted  in  individualism"   (320).  Although  the  term  `power  dressing'  is  now  considered  dated,  the  core  traits  of  what  it   means  still  exist  today,  and  its  significance  in  the  workplace,  especially  for  women,  cannot  be   denied.  What  led  Malloy  to  develop  a  "system"  to  teach  women  how  to  power-dress?  During  a   time  when  there  were  large  shifts  happening  in  the  workplace  with  many  women  beginning   to  work  in  office  settings,  Malloy  presented  the  argument  that  most  women  dressed  for  fail- ure:  either  they  let  fashion  dictate  their  choice  of  clothes  (meaning  they  followed  trends  too   closely),  or  they  saw  themselves  merely  as  sex  objects.  In  addition,  most  women  dressed  ac- cording  to  their  socio-economic  status,  which  naturally  makes  sense,  although  Malloy  saw  this   as  a  drawback  ­  he  believed  women  should  dress  for  their  desired  socio-economic  status.   Based  on  these  observations,  Malloy  concluded  that  these  were  all  factors  that  prevented   women  from  gaining  access  to  positions  of  power  in  the  business  and  corporate  world  -  fash- ion  had  essentially  dictated  women's  glass  ceilings.  Malloy  saw  "science"  as  the  only  way  that   women  should  be  choosing  their  clothes.  By  science,  he  was  referring  to  his  methodical  obser- vation  of  many  women  over  time,  and  his  development  of  a  systematic  way  of  power  dressing.     Malloy's  notions  of  power  dressing  for  women  can  be  applied  to  ideas  of  women   adorning  corporate  "uniforms,"  as  these  uniforms  can  often  be  used  to  increase  power  and      25  

presence  in  a  corporate  setting,  which  Malloy  recognized  through  his  research.  Uniforms  in   this  context  can  refer  to  both  the  traditional  attire  most  women  were  wearing  in  offices  at  the   time,  such  as  structured  dresses,  nylons  and  a  hair  up-do,  as  well  as  actual  uniforms  which   women  were  required  to  wear  in  certain  office  settings,  such  as  a  skirted  suit  which  was  sug- gested  by  Malloy  (35).  The  uniforms  played  an  important  part  in  "structuring  the  career   woman's  everyday  experience  of  herself,  serving  as  a  mode  of  self-presentation  that  enabled   her  to  construct  herself  and  be  recognized  as  an  executive  or  business  career  woman"  (Entwis- tle  312).  Here,  the  cognitive  effect  of  clothing  worn  is  noteworthy.  Clothing,  in  this  case  the   uniform,  helped  in  forming  the  woman's  experience  of  herself  as  a  career  woman  ­    it  allowed   her  to  both  see  herself,  and  be  seen  by  others,  as  a  professional  career  woman.  In  other  words,   the  discourse  of  power  dressing  provided  women  with  a  means  of  fashioning  themselves  as   career  woman.  In  this  sense,  examining  the  history  of  the  word  fashion,  very  briefly,  is  im- portant.  It  was  circa  1300  when  notions  of  fashion,  style  and  manner  of  dress  was  first  rec- orded  (Kawamura  3).  The  French  origin  of  the  word,  mode,  derives  from  modus,  meaning   "manner"  in  English.  In  terms  of  the  English  "fashion,"  its  roots  are  Latin  in  nature  and  derive   from  facio  or  factio,  which  means  "making",  or  "doing"  (Kawamura  3).    The  word  evolved  natu- rally,  but  its  roots  were  always  in  the  idea  of  "making"  or  "to  make."    In  this  sense,  it  is  clear  to   see  how  women  entering  the  professional  sphere  used  clothing  and  fashion  to  construct,  or   make,  their  professional  identities.     As  was  made  clear  by  scholars  such  as  Thorstein  Veblen  and  extending  to  the  later   work  of  Joanne  Entwistle,  fashion  was,  and  still  is,  used  as  a  tool  by  women  to  construct  visual   identities  of  themselves  as  professionals.  It  was,  and  continues  to  be,  used  to  help  women  cre- ate  favorable  first  impressions  of  themselves  in  a  workplace  setting,  and  can  arguably  be  seen      26  

as  an  influencing  factor  in  terms  of  how  others  view  women  in  corporate  settings.  However,   fashion  within  this  context  is  a  double-edged  sword;  it  can  often  be  utilized  by  men  as  a  sort  of   scapegoat  for  the  discrimination  against  women  in  corporate  settings.     A  historic  example  of  the  very  real  way  fashion  negatively  impacted  women  in  the   workplace  is  the  following  quote,  taken  from  an  article  in  Fortune  Magazine  in  1945  and   quoted  in  Angel  Kwolek-Folland's  book  Engendering  Business:  Men  and  Women  in  the  Corpo- rate  Office,  1870-1930:  "What  kind  of  nation  is  this  callipygian  nation  of  silk  knees,  slender   necks,  narrow  fingers,  and  ironic  mouths  which  has  established  itself  upon  our  boundaries?"   (41).  By  "our  boundaries,"  the  author  is  referring  to  the  corporate  office,  and  specifically  the   corporate  office  traditionally  run  by  men.  The  rarely  used  term  "callipygian"  means  "having   well-shaped  buttocks"  ("Callipygian,"  Mirriam-Webster)  and  was  a  popular  term  in  the  mid- twentieth  century,  which  is  when  this  particular  Fortune  Magazine  article  was.  The  mere  use   of  this  term  in  a  sentence  in  which  the  employment  of  women  is  discussed  serves  to  show  the   impact  that  women's  appearance  alone  had  on  opinions  of  them  and  their  abilities  in  a  work- place  setting.  The  majority  of  the  quote  focuses  on  physical  features:  slender  necks,  narrow   fingers,  ironic  mouths.  Needless  to  say,  these  physical  features  have  nothing  to  do  with  a   woman's  ability  to  do  her  job,  so  why  are  they  discussed  as  such?  This  can  be  related  to  the   physicality  of  the  female  body  being  used  as  a  reason  for  not  believing  them  to  be  fit  for  work   in  an  office.  Prevalent  attitudes  suggested  that  women  were  frail  and  should  focus  on  using   their  bodies  to  bear  children,  not  to  work  in  an  office.  Apart  from  mentioning  various  physical   features,  this  author  also  mentions  a  "nation  of  silk  knees,"  referring  to  women's  hosiery.  It  is   somewhat  ironic  that  this  author  mentioned  hosiery  in  an  arguably  negative  way,  but  women  

   27  

in  the  mid  1950's  were  required  to  wear  hosiery  in  an  office  setting,  in  order  to  appear  pre- sentable  and  be  taken  seriously,  in  addition  to  needing  to  act  "appropriately"  and  be  modest.   This  is  a  very  clear  example  of  the  insurmountable  tension  that  women  faced  during  this  time.     Items  of  clothing  items  that  women  were  required  to  wear,  often  specifically  by  their  superi- ors  but  also  as  more  broad  societal  attitudes  may  have  suggested,  were  subsequently  used   against  them,  perpetuating  discrimination  and  stereotyping  in  the  workplace.     Philip  Warkander,  in  his  article  "'No  Pansies!!':  Exploring  the  Concept  of  `Style'   Through  Ethnographic  Fieldwork"  again  reinforces  the  use  of  clothing  as  a  method  of  gender   discrimination  in  a  more  contemporary  context:  "...I  suggest  that  within  a  contemporary  con- text,  the  concept  of  fashion  has  been  used  to  categorize  individuals  as  feminine,  subsequently   also  defining  them  as  socially  mobile  (implicating  vulnerability)  and  therefore  subordinate  to   others,  labeled  as  seemingly  stable"  (6).  One  need  only  think  of  a  man's  work  uniform  ­  the   suit  and  tie  ­  to  see  the  implications  of  this;  for  men,  dressing  for  work  is  a  relatively  straight- forward  process,  and  for  women  it  is  not.    The  suits  that  men  wear,  and  have  worn  for  hun- dreds  of  years  (despite  the  fact  that  they  have  gone  through  many  transformations,  they  have   nonetheless  remained  relatively  constant  in  comparison  to  women's  formal  clothing)  are  a   stable  and  constant  way  that  men  create  their  own  visual  identities  as  professional  workers   within  the  corporate  world.  The  fact  that  this  "uniform"  remains  relatively  consistent  is  one   way  that  men's  professional  identities  also  remain  relatively  consistent.  This  is  what  War- kander  is  referring  to  when  he  discusses  men's  seemingly  "stable"  state  within  the  workplace,   in  contrast  to  women  who  must  constantly  negotiate  their  wardrobe,  their  appearance,  and   the  rapidly  changing  styles  that  are  offered  to  them  in  order  to  attempt  to  create  a  visual  iden- tity  that  is  somewhat  constant.  However,  Warkander  argues  that  the  way  the  fashion  system  

   28  

works  for  women  helps  to  create  an  atmosphere  of  instability,  which  can  directly  be  applied   to  the  workplace  and  can  be  seen  as  a  basis  for  much  of  the  discrimination  that  women  faced,   and  continue  to  face,  in  a  corporate  setting.     In  summary,  it  is  clear  that  up  until  at  least  the  mid  1900's,  women  faced  many  overt   obstacles  in  terms  of  merely  their  ability  to  enter  the  business  world.  An  example  of  a  very   tangible  way  women  were  kept  out  of  the  office  environment  was  the  marriage  bar.  Women   faced  hindrances  from  governments  as  well  as  their  male  counterparts.  Despite  these  seem- ingly  insurmountable  hurdles,  women  managed  to  overcome  many  of  these  obstacles  and  suc- cessfully  entered  the  corporate  workplace.  One  of  the  aspects  that  helped  them  accomplish   this,  and  perhaps  helped  to  provide  a  smoother  transition,  was  through  the  use  of  clothing   and  fashion.  These  women  recognized  that  the  way  they  presented  themselves  to  others,  es- pecially  in  the  context  of  the  corporate  office,  significantly  affected  their  abilities  to  secure  the   job  in  question,  stand  out  within  the  position,  as  well  as  potentially  move  up  the  corporate   ladder.  Women  continue  to  face  many  obstacles  within  the  business  world,  including  lower   employment  levels  and  unequal  wages,  however  there  has  clearly  been  significant  progress   over  the  last  hundred  years  .  Despite  these  positive  advancements,  the  shifting  business  at- mosphere  is  arguably  evolving  at  a  leisurely  pace.  Notwithstanding  major  advancements  in   technology,  medicine  and  politics,  the  role  women  play  in  the  business  world  is  not  reflected   to  the  same  degree.  It  is  therefore  worth  examining  why  this  may  be,  and  attempting  to  indi- cate  ways  in  which  equality  in  the  workplace  might  be  expedited.          

   29  

4.  Gender  Stereotypes,  Discrimination  and  Harassment  in  the  Workplace        

There  has  been  a  fairly  substantial  amount  of  research  conducted  on  notions  of  profes-

sional  dress,  appearance,  first  impressions,  discrimination  and  physical  attractiveness  in  the   workplace.  The  bulk  of  this  research  has  been  conducted  from  an  American  perspective,  by   American  researchers  and  using  American  participants.  Although  Canada  and  the  United   States  share  many  similarities  in  terms  of  culture  and  business,  they  are  two  distinct  countries   with  different  laws  and  social  systems.  Therefore,  despite  the  growing  amount  of  research  be- ing  conducted  on  these  topics,  there  is  a  significant  need  for  Canadian  research  so  that  we   may  better  understand  these  ideas  and  how  to  use  them  to  our  advantage  as  Canadians.  In  ad- dition,  much  of  this  research  has  been  conducted  using  male  and  female  participants.  While   this  provides  a  picture  of  the  overall  effect  of  clothing  and  first  impressions  on  the  working   population,  it  can  be  argued  that,  because  men  and  women  are  held  to  completely  different   standards  in  terms  of  appearance  (Warkander  2014;  Hewlett  2012),  more  studies  need  to  be   done  focusing  solely  on  females  in  a  workplace  setting.     When  looking  at  the  history  of  women  in  the  corporate  workplace  within  a  Western   context,  it  is  clear  that  much  has  changed  over  the  past  hundred  years,  and  women  have  be- come  a  crucial  and  accepted  part  of  the  workforce.  Despite  this  extraordinary  progress,   women  are  still  subject  to  harassment,  discrimination  and  stereotyping  within  corporate   workplace  settings,  and  gender  equality  still  does  not  exist,  contrary  to  popular  belief.  Why   does  this  discrimination  still  exist?  How  are  stereotypes  formed  and  what  negative  impacts  do   they  create?  Why  are  women  often  the  sole  recipients  of  sexual  harassment,  and  what  role  

   30  

does  clothing  play  within  these  circumstances?  How  might  we  move  forward  from  discrimina- tion  and  stereotyping  to  create  a  more  equitable  corporate  environment?  These  are  all  ques- tions  that  will  be  addressed  in  this  section  in  order  to  better  understand  the  current  corporate   environment  and  how  it  may  be  changed  and  adapted  to  foster  an  equitable  workplace  atmos- phere.   When  references  to  stereotyping  and  discrimination  are  made  in  regards  to  the  work- place,  one  typically  need  not  pause  to  think  about  which  gender  is  the  one  being  stereotyped   or  discriminated  against.  Why  is  it  that  women,  more  often  than  not,  are  the  ones  being  dis- criminated  against.  As  mentioned  in  the  previous  section,  perhaps  it  was,  and  still  is,  a  defence   mechanism put  in  place  by  male  employees  to  protect  against  fears  of  women  entering  their   "spheres," and  either  taking  over  or  disrupting  the  flow  of  business  (Gregory  11).  From  the   beginning  through  the  mid-twentieth  century,  men  were  so  concerned  about  women  entering   the  corporate  workplace  that  there  was,  for  example,  much  effort  put  into  separating  men  and   women  on  the  job.  There  were  distinct,  gendered  spaces  within  the  office,  such  as  separate   lunchrooms  based  on  gender  (Kwolek-Folland  123).  This  notion  of  separation  persisted  out- side  the  confines  of  the  private  office  as  well,  and  into  the  more  public,  service  spaces  of  many   corporations.  Men  were  often  part  of  the  public  sphere  of  the  business,  and  women  part  of  the   private  (Kwolek-Folland  9).  Some  corporations  in  the  early  twentieth  century,  such  as  the   Head  Office  of  the  Metropolitan  Life  Insurance  Company  in  New  York  City,  even  went  so  far  as   to  install  separate  elevators  for  men  and  women  (Boyer  220).  The  same  theme,  separate  gen- dered  spaces,  could  be  seen  in  Canadian  business  rhetoric  as  well.  For  instance,  when  faced   with  his  first  female  employee  in  1901,  a  bank  manager  recommended  putting  up  a  screen  to   hide  her  completely  from  public  view  (Boyer  220).  Discrimination  against  minorities  in  the  

   31  

corporate  workplace,  whether  women,  immigrants  or  homosexuals,  is  certainly  not  a  new   concept,  however  it  seems  that  despite  the  recent  changes  within  the  corporate  world,  the  in- creasing  number  of  female  employees  within  these  settings,  and  our  increasing  acceptance  of   this  change,  an  uneven  presence  of  stereotyping  and  discrimination  within  this  framework   seems  to  persist.  Despite  a  general  sense  that  gender  discrimination  is  ending,  it  is  still  alive   and  well,  particularly  within  workplace  settings  (Gregory  2).          When  discussing  appearance  and  how  it  may  lead  to  discrimination,  it  is  hard  to  be-

lieve  that  this  type  of  behaviour  exists  within  a  corporate,  professional  setting,  yet  it  is  still   very  rampant.  Shockingly,  in  Canada,  there  is  no  law  in  place  that  prohibits  an  employer  from   not  hiring  a  prospective  employee  due  to  their  appearance  alone  ("Employees").  South  of  the   border,  there  is  only  one  state  (Michigan),  a  small  number  of  American  cities,  and  a  small   number  of  countries  that  explicitly  prohibit  appearance  discrimination  in  employment  set- tings  (Adamitis  196).  One  need  only  look  to  Abercrombie  and  Fitch  to  see  that  workplace  dis- crimination  based  on  appearance  is  still  alive  and  well.  Abercrombie  and  Fitch  is  an  American   apparel  company  that  was  founded  in  1892.  Over  the  course  of  its  long,  storied  history,  the   corporate  culture  and  goods  offered  have  changed  dramatically  (Schlossberg).  In  its  infancy,  it   was  a  destination  for  professional  gear  for  the  avid  outdoorsman.  Today,  it  is  a  destination  for   pre-teens  and  teenagers  alike  looking  for  often  skimpy,  casual  apparel.  The  company  has  re- cently  faced  scrutiny  for  supposedly  hiring  only  "beautiful" people  and  discriminating  against   less-attractive  applicants.  The  unique  aspect  of  this  case  is  that  Abercrombie  and  Fitch  dis- criminates  against  both  men  and  women,  unlike  in  many  cases  where  it  is  mostly,  if  not  to-

   32  

tally,  women  being  discriminated  against.  The  fact  of  the  matter  is  simply  that  workplace  dis- crimination  based  on  appearance  is  still  alive  and  well,  and  in  one  way  or  another  accepted   and  understood.     Abercrombie  and  Fitch  is  an  apparel  company,  and  as  such  is  focused  on  aesthetics  and   appearance.  However,  in  corporate  settings  the  focus  is  typically  not  on  the  visual,  so  why  are   women  being  discriminated  against,  not  only  because  of  their  gender,  but  because  of  their  ap- pearance?  As  discussed  in  the  previous  section,  gender,  appearance,  and  cognitive  abilities  are   often  intertwined  which  is  why  this  type  of  discrimination  is  so  problematic,  especially  in  a   setting  where  cognitive  abilities  are  valued  so  highly.  In  addition,  it  is  important  to  note  that   not  only  are  women  held  to  a  stricter  standard  of  appearance,  but  at  the  same  time  they  are   denied  feedback  on  what  those  standards  are  (Hewlett  2).  In  fact,  in  a  study  conducted  by  the   Center  for  Talent  Innovation,  researchers  found  that  only  32%  of  female  employees  received   feedback  from  a  male  superior  on  aspects  of  appearance,  compared  with  47%  of  males   (Hewlett  et  al.  2).  Still,  women  are  expected  to  look  their  best,  dress  their  best,  and  appear  ap- propriate  yet  authoritative,  feminine  but  not  sexy.  Women  lack  feedback  on  their  appearance   (and,  in  addition,  on  matters  of  executive  presence  which  will  be  further  explored)  because   employers  are  more  often  than  not  reluctant  to  comment  on  women's  appearance:  it  invites   the  question  as  to  why  employers  are  looking  in  the  first  place  (Hewlett  109).  This  creates  an   awkward  and  potentially  dangerous  dynamic.  Direct  feedback  should  be  given  from  a  direct   superior,  however  given  the  tense  gender  climate  in  many  office  spaces,  the  last  thing  a  male   supervisor  is  going  to  do  is  tell  his  female  employee  that  her  blouse  is  cut  too  low,  or  that  she   should  wear  less,  or  more,  makeup.  Commenting  on  someone's  appearance  is  never  easy  and   can  often  be  taken  the  wrong  way.  This  problem  is  also  amplified  because  "what  a  woman  

   33  

wears  is  still  a  matter  of  greater  moral  concern  than  what  a  man  wears.  Evidence  of  this  can   be  found  in  cases  of  sexual  harassment  at  work" (Barnard  245).  This  begs  the  question:  what   exactly  does  discrimination  mean?        4.1  What  is  Workplace  Discrimination?        For  quite  some  time  the  prevailing  theory  of  discrimination  focused  on  notions  of  dis- crimination  as  an  outcome  of  antipathy.  However  these  theories  have  been  expanded  upon,   and  some  theorists  (Heilman  1983;  Dipboye  1985;  Eagly  and  Karau  2002)  have  now  come  to   recognize  that  "...it  is  not  the  negativity  of  gender  stereotypes  but  their  mismatch  with  desira- ble  work  roles  that  underlies  biased  workplace  evaluations" (Heilman  and  Eagly  394).  For  in- stance,  as  Madeline  Heilman  and  Alice  Eagly  point  out,  even  positive  attributes  typically  asso- ciated  with  women,  such  as  niceness  and  warmness,  are  used  against  them  in  negative  ways   (394),  in  much  the  same  way  that  clothing  typically  associated  with  what  women  wear  in  the   workplace,  and  hence  seen  as  traditional,  feminine,  and  appropriate,  is  used  against  them  (re- call  the  quote  from  Fortune  Magazine  on  women's  nylons,  and  other  items  such  as  stilettos   which  many  women  are  required  to  wear  in  the  office,  but  possess  many  negative  connota- tions).  Attributes  such  as  niceness  and  warmth,  for  example,  are  usually  not  associated  with   what  it  takes  to  be  in  a  managerial  position;  typically,  masculine  attributes  such  as  competi- tiveness  and  self-confidence  are  associated  with  such.  Essentially,  discrimination  occurs  when   a  mismatch  between  a  group  stereotype  (for  example,  women)  and  a  job  role  (for  example,   manager  or  CEO)  fosters  negative  performance  expectations,  in  turn  producing  biased  evalua- tions  (Heilman  and  Eagly  393).  In  their  research  on  gender  stereotypes  and  discrimination  in  

   34  

the  workplace,  Heilman  and  Eagly  do  an  excellent  job  of  defining  the  relationship  between  the   role  of  stereotypes  in  the  workplace  and  state  that  it  is  their  mismatch  with  desirable  work   roles  that  causes  the  problem  (such  as  the  stereotype  of  niceness  typically  attributed  to   women,  and  roles  such  as  manager,  which  aren't  typically  attributed  to  characteristics  such  as   niceness).  Despite  the  fact  that  their  work  is  placed  within  an  American  context  and  does  not   speak  to  discrimination  based  on  appearance,  but  is  focused  solely  on  personality  traits,  it  is   still  relevant  to  our  exploration.  As  we  have  observed,  personality  traits  and  appearance  traits   are  often  grouped  together,  and  therefore  it  is  possible  to  generalize  their  findings,  at  least  to   some  extent,  when  looking  at  appearance  discrimination.  For  instance,  overweight  women  are   expected  to  be  less  intelligent,  popular  and  outgoing  than  their  "thinner"  counterparts  (Ste- phens,  Hill  and  Hanson  143).   Workplace  discrimination  based  on  gender  is  most  striking  when  observing  the  num- ber  of  women,  or  lack  thereof,  who  hold  high-level  positions  in  the  corporate  workplace.  For   instance,  Forbes  Magazine  conducted  a  review  of  proxy  statements  of  the  1000  largest  U.S.  in- dustrial  and  service  companies,  which  indicated  that  less  than  one  half  of  1%  of  the  highest   paid  officers  and  directors  were  women  (Heilman  877).  Granted,  this  study  is  a  few  years  old   (1997),  and  much  has  changed  since  Forbes  conducted  this  research,  however,  current  num- bers  are  not  so  different.  For  instance,  women's  representation  on  corporate  boards  is  signifi- cantly  lacking.  Specifically,  women  represent  less  than  15%  of  corporate  board  members  in  the   United  States,  Canada,  Australia,  and  many  European  countries,  and  as  low  as  0.2%  in  some   Asian  countries  (Terjesen  and  Singh  55).  Catalyst,  a  Research  and  Strategy  Development  com- pany  focused  on  the  corporate  workplace,  compiled  a  list  of  women  CEO's  at  S&P  (Standard   and  Poor's)  500  companies  in  the  United  States.  There  are  currently  23  CEO  positions  held  by  

   35  

women,  accounting  for  only  4.5%  of  CEO  positions  within  these  companies  ("Women  CEO's").   Interestingly,  there  is  a  significant  lack  of  data  on  CEO  gender  (Wolfers  533).  Wolfers  refer- ences  the  ExecuComp  data  (S&P's  objective  executive  compensation  data),  which  tracks  S&P   1500  firms  from  1992-2004,  and  finds  only  64  female  CEOs  compared  with  4175  male  CEOs;   over  this  15-year  sample,  a  minute  1.3%  of  CEO-years  were  worked  by  women  (Wolfers  533).   In  addition  to  their  relative  lack  of  presence  at  the  top-tiers  of  corporations,  women  still  do   not  get  paid  nearly  the  same  amount  as  their  male  counterparts.  For  instance,  in  the  United   States  men  earn  24.1  percent  higher  base  pay  than  women  (Chamberlain  2),  and  in  Ontario,   Canada,  men  earn  26  percent  more  than  women  for  equivalent  work  (Antonie  et  al.  465).   Some  theorists  (Heilman  877)  directly  blame  workplace  discrimination  on  this  large  discrep- ancy.  Once  again,  we  must  be  cautious  when  analyzing  these  numbers  ­ this  is  a  mere  snap- shot  of  the  field,  and  deals  exclusively  with  American  companies,  and  is  therefore  not  com- pletely  generalizable  to  the  state  of  the  field  in  Canada.  What  it  does  show,  nonetheless,  is  the   significant  lack  of  women  in  high-level  positions  in  some  of  the  world's  top  companies.  The   question  we  must  ask  ourselves  is  why,  and  what  can  be  done  about  it.  It  is  arguable  that  dis- crimination,  both  based  on  gender  and  appearance,  is  partly  to  blame  for  this  huge  gender  di- vide.   There  are  people  who  suggest  that  gender  discrimination  is  warranted,  meaning  either   women  do  not  possess  the  necessary  skills  to  be  in  top  leadership  roles  or  that  they  lack  the   motivation  to  reach  the  top  (Heilman  878).  Some  believe  that  gender  discrimination  is  in  de- cline  and  that  it  is  only  a  matter  of  time before  women  reach  the  top  ranks  in  higher  numbers.   Proponents  of  this  theory,  called  the  Pipeline  Theory  (Heilman  and  Eagly  2008;  Gregory  

   36  

2003)  believe  that  "women's  absence  from  the  top  levels  of  management  is  a  natural  conse- quence  of  them  not  having  been  in  managerial  positions  long  enough  for  the  natural  career   progression  to  take  hold  (Heilman  877).  There  is  no  scientific  evidence  to  support  these   claims  however,  indicating  that  any  perceived  differences  in  abilities  and  behaviours  between   men  and  women  in  managerial  positions  is  more  supposed  than  real  (Heilman  878).  Yet  an- other  theory  of  workplace  discrimination  involving  gender  is  called  the  Rational  Bias  Theory.   This  theory  suggests  that  employees  may  "rationally" choose  to  discriminate  "as  a  conse- quence  of  particular  attributional  and  instrumental  conditions" (Trentham  and  Larwood  2),   such  as  gender  or  appearance.  The  heart  of  this  theory  lies  in  external  pressure:  employees   may  feel  that  their  superiors  expect  them  to  discriminate.  This  theory  also  involves  the  idea   that  business  norms  encourage  discrimination,  and  compliance  with  these  norms  is  essential   to  success.  What  these  two  theories  hold  in  common  is  that  they  both  blame  others  -  in  this   case,  superiors,  and  in  the  Pipeline  Theory,  the  women  themselves  -  and  effectively  disregard   those  who  are  actively  discriminating.        4.2  What  Are  Sex  Stereotypes?   What  exactly  are  sex  stereotypes  and  how  do  they  instigate  workplace  discrimination?   According  to  Heilman,  a  sex  stereotype  is  "a  set  of  attributes  ascribed  to  a  group  and  believed   to  characterize  its  individual  members  simply  because  they  belong  to  that  group" (879)  and   stereotypes  often  form  the  basis  for  discrimination.  In  terms  of  sex  stereotypes  in  the  work- place,  clothing  and  image  tend  to  significantly  come  into  play.  For  instance,  a  colleague  might   think  that  a  female  employee  wore  a  short  skirt  to  use  her  sexuality  to  get  ahead  and  will  

  

   37  

therefore  treat  her  with  a  lack  of  respect.  Others  question  why  women  are  seemingly  "ex- pected" to  wear  high  heels  and  stilettos  in  the  workplace  in  order  to  connote  credibility,  when   there  is  ample  evidence  that  they  cause  severe  health  effects  (Linder  296;  Wright  11,  13).   Both  of  these  items,  the  skirt  and  the  stiletto,  are  part  of  a  women's  corporate  uniform,  how- ever  they  can  easily  be  used  against  her  by  stereotyping  her  and  portraying  her  as  someone   who  is  trying  to  use  her  sexuality  to  get  ahead.  Again  we  see  the  complicated  relationship  that   women  have  with  clothing;  it  can  be  used  to  help  women  advance  in  their  careers  and  be  a   significant  roadblock  at  the  same  time.  The  same  can  be  said  about  the  influence  that  overall   appearance  has  on  women  in  the  workplace.  Heather  James,  in  her  article  entitled  "If  You  Are   Attractive  and  You  Know  It,  Please  Apply:  Appearance  Based  Discrimination  and  Employers' Discretion" states:  "...several  positive  qualities  such  as  happiness  and  success  are  associated   with  attractiveness" (637).  We  can  therefore  determine  the  significant  impact  that  clothing   and  appearance  can  have  on  others.  A  presentable  woman  with  a  pretty  face  and  well-put-to- gether  attire  might  be  perceived  as  more  competent  than  an  average  looking  women  in  a  drab   suit  ­  despite  the  fact  that  they  may  have  exactly  the  same  credentials  (Forsyth  1990;  For- sythe,  Drake  and  Fox  1985;  Riggio  and  Throckmorton  2006).  Although  attractiveness  has  its   benefits  (such  as  earning  higher  wages  and  perhaps  securing  the  job  in  the  first  place),  studies   have  indicated  that  attractive  women  are  also  more  likely  to  be  the  subjects  of  harassment,   traditional  stereotypes  and  scrutiny,  than  unattractive  women  (Browne  100).  One  potential   reason  for  this  is  that  it  is  assumed  that  attractive  women  will  marry  and  start  a  family,   thereby  subjecting  them  to  traditional  female  stereotypes.  Many  scholars  agree    that  appear- ance  and  beauty  matters  more  in  American  society,  and  hence  in  business,  than  it  ever  has  be- fore  (Mujtaba,  2010;  Mahajan  2007;  Corbett  2011).  In  theory,  there  may  be  nothing  wrong  

   38  

with  that,  however  it  unfortunately  leads  to  appearance  discrimination  and  sex  stereotyping   in  the  workplace.  In  fact,  "employers  often  make  hiring  decisions  based  on  the  appearance   and  attractiveness  of  the  job  applicants" (Cavico,  Muffler  and  Mutjaba  791;  Riggio  and  Throck- morton  2006;  Rooth  2006;  Shannon  and  Stark  2003).   There  is,  actually  a  financial  consequence  of  hiring  attractive  personnel.  According  to   Daniel  Hamermesh,  an  economist  at  the  University  of  Texas  and  author  of  Beauty  Pays:  Why   Attractive  People  Are  More  Successful,  "over  a  lifetime  and  assuming  today's  mean  wages,  `at- tractive' American  workers  on  average  make  $230,000  more  than  their  very  plain-looking  co- workers" (47).  This  leads  us  to  the  inevitable:  hiring  for  aesthetic  purposes  can  thus  be  con- sidered  a  business  strategy  for  success  in  this  highly  competitive  marketplace.  There  is  con- crete  evidence  that  employers  will  hire  based  on  looks  alone  (recall  Abercrombie  and  Fitch).  A   study  conducted  by  Dan-Olof  Rooth  entitled  "Obesity,  Attractiveness,  and  Differential  Treat- ment  in  Hiring" explored  the  differential  treatment  in  the  hiring  of  obese  individuals  in  the   Swedish  labour  market.  The  research  discovered  that  the  participants  who  were  sent  to  a   mock  interview  with  a  weight-manipulated  photo  had  a  lower  callback  response  than  those   who  did  not  use  a  weight-manipulated  photo  (Rooth  710).  Specifically,  the  numbers  were  6%   lower  for  men,  and  8%  lower  for  females  (Rooth  710).  The  difference  between  the  numbers   for  males  and  females  is  significant,  although  not  surprising.  The  effect  of  physical  appearance   in  this  case,  as  it  relates  to  weight,  had  more  of  an  effect  on  the  female  applicants  than  the   male  applicants,  showing  that  the  effect  of  appearance  for  women  is  stronger  than  the  effect   of  appearance  as  it  relates  to  men.  Although  this  study  focuses  on  aspects  of  appearance  that  

   39  

are  not  discussed  in  this  paper  (weight),  it  is  still  nonetheless  eye-opening  and  worthy  of  con- sideration.  Weight  affects  appearance,  and  appearance  affects  the  likelihood  of  getting  hired,   more  so  for  women  than  men. How  does  being  perceived  (both  by  self  and  others)  as  a  minority  in  the  workplace  af- fect  women's  thoughts,  feelings  and  experiences  in  the  workplace?  What  are  the  effects  of  dis- crimination  based  on  gender  and  appearance?  Kanter,  a  proponent  of  gender-neutral  theory,   explains  that  the  negative  experience  that  women  have  on  the  job,  with  an  emphasis  on  not   reaching  gender  equality,  is  due  to  their  "token" status  (209).  Supporters  of  this  theory  be- lieve  that  as  the  number  of  females  in  the  workplace  increases,  their  situations  will  improve   greatly,  and,  in  theory,  this  makes  sense.  However,  Kanter  wrote  her  book,  Men  and  Women  of   the  Corporation,  in  1977;  since  then,  many  more  women  have  entered  the  corporate  world,   yet  these  same  problems  still  seem  to  persist.  In  addition,  research  since  then  has  found  no   evidence  of  a  causal  link  between  the  number  of  women  in  office  and  subsequent  occupational   consequences  (Zimmer  64).  Lynn  Zimmer  states:  "simply  because  of  their  obvious  contrast  to   dominants,  tokens  are  highly  visible  and  intensely  scrutinized  by  others" (66),  once  again  ex- hibiting  the  microscope  effect  that  women  have  to  endure  on  a  daily  basis.  This  is  also  a  good   example  of  why  appearance  management  and  dressing  professionally  and  appropriately  for   the  job  can  have  either  positive,  or  detrimental  effects. The  history  of  women  entering  the  corporate  workplace  is  wrought  with  struggles  sur- rounding  gender  and  appearance  discrimination.  Gender  discrimination,  appearance  discrimi- nation  and  sex  stereotypes  are  still  rampant  within  today's  corporate  culture.  Women  face  the   brunt  of  this  discrimination  for  a  number  of  reasons.  Firstly,  women's  appearance  is  held  to  

   40  

impeccably  high  standards,  much  higher  than  men's.  In  fact,  the  objectification  of  women's  ap- pearance  is  currently  so  ingrained  in  Western  culture  that  the  relationship  that  women  have   with  fashion  is,  in  a  sense,  fetishistic  in  nature  (Gamman  and  Makinen  61).  According  to  the   authors:  "Modern  women  often  see  themselves  in  fragments  ­  a  good  pair  of  legs,  tits  or  eyes,   etc.  Some  women  get  fixated  on  emphasizing  their  lips  (by  constantly  putting  on  lipstick)  or   maintaining  impractical  ultra-long  varnished  nails  at  the  expense  of  free  movement"  (61).   Here,  Gamman  and  Makinen  reference  the  "modern"  woman,  which  suggests  the  contempo- rary  working  woman,  and  how,  like  in  the  past,  women's  appearance  and  the  way  they  engage   with  it  actually  serves  to  hinder  their  movements  (recall  the  corset  and  hobble  skirt).  The  au- thors  go  on  to  state  that  this  behaviour,  this  obsession  with  aspects  of  women's  appearance,   can  be  linked  to  the  overall  effect  of  the  objectification  of  the  female  form.  In  this  sense,   women  and  their  bodies  have  become  commodities.  Secondly,  hiring  someone  with  an  attrac- tive  appearance,  especially  as  it  relates  to  females,  can  be  considered  a  smart  business  move.   Thirdly,  women  lack  feedback  on  their  appearance  from  their  superiors,  further  perpetuating   the  problem  and  creating  a  negative  feedback  loop.  Lastly,  appearance  and  cognitive  abilities   are  often  connected.  Based  on  what  has  been  discussed  so  far,  this  connection  perhaps  seems   out  of  place  and  misguided,  however  there  is  a  connection  between  clothing  and  cognition,   which  will  be  further  examined  in  the  next  section.  This  link  is  important  as  it  can  serve  as  an   explanation  as  to  why  women's  cognitive  abilities  are  often  tied  to  their  appearance,  as  well  as   providing  evidence  of  the  importance  of  appearance  and  clothing  as  it  relates  to  a  corporate,   or  business,  environment.       

   41  

5.  The  Importance  of  Clothing  Behaviourally  and  Cognitively      Just  as  first  impressions  can  have  significant  consequences,  clothing  can  as  well,  both   on  the  wearer  and  the  observer.  Many  people  do  not  fully  grasp  the  effect  that  the  clothing   they  choose  to  wear  has  on  others,  as  well  as  themselves.  A  prime  example  of  this  is  the  very   popular  saying:  "never  judge  a  book  by  its  cover,"  or  even:  "there  is  more  to  them  than  meets   the  eye."  While  these  sayings  hold  true  to  some  extent,  they  are  a  testament  to  societies'  deep   and  unrelenting  desire  not  to  immediately  take  into  account  outside  appearances  as  they  may   relate  to  an  individual's  intelligence,  personality  or  behaviours.  While  there  likely  is  more  to   someone  than  meets  the  eye,  the  information  we  glean  from  observing  someone  cannot,  and   should  not,  go  unnoticed.  There  are  a  few  reasons  for  this.  Firstly,  there  have  been  many  stud- ies  conducted  that  indicate  the  cognitive  effects  of  clothing  on  the  wearer,  where  clothing  ef- fectively  alters  the  wearer's  cognitive  processing  (Adam  and  Galinsky  2012;  Slepian  et  al.   2015).  Secondly,  there  is  scientific  evidence  that  what  one  is  wearing  affects  how  others  they   encounter  will  subsequently  treat  them  (Harris  et  al.  1983;  Bickman  1974;  Tracy  Morris  et  al.   1996);  this,  of  course,  is  linked  to  first  impressions.  William  Thourlby,  an  American  writer  and   actor,  states  that  we  can,  in  effect,  control  the  way  others  treat  us,  simply  by  controlling  our   own  appearance  (20).    This  is  certainly  a  bold  statement,  but  one  that  is,  as  will  become  clear,   a  matter  of  fact.   An  excellent  example  of  the  very  real  way  clothing  can  affect  cognition  is  a  well-known   study  within  the  field  of  psychology,  entitled  "Enclothed  Cognition"  and  conducted  by  Hajo   Adam  and  Adam  Galinsky.  This  study  effectively  depicts  direct  cognitive  effects  of  wearing  dif- ferent  items  of  clothing  during  specific  mental  tasks.  According  to  the  researchers,  "Enclothed   cognition  involves  the  co-occurrence  of  two  independent  factors:  the  symbolic  meanings  of      42  

the  clothes  and  the  physical  experience  of  wearing  them"  (Adam  and  Galinsky  2).  The  authors   argue  that  similar  to  physical  experiences,  the  experience  of  wearing  clothes  "triggers  associ- ated  abstract  concepts  and  their  symbolic  meanings"  (Adam  and  Galinsky  2).    Specifically,  the   research  focused  on  the  cognitive  effects  of  wearing  a  lab  coat,  such  as  a  doctor's  coat  (which   is  associated  with  attentiveness  and  carefulness)  versus  wearing  a  painter's  coat  (which  is  not   associated  with  the  same  characteristics  as  a  doctor's  coat).  In  point  of  fact,  it  was  the  exact   same  coat,  but  presented  and  labeled  differently  to  participants.  Participants  were  either  in- structed  to  wear  the  "doctor's"  coat  or  the  "painter's"  coat  and  complete  the  same  tasks.  Re- searchers  predicted  that  wearing  the  "doctor's"  coat  would  increase  performance  on  atten- tion-related  tasks.  Through  a  total  of  three  different  experiments,  and  by  manipulating  the  lab   coat  and  representing  it  as  either  a  "painter's"  coat  or  a  "doctor's"  coat,  the  evidence  clearly   showed  that  the  influence  of  clothing  depended  on  both  whether  the  clothes  were  physically   worn  and  their  symbolic  meaning.  Results  indicated  that  only  when  the  coat  was  physically   worn  and  associated  with  a  "doctors'"  coat  did  participants  experience  sustained  attention  on   multiple  tasks.  The  study  is  based  on  the  theory  that  cognition  can  be  influenced  by  outside   factors,  such  as  physical  experiences,  and  results  of  this  study  support  this.    The  "Enclothed   Cognition"  study  is  comprehensive  and  thorough,  and  the  researchers  conducted  three  sepa- rate  experiments  to  account  for  possible  confounding  variables.  It  could  be  argued,  however,   that  a  lab  coat  is  a  very  symbolic  article  of  clothing.  Would  the  effect  have  been  the  same  if   more  traditional  clothing  had  been  used?  Is  this  study  applicable  to  our  day-to-day  lives?        The  answer  to  the  above  questions  appears  to  be  "yes."  Research  conducted  by  Michael  

Slepian,  Simon  Ferber,  Joshua  Gold  and  Abraham  Rutchick,  entitled  "The  Cognitive  Conse- quences  of  Formal  Clothing,"  explores  the  relationship  between  wearing  formal  clothing  and  

   43  

different  mental  capabilities,  and  specifically,  abstract  cognitive  processing.  Not  only  does   clothing  influence  impressions  formed  by  others  about  oneself,  but  it  is  also  responsible  for   influencing  cognition  on  a  broad  scale,  "impacting  the  processing  style  that  changes  how  ob- jects,  people,  and  events  are  construed"  (Slepian  et  al.  661).  The  researchers  conducted  a  total   of  five  experiments,  manipulating  the  sample,  the  clothing  worn,  and  the  tests  given  to  partici- pants.  Their  third  study,  which  manipulated  clothing  formality  by  having  participants  change   into  either  formal  or  casual  clothing,  demonstrated  that  wearing  formal  clothing  increased  the   extent  to  which  participants  exhibited  abstract  processing,  which  is  regarded  as  a  higher  form   of  cognitive  processing.  Essentially,  the  researchers  showed  a  causal  link  between  wearing   formal  clothing  and  the  ability  to  achieve  abstract  processing  capabilities.  In  addition,  and  of   great  significance,  wearing  formal  clothing  lead  to  more  "felt  power"  for  participants.  It  is  im- portant,  of  course,  to  acknowledge  the  definition  of  "formal  clothing"  and  what  that  entailed   for  the  researchers.  The  researchers  asked  participants  to  bring  two  outfits  with  them,  the   formal  one  being  explained  as  "something  you  would  wear  to  a  job  interview,"  versus  casual   "clothing  you  might  wear  to  class"  (663).  Needless  to  say,  this  is  a  fairly  broad  categorization,   however  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  "something  you  would  wear  to  a  job  interview"  might  in- clude  some  type  of  suit  for  men,  and  either  pants  or  skirt  for  women,  a  blouse,  and  perhaps   some  form  of  jacket.  In  this  sense,  and  if  this  is  the  case,  the  clothing  worn  by  participants  re- flects  nicely  the  clothing  often  worn  in  corporate  workplace  settings.  Of  course,  this  is  a  gener- alization,  and  all  workplaces  differ,  but  this  could  be  considered  a  variation  on  the  "corporate   uniform."  This  study  has  real-world  implications  directly  applicable  to  women  in  corporate   settings.  Not  only  does  it  imply  a  significant  link  between  wearing  formal  clothing  and  the  

   44  

ability  to  perform  well  (or  better,  or  smarter)  at  the  job  in  question,  but  it  might  serve  to  posi- tively  impact  the  way  women  deal  with  potential  negative  discrimination  and  harassment  at   work.  Essentially,  wearing  formal  clothing  could  potentially  help  equip  a  female  with  cogni- tive  tools  to  better  mentally  cope  with  this  kind  of  gendered  discrimination,  and  lead  her  to   being  able  to  respond  to  this  type  of  discrimination  in  more  effective  ways.        Another  study  conducted  by  Harris  et  al.  in  1983  further  shows  the  striking  effects  of  

formal  clothing  as  it  relates  to  female  wearers.  The  study  itself  was  conducted  in  a  mall  and   involved  analyzing  participants'  reactions  to  being  approached  by  graduate  students  who   asked  them  to  fill  out  a  questionnaire  (which  consisted  of  photographs  of  women  in  these  var- ious  outfits)  wearing  either  a  formal  skirt  outfit,  a  formal  pants  outfit,  a  casual  skirt  outfit,  a   casual  pants  outfit,  or  jeans  and  a  T-shirt.  Overall  results  of  this  study  were  significant:  a  pic- ture  of  a  woman  shown  to  participants  was  perceived  as  most  happy,  successful,  feminine,  in- teresting,  attractive,  intelligent  and  desirable  as  a  friend  when  she  was  wearing  the  formal   skirt  suit,  and  least  so  in  the  jeans  and  T-shirt.  The  authors  state  that  clothing  does  communi- cate  something  about  the  wearer,  but  may  only  influence  behavior  toward  her  (this  study   deals  with  only  females)  in  the  absence  of  other  information  about  her  status  or  role  (Harris   et  al.  88).  This  statement  alone  has  significant  implications  for  scenarios  such  as  job  inter- views,  where  very  little  is  known  about  the  interviewee.  Analyzing  the  results  of  this  study   shows  that,  everything  else  being  constant,  different  dress  styles  communicate  different   things  about  their  wearer,  such  as  status  (Harris  et  al.  96).  The  authors  even  go  so  far  as  to  say   that:  "...women  who  wish  to  be  viewed  as  successful  might  be  well  advised  to  wear  the  dress   styles  suggested  for  women  executives"  (Harris  et  al.  95).  These  "suggested"  styles  that  the  

   45  

authors  speak  of  are  those  put  forth  by  John  T.  Malloy  (discussed  previously),  and  include  pri- marily  the  skirt  suit.  This  is  an  interesting  concept  that  should  be  unpacked  further.  It  is  sug- gested  that  the  most  powerful  "look"  for  a  woman  in  the  corporate  world  is  a  skirt  suit,  which   undoubtedly  incorporates  a  very  gendered  article  of  clothing,  the  skirt.  Women  have  been   wearing  pants  regularly  for  about  a  century,  and  the  practice  was  a  marker  for  women's  liber- ation,  especially  on  the  fashion  front.  It  is  understood  that  times  have  changed,  and  women   can  now  wear  what  they  want.  This  poses  the  question  then,  of  why  it  is  a  skirt,  and  not  pants,   that  is  suggested  to  women  in  the  corporate  world.  As  will  be  discussed  in  the  following  sec- tion,  in  a  study  conducted  by  Mary  Forsythe  (1990),  more  masculine  clothing  was  favored  for   a  female  wearer  during  a  job  interview.  There  is  therefore  contradictory  evidence  being  put   forth.  There  are  a  few  ways  of  looking  at  this:  firstly,  it  could  be  indicative  of  a  preference  for   women  to  adopt  both  feminine  and  masculine  modes  of  attire  in  the  office:  masculine  to  con- note  male  stereotypes  such  as  strong  and  ambitious  and  feminine  to  connote  positive  female   stereotypes  such  as  niceness  and  warmth.  Secondly,  it  is  possible  that  the  encouragement  of   the  skirt  (as  opposed  to  more  masculine  clothing  which  has  been  shown  to  be  more  favorable   in  certain  situations)  is  in  fact  an  attempt  to  create  a  symbolic  reminder  of  women's  "differ- ent"  gender,  which  would  encourage  and  lead  to  discrimination  within  the  workplace.  For  in- stance,  the  modern-day  pencil  skirt  is  often  very  slim  and  constricting  at  the  knees,  and  bears   some  resemblance  to  the  hobble  skirt  by  Poiret.  Is  this  a  way  to  slow  women  down,  literally   and  metaphorically,  in  the  office?        Another  example  of  the  connection  between  our  cognition  and  clothing  is  a  study  con-

ducted  by  Leonard  Bickman  entitled  "The  Social  Power  of  the  Uniform,"  in  which  strangers  on   the  street  were  approached  by  someone  dressed  as  either  a  civilian,  a  milkman,  or  a  security  

   46  

guard,  and  asked  to  complete  a  task  such  as  picking  up  a  paper  bag,  giving  a  dime  to  a  stranger   or  moving  away  from  a  bus  stop.  The  researchers  found  much  greater  compliance  from   strangers  when  requests  were  made  by  individuals  dressed  in  a  high-authority  uniform  (the   security  guard  uniform)  over  requests  by  individuals  in  a  low-authority  uniform,  or  civilian   clothing.  This  may  seem  evident,  however  security  guards  do  not  typically  ask  strangers  to   give  a  dime  to  other  strangers,  or  to  move  away  from  a  bus  stop.  These  were  out-of-role  re- quests  being  made,  and  the  implications  of  this  are  striking:  "It  is  likely  that  the  degree  to   which  a  person  will  comply  with  orders  is  partially  determined  by  the  characteristics  of  the   person  who  gives  the  orders.  One  way  to  identify  those  individuals  who  possess  authority  is   by  their  attire"  (Bickman  47).  Results  of  this  study  suggest  that  we  respond  differently  to  peo- ple  based  on  what  they  are  wearing.  This  phenomenon  surely  translates  into  a  corporate  set- ting,  suggesting  that  one  could  take  charge,  to  some  extent,  of  how  others  respond  to  them   simply  based  on  what  they  are  wearing.        In  a  study  somewhat  more  closely  tied  to  a  corporate  atmosphere,  authors  Tracy  Mor-

ris  et  al.  examined  three  dress  conditions  (formal  professional,  casual  professional  and  casual)   and  their  effects  of  students'  perceptions  of  college  teachers.  The  study  took  place  in  an  intro- ductory  psychology  course  at  West  Virginia  University,  where  four  graduate  students  (two   male  and  two  female,  of  similar  build,  attractiveness  and  age)  were  trained  as  associates  in   the  study.  Results  of  this  study  were  clear:  more  formal  dress  (such  as  business  suits  and   dress  shoes)  was  associated  with  increased  ratings  of  instructor  competence,  especially  with   regards  to  ratings  made  by  female  students  about  female  instructors.  In  fact,  perceptions  of   competence  decreased  as  attire  became  more  casual.  Perceptions  of  competence,  when  some- one  is  in  a  position  of  authority,  holds  extreme  value.  In  fact,  Leathers  (1992)  explains  that  

   47  

communicators  who  dress  in  such  a  way  as  to  meet  the  expectations  of  the  people  with  whom   they  may  be  interacting  with  will  be  seen  as  more  competent,  as  well  as  better  liked.  It  is  clear   that  the  articles  of  clothing  -    aspects  of  nonverbal  communication  -  that  one  decides  to  wear   greatly  impacts  how  one  is  perceived,  and  context  is  a  big  part  of  that  perception  (Thourlby   34).           There  is  no  doubt  about  the  power  of  non-verbal  communication;  one  need  only  look  

at  the  power  of  first  impressions  and  appearance  to  see  these  effects.  Dr.  Dana  Carney,  Amy   Cuddy  and  Andy  Yap,  from  Harvard  University,  wanted  take  things  further,  and  see  if,  similar   to  the  effects  of  wearing  formal  clothing  on  cognition,  the  body  could  affect  cognition.  The  re- searchers  predicted  that  posing  in  high-power  nonverbal  displays  (as  opposed  to  low-power   nonverbal  displays)  would  cause  neuroendocrine  and  behavioural  changes  for  both  male  and   female  participants.  One  of  the  two  high-power  poses  used  in  the  study  involved  someone  sit- ting  in  a  chair,  with  their  legs  crossed  and  outstretched  up  on  the  desk  in  front  of  them,  and   hands  back  behind  their  head,  almost  in  a  relaxed,  but  authoritative,  position.  The  second   high-power  pose  involved  the  person  standing  up  in  front  of  a  desk,  with  one  leg  in  front  of   the  other,  and  both  hands  placed  firmly  on  the  desk.  One  of  the  two  low-power  poses  involved   the  person  sitting  in  a  chair,  with  their  head  tilted  downward  and  hands  placed  in  their  lap,   with  one  hand  covering  the  other  in  a  fist  positon.  The  second  low-power  pose  involved  the   person  standing  upright,  legs  crossed  tightly  and  with  their  arms  giving  themselves  a  hug.     The  authors  measured  fundamental  features  of  having  power:  namely,  feelings  of  power,  ele- vation  of  the  dominance  hormone  testosterone,  lowering  of  the  stress  hormone  cortisol,  and   an  increased  tolerance  for  risk.  Participants  who  posed  in  high  power  poses  experienced  a  de- crease  in  cortisol,  and  an  increase  in  testosterone.  The  reverse  was  also  true;  those  who  posed  

   48  

in  low-power  poses  showed  a  decrease  in  testosterone  and  an  increase  in  cortisol.  The  impact   of  feeling  powerful  should  not  go  unnoticed:  "Power  determines  greater  access  to  resources,   higher  levels  of  agency  and  control  over  a  person's  own  body,  mind  and  positive  feelings,  and   enhanced  cognitive  function"  (Carney,  Cuddy  and  Yap  1365).  It  is  worth  noting  briefly  that   some  aspect  of  high  power  posing  (for  example,  adopting  a  wide-legged  stance  or  even  either   of  the  power-poses  adopted  here)  are  dependent  on  the  individual's  physicality,  which  incu- des  clothing  worn.  It  is  arguable  that  if  a  woman  is  wearing  a  slim  fitting  pencil  skirt,  which  is   typically  what  is  suggested  of  her  to  wear  (recall  Malloy),  that  might  make  these  poses  more   difficult,  if  not  impossible.  There  are  surely  ways  to  get  around  this,  as  a  woman  could  adopt  a   different  type  of  power-pose,  however  it  still  points  to  potential  issues  with  regards  to  what   women  are  expected  to  wear  and  the  consequences  and  constraints  of  wearing  that  specific   clothing.     Although  this  research  looks  at  the  body  itself,  it  can  be  related  back  to  the  work  con- ducted  by  Slepian  et  al.  (2015)  with  regards  to  notions  of  felt  power.  In  addition,  another  simi- larity  between  the  two  studies  is  illustrated  by  the  following  quote:  "By  changing  physical   posture,  an  individual  prepared  his  or  her  mental  and  physiological  systems  to  endure  diffi- cult  and  stressful  situations,  and  perhaps  to  actually  improve  confidence  and  performance  in   situations  such  as  interviewing  for  jobs,  speaking  in  public,  disagreeing  with  a  boss,  or  taking   potentially  profitable  risks"  (Carney,  Cuddy  and  Yap  1367).  It  is  safe  to  say  that  feelings  of   power  may  also  equip  a  person  to  deal  with  negative  social  interactions  at  work,  namely  gen- der  discrimination  and  stereotyping.  Despite  this  study  having  no  tangible  link  to  clothing  and   appearance,  it  speaks  to  the  effectiveness  and  implications  of  outside  stimuli  affecting  one's   cognitive  abilities,  the  sheer  power  of  feeling  powerful,  as  well  as  possible  positive  impacts  of  

   49  

possessing  executive  presence.  Taken  together  (power  posing  and  formal  clothing),  these  two   aspects  of  non-verbal  communication  can  effectively  work  together  to  foster  confidence,  deci- siveness  and  feelings  of  power  and  authority.        6.  The  Importance  of  First  Impressions  and  Professional  Dress               

The  effects  of  clothing  and  appearance  in  corporate  settings  can  be  seen  in  the  very  

early  stages  of  the  first  interview.  A  leading  researcher  and  writer  in  the  field,  Sandra  For- sythe,  has  conducted  a  number  of  studies  which  look  at  the  effects  of  appearance,  clothing,   and  attractiveness  on  the  outcome  of  job  interviews.  In  her  1990  study  entitled  "Effect  of  Ap- plicant's  Clothing  on  Interviewer's  Decision  to  Hire,"  Forsythe  examines  the  extent  to  which   an  applicant's  clothing  influenced  interviewer's  perceptions  of  management  characteristics   and  decisions  to  hire  women  for  management  positions.  Forsythe,  unlike  many  other  scholars,   focuses  solely  on  female  applicants,  giving  us  a  better  idea  of  how  they  are  directly  affected  as   a  cohort.  Forsythe  found  that  the  more  masculine  an  applicant's  dress  was,  the  more  they  re- ceived  favorable  hiring  recommendations.  This  can  be  related  back  to  Warkander  (2014)  and   his  notion  that  feminine  apparel  connotes  social  mobility  instead  of  stability  (like  a  man's  suit   might).  In  addition,  clothing  masculinity  was  found  to  be  a  significant  predictor  in  the  percep- tion  of  all  the  management  characteristics  examined.  This  is  a  great  example  of  how  appear- ance  can  lead  to  others  making  judgments  about  a  person's  abilities  or  personality  traits   which  have  nothing  to  do  with  their  appearance,  such  as  their  ability  to  manage  adequately.  In   a  similar  study  conducted  by  Sandra  Forsythe,  Mary  Drake  and  Charles  Fox,  researchers   looked  at  the  effect  of  female  applicants'  dress  on  interviewers'  decisions  to  hire,  specifically      50  

for  management  positions.  The  authors  state:  "...during  an  employment  interview,  appearance   is  an  important  source  of  information  because  information  about  an  applicant  is  limited"  (For- sythe,  Drake  and  Fox  374).  What  the  author  is  suggesting  is  that  appearance  and  clothing  are   forms  of  nonverbal  communication,  and  influential  ones  at  that.        Kim  Johnson  and  Mary  Roach-Higgins  conducted  similar  research  in  1987.  Their  re-

search,  entitled  "Dress  and  Physical  Attractiveness  of  Women  in  Job  Interviews,"  also  looked   at  the  combined  influence  of  physical  attractiveness  and  dress  on  impressions  made  by  both   male  and  female  hiring  agents  about  the  personality  characteristics  of  females  applying  for   either  male-  or  female-dominated  jobs.  Again,  the  researchers  were  examining  the  role  that   clothing  and  appearance  played  on  notions  of  personality  characteristics,  and  personal  abili- ties  (such  as  being  an  effective  leader).  The  results  of  this  study  indicate  that  the  dress  of  the   applicant  exerted  a  consistent  influence  on  the  subjects'  ratings  of  the  participants.  The  most   significant  result  of  this  study  is  that  dress,  as  opposed  to  physical  attractiveness  or  the  sex- typing  of  the  job  position,  had  the  most  influence  on  hiring  agents'  impressions  of  the  person- ality  of  the  job  applicant  (6).  This  suggests  that  a  female  can  use  clothing  to  her  advantage,   and  counteract  negative  impressions  of  her  ability  simply  by  wearing  the  right  clothing.            Other  scholars  (Riggio  and  Throckmorton  2006;  Shannon  and  Stark  2003)  have  more  

recently  replicated  these  trends  in  the  research.  These  studies  continue  to  show  that  appear- ance  ­  clothing  worn  and  grooming  capabilities  ­  has  significant  effects  on  the  perception  of   both  an  applicant's  capabilities  to  successfully  work  in  the  position  in  question  (often  in  these   studies,  this  is  not  specified,  which  in  a  way  is  slightly  problematic),  as  well  as  the  applicant's   personality  characteristics.  What  these  studies  do  not  show,  however,  is  whether  or  not  these  

   51  

"judges"  (those  that  determine  the  participants'  personality  characteristics  based  on  their  ap- pearance)  are  right.  It  would  be  interesting,  and  useful,  to  compare  and  contrast  what  others   believe  to  be  participants'  personality  characteristics,  and  their  actual  personality  characteris- tics.        The  significance  of  first  impressions  as  they  relate  to  clothing  does  not  stop  in  an  inter-

view  setting.  Research  by  Chris  Shao,  Julie  Baker  and  Judy  Wagner  shows  the  significance  of   the  appropriateness  of  employee  uniforms  on  customers'  expectations  of  a  company,  as  well   as  their  purchasing  intention.  The  authors  of  this  study  found  that  not  only  are  "customers   likely  to  judge  service  employees  themselves  by  their  dress,  but  customers  are  also  likely  to   use  contact  employee  dress  as  cues  to  the  quality  of  the  service  firm  itself"  (1172).  Findings   also  indicate  that  "the  effect  of  appropriateness  of  dress  on  expectations  of  service  quality  and   purchase  intent  was  stronger  for  females  than  for  males"  (1172),  echoing  other  scholars  who   have  indicated  that  appearance  and  clothing  affect  females  differently  than  males  (Davis   1992;  Entwistle  1997;  Sapir  1949;  Roach  and  Eicher  1979;  Wolf  1991).  Needless  to  say,  this   research  focused  on  uniforms  in  relation  to  appearance  and  impression  formation,  and  the  re- sults  of  this  study  are  therefore  not  generally  applicable  to  the  majority  of  corporate  settings   (at  least  in  terms  of  the  corporate  world  this  paper  is  investigating).  However,  what  is  note- worthy  is  the  effect  that  appearance  and  clothing  can  have  on  potential  customers  and  clients.   The  importance  of  dressing  professionally  and  in  line  with  the  brand  of  the  company  in  ques- tion  not  only  has  direct  implications  for  the  status  of  the  employee,  but  will  also  affect  how   business  is  conducted  with  outsiders.          How  do  first  impressions  fit  in  to  these  findings,  apart  from  the  obvious?  According  to  

Lennon  and  Miller  (1984),  "...typically,  in  real  life  encounters,  first  impressions  are  often  

   52  

formed  on  the  basis  of  physical  appearance"  (1).  The  authors  examine  how  diverse  pieces  of   information  are  integrated  in  person  perception,  or  impression  formation.  It  has  been  argued   (Riggio  and  Throckmorton  2006;  Shannon  and  Stark  2003;  Johnson  and  Roach-Higgins  1987;   Forsythe  1990;  Forsythe,  Drake  and  Fox  1985;  Stephens,  Hill  and  Hanson  1994)  that  physical   appearance  affects  trait  judgments  and  it  is  also  known  that  the  traits  attributed  to  a  person,   such  as  in  a  mock  interview  setting,  affect  first  impressions  of  that  person.  Thus,  according  to   Sharron  Lennon  and  Franklin  Miller:  "...physical  appearance  may  affect  first  impressions  by   virtue  of  the  fact  people  assign  traits  on  the  basis  of  physical  appearance  cues"  (2).  Overall,   the  researcher's  hypothesis  was  correct,  and  results  show  that  under  certain  circumstances,   the  influence  of  any  one  physical  appearance  cue  on  first  impressions  will  be  altered  by  the   presence  or  absence  of  other  such  cues.  Implications  of  the  study  suggest  the  importance  of   cohesion  in  a  person's  total  "look;"  given  the  presence  of  conflicting  cues,  negative  first  im- pressions  are  likely  to  form.  For  instance,  it  would  be  detrimental  for  a  female  to  be  dressed  in   a  professional  business  outfit  at  work,  and  then  to  wear  an  over-the-top,  goofy  hairband.        But  what  exactly  is  a  first  impression?  It  is  imperative  to  define  what  it  is  and  how  it  

works  in  order  to  put  these  results  into  context.  A  first  impression  involves  the  lightning- quick  formation  of  thoughts  and  feelings  of  someone  else  based  on  nothing  more  than  visual   cues  of  that  person.  For  example,  it  is  said  that  people  not  only  form  global  impressions  but   specific  trait  impressions  simply  based  on  the  structure  of  the  face  (Willis  and  Todorov  592).   Specifically,  one  trait  that  is  highly  influenced  by  this  phenomenon  is  that  of  competence.  In  a   very  informative  study  conducted  by  Janine  Willis  and  Alexander  Todorov  entitled  "First  Im- pressions:  Making  Up  Your  Mind  After  a  100-Ms  Exposure  to  a  Face,"  the  researchers  con-

   53  

ducted  five  experiments,  each  focusing  on  a  different  judgment  from  facial  appearance:  attrac- tiveness,  likeability,  competence,  trustworthiness  and  aggressiveness  (attractiveness  being   the  only  one  that  is  related  to  facial  appearance).  Pictures  of  unfamiliar  faces  were  presented   for  100-milliseconds,  500-milliseconds  or  1000-milliseconds.  Next,  participants  were  asked  to   make  a  trait  judgment  and  subsequently  express  their  confidence  in  that  judgment.  The  re- sults  of  the  study  clearly  indicate  that  even  after  a  mere  100-millisecond  exposure  to  a  face,   trait  judgments  were  highly  correlated  with  judgments  made  in  the  absence  of  time  con- straints  (596).  Notably,  the  correlation  for  judgments  of trustworthiness was the highest. This   has  direct  implications  with  regards  to  first  impression  formation  in  a  workplace  setting,  es- pecially  in  a  hiring  setting.  An  interviewer  will  be  more  inclined  to  hire  someone  they  believe   they  can  trust.  Granted,  this  study  was  based  on  notions  of  facial  features,  however  it  is  argua- ble  that  the  same  theory  could  be  applied  to  notions  of  first  impressions  formed  on  the  basis   of  clothing,  grooming,  and  general  appearance.        By  reviewing  existing  research  on  the  history  of  women  in  the  corporate  workplace,  

first  impressions,  clothing  and  its  effects  on  the  mind  and  body,  and  stereotyping  and  discrim- ination  in  the  workplace,  it  is  clear  that  there  are  many  factors  that  interact  to  create  either   favorable  or  unfavorable  experiences  for  females  in  the  workplace.  Women  are  held  to  impos- sibly  high  standards  of  appearance  and  are  meant  to  walk  a  fine  line  between  notions  of  femi- nine  yet  appropriate,  powerful  yet  non-threatening  dress.  Not  only  do  they  have  to  navigate   this  problematic  fashion  system,  but  generally,  they  are  required  to  do  so  alone  ­  very  rarely   will  women  receive  feedback  (either  from  women  or  men)  on  their  appearance  as  it  might  be   seen  as  inappropriate  or  rude.  Many  women  are  therefore  forced  to  seek  out  some  type  of   "image  consulting"  service  to  help  them  "construct"  an  appropriate  business  wardrobe  

   54  

(Entwistle  322).  Successfully  managing  one's  appearance,  or  brand,  in  the  workplace  can   mean  the  difference  between  success  and  failure,  promotion  or  no  promotion.  As  Thourlby   suggests,  you  will  only  be  promoted  to  a  job  you  look  like  you  belong  in  (53).  Appearance,  in   this  sense,  isn't  limited  to  the  clothing  one  wears  -  it  encapsulates  grooming,  attitude,  and   presence.  Clearly,  the  task  of  managing  one's  appearance  is  not  an  easy  one,  and  requires   much  hard  work,  dedication,  and,  most  importantly,  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  im- portance  of  first  impressions,  appearance,  and  executive  presence  in  the  workplace.  In  the   closing  section,  the  notion  of  executive  presence  will  be  analyzed  more  thoroughly  and  ap- plied  to  the  concepts  of  first  impressions,  women  in  the  workplace  and  appearance.        7.      Executive  Presence  and  its  Impact  on  Women  in  Business         Within  the  last  twenty  to  thirty  years,  corporations  and  high-level  executives  have  

known  about  executive  presence  and  have  been  using  the  term  since,  however  no  one  truly   knew  what  it  meant  or  encompassed.  It  was  used  as  a  type  of  umbrella  term  to  describe  some- one  with  not  only  the  technical  skills  to  succeed,  but  the  interpersonal  skills  as  well.  It  was   recorded  in  academic  literature  as  early  as  1983  (Kaufman  and  Fetter),  although  even  then  it   was  not  clearly  defined  (205).  In  2012,  Sylvia  Ann  Hewlett,  an  economist  from  the  United   States  and  founder  of  the  Center  for  Talent  Innovation,  sought  to  figure  out  exactly  what  exec- utive  presence  meant  to  corporations  and  executives  alike.  It  had  become  increasingly  clear   that  leadership  ability  alone  was  not  enough  to  effect  promotions  to  the  executive  suite.  This   is  where  executive  presence  comes  in.        In  order  to  measure  executive  presence,  Hewlett  and  her  team  at  the  Center  for  Talent  

Innovation  surveyed  close  to  4,000  college-graduate  professionals  in  large  corporations  to      55  

find  out  what  executive  presence  meant  to  them.  According  to  results  of  the  study,  executive   presence  accounted  for  26  percent  of  "what  it  takes  to  get  the  next  promotion"  (Hewlett  et  al.   1).  But  what  exactly  does  it  consist  of?  Hewlett  and  her  team  recognized  that  there  are  in  fact   three  distinct  pillars  of  executive  presence:  appearance,  communication  and  gravitas.  Addi- tional  findings  from  the  study  revealed  how  these  elements  all  work  together  to  create  the   aura  of  authority  that  sets  leaders  apart.  According  to  Hewlett:  "Presence  alone  won't  get  you   promoted  [...]  but  its  absence  will  impede  your  progress,  especially  if  you're  female  or  a  per- son  of  colour"  (1).  This  statement  alone  indicates  the  sheer  importance  of  executive  presence   when  it  comes  to  women  in  business.  In  addition,  it  has  been  shown  that  women  are  at  a  dis- advantage  (in  the  accounting  business,  at  least)  within  the  male-managerial  model,  also  syn- onymous  with  notions  of  executive  presence  (Kaufman  and  Fetter  205).        7.1  Pillars  of  Executive  Presence       

  
Each  pillar  of  executive  presence  will  be  dissected  more  thoroughly  here  and  applied  to  no- tions  covered  previously  with  regards  to  the  difficulties  women  face  in  business  settings,  such   as  stereotypes,  discrimination,  and  creating  favorable  first  impressions.  Hewlett's  examina- tion  of  executive  presence  will  be  the  focus  of  this  analysis,  as  it  is  the  most  comprehensive   study  conducted  on  the  matter  to  date  In  addition,  scholars  have  begun  to  use  her  findings  as   a  trusted  analysis  of  executive  presence  (Shirey  2013;  Service  and  Reburn  2014;  Beeson  and   Valerio  2012).  In  addition,  much  of  the  research  conducted  by  Hewlett  and  her  team  focusses   on  minorities  and  marginalized  individuals  in  the  workplace,  such  as  women,  LGBT  communi- ties  and  veterans.  For  instance,  sixteen  of  just  over  50  publications  listed  on  the  Center  for  

   56  

Talent  Innovation  address  accelerating  women  in  the  corporate  workplace,  some  of  which   have  been  published  in  scientific  journals,  such  as  the  Harvard  Law  Review.  Also,  in  the  1983   study  conducted  by  Debra  Kaufman  and  Michael  Fetter,  many  of  the  "components"  of  execu- tive  presence  that  they  named  have  been  replicated  in  Hewlett's  research.  It  is  clear  that   Hewlett,  despite  her  work  not  being  considered  formally  academic,  should  be  considered  a   trusted  source  on  notions  of  executive  presence  and  how  it  affects  women  in  the  corporate   workplace.      i.   Gravitas   Gravitas  was  found  to  be  the  core  characteristic  of  executive  presence,  according  to  67   percent  of  executives  surveyed.  Gravitas  involves  six  specific  behaviours.  Firstly,  and   most  importantly,  exuding  grace  under  fire  is  a  true  testament  that  an  individual  pos- sesses  gravitas.  Acting  decisively  and  showing  integrity  fall  closely  behind  (also  dis- cussed  as  a  large  component  of  executive  presence  in  the  Kaufman  and  Fetter  (1983)   study).  Next,  demonstrating  emotional  intelligence  is  seen  as  a  contributor  to  executive   presence.  Finally,  burnishing  reputation  and  projecting  vision  (mentioned  in  the  Kauf- man  and  Fetter  (1983)  study  as  ambition/dedication)  come  in  last,  with  approximately   50  percent  of  executives  saying  it  contributes  to  both  men  and  women's  executive   presence.  Gravitas,  based  merely  on  its  breakdown  here,  can  be  thought  of  as  a  core   characteristic  of  leadership  potential,  which  has  been  looked  at  by  other  scholars  as  a   notion  of  executive  presence  (Shirey  2013;  Service  and  Reburn  2014;  Beeson  and  Va- lerio  2012;  Kaufman  and  Fetter  1983).  The  most  significant  part  of  gravitas,  exuding   confidence  and  grace  under  fire,  can  be  directly  applied  to  results  previously  discussed  

   57  

involving  the  effects  of  clothing  cognitively  and  behaviourally.  As  has  been  discussed   (Slepian  et  al.  2015),  for  example,  clothing  can  have  a  direct  influence  on  levels  of  con- fidence  and  felt  power.  Therefore,  if  clothing  is  used  properly,  it  can  effectively  serve  to   enhance  one's  confidence,  and  thus  one's  executive  presence.  In  terms  of  how  this  may   affect  women,  there  is  an  inherent  assumption  that  women  are  less  capable  of  coping   with  crises  than  men  (Kaufman  and  Fetter  204),  indicating  a  potential  lack  of  gravitas   found  amongst  women.      ii.   Communication   Communication  was  acknowledged  by  28  percent  of  senior  executives  as  indicative  of   leadership  material.  Part  of  this  pillar  of  communication  involves  nonverbal  communi- cation.  Hewlett  and  her  associates  found  that  great  speaking  skills,  the  ability  to  com- mand  a  room  and  the  ability  to  read  an  audience  were  all  important  aspects  of  commu- nication.  One  element  that  creates  a  great  public  speaker  is  confidence,  a  core  execu- tive  presence  trait  that  was  acknowledged  in  the  Kaufman  and  Fetter  (1983)  study.  As   discussed,  appearance  is  another  non-verbal  aspect  of  communication  and  thus  by  na- ture  belongs  in  this  pillar  as  well.  Kaufman  and  Fetter  also  found  that  "the  maintenance   of  a  cool,  competent  image"  is  linked  to  possessing  executive  presence  (206).  The  first   two  aspects  of  communication,  strong  speaking  skills  and  the  ability  to  command  a   room,  can  both  be  influenced  by  how  we  choose  to  present  ourselves,  even  down  to   our  posture  (Carney,  Cuddy  and  Yap  2010).  As  discussed  in  the  previous  section,  wear- ing  formal  clothing  can  enhance  abstract  processing  (Slepian  et  al.  2015),  potentially   allowing  someone  to  work  a  room  with  more  confidence  and  poise.  In  addition,  we  

   58  

have  seen  that  the  clothing  one  wears  can  lead  a  person  to  feel  more  powerful,  and   hence  more  confident,  allowing  them  to  perform  better  when  speaking  in  public.        iii.   Appearance   While  appearance  is  the  least  important  pillar,  with  only  5  percent  of  executives  stating   in  was  an  important  aspect  of  executive  presence,  it  counts,  as  Hewlett  points  out,  as  a   filter  "through  which  your  communication  skills  and  gravitas  become  more  apparent"   (2).  This  can  also  be  linked  back  to  the  Kaufman  and  Fetter  study  (1983)  which  found   that  the  projection  of  a  competent  image  was  essential  to  executive  presence  (206).   The  breakdown  of  appearance  is  as  follows  in  order  of  pertinence:  good  grooming  and   physical  attractiveness,  respectively.  It  is  worth  noting  that  physical  attractiveness  was   found  to  be  2  percent  more  important  for  females  than  males,  highlighting  a  signifi- cant,  albeit  small,  difference  in  the  importance  of  appearance  with  regards  to  men  and   women,  and  further  highlighting  women's  special  relationship  with  appearance.  De- spite  the  fact  that  it  is  the  least  important  pillar,  leaders  recognize  its  potential  for  hin- dering  progress  up  the  corporate  ladder.  Some  appearance  blunders  include  unkempt   attire  (specifically,  and  of  significance,  83  percent  say  it  detracts  from  a  woman's  exec- utive  presence,  and  only  76  percent  say  it  detracts  from  a  man's),  and  for  women  spe- cifically,  too-tight  provocative  clothing.        According  to  both  Hewlett  and  other  scholars  (Kaufman  and  Fetter  1983),  women  have   difficulty  possessing  and  projecting  executive  presence,  at  least  more  difficulty  than  men.  For  

   59  

instance,  43  percent  of  respondents  in  the  Kaufman  and  Fetter  (1983)  study  perceived  differ- ences  between  men  and  women  with  regards  to  executive  presence,  and  a  staggering  85  per- cent  thought  that  women  lacked  executive  presence  (206).  According  to  findings  of  the   Hewlett  study,  there  is  an  inherent  tension  between  conforming  to  corporate  culture,  and  be- ing  true  to  oneself.  As  mentioned  previously,  women  are  held  to  stricter  standards  of  appear- ance,  yet  are  denied  feedback  on  their  appearance.  This  factor  alone  inevitably  leads  to  feed- back  on  executive  presence  that  is  contradictory,  if  existent  at  all.  This  may  play  into  why  a   staggering  81  percent  of  women  and  people  of  colour  say  they  are  unclear  how  to  act  on  it   (Hewlett  2).  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  need,  then,  for  women  to  increase  and  enhance  their  ex- ecutive  presence.        8.      Conclusion         While  significant  progress  has  been  made  with  regards  to  gender  diversity  within  cor- porate  settings,  the  evidence  suggests  that  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go  before  gender  equity   within  this  environment  is  achieved.  North  American  society  is  once  again  in  the  midst  of  ex- periencing  a  shifting  gender  atmosphere:  women's  issues  are  being  discussed  in  the  media,   more  women  are  filling  CEO  positions,  and  certain  branches  of  feminism  are  becoming  more   and  more  accepted  and  embraced  by  both  sexes.  Yet,  despite  this  progress,  there  are  still  a   number  of  unanswered  questions,  including  why  women  are  continually  discriminated   against  in  workplace  settings,  and  why  there  is  still  a  significant  lack  of  females  present  within   upper  management  levels.  In  order  to  better  understand  women's  complicated  relationship   with  appearance  and  subsequently  address  these  questions,  more  research  needs  to  be  done  

   60  

that  focuses  specifically  on  women  and  discrimination  as  it  relates  to  appearance.  In  addition,   the  bulk  of  the  research  that  currently  exists  on  these  topics  has  been  conducted  from  an   American  perspective.  Despite  the  similarities  between  American  and  Canadian  culture,  in- cluding  corporate  culture,  they  are  two  distinct  countries  with  distinct  morals  and  values,  and   hence  research  conducted  in  Canada  would  be  extremely  beneficial  in  terms  of  providing  a   state  of  the  field  within  Canadian  corporations.  Lastly,  based  on  the  fact  that  executive  pres- ence  seems  to  be  of  increasing  importance  within  the  corporate  world,  more  academic  re- search  on  its  implications  is  necessary,  and  would  help  to  measure  its  effect  even  further.   There  are  a  few  clear  takeaways,  however,  which  should  not  be  ignored.  Firstly,  as  the   evidence  suggests,  appearance  and  clothing  can  impact  how  a  person  behaves,  and  also  how   others  respond  to  them.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  acknowledge  the  importance  of  appear- ance,  especially  within  a  workplace  setting,  and  especially  with  regards  to  women  who  face  a   number  of  gendered  issues  within  this  environment.  Secondly,  it  is  clear  that  there  are  signifi- cant  double-standards  that  women  face  daily,  such  as  the  suggestion  by  professionals  like   John  T.  Malloy  that  women  wear  a  skirt  suit  at  work  as  it  connotes  respectability  and  author- ity  while  studies  indicate  the  opposite,  that  women  who  wear  more  "masculine"  clothing  are   viewed  as  more  competent  and  able  to  hold  a  certain  position  more  successfully.  Another  dou- ble-standard  that  women  face  is  the  importance  placed  on  appearance,  and  expectations  that   women  present  themselves  in  a  certain  way,  however  women  more  often  than  not  lack  con- structive  and  appropriate  feedback  on  their  appearance.  A  third  duality  that  exists  is  the  of- ten-favorable  treatment  that  attractive  women  receive  (such  as  in  hiring  situations  as  well  as   income  earned),  but  also  the  potential  for  a  higher  rate  of  stereotyping  that  is  sometimes  di- rected  towards  more  attractive  women  (Browne  100).  The  relationship  between  appearance  

   61  

and  stereotyping  is  clearly  not  a  simplistic  one.  For  instance,  the  evidence  suggests  that   among  different  environments  within  the  same  occupational  role,  a  woman  could  be  both  fa- vored  for  her  "successful"  image,  and  punished  for  it.  These  dualities  and  double-standards   alone  present  significant  roadblocks  for  women  within  corporate  settings.  The  evidence  sug- gests  that  one  way  to  overcome,  or  deal  with,  these  double-standards  is  an  increase  in  the   possession  of  executive  presence,  which  women  are  perceived  as  possessing  less  than  their   male  counterparts.  An  increase  in  executive  presence  for  women  might  mean  a  better  under- standing  of  appearance  and  how  it  affects  them,  which  in  turn  could  lead  to  an  increase  in   confidence,  decision-making  skills  and  communication  skills,  which  in  turn  would  denote  a   higher  level  executive  presence,  creating,  for  the  first  time,  a  positive  feedback  loop.  It  is  clear   then  that  aspects  of  executive  presence  and  how  it  can  affect  success  in  the  workplace,  should   not  go  unnoticed,  and  is  certainly  deserving  of  more  thorough  investigations.     

Works  Cited      Adam,  Hajo,  and  Adam  Galinsky.  "Enclothed  Cognition".  Journal  of  Experimental                         Psychology  48.4  (2012):  918-925.  Web.  21  Nov.  2014.           Adamitis,  Elizabeth.  "Appearance  matters:  a  proposal  to  prohibit  appearance                         discrimination  in  employment." Washington  Law  Review  75.1  (2000):  195-223.                                 20  Jul.  2015.         Albert,  Rosita.  "A  Framework  and  Model  for  Understanding  Latin  American  and  Lati                       no/Hispanic  Cultural  Patterns."  Handbook  of  Intercultural  Training.  2nd  eds.  Ed.  Dan                         Landis  and  Rabi  S.  Bhagat.  Thousand  Oaks:  SAGE  Publications,  1996.  Print.        

   62  

Ambady,  Naliin  and  John  Skowronski.  First  Impressions.  New  York:  The  Guilford  Press,  2008.                             Print.         "America's  Beauty  Obsession  Poses  Serious  Consequences  for  Women  and  Girls,  Report                         Reveals."  Women's  Health  Weekly  4  Sept.  2008:  674.  Academic  OneFile.  Web.  10  Feb.                            2016.     

  

Anderson,  Doris.  "Status  of  Women."  The  Canadian  Encyclopedia.  Historica  Canada,  2  July                         2006.  Web.  6  Jan.  2016.           Antonie  et  al.  "Analyzing  the  Gender  Wage  Gap  in  Ontario's  Public  Sector."  2015  IEEE  14th  In                       ternational  Conference  on  Machine  Learning  and  Applications  (ICMLA)  (2015):465-470.                         Web.  18  Apr.  2016.         Averett,  Susan  and  Sanders  Korenman.  "The  Economic  Reality  of  the  Beauty  Myth."  The                         Journal  of  Human  Resources  31.2  (1996):  304-330.  Web.  20  Mar.  2016.         Barnard,  Malcolm,  eds.  Fashion  Theory:  A  Reader.  New  York:  Routledge,  2007.  Print.           Baudrillard,  Jean.  For  A  Critique  of  The  Political  Economy  of  The  Sign.  Trans.  Charles  Levin.                         Missouri:  Telos  Press,  1981.  Print.         Beeson,  John  and  Anna  Marie  Valerio.  "The  executive  leadership  imperative:  A  new  perspec-                       tive  on  how  companies  and  executives  accelerate  the  development  of  women  leaders."                         Business  Horizons  55.5  (2012):  417-425.  Web.  20  Mar.  2016.           Bickman,  Leonard.  "The  Social  Power  of  a  Uniform."  Journal  of  Applied  Social                         Psychology  4.1  (1974):  47-61.  Web.  2  Mar.  2016.      Bourke,  Joanna.  "The  Great  Male  renunciation:  Men's  Dress  Reform  in  Inter-War                         Britain.  Design  History  Society  9.1  (1996):  23-33.  Web.  10  Feb.  2016.                

   63  

Boyer,  Kate.  "`Neither  forget  nor  remember  your  sex':  Sexual  politics  in  the  early  twentieth-                       century  Canadian  office."  Journal  of  Historical  Geography  29.2  (2003):  212-229.  Web.  14                         Jan.  2016.        Browne, Neil and Andrea Giampetro-Meyer. "Many Paths to Justice: The Glass Ceiling, the Looking Glass, And Strategies For Getting to the Other Side." Hofstra Labor & Employment Law Journal 21.1 (2003-2004): 61-108. Web. 17 Feb. 2016.          "Callipygian."  Mirriam-Webster.  Mirriam-Webster  Incorporated.  N.d.  Web.  6  January  2016.             Carney,  Dana,  Amy  Cuddy  and  Andy  Yap.  "Power  Posing:  Brief  Nonverbal  Displays                       Affect  Neuroendocrine  Levels  and  Risk  Tolerance."  Psychological  Science                         21.10  (2010):  1363-1368.  Web.  19  Sept.  2015.     Cavico,  Frank,  Stephen  Muffler  and  Bahaudin  Muajaba.  "Appearance  Discrimination,                         `Looksim'  and  `Lookphobia'  In  The  Workplace".    Journal  of  Applied  Business  Research  28.5                         (2012):  791-802.  Web.  3  May  2015.           Chamberlain,  Andrew.  "Demystifying  the  gender  Pay  Gap:  Evidence  From  Glassdoor  Salary                         Data.  Glassdoor,  2016.  Web.         Collier,  Jane.  "Women  in  Politics."  Women,  Culture,  and  Society.  Ed.  Michelle  Rosaldo  and                         Louise  Lamphere.  Stanford  Universtiy  Press:  Stanford.  1974.  Print.      Corbett,  William.  "Hotness  Discrimination:  Appearance  Discrimination  as  a  Mirror  for                         Reflecting  on  the  Body  of  Employment  Discrimination  Law."  Catholic  University  Law                         Review  60.3  (2010-2011):  615-660.  Web.  7  Jun.  2015.             Davis,  Fred.  Fashion  Culture  and  Identity.  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1992.  Print.               Dipboye,  Robert.  "Some  Neglected  Variables  in  Research  on  Discrimination  in  Appraisals."                         Academy  of  Management  Review  10.1  (1985):  116-127.  Web.  17  Feb  2016.                

   64  

Eagly,  Alice  and  Steven  Karau.  "Role  Congruity  theory  of  prejudice  toward  female  leaders."                         Psychological  Review  109.3  (2002):  573-598.  Web.  9  Jan.  2016.           Eco,  Umberto.  Travels  in  Hyper  Reality:  Essays.  Trans.  William  Weaver.  San  Diego:  Harcourt                         Brace  Jovanovich,  1990.  Print.           "Employees:  Too  Ugly  to  Hire,  or  a  Must  Fire?"  PIHL  Law  Firm,  n.p.,  n.d.  Web.  17  Feb  2016.           Entwistle,  Joanne.  "Power  Dressing  and  the  Construction  of  the  Career  Woman."  Buy  This                         Book:  Studies  in  Advertising  and  Consumption.  Ed.  Mica  Nava,  Andrew  Blake,  Iain                         MacRury  and  Barry  Richards.  New  York:  Routledge,  1997.  Print.           Epstein,  Cynthia.  "Encountering  the  Male  Establishment:  Sex-Status  Limits  on  Women's  Ca-                       reers  in  the  Professions."  American  Journal  of  Sociology  75.6  (1970):  965-982.  Web.  18                         Apr  2016.         Feo,  Katherine  Kelly.  "Performing  Prison:  Dress,  Modernity,  and  the  Radical  Suffrage  Body."                         Fashion  Theory  15.3  (2011):  299-322.  Web.  23  Oct.  2014.    Forsythe,  Sandra.  "Effect  of  Applicant's  Clothing  on  Interviewer's  Decision  to  Hire."                         Journal  of  Applied  Social  Psychology  20.19  (1990):  1579-1595.  Web.  20  Jul.                         2015.     Forsythe,  Sandra,  Mary  F.  Drake  and  Charles  E.  Fox.  "Influence  of  Applicant's  Dress  on                         Interviewer's  Selection  Decisions."  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology  70.2  (1985):                         374-378.  Web.  29  Oct.  2014.        Foucault,  Michel.  Discipline  and  Punishment:  The  Birth  of  the  Prison.  Trans.  Alan  Sheridan.  New                         York:  Vintage  Books,  1977.  Google  Books.  Web.  10  Jan  2016.           Gamman,  Lorraine  and  Merja  Makinen.  Female  Fetishism:  A  New  Look.  London:  Lawrence  &                         Wishart,  1994.  Print.       
  

   65  

Giorgis,  Nancy  Johnson  and  Annamarie  Bonomo  &  al.  "Visual  Literacy." The  Reading                         Teacher  53.2  (1999):  146-153.  Web.  18  Oct.  2015.         Goldin,  Claudia.  Understanding  The  Gender  Gap.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1990.                         Print.           Gottschall,  Jonathan  et  al.  "The  `Beauty  Myth'  Is  No  Myth:  Emphasis  on  Male-Female  Attrac-                       tiveness  in  World  Folktales."  Human  Nature  19.2  (2008):  174-188.  Web.  20  Mar.  2016.           Gregory,  Raymond  F.  Women  and  Workplace  Discrimination:  Overcoming  Barriers  to                         Gender  Equality.  New  Brunswick:  Rutgers  University  Press,  2003.  Print.        Hamermesh,  Daniel.  Beauty  Pays:  Why  Attractive  People  are  More  Successful.  Oxford:                         Princeton  University  Press,  2011.  Print.         Harris,  Mary  et  al.  "Clothing:  Communication,  Compliance,  and  Choice."  Journal  of                         Applied  Social  Psychology  13.1  (1983):  88-97.  Web.  3  Mar.  2016.           Heilman,  Madeline  E.  "Sex  Discrimination  and  the  Affirmative  Action  Remedy:  The  Role                         of  Sex  Stereotypes." Journal  of  Business  Ethics  16.9  (1997):  877-889.  Web.  1  May                       2015.         Heilman,  Madeline  E.  and  Alice  Eagly.  "Gender  Stereotypes  Are  Alive,  Well,  and  Busy                         Producing  Workplace  Discrimination." Industrial  and  Organizational  Psychology                       1.4  (2008);  393-398.  Web.  6  May  2015.      Hewlett,  Sylvia  Ann,  Lauren  Leader-Chivée,  Laura  Sherbin,  Joanne  Gordon  and  Fabiola                         Dieudonné.  "Executive  Presence."  Center  for  Talent  Innovation.  2013.  Web.    4  Sept.  2015.         Hewlett,  Sylvia  Ann.  Executive  Presence:  The  Missing  Link  Between  Merit  and  Success.  New                         York:  HarperCollins,  2014.  Print.         James,  Heather.  "If  You  Are  Attractive  and  You  Know  It,  Please  Apply:  Appearance  Based                         Discrimination  and  Employers'  Discretion."  Valparaiso  University  Law  Review  42.2                         (2008):  629-674.  Web.  17  Feb.  2016.          66  

Johnson,  Kim  K.  P.  and  Mary  Roach-Higgins.  "Dress  and  Physical  Attractiveness  of                         Women  in  Job  Interviews."  Clothing  and  Textiles  Research  Journal  5.2  (1987):  1-                       8.  Web.  5  May  2015.           Kanter,  Rosabeth.  Men  and  Women  of  the  Corporation.  New  York:  Basic  Books,  1977.                             Print.         Kaufman,  Debra  and  Michael  Fetter.  "The  Executive  Suite:  Are  Women  Perceived  as  Ready  for                           the  Managerial  Climb?"  Journal  of  Business  Ethics  2.3  (1983):  203-212.  Web.  6  Apr  2016.           Kawamura,  Yuniya.  Fashion-ology:  An  Introduction  to  Fashion  Studies.  New  York:  Berg,  2005.                         Print.         Kwolek-Folland  ,  Angel.  Engendering  Business:  Men  and  Women  in  the  Corporate  Office,  1870-                       1930.  Baltimore:  The  John  Hopkins  University  Press,  1994.  Print.         Leathers,  Dale.  Successful  Nonverbal  Communication.  Macmillan:  New  York,  1986.  Print.           Lennon,  Sharron  and  Franklin  Miller.  "Attire,  Physical  Appearance,  and  First                           Impressions:  More  Is  Less."  Clothing  and  Textiles  Journal  3.1  (1984):  1-8.  Web.  5                         May  2015.           Linder,  Marc.  "Smart  women,  stupid  shoes,  and  cynical  employers:  The  unlawfulness  and                         adverse  health  consequences  of  sexually  discriminatory  workplace  footwear                         requirements  for  female  employees."  The  Journal  of  Corporation  Law  22.2  (1997):                         295-328.  Web.  17  Jul.  2015.             Lipovetsky,  Gilles.  The  Empire  of  Fashion:  Dressing  Modern  Democracy.  New  French  Thought.                         Trans.  Catherine  Porter.  New  Jersey:  Princeton  University  Press,  1994.  Print.           Mahajan,  Rita.  "The  Naked  Truth:  Appearance  Discrimination,  Employment,  and  the  Law".                         Asian-American  Law  Journal  14.1  (2007):  165-204.  Web.  4  Mar.  2015.         McInturff,  Kate.  "Ontario's  Gender  Gap."  Canadian  Center  for  Policy  Alternatives,  2014.  Web.  5                         Apr  2016.        67  

Molloy,  John  T.  Women:  Dress  for  Success.  Buckinghamshire:  Foulsham,  1980.         Morris,  Tracy  et  al.  "Fashion  in  the  Classroom."  Communication  Education  45.2                         (1996):  135-148.  Web.  5  Mar.  2016.           Morrison,  Melanie,  Todd  Morrison  and  Randal  Franklin.  "Modern  and  Old-fashioned                                  Homonegativity  Among  Samples  of  Canadian  and  American  University  Students."  Journal                         of  Cross-Cultural  Psychology  40.4  (2009):  523-542.  Web.  8  Feb  2016.           Mujtaba,  Bahaudin.  Workforce  Diversity  Management:  Challenges,  Competencies  and  Strategies.                         El  Paso:  Media  Creations,  Incorporated,  2006.  Print.           Partington,  Angela.  "Popular  Fashion  and  Working-Class  Affluence,"  in  E.  Wilson  and  J.  Ash                         Chic  Thrills:  A  Fashion  Reader.  Los  Angeles:  University  of  California  Press.  Web.           Polan,  Brenda  and  Roger  Tredre.  The  Great  Fashion  Designers.  New  York:  Berg,  2009.  Print.           Quast,  Lisa.  "Causes  And  Consequences  Of  The  Increasing  Numbers  Of  Women  In  The                         Workforce."  Forbes.  14.  Feb.  2011.           Reardon,  Kathleen  Kelley.  The  Secret  Handshake:  Mastering  the  Politics  of  the  Business                         Inner  Circle.  New  York:  Doubleday,  2001.  Print.         Rhode,  Deborah.  "Perspectives  on  Professional  Women."  Stanford  Law  Review  40.5                         (1988):  1163-1207.  Web.  5  May  2015.           Riggio,  Ronald  E.  and  Barbara  Throckmorton.  "The  Relative  Effects  of  Verbal  and                         Nonverbal  Behavior,  Appearance,  and  Social  Skills  on  Evaluations  Made  in  Hiring                         Interviews."  Journal  of  Applied  Social  Psychology  18.4  (2006):  331-348.  Web.  29                         Oct.  2014.         Roach,  Mary  and  Joanne  Eicher.  "The  Language  of  Personal  Adornment."  The  Fabrics  of                                 Culture:  The  Anthropology  of  Clothing  and  Adornment.  Eds.  Justine  Cordwell  and  Ronald                         Schwartz.  The  Hague:  Mouton  Publishers,  1979.  Print.            68  

Rooth,  Dan-Olof.  "Obesity,  Attractiveness,  and  Differential  Treatment  in  Hiring."  The  Journal  of                         Human  Resources  44.3  (2006):  710-735.  29  Oct.  2014.           Rosen,  Benson  and  Thomas  Jerdee.  "Effects  of  Applicant's  Sex  And  Difficulty  Of  Job  On  Evalua                       tions  Of  Candidates  For  Managerial  Positions."  Journal  of  Applied  Psychology  59.4  (1974):                         511-512.  Web.  18  Apr  2016.         Rothstein,  William.  American  Physicians  in  The  19th  Century:  From  sects  to  science.  Baltimore:                         The  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press,  1972.  Print.         Sapir,  Edward.  Selected  Writings  of  Edward  Sapir:  In  Language,  culture,  personality.  Ed.                         David  Mandelbaum.  London:  University  of  California  Press,  1949.  Print.           Sawchuck,  Kim.  "A  Tale  of  Inscription:  Fashion  Statements."  Body  Invaders:  Panic  Sex  in                             America.  Eds.  Arthur  Kroker  and  Marilouise  Kroker.  New  York:  St  Martins,  1988.                             61-77.  Web.  2  Jan  2016.           Schlossberg, Mallory. "The bizarre history of Abercrombie and Fitch ­ and how the retailer is trans forming yet again." Business Insider. Business Insider, 12 Jan. 2016. Web. 18 Apr. 2016.       Service,  Robert  and  James  Reburn.  "Leadership  for  Innovation:  Fundamentals  of  Human  Influ-                       ence."  The  Journal  of  International  Business  Research  and  Practice  8  (2014):  35-76.  Web.                         20  Mar.  2016.           Shannon,  Michael  and  Patrick  Stark.  "The  influence  of  physical  appearance  on                         personnel  selection."  Social  Behavior  and  Personality  31.6  (2003):  613-623.  Web.                         17  Jul.  2015. Shao,  Chris,  Julie  Baker  and  Judy  Wagner.  "The  effects  of  appropriateness  of                         service  contact  personnel  dress  on  customer  expectations  of  service  quality  and                         purchase  intention"  Journal  of  Business  Research  57.10  (2004):  1164-1176.  Web.                         17  Mar.  2015.           Shirey,  Maria.  "Executive  Presence  for  Strategic  Influence."  Journal  of  Nursing  Administration                         43.7/8  (2013):  373-376.  Web.  20  Mar.  2016.     

   69  

Slepian,  Michael  et  al.  "The  Cognitive  Consequences  of  Formal  Clothing."  Social                         Psychological  and  Personality  Science  6.6  (2015):  661-8.  Web.  2  Jan.  2016.           Stephens,  Debra,  Ronald  Hill  and  Cynthia  Hanson.  "The  Beauty  Myth  and  Female  Consumers:                         The  Controversial  Role  of  Advertising."  The  Journal  of  Consumer  28.1  (1994):  137-153.                         Web.  20  Mar  2016.         Stewart,  Edward  and  Milton  Bennett.  American  Cultural  Patterns:  A  Cross-Cultural  Perspective.                           Yarmouth:  Intercultural  Press,  1991.  Print.           Terjesen,  Siri  and  Val  Singh.  "Female  Presence  on  Corporate  Boards:  A  Multi-Country  Study  of                         Environmental  Context."  Journal  of  Business  Ethics  83.1  (2008):  55-63.  Web.  26  Mar.                         2016.     Thourlby,  William.  You  Are  What  You  Wear:  The  key  to  business  success.  Kansas:  Sheed                         Andrews  and  McMeel,  Inc,1978.  Print.         Trentham,  Susan  and  Laurie  Larwood.  "Gender  Discrimination  and  the  Workplace:  An                         Examination  of  Rational  Bias  Theory."  Sex  Roles  38.1/2  (1998):  1-28.  Web.  16  Feb.  2016.             Warkander,  Philip.  "'No  Pansies!!':  Exploring  the  Concept  of  `Style'  Through  Ethnographic                         Fieldwork."  Fashion  Theory  18.3  (2014):  233-250.  10  Sept.  2015.           Willis,  Janine  and  Alexander  Todorov.  "First  Impressions:  Making  Up  Your  Mind                                   After  a  100-Ms  Exposure  to  a  Face."  Psychological  Science  17.7  (2006):  592-                       598.  Web.  24  Sept.  2015.           Wilson,  Elizabeth.  Adorned  in  Dreams:  Fashion  and  Modernity.  2nd  ed.  London:  I.B.  Tauris  &  Co                         Ltd.,  2013.  Print.           Wolf,  Naomi.  The  Beauty  Myth:  How  images  of  beauty  are  used  against  women.  London:                         Vintage  Books,  1991.  Print.      Wolfers,  Justin.  "Diagnosing  Discrimination:  Stock  Returns  and  CEO  Gender."  European  Eco-                       nomic  Association  4.2/3  (2006):  531-541.  Web.  26  Mar.  2016.      

   70  

"Women  CEOs  of  the  S&P  500".  Catalyst.  New  York:  Catalyst,  February  1,  2016.   Wood, Greg. "A Cross Cultural Comparison of the Contents of Codes of Ethics: USA, Canada and Australia." Journal of Business Ethics 25.4 (2000): 287-298. Web. 8 Feb 2016.       Wright,  Lee.  "Objectifying  Gender:  The  Stiletto  Heel."  A  View  from  the  Interior:  Feminism                         Women  and  Design.  Eds.  Judy  Attfield  and  Pat  Kirkham.  London:  The  Women's  Press                             Group,  1989.    Print.           Veblen,  Thorstein.  The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class.  Ed.  Martha  Banta.  New  York:  Oxford                         University  Press,  2007.  ProQuest  ebrary.  Web.  10  Jan.  2016.         Zimmer,  Lynn.  "Tokensim  and  Women  in  the  Workplace:  The  Limits  of  Gender-Neutral                         Theory."  Social  Problems  35.1  (1988):  64-77.  Web.  19  Sept.  2015.  

   71  


