Ryerson University

Digital Commons @ Ryerson
Theses and dissertations

1-1-2009

Human analogues of rodent spatial pattern association, separation, and completion memory tasks
Meera Paleja
Ryerson University

Follow this and additional works at: http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/dissertations Part of the Cognition and Perception Commons Recommended Citation
Paleja, Meera, "Human analogues of rodent spatial pattern association, separation, and completion memory tasks" (2009). Theses and dissertations. Paper 490.

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by Digital Commons @ Ryerson. It has been accepted for inclusion in Theses and dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ Ryerson. For more information, please contact bcameron@ryerson.ca.

HUMAN ANALOGUES OF RODENT SPATIAL PATTERN ASSOCIATION, SEPARATION,
AND COMPLETION MEMORY TASKS
by

.Meera Paleja, B.Sc. (Hons.) York University, Toronto, June 2007

A thesis

presented to Ryerson University

in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Arts

in the Program of Psychology

Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2009 © Meera Paleja, 2009

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis.

Human Analogues of Rodent Spatial Pattern Association, Separation, and Completion
Memory Tasks

I authorize Ryerson University to lend this thesis to other institutions or individuals for the
purposes of scholarly research.

Master of Arts, October 2009

MeeraPaleja
Psychology Ryerson University

I farther authorize Ryerson University to reproduce this thesis by photocopying or by other means, in total or in part, at the request of other institutions of individuals for the purpose of
scholarly research. ,,,

Spatial pattern association (SPA), separation (SPS), and completion (SPC) have been shown to

be dependent on distinct subfields of the hippocampus in rodents, but these processes have not
been assessed using analogous paradigms in humans. In this thesis I developed three
computerized tasks analogous to well-established rodent tasks used to assess these processeso

Participants showed improved performance across trials in the SPA task, indicating increasing familiarity with the environment. Participants showed performance differences that were
dependent on the amount of demand on the subprocesses used in SPS and SPC, specifically,
poorer performance with decreasing separation distance between target and foil in the SPS task,

and poorer performance with decreasing number of wall cues in the SPC task. These results
support sensitivity of the tasks to these subprocesses in humans. These tasks set the stage for

valuable future directions including the use of these tasks with imaging and clinical populations.

II

Acknowledgments

Table of Contents

Introduction...............................

Over the course of my M.A. studies,! have been privileged to have had the support and
guidance of a number of people. First and foremost, I could not have done this without my

Spatial Memory and the Hippocampus..................................................................................1

Virtual Human Analogues of Rodent Spatial Memory Tasks................................................4

parents, who taught me the importance of education and hard work, and also made me aware of
how fortunate I am to be able to pursue my goals with relatively few boundaries. Ba taught me the importance of enjoying life, smiling, and always making an effort to connect with others, no

Hippocampal Anatomy .........................................................................................................6
Spatial Memory Subprocesses ..............................................................................................8
Summary ...................................................____...._ 19

matter how busy or stressed out I might be. Raj and Radha taught me that life is about more than what you read about in books and journal articles. In their words, it's not enough to know all
about the human brain- you have to be able to use yours.

Main Thesis Objective ........................................................................................................ 19
Methods and Results...........................................................22
Participants............................_^

Thanks to my labmates, Ronak and Maddy, who were able to provide insight into my

General Experimental Paradigm .........................................................................................23

project, ask relevant and important questions, and really made me think about what I was doing

Experiment 1 Procedure ......................................................................................................25
Experiment 1 Results ..........................................................................................................28

on a larger scale. Also, thanks to them for putting up with my hogging the testing room. Thank
you to the lab research assistants, Adina and Vanessa, who helped me get the participants I
needed in the nick of time.

Experiment 2 Procedure ......................................................................................................31
Experiment 2 Results ..........................................................................................................32
General Discussion............................................................37
SPA...................................................

To my committee member Julia Spaniol, thank you for your suggestions, Insight, and
perspective Into my project

SPS ...................................................................39
SPC...................................................................40

Finally and most importantly, thanks to my advisor Todd Girard, for Ms limitless

patience, attention to detail, and knowledge. I feel privileged to be your student and look forward
to working with you in the years ahead.

Limitations and Future Directions .......................................................................................43
Conclusions ............................................................../IS References.............................................................................................................47

IV

v

List of Figures

While the hippocampus has long been renowned for its general role in spatial memory in

Figure 1. Abstract fractal patterns on Arena walls.
rodents and huxnans9 recent research has identified the importance of specifically considering

Figure 2. Pattern Association task.

Figure 5. Pattern Separation task from Experiment 1.
Figure 4, Pattern Completion task.

subprocesses of spatial memory. In this thesis31 first provide an overview of the hippocampus"
role in episodic memory more generally and spatial memory in particular, I then discuss the relevance of virtual analogues of rodent spatial memory tasks and how they have been used to study spatial memory in humans. The general anatomic features of the hippocampus are

Figure 5. Pattern Separation task from Experiment 2.

Figure 6. Pattern Association mean accuracy across bins of 7 trials For Experiments 1 and 2.
Figure 7. Pattern Separation task accuracy in Experiment 1 (original) and Experiment 2.
Figure 8. Pattern Completion mean accuracy in Experiments 1 and 2.

discussed, as they are useful for understanding relations between hippocampal subregions and
spatial memory subprocesses. Then various memory-related functions of the hippocampus are considered9 particularly spatial memory and the subprocesses of pattern separation, association and completion as well as rodent evidence, computational models., and human studies examining the neural correlates of these tasks. The main objective of my thesis is the development of human
analogues of various rodent tasks that have been shown to be sensitive to hippocampal
subprocesses in rodents.
Spatial Memory and the Hippocampus

Explicit memory refers to forms of memory accompanied by conscious awareness and

includes both semantic (fact-based) and episodic (event-based) memory. The hippocampi are
bilateral structures in the medial-temporal lobe (MTL) that are highly involved in various aspects
of long-term explicit memory, including both semantic and episodic memory. To the extent that episodic memory is defined as memory for a personal event in a particular spatial-temporal context9 spatial memory is integral to forming a coherent episode and
hence a critical component of episodic memory. Remembering the spatial context of events and being able to navigate and form a "cognitive map/9 or an allocentric, viewer-independent mental representation that allows one to remember and navigate a spatial environment (O'Keefe &

VI

1

Nadel, 1978), is essential for day-to-day functioning. For example, spatial memory is required to
remember where one parked one9s car and also to navigate the route one uses to get to one9s

One viewpoint is that spatial memory, including memory for object-location or locationlocation associations, is just a special case of more general contextual memory, or the ability to

workplace. Various lines of evidence support the notion of hippocampal involvement in spatial
memory in both rodents and humans.

form associations between various aspects of the environment. Specifically, the hippocampus is ' important for spatial memory because it is involved in forming relations between objects and
locations (Eichenbaum, 2000),

One seminal study found that hippocampally lesioned rats performed poorer than controls
on the Morris Water Maze task, a well-established measure of spatial memory. In this task, rats

Another view about the nature of the hippocampus5 role in spatial memory is that the
hippocampus functions to support a "cognitive map" (O'Keefe & Nadel, 1978). According to

are submerged into a pool of opaque water and must search to find a hidden platform under the surface to escape. Then, placed in a random starting location, they must use distal cues from the
room to assess their whereabouts in order to relocate the platform more efficiently on subsequent

this view, the spatial arrangement of the environment is stored in the hippocampus as a map and
the hippocampus is important for both the formation and storage of these maps. Initial support

trials. Rats with hippocampal lesions were significantly worse at acquiring the location of the platform than rats with superficial cortical lesions, sham surgery, and no surgery (Morris et al,
1982),

for this view came from the finding that certain "place cells55 in the hippocampus of freely

moving rats fired maximally when rats were in certain locations. These neurons are thought to be
involved in the encoding of these specific spatial locations (O'Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971).

The finding of hippocampal involvement in spatial memory has also been extended to

Rolls (1996) suggested that primates, including humans, possess analogous "spatial

humans. One study found that the gray matter volume of the right hippocampus correlated

view" cells in the CAS subregion of the hippocampus that is related to the more sophisticated visual system of primates. Thus, he suggests one major function of the primate hippocampus is

positively with years of experience as a taxi driver (Maguire et al., 2003), Results further

suggested that larger hippocampi may result from increased duration and frequency of use of
spatial information, as opposed to navigational expertise per se, A subsequent study found that a former taxi driver with Alzheimer's disease and bilateral hippocampal damage was unable to navigate around streets in London with which he had much prior experience. Specifically, using

to associate spatial locations with objects in the environment. In other words, there is no need for
the primate to actually visit the place, as rats would have to do. Rather, simply viewing an object at some location is adequate for the formation of object-place memories that can lead to a later

recall of the location of the object observed, In this sense, spatial memory abilities in rats and
humans to some extent are distinct, given that the two species have evolved quite differently. Nonetheless, rodent studies have done much to illuminate understanding of human spatial

a virtual reality driving simulator, he was only able to find a location when he could take
commonly used roads, but not when he was required to use an alternate, uncommon route

(Maguire, Nannery, & Spiers, 2006). Therefore, it seems that the hippocampus is required for
facilitating flexible navigation even in places learned long ago.

memory and its underlying neural correlates, indicating much evolutionary continuity in spatial

memory abilities overall The use of analogous tasks with humans and rodents will assist in
identifying the limits of this evolutionary continuity in spatial memory.

have made efforts to address this limitation by designing spatial memory tasks that closely

parallel those used with rodents. These analogous tasks allow for the formulation and testing of
hypotheses concerning expected neural activation in humans during task performance.

Virtual Human Analogues of Rodent Spatial Memory Tasks

Rodent studies have played a critical and invaluable role in illuminating the nature of

According to this line of thinking, human spatial memory tasks that are a close approximation of
rodent tasks that require certain brain regions should involve similar or identical neural regions

memory processes mediated by the hippocampus. Work with rodents allows the use of
experimental designs and manipulations that could not be implemented in human populations for ethical or practical reasons. Specifically9 the experimental induction of lesions has allowed
researchers to gain a greater understanding of the neural substrates essential for particular spatial
memory tasks.

in humans. Thus, the design of tasks that resemble rodent tasks is the first step to delineating the
neural regions involved when humans engage in these tasks. One major advantage of using

analogues of rodent tasks is that they enable us to bridge the well-established, well-controlled,
and finer-grained studies conducted with rodents with human studies. Although the regions involved in humans may end up being dissimilar from those involved in rodent tasks, rodent

One advantage of lesion studies in rodents is that they provide experimental control that
imaging and lesion studies in humans cannot. For instance, they allow researchers to lesion a

tasks provide a useful "starting point" to predict neural correlates of analogous spatial memory
tasks in humans.

particular region and thus assess more definitively if it is necessary for a particular task and also which regions are not. Neuroimaging studies in humans differ from rodent lesion studies in that

In an attempt to more closely emulate tasks used in the rodent spatial memory literature, a

they tell us what brain regions are involved during a task, not which areas are necessary. To this
end, one benefit of imaging studies is that they may reveal involved regions not evident or not studied using lesion work. A limitation of studying lesions in humans is that the damage typically does not occur to a circumscribed region making data much more difficult to interpret.

number of different computerized analogues of rodent spatial memory tasks have been developed for use with human populations in recent years (e.g. Astur et al., 2005; Canovas, Espinola,

Iribarne, & Cimadevilla9 2003; Hanlon et al., 2006; Jacobs, Laurance, & Thomas, 1997; Jacobs,
Thomas, Laurance, & Nadel, 1998; Laurance et al., 2002; Livingstone & Skelton, 2007;

Furthermore, it is often not possible to compare pre- and post-lesion performance in humans due

Shipman & Astur, 2006; Shore et al., 2001; Skelton, Ross, Nerad, & Livingstone, 2006; Thomas, Hsu, Laurance, Nadel, & Jacobs, 2001). These tasks involve three-dimensional computerized virtual environments that participants navigate through, typically using a joystick or keyboard.
For instance, Canovas et al. (2008) developed a virtual version of the rodent cheeseboard maze.

to ethical and practical reasons. In this regard9 among others, rodent studies remain informative
and useful for understanding brain-behaviour relations.

However, a key issue surrounding rodent studies is the generalizability of findings to

human populations5 specifically9 the extent to which neural regions implicated in rodents when performing certain tasks are also implicated in humans. In recent years, a number of researchers

In this computerized task5 participants were presented with a room full of boxes and asked to
discover hidden rewards as efficiently as possible. Jacobs et al. (1998) developed a computer

4

program called CG-Arena that resembled the dry-land version of the Morris water maze, which they used to assess place learning. Virtual versions of the Morris water maze have also been
developed and used in conjunction with fMRL These studies report hippocampal activation
during the virtual maze, suggesting convergence across species for the involvement of the

in the coronal view (Duvernoy, 2005). The anterior end of the hippocampus is adjacent to the amygdala and there are strong interconnections between these two structures. The fornix extends from the posterior end of the hippocampus and primarily connects it directly with subcortical
regions (Sweatt, 2004), The central location of the hippocampus in the brain is ideal when

hippocampus in the Morris water maze task (Astur et al., 2005; Shipman & Astur, 2008), These

considering its role in integrating converging multimodal sensory information. The hippocampus is divided into subregions based on differences in cellular morphology,
connectivity and development. Hippocampal subregions are labeled by CA fields, where CA

tasks have also been used to assess spatial memory deficits in clinical populations associated
with hippocampal dysfunction, including traumatic brain injury (Livingstone & Skelton, 2007; Skelton et al., 2006) and schizophrenia (Hanlon et al., 2006), These tasks have been useful in providing cross-species convergence of hippocampal

refers to cornu ammonis in Latin, meaning ram's horn. They are so named because of their curved shape. Subregions of the hippocampus include the dentate gyms (DG), CA15 CA2, CAS
and CA4. CA1 and CA3 are the largest and most easily identified subfields in the hippocampus.

function and dysfunction in spatial memory tasks. However, this thesis is innovative in
developing human analogues to assess more specific subprocesses of spatial memory. This
direction is important because recent theoretical and empirical work indicates that spatial
memory may be better understood in terms of its subprocesses that differentially involve unique

In terms of information processing, the CA1 neurons are the main output to the fornix. The main
input into the hippocampus is the entorMnal cortex, via which two projection pathways terminate
onto hippocampal pyramidal neurons: a primary one to DG and second to CA1 (Duvernoy,
2005).

subregions'of the hippocampus in rodents.
Hippocampal Anatomy

Two cortical projection pathways that converge onto the hippocampus are the dorsal and

Although the general role of the hippocampus in spatial memory has been wellestablished, recent studies have identified functional dissociations among hippocampal subregions. To fully appreciate these dissociations, an understanding of hippocampal anatomy is
useful and important.

ventral visual streams (Duvernoy, 2003), The dorsal stream is often referred to as the

"where/action" path. This stream is essential for indicating where in space an object is located as
well as guiding interactions with that object The dorsal stream preferentially connects to a

polysynaptic intrahippocampal path that travels from the entorhinal cortex to the dentate gyms

The MTL includes the region of forebrain along the ventromedial surface of the temporal lobe. In addition to the hippocampus, it includes the amygdala and parahippocampal gyruss

and then to the CAS and finally CA1 subfield. In contrast, the ventral stream is often referred to
as the awhat/perceptual path" and is important for identifying or recognizing an object, This

which contains the parahippocampal, perirhinal, and entorhinal cortices (Sweatt, 2004), The
name hippocampus derives from the Greek word meaning seahorse, because of its curved shape

stream preferentially connects to a direct perforant path from the entorMnal cortex to the CA1
subfield (Duvernoy, 2005), Thus, the hippocampus appears to be integrating information about

both what an object is as well as where it is located,, indicating that it plays an important role in
processing and remembering the spatial location of objects in the environment. Further the

separate stimuli in the environment in space, allowing us to form unique representations of the
places where events occur.

different subfields of the hippocampus also appear to have differential functional relevance.
Spatial Memory Subprocesses

Pattern Separation in Rats. Gilbert, Kesner, and Lee (2001) showed that spatial pattern separation may be dependent on a different subfield than spatial-temporal pattern separation. For

Rodent studies and computational models suggest different subprocesses of spatial

spatial pattern separation, a delayed-matching-to-place task was used. Rats were trained to
displace an object covering a food well that was baited. At test, they were to choose between two

memory may be preferentially dependent on different hippocampal subfields. In a review,
Kesner and Hopkins (2006) categorize spatial memory tasks into the subprocesses of pattern separation, pattern association and pattern completion. It is important to note that there is conceptual overlap among these subprocesses of spatial pattern separation association and completion. Specifically, while they all surround the concept of associative memory, pattern separation probes more precisely into places and times as

identical objects^ one of ¥/hich covered the same well as the sample object (correct) or a second
that covered a different unbaited well (incorrect). Difficulty was manipulated by increasing or
decreasing the distance between the two objects. The further apart the two objects, the easier it

was to discriminate between them. For the spatial-temporal order pattern separation task, a radial arm maze was used. A sequence of eight arms was presented to the animal by sequentially opening each door one at a time to allow access to the food reward at the end of the arm. On the choice phase, doors for two of the arms were presented and the rat had to enter the arm that had occurred earlier in the sequence to get a reward. Similar to the spatial task, as the temporal

individual components, while pattern completion probes the ability to not only recognize a welllearned association but fill in partial or incomplete information, These processes are described in
further detail in the following sections.
Pattern Separation

distance in the sequence between the two choice arms decreased, the difficulty increased. The results showed that DG lesions in rats resulted in a deficit on the spatial task but not the spatialtemporal task, whereas CA1 lesions resulted in a deficit on the spatial-temporal task but not

Pattern separation is the process of transforming similar memories into different nonoverlapping representations (Bakker, Kirwan, Miller, & Stark9 2008). In other words, pattern

separation involves the orthogonalization of both objects and events in the environment spatially
and temporally. The hippocampus appears to be involved in separating events in space and time so that one event can be remembered as distinct from another event (Kesner & Hopkins, 2006), Spatial pattern separation is important for remembering where something happened. In order to

spatial task. These findings indicate that DG may be more important for spatial pattern
separation, while the CA1 may be more important for temporal pattern separation

In a subsequent study, the same spatial pattern separation task was used with rats with

CA3 lesions (Gilbert & Kesner, 2006). These rats all showed a uniform deficit compared to controls across all conditions. The authors suggested deficits in this spatial pattern separation task in CA3-lesioned rats could be indicative of a spatial working-memory deficit rather than the

support contextual processing and thus episodic memory5 it is necessary to be able to optimally

involvement of CAS in spatial pattern separation. Specifically, DG lesions in rats showed graded

Connections between granule cells in the DG and CAS pyramidal cells may allow for these uncorrelated firing patterns to transfer to the CAS cells. These firing patterns lead to the

deficits across separation conditions (performing at chance at the two closest separations, and
identical to preoperative performance and controls at the two furthest distances), showing that the DG lesions disrupted the ability to discriminate bet¥/een spatial locations as opposed to the
working memory demands of the task. Conversely, the proportionally poorer performance of the

disambiguation of memories in the hippocampus. When there are greater changes in the environment, pattern separation involves an independent cell population in CA3. Others have
also suggested the process CA3 engages in might differ as a function of environmental change

CA3 lesioned rats shows, according to the authors, that their deficits are more likely to be due to a spatial working memory deficit that affects performance equally across separation conditions.
However, this could also just be a result of some other general deficit that impairs even more

(e.g. Lee9 Yoganariasimha, Rao? & Knlerim, 2004; Leutgeb & Leutgeb, 2007; Vazdaijanova &
Guzowski, 2004). Further study is needed to fully understand the role of CAS in pattern separation in rodents. Nonetheless, it seems clear that slightly different aspects of spatial pattern
separation depend upon the DG and CAS cell fields.

basic task performance, for instance, a general spatial learning deficit. It is important to note that
these findings do not preclude the possibility that CAS is also involved in pattern separation. Both rodent studies and computational models implicate the DG as crucial for pattern
separation in the hippocampus. Spatial pattern separation is impaired with dorsal DG lesions and

Pattern Separation in Humans. The hippocampus appears to play a critical role in spatial

pattern separation in humans too. Hopkins and Kesner (1993) found impairment of hypoxic
participants with Mppocampal atrophy on a geographical spatial distance task where participants

spared with dorsal CA1 lesions (Goodrich-Hunsaker, Hunsaker, & Kesner, 2008). This result is
in line with computational models that suggest the DG orthogonalizes input by removing

were asked during the study phase to remember cities on a map of Mew Brunswick. During the test phase, participants were presented with two cities and asked to indicate which one was the furthest east Spatial distances were manipulated, with 0, 2, 4, or 6 cities from the study phase in between the two test cities presented. The hypoxic subjects performed on a gradient

redundant information before it reaches the CA3 cells (Becker, 2005; Rolls, 1996),
The role of CAS in pattern separation is less clear-cut. According to O'Reilly and

McClelland's model (1994), CAS might act to store representations already separated by the DG. Leutgeb9 Leutgeb? Moser and Moser (2007) suggest that a dual set of mechanisms involving the DG and CAS are involved in pattern separation. When there is only a slight change in the

corresponding to the spatial separation but poorer on all conditions compared to controls. Given

that hypoxia tends to preferentially affect the CA1 subregion (Duvernoy, 2005)9 this indicates
that the CA1 subregion may be important for spatial pattern separation in humans. However,

environment at a fixed location9 pattern separation occurs in the DG and CA3, Specifically,
cortical inputs change their pattern of correlated activity in the DG and the cells in the DG begin

subfield-specific damage was not assessed in this study. Therefore^ we can only conclude that the
hippocampus appears to play a role in spatial pattern separation in humans.

firing at different rates. This disambiguation of firing patterns is transferred to the CA fields via sparse connections between granule cells in the DG and pyramidal cells in the CA fields*

Moreover^ the hippocampus appears to be more important than other MTL structures for

pattern separation, Kirwan & Stark (2007) administered a continuous recognition task to

10

11

participants in a high-resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scanner. In a

was taking place in a certain subregion, the lure would be treated more like a new stimulus than a

continuous recognition paradigm, on each trial, a presented object might be new, a repetition of an object viewed previously, or a slightly altered version of a previously viewed object (ie,9 a
lure). Participants were asked to state whether the object was new9 old, or similar to an object
they had seen previously., Pattern separation was inferred by participants successfully discriminating a lure from an old object In other words3 they had to identify it as a "similar" object This "similar" option was important because calling a lure "new95 could just mean the participant never encoded the original variation of this cue. Identifying a lure as "similar" meant they could correctly identify they had seen something similar before, but had successfully "separated59 the two as distinctive stimuli, despite their similarities. Activity in the hippocampus,
unlike the parafaippocampus, successfully discriminated between correctly identified true

repetition, as measured by fMRI. Specifically, if the subregion is engaging in pattern separation,
the subregion should show similar activity to the presentation of the lure as it did to the initial presentation of the similar stimulus. They found activity demonstrating a strong bias toward pattern separation that was limited to the CA3/DG region. Even though the resolution used was

very Mgh (1.5mm) for flvfKI, it was still not possible to confidently isolate CAS from the DG and
thus, they referred to it as a single region, Interestingly, this task produced findings of
subregional involvement that paralleled findings in rodent literature, that is, a bias for pattern

separation in the DG/CA3, while the former study did not show any subregional differences,
Both of the aforementioned studies employed similar paradigms, with a few important

distinctions that could account for the dissimilar findings. First, pattern separation was

stimulus repetitions,, correctly rejected presentations of lure stimuli, and false alarms to similar lures. There were no differences in subregional involvement when subjects engaged in pattern separation. In other words, the pattern of activity in CA1, CA3/DG and the subiculum were

operationalized differently, Kirwan and Stark (2007) used behavioural measures to infer this process, while Bakker et al. (2008) used neural activation to infer this process, Second, the
former study assessed regions involved during encoding, while the latter assessed regions
involved at retrieval Third, Bakker et al. (2008) used incidental encoding in an attempt to more

similar.
Bakker, Kirwan, Miller and Stark (2008) used high-resolution fMRI to measure

closely emulate rodent tasks. To our knowledge, these are the only studies that have examined
the hippocampal subregions involved in pattern separation in humans. Although these tasks
assess pattern separation, they differ from the well-established rodent paradigms that support

hippocampal activity during a memory encoding task. Subjects viewed pictures of everyday
objects. Similar to Kirwan & Stark (2007), a continuous repetition paradigm was used in which a

presented object might be new, a repetition of an object viewed previously, or a slightly altered
version of a previously viewed object, a lure. To parallel the rodent literature5 an incidental ei!coding9 rather than intentional encoding paradigm was utilized by asking participants to make an indoor/outdoor object judgment with no indication that they would later be given a memory

differential subregional functions. Thus, the human analogue developed in this thesis will be
useful for further subregional interrogation of human spatial memory and for drawing crossspecies comparisons.

test, rather than old/new/similar memory judgment. They hypothesized that if pattern separation

12

13

Pattern Association

associations between objects and spatial locations. This finding is consistent with the
computational model proposed by Rolls (1996), mentioned previously.

In addition to pattern separation, pattern association is also necessary for remembering

events^ as it allows us to associate components of the environment or event with each other. The
hippocampus and its subregions support the formation of arbitrary associations., including pairedassociate learning. Spatial pattern association involves the binding of associations between

Gilbert and Kesner (2002) trained rats on a successive discrimination go/no go task to
examine object-place paired associate learning. Two paired associates were used, A particular

object (A) in one particular location (1) was reinforced, and another object (B) in a different
location (2) was also reinforced, Mispairs, such as object A in location 2, were not reinforced. If

objects/events with places, as well as among places (i.e., as required to construct a cognitive map). The hippocampus in rats and humans is critically involved in processing information associated with learning and subsequent retrieval of object-location (place) associations (Kesner
& Hopkins, 2006).

the object was presented in its correctly paired location, the rat should displace the object to
receive a reward, but if the object was in a mispaired location^ the rat was to withhold displacing
it. CAS-lesioned rats were impaired in associating an object with a spatial location, but not in
associating an object with something without a spatial component, such as an odor. This suggests

According to his computational model of the role of memory in the CAS subregion, Rolls
(1996) suggests that a CA3 auto-associative network is responsible for the formation and storage

that the CAS is important for paired-associate learning for spatial associations but not for

of arbitrary associations. According to this model, the intrinsic, recurrent connectivity within CAS allows various elements of an episode to be automatically integrated into a unified representation. In other words, the CAS functions like its own network because of its recurrent connectivity within itself, making associations between various stimuli in the environment.
Pattern Association in Rats. In a recent study, Kesner9 Hunsaker, and Warthen (2008) found that CAS lesions disrupted the ability of rats to support arbitrary associations. For

nonspatial associations. A subsequent study from the same lab with a similar paradigm found
that CA1-lesioned and DG-lesioned rats were not impaired in learning the paired association,
while the CAS-lesioned rats were5 suggesting the importance of the CAS subregion, but not CA1
or DG in object-place paired-associate learning (Gilbert & Kesner, 2003).

Pattern Association in Humans. Memory for paired associations between objects and
locations can be considered to rely on intact spatial pattern association processes, and numerous studies have examined paired-associate learning in humans (Kesner & Hopkins, 2006). In one
such study by Stepankova, Fenton, Pastalkova, Kaline, and Bohbot (2004) participants were

example, these rats were unable to associate an object and its spatial location, This finding could

not be accounted for by lack of motivation or a deficit in working memory. Further, CASTM
lesioned rats were only impaired on an episodic (different object-place associations at every trial)
memory version of the task and unimpaired when the task was nonepisodic (same object-place

shown up to six objects on the floor of a circular curtained area for 10s, Then, participants were

asked to mark off locations on a map of the area where the objects were located. They were also
asked to put the objects back in their original locations, Right-hippocampal lesioned participants

association at every trial), suggesting the importance of the CAS subregion in forming arbitrary

performed poorly compared to normal controls. In addition., there was an increased magnitude of

15

deficit with an increasing number of object-locations, suggesting the hippocampus plays a role in

distal, extramaze cues provided in the room. After they reached, stable performance, rats were
then given lesions to the CAS subregion. Subsequently they were tested on the same task, but

paired association memory in humans. However, the role of hippocampal subregional
involvement in pattern association has not been systematically studied.
Pattern Completion

with zero3 one, two, three, or all four extramaze cues missing. In order to find the correct well efficiently, rats presumably have to mentally "fill in" or complete the arrangement of extramaze
cues. Rats with CA3 lesions were impaired in pattern completion as indicated by a

Pattern completion is also critical to episodic memory as it allows us to make inferences when given partial spatial information. Spatial pattern completion allows us to recall or generate

disproportionate linear increase in errors in comparison to controls as the number of available cues was reduced. This provides evidence for the role of CAS in spatial pattern completion in
rodents.

well-established knowledge based on partial or incomplete spatial information. Computational
models have suggested one potential mechanism for retrieval of episodic memory is pattern

completion. According to this notion, an auto-associative network retrieves patterns of activity, or memories, based on partial or degraded information or cues (Kesner & Hopkins, 2006). For
example, pattern completion might allow us to infer the location of our car in a parking lot when

Nakazawa and colleagues (2002) ablated the iV-methyl-D-asparate (NMDA) receptor gene in the CAS subregion of rodents. These rodents performed equivalent to controls on the Morris water maze task when all extramaze cues were present. However, when three out of the
four extramaze cues were removed, control rodents showed the same level of recall as in the fullcue condition, whereas the mutant rodents were severely impaired on the task* Therefore, CAS

the cars surrounding it have changed or gone, and we can no longer use them as cues to locate our car. In this situation, we may use cues such as other cars, or landmarks such as lamp posts,
trees, or the road to locate our car. In this case9 the subset of available cues leads to the retrieval of a complete memory of where the car is located. The CA3 subregion appears to act as an autoassociated and thus forms and stores episodic memories. The extensive recurrent collateral connectivity of the CA3 subregion allows for the retrieval of the entirety of the memory, based
on the activation of a portion of the representation (i.e., a cue or subset of cues; Rolls, 1996; Rolls, 1997).

appears to be important for spatial pattern completion in rodents.

Pattern Completion in Humans. Ryan, Alhofif, Whitlow, and Cohen (2000) and Ryan and
Cohen (2004) examined relational processing in normal controls and hippocampal amnesia

patients. Participants were shown a scene, and later, participants examined a similar, but slightly altered scene. For instance, in an altered scene, an object may be moved to a different location in
the scene or removed entirely. Eye-tracking equipment indicated that normal participants tended to spend more time looking at the area of the scene that was altered (the area where the object

Pattern Completion in Rats. Gold and Kesner (2005) used a delayed matching-to-place

task on rats with CAS lesions. During the sample phase, rats removed a covering, of a food well that could appear in one of five possible spatial locations. At the choice phase, rats were to find
the same well with the proximal block removed and thus, needed to relocate it using the four

was originally presented) compared to unaltered areas of the scene at both short and long delays. This increased looking indicates they had knowledge that something was previously there and that a representation of this was activated. In other words, they were engaging in a process that

16

17

could be considered pattern completion. At short delays3 the amnesic participants performed
similarly to controls, That is5 they spent an increased amount of time looking at the altered area  of the scene. However, at long delays, the amnesic patients spent less time looking at the altered
area of the scene compared to controls, suggesting an issue with the spatial pattern completion

Summary

In summary, animal lesion studies have shown that spatial pattern separation5 association,
and completion subprocesses are differentially dependent on DG9 CA!9 and CAS, Rodent studies

and computational models have shown that CA3 appears to be important for spatial pattern association and spatial pattern completion, and possibly spatial pattern separation. DG appears to
be preferentially involved in spatial pattern separation. The sole human study examining the neural correlates of pattern separation and completion found DG/CA3 to be involved in the
former, and CA1 to be involved in the latter (Bakker et al., 2008), To our knowledge,

process. This study provides evidence for hippocampal involvement in spatial pattern
completion. However, one issue with viewing this study as assessing pattern completion is that it does not involve a "well-learned" environment, posited to be a crucial component of pattern
completion (Kesner & Hopkins, 2006),

Few studies have examined subregional hippocampal involvement in pattern completion

subregional involvement in pattern association has not been assessed in human studies. It is
premature to conclude that these apparent discrepancies in subfield-processing relations reflect

in humans. In addition to pattern separation, the study mentioned previously by Bakker et al.
(2008) examined subregional correlates of pattern completion, Because pattern completion
involves well-established representations, images of common objects (e.g. rubber duck) were
used, In this case, pattern completion was operationalized as the processing of a similar lure

species differences. Indeed, the rodent studies are based on lesion methodology; whereas the human findings are based on a single fMRI study. In addition, the rodent tasks are based on
memory for locations, whereas the human paradigm assessed processing of common objects.

(e.g., rubber duck viewed from a different orientation) like a repetition of the original stimulus.

Moreover, it is only very recently that subfteld4evei analysis of human neuroiniaging data has

In particular, if a brain region was involved in pattern completion, it should respond as though
the similar lure is a repeated stimulus. This approach is based on the assumption that if a similar object is processed as a repetition, then the responsive brain region is preserving the overlap/similarities between the two. It is involved in completing or realizing a representation of

been possible and current methods remain unable to parse out the DG from the CAS subregion in

humans. If neural involvement of rodents and humans is identical, we would expect DG to be preferentially involved in spatial pattern separation in humans. Since current imaging techniques
are unable to obtain isolated DG versus CA3 activation, human analogues of a rodent pattern

the same or similar object based on partial visual information to what was previously seen (e.g., because of the differing orientation). A bias towards pattern completion was observed in various
MTL regions, including the CA1, but not the CA3»

separation behavioural task offers the potential to provide insight into processes to which even
modern imaging remains blind.
Main Thesis Objective

This thesis addresses two main gaps in the literature. First? while human analogues of

rodent spatial memory tasks have been developed, none have been developed that isolate spatial

18

19

pattern association^ separation, and completion in particular. Second, while tasks assessing
spatial pattern association, separation, and completion in humans have been developed,, none have been developed that are directly analogous to rodent tasks. Thus9 the objective of the
current project is to develop virtual human analogues of rodent tasks assessing these subprocesses. As in the rodent tasks5 task sensitivity to these processes will be assessed in terms of differences in performance in response to increasing task demands related to the subprocesses.
The development of these tasks will lead to future imaging work that will allow us to examine the neural correlates of these tasks and assess whether they correspond to those involved in rodents. Similar neural involvement in rodents and humans would be indicative of similar neural processes in both species when performing similar tasks9 and would provide evidence for the applicability of rodent spatial memory tasks assessing these subprocesses to humans. In addition similar neural involvement will provide further support for evolutionary continuity in Mppocampal cognitive function in humans and rodents (Kesner & Hopkins9 2006).
The current study has three specific goals: 1. In a virtual analogue of the rodent spatial pattern association (SPA) task, I aim to

the removal of distal cues, accuracy should decrease and latency increase as the number
of surrounding/distal cues in the environment decrease.

demonstrate learning over trials. Specifically, participants should shov/ increasing accuracy and decreasing latency as the trials progress if they are learning over trials. 2. In a virtual spatial pattern separation (SPS) task, I aim to demonstrate my task's sensitivity to separation manipulations. If my task is sensitive to separation manipulations, accuracy should decrease as the distance between target and foil decrease.

3.

In a virtual analogue to a rodent task assessing pattern completion (SPC), I aim to
demonstrate my task's sensitivity to cue removal manipulations. If this task is sensitive to

20

21

Methods and Results
Participants

difficulty, a = ,059 and power = ,8S9 which yields a recommended sample size ofN= 31. Therefore, 31 healthy participants were ran in Experiment 2 (22 female, Mage= 22.87, SD= 4.545 age range= 18-42 years), Eleven of these were community participants with a mean
education level of 16 years (SD=1.79 years).

Sixty-two young adults In total were recruited from the Psychology Participant Pool
(undergraduate students; both Experiments 1 and 2) and on-campus advertisement (community participants; only In Experiment 2). Exclusionary criteria included lack of fluency in Engllsh9

General Experimental Paradigm

non-normal vision^ having a psychological disorder, or being on medication that could affect performance. On the basis of these exclusionary criteria, seven participants were excluded. Eight
additional participants were excluded for not completing the tasks3 the task being overwritten, or being administered Incorrectly by the experimenter. Therefore, data from 47 diverse participants
is presented. One participant from Experiment 1 had their spatial pattern association data overwritten and thus only 10 people were included In the SPA analysis for this Experiment Further one participant from Experiment 2 also had their SPA data overwritten, and thus only 30 participants

One contrast between the human tasks and analogous rodent tasks Is that participants in human tasks are given verbal instruction about general task demands, rather than being given multiple training phases (e»go? learning to displace objects to obtain food rewards, etc.) as rodents are. However, the mnemonic content being assessed remained analogous. All tasks were performed In a circular computer-generated (CG) arena with brick walls

(http://web.arizona.edu/-arg/data.html; Jacobs et al., 1997). Each meter is represented by 10 units, based on the length of one stride (10 units) as appearing equivalent to 1 meter on the
screen (Jacobs et al., 1997), The arena had a diameter of 92 units and was housed in a 500 x 500

were included In the SPS analysis for Experiment 2. Both these participants9 data were Included in the spatial pattern separation and spatial pattern completion tasks.
Sixteen undergraduate students participated in Experiment 1 (13 female3 A/age= 21.47

x 100 unit room. The wall had a height of 8 units. The external walls were purple, the ceiling
gray2 and the floor gray. Each wall had a different picture of a fractal pattern on it that was

difficult to verbalize (i.e. did not resemble any common objects that could be easily verbalized)

years, SD= 4.699 age range= 18-36 years). I Initially planned to ran 10 participants and then check the data to monitor performance. Thus9 eleven of these participants completed the original version of the spatial pattern separation task. Then I ran five participants on a modified version
that appeared more promising (summarized below). Experiment 1 results suggested mediumsized effects for the spatial pattern association task and spatial pattern separation task3 with larger

and was similar in colour to the others (Figure 1). The use of non-verbalizable stimuli in this task

Is in line with Steckler and Muir's (1995) suggestion to design tasks with abstract stimuli that
cannot be easily verbalized when comparing humans and non-humans in order to minimize
verbal processes.

effects for spatial pattern completion. Therefore, I used Cohen's standard effect size off=25 for
an estimated minimum medium-sized effect for a repeated-measures ANOVA with 3 levels of

22

23

I

(and foil) locations. Participants were randomly assigned to one of these three different
sequences.

Experiment 1 Procedure

Figure 1. Abstract fractal patterns on Arena walls.

The spatial pattern tasks were designed so that the tasks and virtual environment were as

similar as possible, with only subtle variations in task demands to assess the subprocesses of

;

pattern separation, association, and completion. Extra-maze cues (Figure 1) were provided on the walls of the virtual room to allow for the allocentric spatial processing required of these tasks. Spatial pattern association. During the sample phase, a 5 by 5 unit green square was
presented in one of 20 pre-determined spatial locations in the arena. The participant was required

11
ffi f-J
....:

to use the arrow keys to navigate to and situate themselves on the green square. Once they reached it, they were required to press the space bar to take them into a 5-s delay followed by the

RBI

w

I

choice phase. During the choice phase, the participant was placed in the centre of the arena in a random start orientation and required to navigate to the spatial location that had been marked in the sample phase, this time in the absence of a visible target (Figure 2).

Of primary importance was the assessment of the sensitivity of performance to difficulty manipulations thought to place increasing demands on the subprocesses of interest. In other

words, these manipulations allowed some assessment of the tasks' construct validity. The tasks were always administered in the following order: SPA, SPS, and SPC. The
SPA task was a baseline task to ensure participants became familiar with the virtual environment

Figure 2. Pattern Association task

and with navigation through the arena. Since SPC involves the retrieval of well-established information (Kesner & Hopkins, 2006), it is important to ensure that the participants were

familiar with the virtual environment before they engaged in this task. Therefore, the SPC task
was administered last. There were three fixed but random sequences for the ordering of trials for each task to minimize the likelihood that the results were due to a particular sequence of target
Sample
Choice

Thus, the participant was required to use only extra-maze cues as a guide. If the

Participants were required to discriminate the correct allocentric location based on its spatial relation to extra-maze cues. To make a selection, they navigated to one of the green

participant did not find the location within 45 s, a new trial would begin. Because the correct
location was no longer indicated by the presence of the green square, the participant had to use extra-maze cues to code for its location. Twenty one study-test pairs of trials were presented.
Spatial pattern separation. The SPS task was modeled after the rat cheeseboard task used by Gilbert et al (2001). A delayed-matching-to-place task was used. In the sample phase, the participant was presented with a green square located in one of 20 pre-determined spatial locations in the CG Arena identical to the study phase for the SPA task. The participant started in

squares, situated themselves on it, and then pressed the space bar. The trial ended after a choice

was made. There were three possible distances presented pseudorandomly that separated the foil from the correct object (10, 20, or 30 area units from the centre of the target to the centre of the

foil). Twenty-one study-test pairs were presented overall, across which the relative position of
the foil was counterbalanced (i.e., N, E, S, W sides).

Spatial pattern completion. This version of the delayed-matching-to-place task was

the centre of the arena facing north. Using the arrow keys, he/she was required to move to the green square on the floor of the arena. Once the participant was situated on it, they pressed the
space bar to take them into the next phase. In the choice phase, participants were allowed to choose between two objects that were identical to the study object. One of these objects was

modeled after the cheeseboard task used by Gold and Kesner (2005). Each trial had a sample phase and choice phase. The sample phase was identical to that in the SPA and SPS tasks. That
is, the participant started from a designated starting position in the centre of the arena facing

north and the participant traveled to the green square placed on the floor of the arena. In the

placed in the study location (correct choice) and the other was placed in a different location
(incorrect choice; Figure 3).

choice phase, the object was removed and after a 5-s delay the participant was allowed to explore the maze until he/she reached the same (correct) spatial location or a maximum of 45s, as in the
association task (Figure 4). The main difference between this task and the SPA task was that the

Figure 3. Pattern Separation task from Experiment 1.

number of extra-maze cues (four, two, or zero) available was manipulated. These three possible

cue conditions were repeated seven times each in a random presentation sequence across trials. In addition, the participant had a random starting orientation in each choice phase requiring
allocentric spatial memory. In total, there were 21 study-test pairs.

Sample

Choice

Figure 4. Pattern Completion Task.

Although significant differences were not revealed in these analyses, the medium and

large effect sizes for accuracy and latency led us to suspect that using a larger sample may bring out these differences. Therefore, this task was not modified further with the expectation that the

larger sample in Experiment 2 might produce differences between the conditions that we did not
find with this relatively smaller sample.

SPS. A repeated-measures ANOVA with foil distance as the levels of the independent
Sample Experiment 1 Results SPA. Accuracy in this task was calculated by a score of 1 for a trial when the participant did find the target in the allotted time and a score of 0 when they did not. This was averaged for each trial across participants. The SPA task appeared to produce a learning curve, with 20% of participants finding the target at trial 1 and 67% by trial 21. However, a linear trend analysis of the accuracy data across the 21 trials indicates no linear trend, F(l,18) = 1.186,/? =.308, MSE =
Choice

variable and accuracy as the dependent variable showed no difference between the three foil

distance conditions, F(2, 20) = 1.613,/? = .224, MSE = 0.019, partial r|2= 0.139.
Since average accuracy on this task was very high for a separation of 10 units (M = .789), 20 units (M= .753), and 30 units (M= .855), and this task did not produce significant differences

in accuracy between the three foil separation conditions, a small sample (N= 5) was tested on a modification of this task that was hypothesized to increase the difficulty of the task. This task had the same requirements with three modifications. First, the targets were made smaller. The
square during the sample phase was now 2 by 2 units rather than 5 by 5 units. The second

0.189, partial r|2=.O73 . Further, there was no quadratic trend across all 21 trials, F(l,18) =

1.056,/? = .318, MSE = 0.344, partial r\2= 0.055.
A further ANOVA was conducted to minimize trial-by-trial noise by using 3 bins of 7 trials (trials 1-7, 8-14, and 15-21). This analysis revealed no significant differences in accuracy

modification was that the stimuli during the choice phase were two circles rather than squares in
order to discourage the use of angle cues in other words, the relation of the edges of the square to

other edges in the room in making a judgment. Since circles have no straight edges, using these

between the three bins, F (2, 18) = 0.537, p = .594, MSE = 0.044, partial r|2 = 0.056. However,
there appears to be a visible trend that failed to reach significance. Latency was also analyzed in

cues during the test phase would be impossible. Further, changing the target from square to circle between study and test ensured the participant was placing an emphasis on remembering the location of the target, rather than the target itself. The third modification was that the target and foil were closer together in all three distance manipulations by a factor of 2 in order to increase

bins of 7 to assess whether participants found the targets faster as the trials progressed. This
analysis found no differences in latency between the three bins, F (2, 18) = 1.328, p = .290, MSE

= 30.930, partial r|2= 0.129.

difficulty (separations of 5, 10, and 15 area units). The participant was instructed to go to the
circle that appeared in the same location as the square had been presented in the study phase.

A repeated-measures ANOVA of this altered task again showed no differences in

= 17.768,/?<.001, MSE = 21.059, partial r| -0.640. Paired-samples t tests showed a difference

accuracy between the three foil distance conditions, F(2, 8) = 0.028, p = .972, MSE = 0.070, partial r|2= 0.007. Although there appeared to be a decline in accuracy for all three separation

approaching significance with shorter latency in the zero cues missing condition versus two cues missing condition, ^(10) = -2.211,/? = .051, d = 0.667, and a slower latency for the two cues

Conditions in the modified task (Afseparationl = -733, SAeparationl = -148, Mseparation2 = -743,

missing versus four cues missing conditions, r(10) = -4.254,/? = .002, d= 1.283.

SAeParation2 = .344, Motions =.771, Separations = · 163) versus the original task, t tests revealed
no difference at the closest separation (7(14) = 0.574, p =.575, d = 0.378), the intermediate
separation (t(\4) = 0.070,p = .945, d = 0.033), or the furthest separation (t(\4) = 1.132,/? =

Thus the results show differential accuracy between the three cue conditions and differential latency between at least two of the three conditions with the other approaching
significance.

.277, d = 0.578). While it was possible these differences were not found because the modified
task was underpowered, I still decided to create a new task that could produce larger differences
between conditions for Experiment 2 (below). An analysis of latency also did not show
differences between conditions, and therefore is not included in detail here.

Experiment 2 Procedure

Since significant differences between the three conditions were not seen in SPS, a

modified task with an increased number of foils was used on another set of 31 participants.

Specifically, during the study phase, three distractors in addition to the target were used, rather than one. This increase in the overall task difficulty was aimed at allowing for more room for variation across performance levels. SPA and SPC were also administered, but unmodified, as a cross-validation of the Experiment 1 findings for these two tasks in a separate sample.
Modified SPS Task. A delayed-match-to-sample for spatial location task was used.

SPC Accuracy was calculated in this task similarly as for the SPA task, where

participants were given a score of 1 for a trial in which they found the target in the allotted time,
and a score of 0 when they did not. A repeated-measures ANOVA with number of wall cues
missing as the levels of the independent variable and accuracy as the dependent variable was

significant, F(2, 20) = 12.222,/? < .001, MSE = 0.018, partial r\2 = 0.550. Follow-up paired
samples Mests confirmed differences in accuracy between all three conditions, with higher
accuracy in the 0 cues missing condition versus the 2 cues missing condition, t(l0) = 2.622,/? -

Participants were presented with a green square located in one of 20 pre-determined spatial locations in the CG Arena. The participant started in the centre of the arena facing north. Using

the arrow keys, they were required to move to a green square on the floor of the arena. Once the participant was situated on it they pressed the space bar to take them into the next phase. In the
choice phase, participants started at a random orientation and were allowed to choose between

.026, d= 0.791 and higher accuracy on the 2 cues missing versus 4 cues missing conditions,
r(10) = 2.622,/? = .026, d= 0.791.

Latency was also analyzed to see if participants took longer to find a target when fewer

four green circles arranged in a square formation. One of these circles was placed in the study

cues were available versus when more cues were available. A repeated-measures ANOVA with
latency as the dependent variable also found significant differences between conditions, F(2, 20)

location (target, correct choice). The others were placed to complete three remaining corners of
the arrangement (foils, incorrect choices). Participants were required to discriminate the correct

allocentric location of the target based on its spatial relation to extra-maze cues. To make a selection, they navigated to one, situated themselves on it and then pressed the space bar. The trial ended after a choice was made (Figure 5). There were three possible distances between the target and the furthest foil (2.83, 5.66, and 8.49 area units), which were presented in a
pseudorandom sequence. Twenty-one study-test pairs were presented overall, across which the

tasks. As expected, there were no differences in accuracy nor latency for any of the bins (p > .144 for all conditions). Mean accuracy for Experiment 1 and 2 is presented in Figure 6.

Figure 6. Mean Accuracy Across Bins of 7 Trials For Experiments 1 and 2. Bin 1, 2, and 3 refer
to bins of trials 1-7, 8-14, and 15-21 respectively (error bars represent standard error).

SPA: Mean Accuracy for Bins of 7
Trials

relative position of the foils were counterbalanced (i.e., equal representation of N, E, S, W sides).
Figure 5. Pattern Separation task from Experiment 2.

u

0.6

Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Sample

Choice

Experiment 2 Results SPA. Again, the SPA task produced a learning curve, with 37% of participants finding the

Latency was also assessed to see if participants became faster at locating the target as the
task progressed. An ANOVA comparing latency of 3 bins of 7 trials found significant

target at trial 1 and 74% by trial 21. Unlike in Experiment 1, a linear trend analysis showed a

linear trend across trials, F(2, 58) = 8.439,p = .009, MSE = .205, partial r|2 = .070.
A further ANOVA using 3 bins of 7 trials (trials 1-7, 8-14, and 15-21) revealed a

differences between the bins, F (2, 58) = 8.002,/? = .001, MSE = 41.739, partial r|2 = 0.216.
Follow-up paired-samples t tests found significant differences between bin 1 and bin 2 t(29)=

significant difference in accuracy between the three bins, F (2, 58) = 5.352, p = .007, MSE =

4.021,p < .001, d= 0.734 as well as bin 1 and bin 3 t{29) = 2.770,/? = .010, d= 0.506, but not
between bin 2 and bin 3 t(29) = -0.764, p = .451, d= 0.139.

.037, partial r\2 = .156. Follow-up paired t tests revealed greater performance on Bin 3 versus Bin
1, t(29) = 2.975,p = .015, d= 0.474, and Bin2 versus Bin 1, t(29) = 2.975,p= .006, d= 0.543, but no difference between Bin 3 and Bin 2, t(29) = 0.512, p = .612, d = 0.094.
Accuracy and latency for each bin in Experiment 1 versus 2 were compared using an

SPS. A repeated-measures ANOVA with foil distance as the levels of the independent variable and accuracy as the dependent variable revealed that the modified task was successful in
demonstrating a difference among the three foil separation conditions, F(2, 60) = 5.028,/? = .010, MSE = 0.031, partial r|2 = 0.144. Follow-up paired samples t tests revealed lower accuracy for a

independent-samples t test to ensure there were no significant differences between these identical

separation of 2.83 area units than for separation of 5.66 area units, t(30) = -2.997, p = .005, d0.538 and lower accuracy for a separation of 2.83 area units than for 8.49 area units, t(30) = -

Figure 7. Pattern separation task mean accuracy in Experiment 1 (original) and Experiment 2. Levels of separation 1, 2, and 3 represent 10, 20, and 30 units respectively for Experiment 1. For Experiment 2, level of separation 1, 2, and 3 represent 2.83, 5.66, and 8.49 area units
respectively (error bars represent standard error).

2.377,p = .024, d = 0.436. There was, however, no difference in accuracy for a separation of
5.66 and 8.49 area units, ^(30) = 0.878, p = .387, d = 0.158. Overall, this new SPS task was more

effective at producing accuracy differences between the separation levels than the original SPS
task, at least between the two closest target-foil distances.

Accuracy as a Function of Target-Foil Separation

Accuracy was compared between Experiment 1 and 2 using three independent samples t

tests in order to assess whether a significant drop in accuracy was achieved through the
modifications made on this task. A significant drop in accuracy was found at the shortest
separation, /(40) = 7.027, p < .001, d= 2.264, the intermediate separation, t(40) = 4.604, p <
 Experiment 1

~ Experiment 2

.001, d= 1.067, and the largest separation, ^(32.132) = 8.776,/? < .001, d= 2.664. Therefore, this
latest task showed significantly lower accuracy in all separation conditions compared to the
original task (Figure 7). Furthermore, polynomial trend analyses revealed both a linear trend, F(l,30) = 5.648,p =

Level of Separation

.024, MSE = .025, partial r|2= .158, as well as a quadratic trend, F(l, 30) = 4.589,/? = .040, MSE
= .036, partial r|2= .133, across levels of separation.
SPC. Accuracy varied across cue missing conditions, F(2, 60) = 12.021, p < .001, MSE =

.034, partial r\2= .286. In particular, performance was more accurate for the zero cues missing
versus two cues missing condition, t(30) = 2.98,p = .006, d= .535 as was the zero cues missing
versus the four cues missing condition, r(30) = 5.495,p < .001, d= .987. In contrast to

Experiment 1, the higher accuracy in the two cues missing condition versus four cues missing

conditions just failed to reach statistical significance although there was a medium effect size,
/(30) = .0993, p =.078, d= .328 (Figure 8).

Figure 8. Pattern completion mean accuracy in Experiments 1 and 2 (error bars represent
standard error).

General Discussion

Accuracy as a Function of # Cues Missing

The objective of this thesis was to develop human analogues of rodent tasks that have

been shown to be sensitive to hippocampal subprocesses in rodents. I developed three novel
computer-generated virtual-maze tasks analogous to rodent tasks used to evaluate pattern

association, separation, and completion in humans. The use of the CG-Arena allowed us to
D Experiment 1

create a computer-generated virtual environment that was visually similar to that used in rodent
tasks. Further, it enabled us to specify parameters that allowed us to create analogous tasks, as

Experiment 2

well as closely parallel the difficulty manipulations used in rodent tasks. Performance on these

tasks varied according to the difficulty manipulation condition (separation distance for SPS and
#Cues Missing

number of wall cues missing for SPC) suggesting these tasks may be sensitive to the same
subprocesses assessed in rodents.

In the SPA task, participants showed improved performance across trials. In the SPS task,
Latency also differed across cue conditions, F(2, 60) = 23.140,/? < .001, MSE = 38.396,

sensitivity to separation of target and foils was evidenced by increased accuracy with increasing separation distance conditions. Furthermore, participants' performance was dependent on the
number of extra-maze cues in the SPC task. I will discuss these findings and their implications

partial r\2 = 0.435 . Specifically, there was a shorter latency for the zero cues missing versus two
cues missing condition, t(30) = -4.399,p = .004, d= 0.563 and shorter latency for the two cues
missing versus four cues missing condition, t(30) = -3.542,p =.001, d= 0.636.

for this study in more detail below, as well as possible future directions incorporating these tasks.

Independent-samples t tests were used to assess whether there was a significant difference in accuracy and latency between conditions in Experiment 1 and 2. These analyses, as expected, found no significant differences for accuracy or latency for the conditions (all/?s >

Participants showed what appeared to be a learning curve, with an increased number of participants who found the target by the last trial versus the first trial. However, there was only a significant linear trend in Experiment 2 and not in Experiment 1. This may have reflected some

inherent differences between the samples for Experiment 1 and Experiment 2 that affected
outcome. For instance, Experiment 1 included only undergraduate students, while Experiment 2
included undergraduate students, graduate students, and community participants. In the future, a

diverse sample that includes undergraduate students, graduate students, and community participants may be more representative of the general population. An even more plausible explanation for the different findings between experiments is the smaller sample size of
In Experiment 1 of the SPS task, participants did not show differences in accuracy

between any of the three separations. An altered task was created that used two circles rather than squares and a decrease in separation distance for all three separations. This task also did not
show differences between any of the levels of separation, although it did result in an overall decrease in accuracy. In Experiment 2, participants were presented with four circles during the sample phase (one target and three foils) as opposed to two circles (one target and one foil). With

participants in Experiment 2. The identical effect sizes between Experiment 1 and 2 indicate that
Experiment 1 did not show a significant result similar to Experiment 2 due to a lack of power.

Overall, however, participants seemed to be learning to find the targets more accurately and
quickly over trials. Importantly, an analysis comparing bins of 7 trials found no significant
differences in accuracy or latency between SPA in Experiment 1 versus Experiment 2,

this modification, participants did show differential accuracy between two of the three conditions
(with the third marginally significant), and lowered overall accuracy. Therefore, four major

suggesting performance on this task is similar across both experiments. Further, there appeared
to be some improvement in accuracy and latency across bins in Experiment 2, indicating
participants were improving at the task over time. Since there was no significant improvement

changes were made that differentiated the original SPS task from the final version: the target and foils were resized to make them smaller, targets and foils were circles rather than squares during the choice phase, the distance between the target and foils was decreased, and the number of foils
were increased. The final task was more successful at producing differences in accuracy between
the separation conditions than the previous two versions.

between Bins 2 and 3, participants were not improving much across trials beyond trial 15.

Therefore, it seems the 21 trials we have for this task were sufficient in producing gains in
performance.

Results were consistent with our goals for the SPA task. The learning curve and

The finding that the final task produced accuracy differences between two of the three
levels of separation could be

improved performance across bins may reflect the participants' increasing familiarity with the
room, including the wall cues that help the participant gauge their location relative to the target,

explained in a number of ways. It is possible that in the first version of the task, the

as well as improved strategy. This former component is critical for the later SPC task, given that
spatial pattern completion requires a 'well-learned' environment. Although we did not set criteria
for what constitutes a well-learned environment, the ordering of the tasks with SPC always
completed last was to ensure the environment was well-learned.

locations were quite easy to discriminate from one another due to the large targets and large

distances between them. This is evidenced by the high accuracy rates for this task at all
separation conditions. Therefore, the three distances did not require or incite intense pattern
separation processes. Arguably, at closer distances, a "heavier" reliance on the pattern separation

process is required to successfully discriminate between spatial locations. This rationale was the basis for the creation of the modified task in Experiment 1. However, this task also did not

produce differences between spatial separations. At this point, a slight deviation from the rodent

found that there was an increase in number of errors that was dependent on number of cues

literature was required and the three-foil task in Experiment 2 was developed. This task did
produce more statistically significant differences in accuracy between separation conditions than
the previous two tasks. Presumably, the final task engaged heavier pattern separation processing,

available. Specifically, rodents searched fewer incorrect locations for the reward when there

were more extra-maze cues available. In another study using the same rodent task, unoperated
control rats and CA3-lesioned rats were highly reliant on visual extra-maze cues in order to

as indicated by differences in accuracy based on distance of separation in the final SPS task.
Performance on the latest SPS task is more sensitive to separation between the target and foils than were the previous two versions. Therefore, this version of the task is a good measure of
spatial pattern separation.

successfully solve a SPC task (Kirwan, Gilbert, & Kesner, 2005). Therefore, findings from the present study are in line with rodent studies that found differences in performance as a function
of available cues.

Jacobs et al. (1998) developed a similar task to our SPC task also using CG-Arena. In this
task, participants learned the location of an invisible target on the arena floor through several

Performance on the SPC task in both Experiment 1 and 2 showed differences between wall cue missing conditions in latency and accuracy. Specifically, as the number of cues on the walls decreased, accuracy decreased and latency increased. Experiment 1 showed differences in
accuracy and latency between all cue missing conditions with accuracy decreasing and latency

acquisition trials. The test phase had four cycles with two trials each. During trial 1 of each cycle, they were to find the invisible target on the first trial while all cues were present. During

trial 2 of each cycle, the participants were to find the invisible target when one or more wall cues were missing. If the participant did not find the target in three minutes, the trial ended and went
on to the next trial. The location of the target remained consistent across trials. There were no

increasing as wall cues were eliminated. Experiment 2 showed differences in accuracy between two of the three conditions and an accuracy difference that just failed to reach significance between two cues missing and all four cues missing. In other words, as the number of wall cues

differences in time to locate the target between the conditions when zero (the baseline acquisition
condition where all cues were present), one, two, or three distal cues were eliminated. However,

in this task decreased, accuracy also decreased for two of the three conditions. Consistent with Experiment 1, Experiment 2 showed an increase in latency as wall cues were removed. Therefore, it appears that the SPC task produced differences in latency and accuracy between the cue missing conditions. This indicates performance on this task was reliant on the number of
cues in the environment.

locating the target under these conditions took significantly less time compared to locating the

target when all four cues were missing. This differed from our findings, since we found
significant differences in latency between all three of our cue missing conditions (zero missing,

two missing, and all four missing). Accuracy was not assessed in the Jacob et al. (1998) study.
One important distinction between the task used by Jacob et al. (1998) and ours is that

Our findings for the SPC task are consistent with findings in rodents for similar tasks. Using an identical paradigm to the SPC task used in the current study, Gold and Kesner (2005)

our target could appear in one of many different spatial locations, unlike their target, which was
consistently in the same position across trials. This might explain the discrepant findings

PROPHY0F

between their task and ours, specifically that performance on our task was more sensitive to the number of wall cues available compared to their task. Perhaps the position of their target became

Limitations and Future Directions

This study aimed to develop human analogues of rodent SPA, SPS, and SPC tasks.

so well-learned that subtle variations in the presence of distal cues had no effect on the time it

Although task parameters were adequately developed, there were some limitations to our study.
First, we did not look at sex differences in spatial navigation, despite a large literature on

took to find the target. Participants were somewhat reliant on distal cues, as indicated by impaired performance when all four cues were removed. In our task, the location of the target
was new on every trial. Together, these findings indicate that participants might be more reliant

differential spatial navigation strategies and overall performance on spatial memory tasks in
males and females (Canovas et al., 2008). Furthermore, previous video game experience was not taken into account, which could affect performance on this task.

on distal cues when first learning a spatial location, and less reliant as they have more experience navigating to that location. Moreover, our target location varied on every trial, which would qualify it more as "episodic-like" and dependent on the hippocampus compared to their
nonepisodic task.

Also, the verbal instructions given to our human participants may have posed different cognitive demands than the incidental learning that takes place in rodents. Arguably the

processes required to perform a task when given verbal instructions may differ from learning

Another difference between our task and the one developed by Jacobs et al. (1998) is that we reported accuracy as well as latency differences in our task, while the task developed by Jacobs et al. (1998) only provided an assessment of latency to reach the target. Although their task follows the traditional procedure used in the Morris Water Maze task, our task more closely
parallels recent rodent literature directly assessing spatial pattern completion in rodents. In this

task demands incidentally. A future study employing an incidental-learning paradigm would
address this limitation.

Other future directions of research will employ fMRI to assess whether the spatial-pattern

tasks involve differential hippocampal subfields in humans as established with findings from

animal models. Animal and computational models have identified DG as important for spatial
pattern completion (e.g. Becker, 2005; Gilbert & Kesner, 2006; Gilbert, Kesner, & Lee, 2001;

regard, our task yielded significant differences in both accuracy and latency based on cue availability, indicating sensitivity to these manipulations in humans as in rats. Furthermore, our
task was specifically aimed at creating a human analogue of a rodent SPC task, whereas Jacobs et al. (1998) did not explicitly state that their objective was to assess spatial pattern completion.

Goodrich-Hunsaker, Hunsaker, & Kesner, 2008; Rolls, 1996). Similarly, the sole human study examining subregional hippocampal involvement in pattern separation has identified preferential
involvement of the DG/CA3 region (Bakker et al., 2008). Thus, in the context of our task, we

Rather it seemed they aimed to assess the impact of distal cue removal on place-learning strategy
more generally.

expect conditions that require greater pattern separation processes to elicit more DG/CA3

activity than those that require less separation. Specifically, we expect DG/CA3 activity will
increase with decreasing separation of target and foil.

The sole human study that has examined hippocampal subfield involvement in nonspatial pattern completion found preferential activity in CA1 as opposed to DG/CA3 (Bakker et al.,
2008). This finding is contrary to both animal studies as well as computational models that

established in the rodent literature, we predict preferential CA3 involvement of the spatial pattern

tasks, and preferential CA1 involvement of the spatial-temporal pattern tasks.
Functional dissociations between subregions are also of clinical relevance. That is, certain clinical disorders show preferential damage to particular hippocampal subfields and

predict CA3 involvement in learning of arbitrary associations and pattern completion when space is a component (Kesner & Hopkins, 2006; Rolls, 1996; Rolls, 1997). Clearly, the study of

sparing of other subfields. For instance, histology studies have indicated that the CA1 subfield
appears to be relatively spared in Schizophrenia, while abnormalities are predominantly seen in
CA3 (Benes, 1999; Harrison, 2004). This pattern of damage contrasts with that found in various other disorders including Alzheimer's disease and hypoxia, which preferentially affect the CA1 subfield (Duvernoy, 2005; Mueller, Stables, Du, et al., 2007). Research demonstrating disparate hippocampal pathology in different disorders suggests that the pattern of memory deficits

hippocampal involvement in pattern completion in humans requires further study. Thus, an
imaging study using our SPC task that more closely models the rodent paradigm might produce findings that are more consistent with the rodent literature. Otherwise, it might corroborate Bakker et al.'s (2008) findings and thereby suggest species differences in performing these similar tasks. In addition, we might predict increasing activity as a function of the degree of
pattern completion processes that are required to complete a task. For example, in line with the current behavioural results, greater subregional activity might be expected in response to
decreasing cue availability in our SPC task.

between disorders may also be unique. Thus, future research using the tasks developed here may

provide means to further understand commonalities and differences across conditions associated
with hippocampal dysfunction.
Conclusions

In addition to the findings of differential subregional involvement in different spatial pattern tasks, dissociations have been found with respect to subregional involvement in spatial
pattern tasks versus spatial-temporal tasks. Specifically, numerous rodent studies have implicated the CA1 subregion as being preferentially important compared to DG and CA3 in temporal
pattern association, separation, and completion (e.g. Gilbert, Kesner, & Lee, 2001; Hoang & Kesner, 2008; Kesner & Hopkins, 2006; Weiss, Bouwmeester, Power, & Disterhoft, 1999).

In sum, in this thesis I developed tasks analogous to the well-established rodent paradigms measuring spatial pattern association, separation, and completion. The CG-Arena was

used to create tasks that were close analogues of rodent tasks. First, it allowed us to provide a

similar visual environment to that used in rodent tasks. Second, it allowed us to manipulate
separation distances between targets, spatial location of targets, and the presence/absence of the
surrounding wall cues in the virtual environment among many other parameters to create

Therefore, a future direction will include the development of human analogues of rodent spatialtemporal pattern tasks. Further, these tasks could be administered in a single imaging study along

conditions that closely paralleled those used in rodent tasks. Subjects showed performance
differences that were dependent on the difficulty manipulations used in these tasks. Specifically,

with the spatial pattern tasks to identify subregional dissociations. Based on the framework

differential performance based on separation distance in the SPS task, and differential

performance based on the number of wall cues in the SPC task. The varying performance across
conditions suggests these tasks may be sensitive to these subprocesses. Furthermore, we

References

Astur, R.S., St. Germain, S.A., Baker, E.K., Calhoun, V., Pearlson, G.D., & Constable, R.T. (2005). fMRI hippocampal activity during a virtual radial arm maze. Applied
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback, 30, 307-317.

attempted to minimize the use of verbalization of wall cues by using fractal patterns rather than
common objects.

This work provides a foundation for various avenues of future research. Imaging studies

Bakker, A., Kirwan, C.B., Miller, M. & Stark, C.E.L. (2008). Pattern separation in the human
hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyms. Science, 319, 1640-1643.

in humans might strengthen the findings from computational models and animal models that predict preferential activity of a particular subregion when engaged in a particular spatial pattern subprocess. Furthermore, dissociations in subregional involvement between spatial and spatialtemporal subprocesses can be examined. The development of these tasks may shed light in
certain clinical disorders that have been shown to be associated with selective damage or sparing
of certain hippocampal subregions. Therefore, the human analogues of rodent spatial pattern

Becker, S. (2005). A computational principle for hippocampal learning and neurogenesis.
Hippocampus, 15, 722-738.

Benes, F. M. (1999). Evidence for altered trisynaptic circuitry in schizophrenic hippocampus.
Biological Psychiatry, 46(5), 589-599.

Canovas, R., Espinola, M., Iribarne, L., & Cimadevilla, J.M. (2008). A new virtual task to
evaluate human place learning. Behavioural Brain Research, 190, 112-118.

association, separation, and completion tasks may illuminate functional differences in subregionspecific hippocampally mediated spatial memory subprocesses and set the stage for valuable
future research directions.

Duvernoy, H.M. (Eds) (2005). The Human Hippocampus: Functional Anatomy, Vascularization,
and Serial Sections with MRI (3rd ed). New York: Springer.

Eichenbaum, H. (2000). Hippocampus: Mapping or memory? Current Biology, 10, 785-787.

Gilbert, P.E. & Kesner, R.P. (2002). Role of the rodent hippocampus in paired-associate learning
involving associations between a stimulus and a spatial location. Behavioral
Neuroscience, 116, 63-71.

Gilbert, P.E. & Kesner, R.P. (2003). Localization of function within the dorsal hippocampus:
The role of the CA3 subregion in paired-associate learning. Behavioral Neuroscience,
117, 1385-1394.

Gilbert, P.E.& Kesner, R.P. (2006). The role of the dorsal CA3 hippocampal subregion in spatial
working memory and pattern separation. Behavioral Brain Research, 169, 142-149.

Gilbert, P.E., Kesner, R.P., & DeCoteau, W.E. (1998). Memory for spatial location: Role of the
hippocampus in mediating spatial pattern separation. The Journal ofNeuroscience, 18,
804-810.

Jacobs, W.J., Thomas, K.G.F., Laurance, H.E., & Nadel, L. (1998). Place learning in virtual
space. Learning and Motivation, 29, 288-308.

Kesner, R.P. & Hopkins, R.O. (2006). Mnemonic functions of the hippocampus: A comparison
between animals and humans. Biological Psychology, 73, 3-18.

Gilbert, P.E., Kesner, R.P., & Lee, I. (2001). Dissociating hippocampal subregions: A double
dissociation between dentate gyms and CA1. Hippocampus, 11, 626-636.

Kesner, R.P., Hunsaker, M.R., & Warthen, M.W. (2008). The CA3 subreion of the hippocampus is critical for episodic memory processing by means of relational encoding in rats.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 122, 1217-1225.

Gold, A.E., & Kesner, R.P. (2005). The role of the CA3 subregion of the dorsal hippocampus in
spatial pattern completion in the rat. Hippocampus, 15, 808-814.

Goodrich-Hunsaker, N.J., Hunsaker, M.R., & Kesner, R.P. (2008). The interactions and dissociations of the dorsal hippocampus subregions: How the dentate gyms, CA3, and
CA1 process spatial information. Behavioral Neuroscience, 122, 16-26.

Kirwan, C.B., Gilbert, P.E., & Kesner, R.P. (2005). The role of the hippocampus in the retrieval
of a spatial location. Neurobiology ofLearning and Memory, 83(1), 65-71.

Kirwan, C.B. & Stark, C.E.L. (2007). Overcoming interference: An fMRI investigation of
pattern separation in the medial temporal lobe. Learning and Memory, 14, 625-633.

Hanlon, F.M., Weisend, M.P., Hamilton, D.A., Jones, A.P., Thoma, R.J., Huang, M. et al.
(2006). Impairment on the hippocampal-dependent virtual Morris water maze task in
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 87, 67-80.

Laurance, H.E., Thomas, K.G.F., Newman, M.C., Kaszniak, A.W., Nadel, L., & Jacobs, W.J. (2002). Older adults map novel environments but do not place learn: Findings from a
computerized spatial task. Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 9, 85-97.

Harrison, P. J. (2004). The hippocampus in schizophrenia: A review of the neuropathological
evidence and its pathophysiological implications. Psychopharmacology, 174(1), 151-162.

Lee, I., Yoganarasimha, D., Rao, G., & Knlerim, J.J. (2004). Comparison of population coherence of place cells in hippocampal subfields CA1 and CA3. Nature, 430, 456-459.

Hoang, L.T. & Kesner, R.P. (2008). Dorsal hippocampus, CA3, and CA1 lesions disrupt
temporal sequence completion. Behavioral Neuroscience, 122, 9-15.

Leutgeb, J.K., Leutgeb, S., Moser, M., & Moser, E.I. (2007). Pattern separation in the dentate
gyms and CA3 of the hippocampus. Science, 315, 961-966.

Hopkins, R.O. & Kesner, R.P. (1993). Memory for temporal and spatial distances for new and
previously learned geographical information in hypoxic subjects. Societyfor
Neuroscience Abstracts 19, 1284 Washington, DC.

Livingstone, S.A. & Skelton, R.W. (2007). Virtual environment navigation tasks and the
assessment of cognitive deficits in individuals with brain injury. Behavioral Brain
Research 183, 21-31.

Jacobs, W.J., Laurance, H.E., Thomas, K.G.F. (1997). Place learning in virtual space I:
Acquisition, overshadowing, and transfer. Learning and Motivation, 28, 521-541.

Maguire, E.M., Nannery, R., & Spiers, H.J. (2006). Navigation around London by a taxi driver
with bilateral hippocampal lesions. Brain, 129, 2894-2907.

Maguire, E.M., Spiers, H.J., Good, CD., Hartley, T., Frackowiak, R.S.J., & Burgess, N. (2003).
Navigation expertise and the human hippocampus: A structural brain imaging analysis.
Hippocampus, 13, 250-259.

Ryan, J.D., Alhoff, R.R., Whitlow, S., & Cohen, NJ. (2000). Amnesia is a deficit in relational
memory. Psychological Science, 11, 454-461.

Ryan, J.D. & Cohen, N.J. (2004). Processing and short-term retention of relational information in
amnesia. Neuropsychologia, 42, 497-511.

Morris, R.G., Garrud, P., Rawlins, J.N., & O'Keefe, J. (1982). Place navigation impaired in rats
with hippocampal lesions. Nature, 297, 681-683.

Shipman, S.L. & Astur, R.S. (2008). Factors affecting the hippocampal BOLD response during
spatial memory. Behavioral Brain Research, 187, 433-441.

Mueller, S.G., Stables, L., Du, A.T., Schuff, N., Truran, D., Cashdollar, N. et al. (2007).
Measurement of hippocampal subfields and age-related changes with high resolution
MRI at 4 T. Neurobiology ofAging, 28, 719-726.

Shore, D.L, Stanford, L., Maclnnes, W.J., Klein, R.M., & Brown, R.E. (2001). Of mice and men:
Virtual Hebb-Williams mazes permit comparison of spatial learning across species.
Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 1, 83-89.

Nakazawa, K., Quirk, M.C., Chitwood, R.A., Watanabe, M., Yeckel, M.F., Sun, LD. et al.
(2002). Requirement for hippocampal CA3 NMDA receptors in associative memory
recall Science, 297,211-218.

Skelton, R.W., Ross, S.P., Nerad, L., & Livingstone, S.A. (2006). Human spatial navigation
deficits after traumatic brain injury shown in the arena maze, a virtual Morris water maze.
Brain Injury, 20, 189-203.

O'Keefe, J. & Dostrovsky, J. (1971). The hippocampus as a spatial map: Preliminary evidence
from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Research, 34, 171-175.

Stepankova, K. Fenton, A.A., Pastalkova, E., Kaline, M., & Bohbot, V.D. (2004). Objectlocation memory impairment in patients with thermal lesions to the right or left
hippocampus. Neuropsychologica, 42, 1017-1028.

O'Keefe, J. & Nadel, L. (1978). The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. New York: Oxford
University Press.

O'Reilly, R.C. & McClelland, J.L. (1994). Hippocampal conjunctive encoding, storage, and
recall: avoiding a trade-off. Hippcampus, 4, 661-682.

Sweatt, J.D. (2004). Hippocampal function in cognition. Psychopharmacology, 174, 99-110.

Thomas, K.G.F., Hsu, M., Laurance, H.E., Nadel, L., & Jacobs, WJ. (2001). Place learning in
virtual space III: Procedures and their application to fMRI and clinical neuropsychology.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 33, 21-37.

Rolls, E.T. (1996). A theory of hippocampal function in memory. Hippocampus, 6, 601-620. Rolls, E.T. (1997). An attractor network in the hippocampus: Theory and neurophysiology.
Learning and Memory, 14,1\A-13\.

Vazdarjanova A. & Guzowski, J.F. (2004). Differences in hippocampal neuronal population
responses to modifications of an environmental context: Evidence for distinct, yet complimentary, functions of CA3 and CA1 ensembles. The Journal ofNeuroscience, 24,
6489-6496.

Rosenbaum, S.R., Priselac, S., Kohler, S., Black, S.E., Gao, F., Nadel, L. & Moscovitch, M.
(2000). Remote spatial memory in an amnesic person with extensive bilateral
hippocampal lesions. Nature Neuroscience, 5, 1044-1048.

